Part Three
1
Six weeks had passed since Charlotte's last visit to Swans' Meadow.
The simple act of starting out on the route from Tunbridge Wells to Bourne End was nevertheless sufficient to call to her mind every detail of what she had seen and heard that afternoon.
She could only hope — with little confidence — that the riotous atmosphere of Samantha's twentieth birthday party would help her to suppress the memory.
The weather was warm and sunny, with the merest hint of a breeze.
Charlotte found herself resenting even this element of her relatives' good fortune.
For others the clouds might gather and the rains fall, but never for Maurice and those around him.
For them high summer was a permanent condition.
Whereas for her — She gripped the steering-wheel tighter and managed to block out the thought.
Anger was useless, she knew, unless it led to a solution.
And to her predicament there was no solution.
She had timed her arrival for half an hour after the party was due to commence, calculating that this would find the host and hostess busy with other guests, leaving her free to mingle and, with any luck, to slip away early.
She had deliberately chosen an outfit likely to reinforce the general perception of her as Samantha's frumpish maiden aunt — floral-patterned dress and plain cardigan.
She did not want to be liked or admired.
She especially did not want to enjoy herself.
So absorbed was she in the effort of preparing herself mentally for what lay ahead that she did not glance upstream as she drove across Cookham Bridge and wonder why there were no party-goers gathered round a  marquee on the lawn of Swans' Meadow, why indeed there was no marquee pitched on the lawn at all.
The silence and emptiness of the scene did not become apparent to her until she turned into the drive of the house and realized there were no other cars parked there, no gaily clad groups tripping towards the garden, no jazz band to summon them nor hired flunkeys to greet them, no pop of champagne corks nor buzz of conversation, no bunting, no balloons, no merriment of any kind.
When she had stopped the car and climbed out, she wondered for a moment whether she had come on the wrong day or at the wrong time, though she was sure she had not.
She took the invitation out of her handbag and confirmed as much.
Mr and Mrs Maurice Abberley request the pleasure of your company at a party in celebration of their daughter's twentieth birthday, to be held at Swans' Meadow, Riversdale, Bourne End, Buckinghamshire at three o'clock on the afternoon of Saturday 5th September.
RSVP .
And here she was, at Swans' Meadow, on the day in question.
And, when she glanced at her watch, she saw that the time was thirty-two minutes past three.
But of a party there was no sign.
Suspecting some bizarre practical joke, Charlotte marched up to the front door and rang the bell.
There was no response.
She rang again and was about to ring for a third time when the door was pulled abruptly open.
‘Charlie!’
It was Ursula, dressed in slacks and a loose cotton top.
She was wearing neither jewellery nor make-up.
Her hair was tousled and looked in need of brushing.
And she had been crying.
Her eyes were red and puffy and the remnant of a tear was still moistening her left cheek.
She was so unlike the groomed and unemotional woman Charlotte knew that, for a second, she thought she might actually be somebody else.
‘Ursula…
What…
What's happening?’
‘I wish I knew.’
Ursula dabbed at her cheek with the back of her hand.
‘Why are you here?’
‘For the party.’
‘Oh, Christ!
Didn't we…
Hell, I forgot the family.
If you can call it a family.’
‘What's going on?’
‘There's no party, Charlie.
You may as well go home.
You'll be better off there, believe —’ She broke off and turned away, her face gripped by a sob.
‘What's the matter?’
Charlotte stepped forward, uncertain whether to offer comfort where it had never previously been needed.
She ended by placing one hand tentatively on Ursula's shoulder.
‘The matter?’
Ursula retreated into the hall, distancing herself from the gesture, imposing a fraction of her normal self-control.
‘The matter is Maurice.
What a bloody fool I was to trust him even in this.’
‘In what?
I don't understand.’
‘No.
You don't, do you?
Well, perhaps you should.
He's your brother.
And do you know what kind of a brother you've got, Charlie?
I mean, really know?’
She stumbled away towards the lounge, neither forbidding nor encouraging Charlotte to follow.
But follow she did.
Once there, Ursula poured more gin than tonic into a tumbler and drank at least a quarter of it in one gulp.
Then she snatched a cigarette from a box, her hand shaking so much she laughed at the difficulty she had in lighting it.
Charlotte stared at her in utter amazement, for she had never seen — nor dreamt of seeing — her sister-in-law in such a condition.
‘I have to tell somebody,’ she said, drawing deeply on the cigarette.
‘Who better than you?
Perhaps not letting you know the party was off was a Freudian slip.
Perhaps I wanted —’ She whirled away towards the window and stared out at the garden.
‘Christ, what a bloody mess!’
‘Why was the party cancelled, Ursula?’
‘Because Sam isn't here.’
‘Where is she?’
‘I don't know.
Nobody knows.
Except —’
‘Except who?’
‘She's been kidnapped.’
‘What?’
‘Kidnapped.
Abducted.
Carried off.
Call it what you bloody like.
Taken by some devils Maurice has managed to call up with his too-clever-by-half pat little schemes.
It's his fault, all of it.
Unless it's mine, for letting him —’ She swung round and stared at Charlotte, who could see her jaw muscles straining with the effort of ensuring she did not cry.
‘Sit down, Charlie.
Sit down and I'll tell you in joined-up sentences what your brother has managed to inflict on us.’
Charlotte lowered herself into the nearest chair and watched Ursula lean slowly back against the window-sill, one hand grasping the edge tightly while the other held her cigarette.
‘Sam went missing on Tuesday.
I was in Maidenhead and Aliki was out shopping.
She left a note, saying she'd be away until Friday, but not why or where she was going.
She'd taken some clothes, though scarcely enough, even for three days.
I phoned all her friends, but none of them knew anything.
Maurice suggested some mystery boyfriend and I thought…
Well, maybe so.
What else was I to think?
I was worried, of course, but I assumed she'd explain herself when she came back.
It was only three days.
Young girls like to rebel a little.
So, don't fight it.
That's what Maurice said.
That's what I said as well.
Don't fight.
Just wait.
And everything will be all right.
But it isn't, is it?
It's not all right.
It's all wrong.
And Maurice — Sorry.
You want the facts, in their proper order.
Well, on Thursday afternoon, Maurice was phoned at the office by a man with a foreign accent who said he wanted to talk to him about Sam.
You can hear their conversation if you like.
Maurice has a gadget to record any telephone calls he wants to.
He has one fitted here as well as at the office, so he need never be in doubt about agreements he reaches or deals he makes.
I'll play you the tape.’
Ursula crossed to the hi-fi cabinet, removed a small cassette from one of the units and slipped another one in, then pressed a button.
‘He switched on after they'd started talking, but you'll soon catch the drift.’
There was a crackle, then Maurice's voice in mid-sentence: ‘—this is all about .’
‘It is about your daughter, Mr Abberley .’
The other man was certainly foreign, but he spoke excellent English, in a tone devoid of all expression.
‘I represent those who are holding her .’
‘Holding her?
What do you mean?
She's —’
‘Our captive, Mr Abberley.’
‘I don't believe you.’
‘Then believe your own ears.
Listen to this.’
The quality of the recording declined suddenly, but not enough for Charlotte to doubt it was Samantha's voice she heard next.
‘Mum and Dad, it's me, Sam.
I'm all right.
I don't know where I am or who these people are, but they haven't harmed me.
They just…won't let me go .’
She sounded frightened but not hysterical and somehow much younger than usual.
‘Do as they say and they'll release me.
I don't know what they want, but give it to them, Dad, please.
I just —’
The man's voice cut in.
‘Do you believe me now, Mr Abberley ?’
‘Yes.’
‘Good.’
‘What do you want?’
‘Ah, you are going to be sensible.
That is better still.’
‘How much do you want?’
‘Not money.
We know you have a lot.
But we do not want any of it.’
‘What, then?’
‘The papers you stole from Frank Griffith, Mr Abberley.
They are what we want.’
‘What ?’
‘You heard.
The papers you stole from Frank Griffith.’
‘You mean…my father's letters…to my aunt?’
‘Everything he sent to her.
Everything you have.
All the papers.
Every one.’
‘You can't be serious.’
‘But we are.
Extremely.’
‘There's been some…mistake.
I don't have…
I've never had…’
‘Do not deny stealing them, Mr Abberley.
We know you have them.
If you refuse to give them up, your daughter will be killed.’
‘Good God.’
‘Do we understand each other, Mr Abberley?’
Maurice did not answer.
‘Mr Abberley?’
‘Yes.
All right.
I understand.’
‘We think you are storing the papers in New York.
Is that correct?’
‘How did you — Yes.
It's correct.’
‘Then this is what you will do.
Fly to New York tomorrow morning.
Collect the papers.
Return on the Pan Am flight scheduled to reach Heathrow at seven fifty on Saturday morning.
Go to the chemist's shop in Terminal 4 called Waltham Pharmacy at nine o'clock.
Stand by the external display of sunglasses.
A man will approach you.
He will hand you an envelope containing a photograph of your daughter, which will prove she is alive and well.’
‘How?
How will it prove that?’
But Maurice's interruption was ignored.
‘In return, you will hand him the papers, packed in a plain buff envelope.
You will then leave.
Your daughter will be released within twenty-four hours .’
‘What if the flight's delayed?’
‘We shall know if that is the case and we shall expect you to be late for our appointment.
But no other excuse will be accepted.’
‘How can I be sure you'll release Sam ?’
Once again the interruption was ignored.
‘If you go to the police, she will be killed.
Is that clear ?’
‘Wait a minute.
I must have —’
‘Is that clear?’
‘Yes.
Of course it's clear.’
‘Do you agree to our terms?’
‘Yes.
Dammit, yes I do.’
‘Then our business is concluded.
Good afternoon, Mr Abberley.’
There was a click as the machine switched itself off.
Ursula stubbed out one cigarette and lit another while Charlotte stared straight ahead, trying to assemble in her mind all the consequences of what she had heard.
In the end, the only question she could frame was the simplest one of all: ‘What have you done about this?’
‘What has Maurice done, you mean.
I suppose I should be grateful he told me about the call at all, but he had to really, didn't he?
Otherwise, I'd have gone to the police when Sam didn't show up yesterday.’
‘You haven't informed them?’
‘Maurice wouldn't hear of it.
To be fair, I was as opposed to the idea as he was, though not for the same reason.
I just wanted my daughter back.
If handing over the letters was what it took, then so be it.
Maurice agreed.
Or so he said.
Like a fool, I thought Sam's safety meant more to him than those bloody royalties.
I should have known better, shouldn't I?
Nothing means more to your brother than having his own sodding way.’
‘What do you mean?
Didn't he give the letters up?’
‘He did and he didn't.
We spent hours on the phone Thursday evening working through the guest-list to tell people the party was cancelled.
As a member of the family, you wouldn't have been on the list.
I suppose that's how we came to forget you.
We packed Aliki off back to Cyprus for a couple of weeks.
Paying her air fare ensured she didn't argue.
Then Maurice flew to New York, as instructed.
He'd lodged the letters in a bank  there, apparently.
He got back here late this morning, saying the swap had gone without a hitch and clutching the photograph of Sam we'd been promised.
See for yourself.’
Ursula crossed to the bureau in the comer, picked up a medium-sized brown envelope and handed it to Charlotte.
Inside was a photograph of Samantha, standing against a whitewashed wall, wearing a baggy tee-shirt and jeans, holding up a copy of the International Herald Tribune so the date on the front page was clearly visible: Friday 4 September.
Samantha looked tired, haggard and unkempt, but otherwise well, disorientated and distressed certainly, maltreated probably not.
‘Maurice reckoned all we had to do was wait to hear of her release.
He was confident there'd be no problem.
So was I.’
‘But there was a problem?’
‘Oh, yes.
There was Maurice's greed, you see, his twisting, slippery, devious mind.
That's what I'd overlooked.
He went out a couple of hours ago.
God knows where he went.
He said he needed to think.
As it turns out, he had plenty to think about.
Around three o'clock, the phone rang.
As soon as I picked it up, I knew it was them — the kidnappers.
I could just sense it.
I was right.
You can hear what was said on the other tape.’
Ursula returned to the hi-fi, removed the cassette they had just listened to and loaded another.
A second later, her own voice could be heard, raised and faintly distorted by the tape.
‘Who's that?’
‘Mrs Abberley ?’
It was the same man who had spoken to Maurice.
‘Yes.’
‘I represent those who are holding your daughter, Mrs Abberley.’
‘Have you released her?’
‘No .’
‘Why not?
We had an agree —’
‘Your husband broke our agreement, Mrs Abberley.’
‘What?
I don't believe you.’
‘It is true.’
‘It can't be.
He wouldn't —’
‘He did.
The papers he delivered this morning were incomplete.
He is holding some back.’
‘That's impossible.’
‘It is stupid, not impossible.
Very very stupid.
He has broken his word.’
‘No.
He can't have done.’
‘But he has.
Ask him and judge for yourself.
Tell him also that we do not react well to such behaviour.’
‘What…
What do you mean?’
‘We shall telephone again twenty-four hours from now with instructions for the delivery of the remaining papers.
If there is any further trickery, your daughter will be killed Do you understand?’
‘For God's sake —’
‘For your daughter's sake, Mrs Abberley, make sure your husband does as he is told this time.
It is your last chance.
No more tricks.
Good afternoon.’
There was a click, then silence.
Charlotte looked up at Ursula, seeking reassurance.
‘Is it true?
Did he hold some back?’
‘What do you think, Charlie?
You've known him longer than me.’
‘He wouldn't.
Not when Sam —’
‘That was my reaction.
As I put the ‘phone down, I said to myself: Maurice couldn't have done this.
Not to Sam.
Not to me.
He just couldn't.
Nobody could.
Not with their daughter's life at stake.
But I had to be sure, didn't I?
You do see that, don't you?’
‘Yes,’ said Charlotte cautiously.
‘Then come with me.’
Ursula led the way into the hall and marched up the stairs, with Charlotte following.
They went straight into  the master bedroom, where a leather briefcase stood open on the floor.
Around it were scattered papers, pens and folders.
‘That's the case Maurice took with him to New York,’ said Ursula.
‘I searched it, just to be sure.’
‘What did you find?’
‘Look in the inside zip pocket.’
Charlotte knelt beside the case.
Along one side of the interior ran a zip-fastened pocket.
She opened it, slipped her hand inside and pulled out an old frayed envelope.
It was addressed, in a faltering hand, to Miss Beatrix Abberley, Jackdaw Cottage, Watchbell Street, Rye, East Sussex, Inglaterra .
And the barely legible postmark removed the last shred of doubt about who had sent it.
Tarragona, República Española, 17 Mar 38 .
‘It's the last letter Tristram sent to Beatrix,’ said Ursula.
‘Maurice must have hoped the kidnappers would think the sequence had ended one earlier.
That way he could have his cake and eat it too.
Sam free.
And one letter still left to prove Beatrix wrote the poems.
The bloody fool!’
‘How could they know there was another?’
‘How could they know any of it?
But they do.
Every single thing.
Every move we make.
It's useless to try and deceive them.
But Maurice had to, didn't he?
He just couldn't help himself.’
‘I'm sorry, Ursula.
I really am.’
‘Don't be.
It's Maurice who should apologize.
To all of us.
And I mean to make sure he does.
But first he's going to have to stop lying.
Once and for all.’
‘May I read the letter?’
‘Be my guest.
Be Maurice's.
After all, it's only thanks to him you have the chance.’
2
Tarragona, 15 (or 16) March ‘38
Sis,
I'm too weak to write much, so this has to be brief.
I've been going downhill for several days now.
Blood poisoning seems the problem.
Not surprising, really.
The Spaniards are stronger on honour than hygiene.
Where there's life, etc., so don't despair yet, unless — Well, you know.
What I want to say is this.
I'm sending you a document I've been keeping for a friend.
I promised him I'd pass it on to his relatives if I could find them, anyway keep it safe in case he managed to get out too.
He thought I'd soon be on my way back to England, you see.
So did I. Now I'm not so sure.
And I must do my best to keep my word while I still have the strength.
From what I hear, he's probably already dead.
Maybe you can find out.
I don't know.
Anyway, I'm sending you my translation of the document as well.
So decide what's best when you've read it.
I know I can trust you to do that.
I always could.
The poems were your only real misjudgement, I reckon.
We should never have let the world think I wrote them.
Not when every word was yours.
You should have had the credit.
Maybe you will now.
Claim it with my blessing, Sis.
It all seems pointless now.
Such a foolish conceit, in both senses, eh?
If this is my last word on the subject, I'm sorry it has to be so close to bathos, but that's how I feel.
Maybe hubris is nearer the mark.
I don't know.
And I'm too tired to write any more.
All my love,
Tristram.
3
‘For your daughter's sake, Mrs Abberley, make sure your husband does as he is told this time.
It is your last chance.
No more tricks.
Good afternoon.’
As the recording ended, Maurice rose, walked slowly across to the hi-fi and switched it off.
Charlotte saw him glance out through the window and clench his teeth before turning back to face Ursula.
He had bought some time for himself by refusing to answer any questions till he had heard the tape.
But now time had run out.
‘There's no way they could have known there was another letter.’
The denial was as stubborn as it was futile.
‘If I'd thought there was —’
‘You think too much, Maurice, that's your trouble!’
Ursula's interruption was almost a scream.
‘You can't stop twisting and scheming and now Sam's life is in danger because of it.’
‘No, no.
It won't come to that.’
‘It already has!
Do you think these people are playing a bloody parlour game?’
‘Of course not.
But I couldn't let them have the last letter.
You must see —’
‘I see, all.
right.
I see even our daughter is expendable to you when it comes to safeguarding those bloody royalties.’
‘It's nothing to do with the royalties.’
Maurice looked hurt at the very suggestion and suddenly Charlotte felt she was seeing beyond what had once been opaque but was now transparent into the cogs and coils of her brother's mind.
She realized that the mechanics of his deceitful nature would function whatever he truly felt, that the conveyor-belt of lies would continue to be fed  even when the demand for them had ceased to exist.
‘I was just playing safe,’ he protested.
‘The letter mentions a document Tristram was sending to Beatrix, a document I don't have.
I was afraid the kidnappers would think I was holding it back.
So, it seemed wiser —’
‘Bullshit!’ shouted Ursula.
‘I know why you kept that letter and you know I know.’
‘Well, if you're not going to listen to reason…’
‘You listen, Maurice!’
Ursula strode to within a foot of her husband and stared straight at him.
Charlotte could see her hand shaking where it held the cigarette, this time with rage rather than fear.
‘I don't care who these people are or why they want the letters, but when they phone tomorrow you're going to agree to whatever they demand.
Is that clearly understood?’
‘What else would I do?’
‘I don't know.
I can't imagine.
But then I can't imagine why you took such a risk with Sam's life in the first place.’
‘I've just explained.’
‘Let me explain something!
If, thanks to you, my daughter comes to any harm, I'll make sure the world knows every detail of how and why she came to be in danger.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘What do you think I mean?
I've closed my eyes to your activities long enough.
Well, they're open now.
And what they see I'll tell, unless Sam's back here soon, safe and sound.’
With that, Ursula turned on her heel and marched out of the room, throwing the parting remark, ‘I need some air!’ behind her as she went.
Maurice stared after her for a moment.
Then, when the back door slammed, he looked down at Charlotte.
There was a fleeting nakedness to the silence hanging between them, an admission of all her worst suspicions and beliefs, a hint that Maurice might now be prepared to confess.
Then he drew back.
‘I'm afraid Ursula's rather  upset,’ he said, attempting a smile.
‘It's understandable, of course, but it means she's not being very rational.’
‘You can hardly expect her to be.’
‘Exactly.
Which means I have to be rational on her behalf.
I can't afford to give way to my emotions.
You do see that, don't you?’
‘I…suppose so.
But —’
‘Who are they, Charlie?
That's what I have to ask myself.
Who are they and what do they want?’
‘They want the letters.
All of them.’
‘But why?
If I understood their motive, I could try to…to negotiate…to reach some kind of…compromise.’
‘Why not just give them what they want?’
‘Because I'm not sure what that is.’
He grabbed the letter from the bureau.
‘Just this scrap of paper in exchange for Sam's life?
It doesn't make sense.’
He was vulnerable now, Charlotte sensed, more vulnerable than he was ever likely to be again.
If there was a time to gain his confidence, this was it.
‘Why did you keep it, Maurice?’
He was tempted, she could see, tempted in his weakness and despair to lay his sins before her, to release the secrets bottled within him.
But his nature was stronger than his conscience, his instinct more powerful than his reason.
He replaced the letter on the bureau.
‘Who knew about them, Charlie?’ he said, staring down at it.
‘Who knew I had them?
You, Frank Griffith and Emerson McKitrick.
Plus Fairfax, of course.
But he hasn't the nerve for this kind of thing.
Nor has McKitrick.
Besides, neither of them could have known how many there were.’
‘You're not suggesting Frank Griffith kidnapped Sam?’
‘No.
I'm not.
I've had him…checked, so to speak.
He's at Hendre Gorfelen — alone.’
‘How do you know?’
‘Never you mind.’
Resilience was the key to Maurice's existence, Charlotte realized.
He could be knocked back  on his heels, but never for long.
He could be defeated, but never demoralized.
‘I'm sorry you should have become involved in this, Charlie.
It would have been better if you hadn't.’
‘I didn't choose to be.’
‘No.
That's true, of course.’
‘What do you intend to do?’
‘What Ursula wants.
Wait for them to call again.
When they do, agree to their terms.’
‘And abide by them?’
But Maurice ignored the question.
‘Until then, I'd be grateful if you stayed here.
Ursula would benefit from your company.’
It would also mean, as Charlotte knew, that awareness of what was happening would remain under one roof, that her judgement of what should and should not be done could be neutralized along with Ursula's.
‘Will you do that for me, Charlie?’
Even now she felt sorry for him, unable to fix at the front of her mind the full extent of what she believed he had done.
It was absurd, but still she could not quite suppress the sisterly instinct to help him.
‘Yes, Maurice.
I'll stay.’
4
It seemed to Charlotte as if she did not sleep at all that night, though her subsequent recollections of dreaming about telephones and disembodied voices suggested otherwise.
At all events, she was awake with the first streaky light of dawn.
And the faint sound of movement from below told her she was not the only one.
By the time she reached the hall, it was clear the sound was coming from the study.
As she moved in that direction, she glanced into the kitchen and caught sight of  the clock.
It was a quarter to six and seemed even earlier because it was Sunday.
The world held its breath.
Maurice was sitting sideways behind his desk, feet up on the radiator beneath the window, one hand flexing his lower lip while the other trailed across the blotter.
He was fully dressed, his shirt creased enough to imply he had not been to bed at all.
In front of him on the desk lay what looked improbably like a holiday brochure.
‘Maurice?’
He started and swung round, blanched visibly, then recovered himself ‘It's you, Charlie,’ he said, passing a hand across his forehead.
‘I'm sorry.
Did I startle you?’
‘No.
That is…
The dressing-gown made me think…just for a moment…’
‘Ursula lent it to me.’
‘It's an old one of Sam's.’
‘Oh, God.
I am sorry.
If I'd known —’
‘Never mind.
Trouble sleeping?’
‘Yes.
You too?’
‘I haven't tried.
I've been thinking.’
‘About the kidnappers?’
‘You heard the tapes.
Do you think the man who rang is Spanish?
The fellow I met at Heathrow never spoke.
He just handed me the photograph of Sam, then took the letters and walked away.
He was young.
Mid-twenties, I should say.
And tough.
Dark-haired, with sallow skin.’
‘Perhaps they are Spaniards, then.
Foreign, certainly.’
‘But Spain's the point, isn't it?
Something's snaked its way out of their Civil War — from fifty years ago — to wrap itself round our throats.’
‘Surely not.’
‘I picked this up from a travel agent in Marlow yesterday afternoon.’
He held up the brochure.
‘It lists car ferry sailings from Plymouth to Santander, on the north coast of Spain — the only direct link.
There are two a  week, on Mondays and Wednesdays.
The crossing takes twenty-four hours.’
‘What of it?’
‘I've been working it out, Charlie.
Why did they wait two days before making contact?
Sam vanished on Tuesday.
They didn't phone until Thursday afternoon.
Well, suppose they took her to Spain.
Drove her there, I mean, trussed up in the boot of a car.
Either aboard the ferry from Plymouth to Santander or across the Channel and down through France.
They'd have had to wait until she was in Spain before showing their hand.
That would explain why they used the International Herald Tribune in the photograph.
A Spanish paper would have given the game away and an English one would have been out of date.
It would also explain the delay in releasing her after handing over the letters.’
‘Wouldn't the car have been searched?’
‘Mine never has been at a Channel port.
And I don't suppose they're very strict at the Franco-Spanish border.’
‘Then yes, I suppose it is possible.
But —’
‘And another thing.
Have you ever heard Uncle Jack refer to a Spaniard calling at Jackdaw Cottage while we were staying there in the summer of 1939?’
Charlotte had.
Indeed, Jack's account had floated into and out of her mind several times in the course of the night.
‘Not exactly the Spaniard who blighted my life, but he looked like he'd blighted a good few others .’
There was no reason to connect this distant visitation with what had now occurred, yet Charlotte could not suppress the suspicion that such a connection existed.
And evidently Maurice felt the same.
‘Uncle Jack told me about him only recently,’ she said.
‘Surely you don't —’
‘He'd known Tristram.
And he had business with Mother and Beatrix.
What business, eh?
Who was he?
What did he want?’
‘We'll never know, Maurice.
It's nearly fifty years ago.
He's probably dead by now.’
‘Maybe.
Maybe not.’
His eyes drifted out of focus.
‘In the letter, Tristram said ‘I'm sending you a document I've been keeping for a friend’.
Did he mean he was enclosing it?
Or sending it separately?
Or intending to send it later?’
‘We'll never know that either.’
‘But what if it's the document they're after, Charlie?
Not the letters at all.’
‘Then they'd have said so, surely?’
Maurice looked directly at her.
‘If there is a connection, I'm dealing with —’ Then he broke off and his gaze slipped down to the car ferry brochure.
Across its glossy cover, his right hand was stretched wide, the fingers straining towards some unattainable circumference.
‘Never mind,’ he murmured.
‘I've no choice but to go through with it.
Speculation's pointless.’
‘Would you like a cup of coffee?
I thought I'd make some.’
‘Yes.’
Maurice sighed.
‘Let's drink some coffee and wait in the time-honoured fashion.’
Charlotte was glad of the excuse to leave him and busy herself in the kitchen.
Samantha's abduction in itself had left her curiously unmoved and she could not understand why.
Perhaps if she had been seized by orthodox kidnappers, demanding millions of pounds in ransom, it would have been different.
Or perhaps, as Charlotte was reluctant to admit to herself, some part of her secretly approved of this blow at the heart of Maurice's greed and Ursula's complacency.
Besides, too much had been laid bare in the wake of Samantha's disappearance to be forgotten however soon she reappeared.
For six weeks, Charlotte had sustained the pretence that her suspicions about Maurice could somehow be stifled.
But he had himself confirmed them now, too blatantly for her to ignore them any longer.
When and if Samantha was restored to her father, he would have to face another kind of reckoning.
Whether he realized that Charlotte did not know.
But she knew.
And the knowledge drained her of desire for an end to their ordeal.
For it would merely herald the beginning of another.
‘Remember the last time we waited together like this, Charlie?’
The sizzling of the water in the kettle had masked the sound of Maurice's footsteps and Charlotte's heart lurched at the realization that he was standing next to her, so close she could imagine he had read her thoughts.
‘The…
The last time?’
‘When Mother was dying, I mean.’
‘Oh…
Of course.
Yes.’
It was less than a year ago, though it seemed far longer, that they had kept each other company at Ockham House during the long bleak hours it had taken Mary Ladram to die.
He was the Maurice Charlotte had always known then, the Maurice she had loved as a brother and trusted as a friend.
And he still was.
The only difference was that she understood him now.
But to understand Maurice Abberley was also to fear and to loathe him.
For the moment, Charlotte could do neither.
But already she sensed that in the end she would.
‘A lot's happened since then,’ she ventured.
‘Hasn't it?’
‘Do you really think so?’
The kettle began to boil.
She stretched across to switch it off, grateful for the distraction.
‘I'm not sure what I think,’ she said.
She spooned coffee into their cups and reached out for the kettle.
‘I just —’ But Maurice was there before her.
She jumped back in surprise as she felt his fingers beneath hers, twined around the handle.
‘Sorry.’
He smiled reassuringly at her.
‘This uncertainty is hard on the nerves, isn't it?’
‘Yes.
It is.’
‘But it won't last much longer.
After Sam's been released, life will revert to normal.’
‘Will it?’
‘Oh, yes.’
He filled the cups, then returned the kettle to the hob.
‘I'll make sure of that.’
‘How?’
‘The same way I always have.’
He looked straight into her eyes, insisting by the force of his gaze that he could somehow persuade her to forget everything she had learned about him since Beatrix's death.
‘Trust me, Charlie.
That's all you have to do.’
5
‘Bourne End 88285.’
‘Mr Abberley?’
‘Speaking.’
‘Good afternoon, Mr Abberley.
I represent those who are holding —’
‘I know who you are, dammit.’
‘Good.
Then you will also know how stupid it was of you to attempt to deceive us.’
‘I never —’ Maurice broke off, then resumed in a calmer tone.
‘I'm sorry.
I shouldn't have done it.
And I won't again .’
‘No.You will not.
Because this time we will take measures to protect ourselves against your duplicity.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘This is what you will do.
Refer to Ordnance Survey Landranger Map 174.
Drive to the parking area and viewpoint shown on the western side of Walbury Hill, grid reference 370 east, 620 north.
Arrive at midnight tonight.
Come alone.
And bring everything else you stole from Frank Griffith.’
‘There's a problem.
I —’
‘The only problem is that we will kill your daughter if you do not do exactly as you are told.’
‘And I will.
It's just —’
‘Do you understand your instructions?’
‘Yes, but —’
‘Then there is no more to be said.
Good afternoon, Mr Abberley.’
The tape clicked off and Charlotte looked across at Maurice, who had the relevant map spread open on his lap.
Ursula was standing behind his chair.
‘Have you found it?’ she asked.
‘Yes.
A few miles south-west of Newbury.
About thirty miles from here.’
‘When will you leave?’
‘It's less than a hour's drive.
But let's say ten-thirty to be on the safe side.’
‘Let's say ten o'clock.
I don't want there to be any question of you being late.
And check the car this afternoon.
Tyres, petrol, oil, everything.
This has to go without a hitch.’
‘It will.
Don't worry.’
‘It's not too late to inform the police,’ put in Charlotte, pausing to study the other two's reactions and finding them to be exactly what she had expected.
Ursula wanted her daughter free at any price and did not mind what risks Maurice had to run to bring that about.
While Maurice had his own reasons for resisting police involvement in the affair.
‘I'm not saying you should inform them.
I'm just —’
‘Sam's my daughter, not yours,’ snapped Ursula.
‘I've no intention of allowing PC Plod to wreck our chances of getting her back.
All they want is this bloody letter and we're going to give it to them.
Is that clearly understood?’
‘Yes.
Of course.’
‘Good.’
With a parting glare, Ursula stalked from the room, leaving Maurice to fold the map shut and smile across at Charlotte.
My daughter’.
Did you notice that, Charlie?
Not ours .’
‘She's upset.’
‘Aren't we all?
But I'm the one who'll be waiting at Walbury Hill tonight, with nothing but my father's last letter to his sister to buy Sam's freedom with.’
‘Which is why I mentioned the police.
You said yourself the kidnappers might —’
‘No!
I have to handle this alone.
There's no other way.
Holding the letter back was a mistake.
Now I have to make amends.’
‘But Maurice —’
‘Don't say any more, Charlie.’
He held up his hand to silence her.
‘Not till Sam's back with us, safe and sound.
Then you can say whatever you like.’
The afternoon and evening seemed to pass with agonizing slowness, yet, when the time came for Maurice's departure, it felt to Charlotte as if it had crept up and taken them by surprise.
Little more had been said since the telephone call.
They had each kept their own counsel: What Ursula and Maurice were really thinking Charlotte could not tell.
For her own part, she was filled with neither hope nor dread, rather a fatalistic inability to foresee the future.
What would be would be.
Samantha might be back home by the early hours of Monday morning.
Or they might hear she had walked into a police station somewhere later in the day.
Or she might call them from a telephone box on a lonely road.
Or
She watched from the unlit half-landing window as Maurice climbed into the Mercedes, its rear lights blurred and twin exhausts clouding in the misty air.
The night was overcast and moonless.
Up on the downs it would be dark as a velvet bag.
She saw him take the envelope from his pocket and show Ursula the letter inside.
There was no farewell kiss, merely a nod of mutual understanding.
Though she knew he did not deserve it, Charlotte could not suppress a stab of sympathy for him.
It seemed to her that, despite all he had done, Ursula might have spared him a word or gesture of encouragement.
But  she did not.
As he started the car and moved away, she turned and walked back into the house.
Charlotte heard the front door close and realized she alone was watching as the white halo of the headlamps traced his progress along the drive.
The brake lights flared suddenly red as he reached the end.
Then he turned into Riversdale and vanished beyond the trees.
6
They had not expected him back before one o'clock.
It was not until two o'clock therefore that they became anxious enough to call him on his car telephone — only to find it had been switched off.
By three both felt certain something was wrong and a nervous debate began about what they should do.
Charlotte suggested contacting the police, but Ursula would not hear of it.
Her own preference was for retracing Maurice's route at first light in case he had suffered a breakdown or been involved in an accident.
Reluctantly, Charlotte agreed, even though she was sure he would already have been in touch with them in such an event.
Whether Ursula shared her growing sense of foreboding she did not know.
Nor did she care to ask.
They set off at half past five in Charlotte's car.
The morning was grey and cool, the roads virtually empty.
Charlotte could have wished they were busier.
The noise and bustle of workbound humanity would have made their journey seem more normal.
Their destination lay patiently in wait on the grey crest of the downs, while below, across the broad green Kennet valley, they approached along winding lanes through slumbering villages.
Then the habitations fell away behind them as their ascent began between  thorn-spattered banks and hangers of oak.
And suddenly, true to the route Ursula had picked out on the map, they reached the crest and saw Maurice's car, parked at the far end of the lay-by where he had been told to wait, maroon and solitary against the pale expanse of chalk-smeared turf.
Charlotte pulled off the road and stopped.
The Mercedes was thirty yards or so ahead of them, facing out across the valley, with the summit of Walbury Hill behind.
And there was a man in the driving seat, leaning back against the head-rest, making no move to acknowledge their presence.
Yet who could he be but Maurice?
Glancing round at Ursula, Charlotte realized she too had seen the figure.
‘Is it Maurice?’ she whispered.
‘It must be,’ Ursula replied.
‘Then why hasn't he seen us?’
‘Perhaps he's asleep.
Sound the horn.’
Charlotte obeyed, but the only reaction came from a sheep beyond the nearby fence, who looked up in surprise.
The occupant of the Mercedes did not stir.
Ursula leant across and pushed the horn herself three more times, but still there was no response.
‘Something's wrong.’
‘Shall we go and see?’
‘No.’
‘What?’
Charlotte looked at Ursula and saw a frozen expression of horror on her face.
‘What's the matter?’
‘You go, Charlie.
Please.
I don't think I can…
Please go and see if he's all right.’
The imploring note in her voice left Charlotte no choice.
‘Very well,’ she said.
Then, hurrying lest her nerves fail her too, she unbuckled her seat-belt and climbed out.
The world beyond the confines of the car was silent but no longer still.
A breeze ruffled her hair and set hanks of wool waving on the fence-wire.
The faded heads in a  patch of thistle between her and the Mercedes seemed to beckon.
And she followed, up the flint-strewn slope, across the swell of the down that seemed, at this altitude and hour, like the curve of the Earth beneath her feet.
She did not look back at Ursula or down into the valley, but trained her eyes forward, fixing them on the interior of the Mercedes and the dark shape of its occupant as, with every step, clarity threatened to break upon her vision.
It was Maurice.
She recognized his check trousers and bottle-green sweater.
But she could not make out his face, obscured from her by shadow and the oblique angle at which he had set his seat.
She began to divert from the path, tracing a semicircular route round the bonnet of the car.
As she did so, the windscreen reflected the cloudy sky back at her as a white sheet.
Only when she was on the other side of the car could she gain a clear view of Maurice and only then by closing to within a few yards.
Suddenly the shadows resolved themselves and the reflections fell away.
Suddenly the truth was before her, hideous and unambiguous.
Maurice was dead, his throat slit wide in a collar of congealed blood.
He was held in a reclining position by his seat-belt, with his head bent back and his mouth open, his eyes staring up at the roof of the car, his right arm hanging straight down, his left snagged on the gear-stick.
All this Charlotte saw in a single glance.
Another showed her the dark stains down his chest and across the dashboard and windscreen.
While a third, as she stepped closer, revealed that his mouth, though open, was not empty.
Some object was lodged between his teeth, forcing them apart.
She leaned for support against the wing of the car, breathless and trembling, wondering if she would scream or vomit.
She must prevent Ursula seeing this, at all events prepare her for the reality of it.
She must remain in control  of herself and her actions.
She must not disintegrate.
There was a conscious effort involved in raising her eyes to look once more.
She reminded herself that nothing must be touched or disturbed.
Yet surely she could render her brother one service to which the dead are always entitled.
His sightless eyes should be closed.
And she should dose them now, before Ursula ran to join her or her hands shook too much to obey her.
She opened the door, looking away as she did so and listening for a second to the song of a skylark on the wind.
Then, taking a gulp of air, she leaned into the car and pressed his eyelids shut with the forefinger and thumb of her right hand, shuddering as the icy coldness of his flesh communicated itself to her.
And then, with his face no more than a foot from her own, she saw what was wedged in his mouth.
It was a roll of freshly minted banknotes.
7
For the rest of that day, Charlotte felt she was at one remove from reality, viewing events through an invisible screen equipped to filter out the extremes of sensation.
The grief and horror she would have expected to experience were somehow blunted and held at bay, though whether permanently or not she had no way of knowing.
She began to suspect her mind had no room for such emotions while there were more urgent issues to be addressed and wondered if, when she was alone and at rest, they would suddenly overwhelm her.
If, that is, she ever was alone and at rest again.
The nearest she came to solitude was the interval that elapsed after she had forced herself to dial 999 on Maurice's car telephone.
Standing on the ridge above the Kennet valley with their backs turned against the  spectacle of what they had found, she and Ursula said little as the early morning slowly advanced.
Indeed, only when the first wail of an approaching siren drifted up from below did Ursula remark: ‘I suppose we'll have to tell them everything.’
‘I think we'd better, don't you?’
Charlotte replied.
‘I don't know what I think.
Except that I hope to God they let Sam go.’
Charlotte said nothing, though she thought even then it was a frail hope.
Maurice had not given the kidnappers what they wanted.
No other interpretation of what had happened seemed sustainable.
As to the kidnappers' next step, she was confused but pessimistic.
If they were prepared to murder once, they would certainly be prepared to murder again.
But she did not propose to point this out to Ursula.
If she believed in the possibility of Samantha's early release, so much the better.
The police, when they arrived, were models of efficiency and solicitude.
Charlotte and Ursula were whisked away to Newbury Police Station, where a pixie-faced detective constable, Valerie Finch, took their preliminary statements.
Ursula was anxious to stress that her daughter's safety was now her only concern and became impatient with the methodical nature of their questioning, but Charlotte knew it could not be otherwise.
Then the officer in charge of the case, Detective Chief Inspector Golding, returned from the scene and persuaded them to repeat everything for his benefit.
Though eager to express his sympathy, he had a sceptical air guaranteed to rile Ursula, in whom anger turned rapidly to hysteria.
At this, Golding decided they should be driven back to Swans' Meadow, accompanied by Finch and a lugubrious detective sergeant called Barrett.
There, he assured them, they would be kept fully informed of developments.
Ursula seemed somewhat calmer once she was home, not least because she was within earshot of the telephone, which she continued to think might ring at any moment, bringing news of Samantha.
Finch encouraged her to talk about Sam, which she did to nervous excess, while Barrett made innumerable cups of tea and coffee.
Eventually, in the middle of the afternoon, Golding arrived with his superior, Detective Superintendent Miller, and a squad of technicians, who began making intricate modifications to the telephone in order to monitor incoming calls.
Barrett supervised this operation, while Miller and Golding, with Finch sitting in, questioned Ursula and Charlotte in the lounge.
Miller's involvement seemed to mark a change of gear in the police's approach to the case.
He was a large rumpled red-faced man in his late forties, with huge hands and a fog-horn voice, disinclined to waste time on niceties.
He had clearly emerged from a rougher mould than the well-mannered and smooth-tongued Golding.
On several occasions Charlotte detected a frisson of mutual resentment between the two, though for the most part they functioned adequately as a partnership.
‘Why didn't you contact us as soon as you knew your daughter had been kidnapped?’ was Miller's unceremonious introduction of a point Charlotte had been expecting to hear raised all day.
‘Because my husband was confident he could deal with the matter on his own,’ Ursula replied.
‘He insisted we should keep it secret.’
‘Delay greatly complicates the gathering of evidence,’ said Golding.
‘Your neighbours may have seen something the day your daughter was seized.
But they've already had the best part of a week in which to forget.’
‘I'm sure we all appreciate it was a terrible mistake,’ said Charlotte.
‘My brother believed he was acting in Sam's best interests.
So did we.’
‘Of course,’ murmured Golding.
‘What I want to know,’ said Ursula, ‘is what you're going to do now.’
Miller's face darkened for a moment.
Then he said: ‘Your husband's murder will be reported, but there'll be a media black-out where the kidnap's concerned.
After that it's a question of waiting for them to contact you again.
When and if they do —’
‘But if they don't?’
Miller said nothing.
His expression implied that the problem, if it eventuated, was not of his making.
Golding spoke for him.
‘If the kidnappers don't have what they want, Mrs Abberley, they'll be in touch.
They're bound to be.’
‘You're sure money wasn't demanded?’ asked Miller.
‘If only it had been,’ said Ursula.
‘At least there'd have been no doubt about our ability to pay.
Whereas supplying what they wanted…’
‘A set of correspondence between the poet Tristram Abberley and his sister,’ said Golding hesitantly.
‘I do have that right, don't I?’
‘Yes.
You do.’
‘Chief Inspector Golding reckons himself something of an expert on poetry,’ said Miller, with the hint of a sneer.
‘The only rhyme I know is crime and time.’
‘Tristram Abberley was a distinguished poet,’ said Golding, refusing, it seemed, to be provoked.
‘But I don't entirely understand why this correspondence should have been so…valuable.’
He leafed through his notes.
‘Are you seriously saying it proves his sister was responsible for his work?’
‘We are,’ said Charlotte.
‘Incredible.’
‘Also irrelevant,’ said Miller.
‘I'm sure you ladies don't expect us to believe that's what lies behind all this.’
‘No,’ said Charlotte.
‘The letter Maurice took with him last night referred to another document which he didn't have.
He was afraid — and I think now he was right to be — that it was what they were really after.’
‘Not money?’
‘I've told you, Superintendent,’ snapped Ursula.
‘Money wasn't the issue.’
‘Then how do you explain the wad of twenty quid notes stuff-’ Miller paused for a moment and softened his tone.
‘We found five thousand pounds on your husband's body, Mrs Abberley.
What are we to make of it?’
‘I think Maurice hoped to buy them off if the letter didn't satisfy them,’ said Charlotte.
She glanced at Ursula, who nodded in reluctant agreement.
‘I'm afraid it's just the kind of reasoning he would apply.
Clearly, if money had been the kidnappers’ motive…’
‘They wouldn't have left it behind in such a contemptuous fashion,’ said Golding.
‘Quite.’
‘All right,’ said Miller, with a glare at his colleague.
‘For the ladies’ benefit, Peter, perhaps you'd like to run over what we've so far established.’
‘Certainly, sir.’
Golding smiled at Ursula and Charlotte in turn.
‘We can't fix a definite time of death until after the post mortem , but we're working on the assumption that it was shortly after the time agreed for the rendezvous — midnight.
Chalky footprints in the back of the car suggest two men joined Mr Abberley, occupying the rear seats.
The quantity of soil deposited suggests they had walked some distance, perhaps from the lay-by on the other side of Walbury Hill.
If so, the purpose was presumably to take Mr Abberley by surprise.
The letter he had with him is missing.
The money…we have already discussed.
Our reconstruction of events assumes a conversation between them, culminating in an argument and Mr Abberley's murder.
He appears to have been grabbed from behind, then, using a knife, his assailant…
Well, perhaps I need not continue.’
‘Any idea who we're dealing with?’ asked Miller.
‘Madmen,’ was Ursula's bleak reply.
‘Maurice thought they were Spaniards,’ said Charlotte.
‘Because his father was killed in the Spanish Civil War?’ enquired Golding.
‘Principally, yes.
But also because of the delay in making contact.
And the use of the International Herald Tribune in Sam's photograph.’
‘Which we have?’
Miller looked across at D.C. Finch.
‘Yes, sir.’
Finch handed the photograph to Miller, who did no more than glance at it before passing it on to Golding and muttering: ‘Could be anywhere.’
‘The man who telephoned certainly spoke with a foreign accent,’ Charlotte pointed out.
‘Ah yes, the tapes,’ said Miller, with a roll of his eyes.
‘High time we heard them, I think.
Any objections, Mrs Abberley?’
‘Of course not.’
Miller nodded to Finch, who rose and moved to the hi-fi cabinet, where the three cassettes stood ready for use.
She inserted the first in the machine and pressed the button.
For several seconds, Charlotte expected to hear Maurice's recorded voice.
Then she realized something was wrong.
Finch ejected the cassette, peered at it, replaced it and tried again.
But the result was the same: the faint whirring of a blank tape.
‘What's going on?’ demanded Miller.
‘I don't know, sir.
These are the tapes Mrs Abberley showed me earlier.’
Ursula tossed her head in irritation and bustled across to join her.
Then, as she inspected the cassette, irritation turned to bafflement.
‘This is the right one,’ she insisted.
‘Try the others,’ suggested Golding.
But even before they had Charlotte knew what they would find.
She knew because, albeit too late, she had come to understand her brother.
Maurice was as cautious as he was clever.
Or had been, she mentally corrected herself The tapes represented proof of his involvement in the theft of the letters and, by inference, in Beatrix's murder.
He had clearly been afraid they might be used against him  after Samantha's release.
Therefore he had taken what must have seemed an obvious step to protect himself.
‘I don't understand,’ said Finch, as, with Ursula, Miller and Golding gathered around her, she played each side of each cassette to no avail.
‘There's nothing on them.’
‘Nothing?’ growled Miller.
‘Oh, Christ!’
Ursula turned away and instantly caught Charlotte's eye.
‘He wiped them.’
Charlotte nodded.
‘I think he must have.’
Golding stared at Ursula.
‘You mean your husband deliberately obliterated these recordings?’
‘I'm afraid so, Chief Inspector.’
‘Why?’
‘Because they proved he'd stolen the letters,’ said Charlotte in a dull voice she scarcely recognized as her own.
‘They were incriminating evidence.’
‘But they were also the only evidence as to the identity of the kidnappers,’ protested Golding.
‘I know.’
‘Let's get this straight,’ put in Miller.
‘The letters have been surrendered to the kidnappers.
The tapes have been wiped.
And apart from a next-to-useless photograph all we have —’
‘Is Maurice dead,’ murmured Ursula.
‘And Sam missing.’
8
The shock of Maurice's death finally overtook Charlotte when sleep had undermined her defences.
Lying in bed at dawn on Tuesday morning at Swans' Meadow, she felt the stirrings of grief more as a physical process than a mental one.
Her eyes were tearful, her hands trembly, her palms moist.
And the horror of how Maurice had  died could not be set aside, even when she was awake.
Whenever she was not concentrating on something else, it sprang into the foreground of her thoughts.
Yet beyond this involuntary level, she was aware of an altogether more complex reaction.
She felt no desire to avenge her brother's murder.
Indeed, some part of her approved of the justice of it.
Maurice had murdered Beatrix, albeit not with his own hands.
He had brought about her death to satisfy his greed and his pride.
He had brushed her aside because he believed his needs and wishes were more important than hers.
And now he had been made to pay for what he had done.
But why?
There her conjectures reached an abrupt end.
Nothing in Tristram's letter could have provoked such a response.
Nothing, at all events, that she had noticed.
And, since the letters were now gone, it was too late to scan them for clues.
She could not even remember exactly how Tristram had phrased his reference to the document he meant to send to Beatrix.
No wonder Superintendent Miller had become exasperated.
His parting remarks last night had suggested he did not believe anything they had told him.
And, in the circumstances, who could blame him?
Not that his scepticism about the letters would last much longer, since Chief Inspector Golding was to travel to Wales today to interview Frank Griffith.
Nevertheless, Charlotte could not see how their enquiries were to be taken forward.
Ursula was clinging to the belief that Samantha would soon be released.
Her daughter's safety was all she cared about.
In many ways, she would prefer not to know the identity or motive of her captors.
If time began to undermine her confidence in such an outcome, it would be different.
But until then…
Charlotte climbed out of bed, put on her borrowed dressing-gown, crossed to the window and pulled back the curtains.
The night had strewn a carpet of dew-beaded cobwebs across the lawn and mist was rising from the  river.
Autumn was reclaiming summer and with it the sun-gilded image of Samantha, last and most innocent of all the Abberleys.
Would she ever again pad across the grass, barefoot in her bikini?
Or stretch her limbs and laugh at the careworn ways of her elders?
How long, Charlotte wondered as she bit her lip to hold the tears at bay, would the question remain unanswered?
Derek Fairfax learned of Maurice Abberley's death from a headline in the Financial Times : LADRAM SHARES SLIP ON NEWS OF CHAIRMAN'S MURDER.
It was such an utterly unexpected development that his mind could not register any immediate reaction beyond amazement.
He bought half a dozen other newspapers and read every word they had printed on the subject, but none added much to his knowledge.
Maurice Abberley, fifty-year-old chairman and managing director of Ladram Avionics, was found murdered in his car in a hilltop lay-by near Newbury, Berkshire, early yesterday morning.
Police said his throat had been cut.
The discovery was made by his wife and sister .
Derek debated whether to telephone Charlotte Ladram and offer his condolences, but, in the end, he decided not to.
He did not want her to think he was gloating.
Later, he began to wonder whether, with her brother dead, she might be prepared to tell the police how he had almost certainly murdered his aunt.
If so, it would surely only be after a period of mourning.
He would have to let her recover from the shock before contacting her.
Even then, she might not respond well to the suggestion.
But, for Colin's sake, he would have to put it to her.
In so far as Derek thought at all about who had murdered Maurice Abberley — or why — he supposed a crazed hitch-hiker must have been responsible.
The possibility that he had been killed for some reason connected with his father's letters did not occur to Derek.
Even for a single moment.
At Swans' Meadow, Charlotte and Ursula had no time to brood.
Police officers of various ranks and specialisms came and went all day, checking for forensic evidence relating to the kidnap, intercepting some telephone calls and listening in to others.
Friends and business associates of Maurice were in frequent contact.
Some were judged trustworthy enough to be told about Samantha's abduction.
Others were not.
Uncle Jack fell into the latter category, Ursula vehemently rejecting his offer to lend a hand.
The police took the immediate neighbours into their confidence out of sheer necessity, hoping one of them might have seen or heard something significant the previous Tuesday; but none had.
Ursula's concern for Samantha's safety seemed to eclipse any grief she felt on Maurice's account.
She was happy to let Charlotte deal with the registrar, coroner and undertaker, with whose procedures Charlotte was only too familiar.
The pathologist had finished with Maurice's body, which now lay in a chapel of rest in Maidenhead, awaiting a decision on when and where the funeral was to be held.
Charlotte felt it was for Ursula to say, but all Ursula could think about was her living daughter, not her dead husband.
In the afternoon, D.C. Finch drove Charlotte to Newbury Police Station to collect her car.
Nothing was said, but she had the impression it had been examined almost as closely as Maurice's.
Superintendent Miller, it seemed, was leaving no stone — or mat — unturned.
She returned to Bourne End by a circuitous route along minor roads.
The winding lanes and grey stillness of early autumn combined to soothe her spirit.
But a stray recollection of a golliwog Maurice had given her for her fifth birthday undid the effect in an instant and she reached Swans' Meadow with her eyes red and face blotchy from tears, only to find to her surprise that Ursula was in a similar condition.
‘It's having to tell so many lies, Charlie.
It's the strain of remembering who knows and who doesn't.
Friends of Sam have been on, wanting to speak to her, eager to offer their condolences.
And I have to keep saying she's out, busy, emigrated, in the bath, gone to bloody Timbuktu.’
‘There's been no news of her release, then?’
‘No.
And now I'm beginning to wonder if there ever will be.’
She poured herself a gin and tonic and took up a position she had frequently occupied since the kidnap — standing by the lounge window, staring out into the garden, glass cupped in her right hand and cradled against her breast like a child, cigarette held aloft in her left hand, mouth half-open, eyes fixed intently on some distant and perhaps invisible object.
‘Everyone's been so bloody kind.
I think that just makes it worse.
So understanding, so very solicitous .’
‘They're only trying to help.’
‘Even Spicer rang.
Can you imagine?
Even he thought he ought to —’
‘Spicer?’
‘Our boozy ex-chauffeur.
Surely you remember?’
‘He phoned?
Today?’
‘Yes.’
‘What did he want?’
‘To express his sympathy, I suppose, which I could have done without.
It was difficult to get rid of him, actually.
He was full of the usual questions.
How?
When?
Why?
Anybody would have thought —’
‘Where did he phone from?’
‘A call-box somewhere.
Or a pay-phone in a pub.
I don't know.
Does it matter?’
‘It may do.
You see, I —’
‘Wait!’
At the first note of the doorbell's chime, Ursula swung round and signalled Charlotte to be silent.
‘This may be news of Sam.
I'll go.’
She almost broke into a run to reach the hall.
Charlotte heard her wrench the front  door open and exclaim: ‘Chief Inspector Golding!
Is it about Sam?’
‘I'm afraid not, Mrs Abberley.
Can I come in?’
Ursula's reply was not audible.
A few moments later, she reappeared in the lounge, with Golding behind her.
‘Ah, Miss Ladram,’ he said, smiling at Charlotte.
‘I'm glad you're here as well.’
‘I thought you were in Wales, Chief Inspector.’
‘I've just got back.
In fact, I came straight here.’
‘Frank Griffith told you all about the letters?’
‘Not exactly.
That's why I've called.
There's a substantial discrepancy between your account and his.’
‘Discrepancy ?’
Ursula rounded on him.
‘What bloody discrepancy?’
‘Perhaps it would be more accurate to call it a total contradiction.’
‘For God's sake say what you mean,’ she snapped.
‘Very well.
Mr Griffith is a prickly character, as I'm sure you're aware.
Unforthcoming, to put it mildly.
But he was emphatic on one point.
He knows nothing about any letters from Tristram Abberley to his sister.’
‘You're joking.’
‘No.’
Charlotte stared at Golding, hoping she had somehow misunderstood.
‘Knows nothing ?
He said that?’
‘He denies ever reading or possessing such letters.
Hence he also denies they were stolen from him.
By Mr Abberley or anybody else.’
‘But we saw them,’ shouted Ursula, stubbing out her cigarette so violently the ashtray vibrated beneath it.
‘At least we saw one of them.’
‘So you said.’
There was a flatness in Golding's voice, a deliberate suppression of meaning.
Charlotte looked straight at him.
‘Don't you believe us, Chief Inspector?’
‘It's certainly hard to imagine why you should invent such an elaborate story.’
‘We didn't invent it.’
He smiled faintly.
‘Well, that remains to be seen, doesn't it?
As a detective, I have to keep an open mind.
I have to consider every possibility.’
‘Including the possibility that we're lying?’
‘Exactly so, Miss Ladram.
Including the possibility that you're lying .’
9
The first telephone call Derek Fairfax received after reaching the office on Wednesday proved what he had begun to suspect: that the death of Maurice Abberley amounted to rather more than the newspapers had revealed.
‘Fairfax.’
‘Good morning, Mr Fairfax.
My name's Golding.
Detective Chief Inspector Golding of Thames Valley CID.’
‘Thames Valley?’
‘I'm investigating the murder of Mr Maurice Abberley.
Perhaps you've read about it.’
‘Er…
Yes, I have.’
‘Your name's been given by the murdered man's sister, Miss Charlotte Ladram, as somebody able to corroborate certain aspects of the evidence she's laid before us.’
‘Really?
What evidence?’
‘I'd like to talk to you about it.
Would that be possible?’
‘Well…
Yes, of course.
But —’
‘Could I call on you later?
This afternoon perhaps?’
‘You mean…here?’
‘If it's not inconvenient.’
‘No, no.
I'm sure —’
‘Shall we say two-thirty?’
‘Well…all right.’
‘Until two-thirty, then.
Goodbye, Mr Fairfax.’
Derek put the telephone down slowly, frowning as he did so.
If he had not been so taken aback, he might have suggested a different venue.
But it was too late now.
What form of corroboration did Golding have in mind? he wondered.
Why had Charlotte Ladram decided to involve him when she had previously been so eager to exclude him?
Impulsively he grabbed the telephone directory, looked up her number and dialled it.
But there was no answer.
He tried again ten minutes later, then at half hourly intervals throughout the morning.
But the result was always the same.
Charlotte Ladram was not at home.
Charlotte was in fact driving west along the M4 to South Wales, intent upon extracting from Frank Griffith some explanation of why he had misled Chief Inspector Golding.
By noon she was on the Brecon by-pass and, less than an hour later, was steering gingerly between the ruts on the rough and winding track to Hendre Gorfelen.
It was as she was approaching the last crest before the house came into sight that she suddenly had to stamp on the brakes as a Land Rover came pitching round the hillside.
The two vehicles came to a halt virtually bumper to bumper, with no room to pass each other between the dry stone walls.
And there, staring back at Charlotte from the cab of the Land Rover, unsmiling and motionless, was Frank Griffith.
Charlotte switched off the ignition and climbed out.
The Land Rover engine rumbled on as she walked round to the driver's door and waited for him to look at her.
Eventually, just when she thought he never would, he turned it off.
‘Frank?’
He continued to stare straight ahead.
‘You must have been expecting me.’
Still there was no response.
‘Why did you lie to the police?’
Now, at last, he did acknowledge her presence, with a faint nod and a stubborn extension of his lower lip.
‘I did what you wanted me to do,’ he said.
‘What I wanted you to do?’
‘Forget the whole thing.
Leave well alone.
Stop causing trouble to you and your family.’
‘I never said that.’
‘You meant it, though.’
He glared round at her.
‘Why else would you have left me that note?
You didn't believe McKitrick had stolen the letters, did you?
It was a lie.
So, before you start demanding to know why I lied, perhaps you'd like to tell me why you lied.’
‘All right.’
She hung her head.
‘There seemed to be no way of proving what Maurice had done.
Nor of preventing him from publishing the letters.
So I thought…
I thought it would be for the best to…to…’
‘Fob me off?’
‘Yes.’
She forced herself to meet his gaze, to admit the truth of his accusations as openly as she could.
‘But everything's changed now, don't you see?’
‘No.
I don't.’
‘Didn't Golding tell you about my niece?’
‘Yes.
He told me.’
‘She's in danger, Frank.
Grave danger.
Aren't you willing to do anything to help her?’
‘There's nothing I can do.’
‘You can convince the police the letters really exist.
That they're what this is all about.’
‘But they're not.
They have nothing to do with it.’
‘They must have.
Nothing else makes any sense.
In his last letter, Tristram referred to a document he was sending — or intending to send — to Beatrix.
And the kidnappers demanded everything Maurice stole from you.
They must have meant that to include the document, but Maurice didn't have it.’
‘Because I didn't have it.
Beatrix sent me the letters and that's all.
She never mentioned receiving anything else  from Tristram, with or after his last communication.’
‘Don't you have any idea what it might be?’
‘None.
Besides, it makes more sense to me to believe your brother was the victim of one of the many enemies I'm sure he made in the course of his life.
As for your niece…’
‘Yes, Frank?
What about Sam?
She's just twenty years old.
Younger than you were when you volunteered for Spain.
Younger than Beatrix was when she wrote Tristram's first poem for him.’
His expression remained as unyielding as ever.
‘I can't help her.’
‘Won't you even try?’
‘Beatrix asked me to keep her secret.
Your brother's death means I can.
It's a second chance I don't deserve.
But it's one I don't intend to waste.’
‘What about Sam?’
‘I'm washing my hands of your family.’
He stared out intently through the windscreen.
‘I'm forgetting everything I've ever known about them.
I'm doing what I should have done from the start.’
‘Which is?’
‘Thinking of myself.’
He turned and looked straight at her.
‘Now, why don't you reverse to the bridge?
You can turn round there.
Then we can both go our separate ways.’
10
Derek's previous experience of dealing with the police amounted to clarifying some technical points for the Fraud Squad when a client of Fithyan &Co. was arrested for tax evasion.
On that occasion he had been treated with a degree of courtesy not far short of deference and he had  subconsciously expected the same of his interview with Chief Inspector Golding.
But his expectations were not to be fulfilled.
Golding was a lean and outwardly languid man of about Derek's own age, smartly dressed in a dark suit, striped shirt and monogrammed tie.
This and his expression of heavy-lidded scepticism gave him more the appearance of an Old Etonian stockbroker than a policeman.
It enabled him to ask the bluntest of questions in the politest of tones and to disguise his opinion behind the blandest of smiles.
When he invited Derek to confirm the existence of Tristram Abberley's letters to his sister, it was impossible to guess at the purpose of his enquiry.
And when Derek emphasized, as he was determined to, that the contents of the letters supported his brother's protests of his innocence, Golding heard him out with patient inscrutability.
It was, indeed, only when their conversation seemed to be moving towards a close, with Derek none the wiser about why it had taken place, that Golding began to apply a steely edge to his questions.
‘Why do you suppose Mr Griffith might deny possessing the letters, Mr Fairfax?’
‘I don't suppose he would.’
‘But he has.
There's my problem.
He denies it point-blank.
And you've never seen any of them, have you?’
‘No, but —’
‘So, strictly speaking, you can't corroborate Miss Ladram's account, can you?’
‘I most certainly can.
She —’
‘Why do you think Mr Abberley was murdered?’
‘I don't know.’
‘For the letters?’
‘I wouldn't have thought so.
But then, as you've pointed out, I don't know what they contain.’
‘Something worth kidnapping Mr Abberley's daughter for, apparently.’
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘Mr Abberley's daughter has been abducted and is still missing.
The letters were demanded as ransom.
All of this was prior to our involvement, of course.’
Derek felt taken aback, as he knew he was meant to be, by this sudden revelation.
‘For the present, I must ask you to say nothing to anybody about this aspect of the case.’
‘Of course…
Of course not.’
‘The kidnappers’ motive is a complete mystery to us.
Money is the norm where abduction is concerned.
Generally lots of it.
A fifty-year-old cache of letters hardly seems to fit the bill, does it?
If you'll pardon the pun.’
‘I suppose not.’
‘Could these letters be worth anything?’
‘No.
I don't see —’ Derek struggled to order his thoughts.
‘Only to Maurice Abberley.’
‘Because they would unlock fifty years’ worth of royalties on Tristram Abberley's poems?’
‘Yes.’
Golding fell silent for a moment, tugging reflectively on the lobe of his left ear.
Then he said: ‘If the letters can't be recovered, your brother's defence collapses even before it's been assembled, doesn't it?’
‘Yes.’
This conclusion had not occurred to Derek, but it was true nonetheless.
He felt helpless, overwhelmed by a tidal rush of events he could not hope to understand.
‘And if they are found, it's too late for Maurice Abberley to benefit from their publication, isn't it?
The royalties would go to his widow and daughter?’
‘I suppose so.’
‘Or just his widow, if his daughter isn't released alive.’
Golding's voice sank to a murmur, as if he were talking to himself rather than Derek.
‘There's something here nobody's seeing.
A pattern to the missing letters and wiped tapes, the denials, the contradictions, the downright —’
‘Wiped tapes?’
Golding stared at Derek in surprise.
‘What?’
‘You mentioned some tapes.’
‘Did I?
Extraordinary.
Well, never mind.’
He smiled.
‘I'd better not hold you up any longer.
One last thing.’
‘Yes?’
‘Where were you last Sunday night?’
‘At home.’
‘Alone?’
‘Yes.’
‘There's nobody who could confirm that?’
‘No.
Why do you ask?’
‘Because you blame — or blamed — Maurice Abberley for your brother's arrest.
You've admitted as much.
In other words, you've admitted to having a motive for his murder.
‘I've done no such thing.’
‘You have, actually.’
Golding grinned at him.
‘I was just trying to rule you out from the start.
It's a pity I can't.’
His grin broadened.
‘Isn't it?’
After Golding's departure, Derek made several further attempts to contact Charlotte by telephone.
When it became obvious she was not at home, he decided — against his better judgement — to try Swans' Meadow, directory enquiries furnishing the number.
This time there was an answer, but it was the one he had dreaded.
‘Hello?’
He recognized the voice instantly as Ursula Abberley's, but knew it would be best to pretend he had not.
‘Could I speak to Charlotte Ladram, please?’
‘Who's calling?’
‘Er…
Derek Fairfax.’
‘Derek Fairfax ?
This is Ursula Abberley speaking, Mr Fairfax.
Charlotte's not here.
Even if she were, I can't think she'd want to talk to you.’
‘I'm sorry to disturb you…at this sad time, Mrs Abberley…but it's very…’
‘If you were really sorry to disturb me, you wouldn't have, would you?’
‘Well, I —’
‘Goodbye, Mr Fairfax.
Please don't call again.’
When Charlotte reached Swans' Meadow late that afternoon, tired and dispirited after her journey to Wales, she found Ursula in a further stage of her adjustment to Maurice's death and Samantha's disappearance.
It was one of wistful regret rather than fretful anxiety and had taken her to her daughter's bedroom, where she was sorting through the show-jumping rosettes Samantha had accumulated during her hippomanic early teens.
‘There's no news, Charlie,’ she mournfully announced.
‘No word.
No sign.
Nothing.’
‘I wish I could tell you I'd expected there to be.’
‘Why are they keeping her?
We gave them everything they wanted.’
‘Everything we had of what they wanted, you mean.
And they don't know that.
They must think we're holding out on them.
That's why they killed Maurice.’
‘But who are they?
And if they want more — of whatever it is — why don't they tell us?’
‘I don't know.
Perhaps they're waiting for the police to lose interest.’
‘Then they may have to wait a long time.
D.C. Finch was here again today, enquiring after my health, checking on my movements, watching, prying, probing.’
‘It's her job.’
‘And doesn't she just love it?
Spying on me is so much pleasanter than directing the bloody traffic.’
Ursula's mood was changing again, reverting to anger and impatience.
She rose from the bed where she had spread out the rosettes, strode to the window and stared down into the garden.
‘They listen to every telephone call, you know, in and out.
They're all recorded, logged and traced.’
‘In case one of them's from the kidnappers.’
‘Or to the kidnappers.
They think we know more than we're telling, Charlie.
How can we convince them we don't?’
‘We can't.
Frank Griffith has made them wonder if the letters really exist.
And there's nothing I can do to make him say otherwise.’
‘Then we're hoist with our own petard.
If the police think we made them up, they'll think the same about the tapes, maybe about the kidnap itself.’
‘Surely not.’
‘It's how their minds work.’
‘But they know Sam's missing.
As soon as the kidnappers make contact —’
‘Exactly!’
Ursula turned to look at her.
‘As soon as they make contact .
But what if they don't?
What if we never heat from them again?
What then, Charlie?
What will the police think then?’
11
Tension eases with the passage of time, no matter how unbearable it seems at the outset.
The human condition adapts in spite of itself, turning abnormality into a form of routine.
So it was that by Thursday morning Charlotte could detect within herself an ebbing of urgency, a slide towards fatalism, a creeping acceptance that Samantha's absence might be as permanent as Maurice's.
Some similar process in Ursula presumably explained her willingness for the first time to discuss arrangements for the funeral, which they agreed should be held as soon as possible.
Charlotte was in fact on the point of telephoning the undertaker to put matters in hand when she was intercepted by an incoming call.
‘Hello?’
‘Who's speaking, please?’
The voice was low and huskily feminine.
‘Charlotte Ladram.
Who —’
‘This is Natasha van Ryneveld.
I know who you are, Charlotte.
Do you know who I am?’
‘Yes.’
‘I thought you might, though Maurice chose to believe otherwise.
I learned of his death when I tried to telephone him at Ladram Avionics.
It was a shock.
I would have liked to have been told less…abruptly.
But perhaps you think I had no right to be.’
‘Perhaps I do.’
‘How is Ursula?’
‘She's…bearing up.’
‘May I speak to her?’
‘I'm not sure.’
In fact the doorbell had just rung and Ursula had gone to answer it.
Charlotte was relieved to be able to say honestly, ‘Actually, I'm afraid you can't.’
‘What happened, Charlie?
May I call you Charlie?
Maurice always did.
How did he come to be murdered?
What were the circumstances?’
‘I can't discuss them.’
‘Why not?’
‘It's…complicated.’
Charlotte heard Superintendent Miller's gruff tones in the hall.
‘I must go now.
I'll tell Ursula you called.’
‘But —’
Charlotte put the receiver down and felt positively grateful for the lack of opportunity to consider her reaction to the conversation.
As she looked up, Ursula returned to the room, with Superintendent Miller, Chief Inspector Golding and D.C. Finch behind her.
The three police officers were grim-faced and intent.
They acknowledged Charlotte with peremptory nods.
‘We've just held a case conference, Mrs Abberley,’ Miller began.
‘And we've decided on a change of approach.’
‘We're hampered by a total lack of evidence,’ said Golding.
‘The only way we can set about obtaining some is to raise the public profile of the case, which is so far limited to the bald facts of your husband's murder.’
‘Accordingly,’ said Miller, ‘I propose to hold a press conference this afternoon at which I'll reveal we're dealing with a kidnap as well as a murder.’
‘You propose ,’ said Ursula.
‘Are you asking for my agreement?’
Golding smiled at her.
‘Naturally, we hope you'll see the wisdom of taking such a step.
Indeed, we hope you'll be willing to attend the press conference and answer questions.’
‘But it'll go ahead anyway,’ growled Miller.
‘I don't need your consent.’
‘Won't publicity frighten off the kidnappers?’ asked Charlotte.
‘The embargo hasn't flushed them out, has it?’
Golding countered.
‘We need a public response.
Sightings.
Suggestions.
Tip-offs.
We need information.’
‘Shouldn't you wait a little longer?’
‘Nine days is long enough,’ put in Miller.
‘People forget quickly, Miss Ladram,’ said Golding.
‘We can't afford to delay.’
‘Very well,’ said Ursula.
‘Hold your press conference.’
‘And you'll attend?’ asked Golding.
‘Yes.’
Charlotte was watching the two policemen as Ursula replied.
She saw them glance at each other and exchange a conspiratorial arching of the eyebrows, compounded in Miller's case by the faintest of nods.
Ursula's participation would evidently strengthen their chances of success.
But what success represented to them she was no longer sure she knew.
Derek started watching the six o'clock news on television that evening in a distracted mood, only for his attention to be seized by mention of the name Abberley during the preamble to film of a press conference held earlier in the day at Newbury Police Station.
The reporter referred to sensational developments in the Abberley murder case.
Then attention switched to a Superintendent Miller of pugnacious appearance, who described in clipped and guarded police-speak how twenty-year-old Samantha Abberley had been abducted nine days previously.
Anybody who had seen or heard anything suspicious in the neighbourhood of her home on Tuesday 1st September was urged to contact Thames Valley CID.
A photograph of the missing girl was displayed, looking wholly unlike Derek's single memory of her.
Then, with Chief Inspector Golding visible in the background, Ursula Abberley made a personal plea for her daughter's release.
Her performance — particularly in response to questions — was not what Derek was used to when viewing such events.
There was none of the customary tearfulness, no hint of hand-wringing despair.
Instead, she spoke calmly and rationally, more like a mediator than a mother.
All the words were in place —‘I would not wish this on my worst enemy ’; ‘Sam's safety is my only concern ’; ‘I appeal to the public to help in any way they can ’; ‘I beg those who are holding her to let her go ’— but the heart seemed strangely absent.
Something else was also absent.
Derek waited for Superintendent Miller to mention Tristram Abberley's letters but he never did.
What the kidnappers wanted was not specified.
What the police expected them to do was not hinted at.
And by the end Derek was more confused than ever.
Charlotte and Ursula watched the broadcast together at Swans' Meadow, Ursula nursing a gin and tonic as she did so.
When it was over, she walked across to the television, switched it off, turned to look at Charlotte and said: ‘They made me sound like an unfeeling bitch.’
‘Nobody will have thought that.’
‘Oh, yes they will.
You're expected to behave as if you're in a soap opera these days.
Floods of tears.
Torrents of emotion.
Self-control counts against you.’
‘Perhaps you shouldn't have taken part.’
‘How could I have refused?
Imagine the capital Miller and Golding would have made out of it if I had.’
‘They're trying to help, Ursula.’
‘Are they?
I don't think so.
I think they're trying to do exactly the opposite.’
‘Oh, come on.’
Charlotte summoned a smile.
‘It's their duty to find Sam — and to protect her.’
‘No it isn't.
It's their duty to find somebody they can convict of Maurice's murder.’
‘Isn't that the same thing?’
‘They don't think it is.
Come into the garden with me.’
‘Why?’
‘Come outside and I'll explain.’
With a shrug of her shoulders, Charlotte rose and accompanied Ursula out through the kitchen and into the garden, where a calm and picturesque evening was spreading long shadows and rectangles of gold across the lawn.
‘See the man feeding the ducks on the other side of the river?’
Ursula pointed towards the Cookham bank, where an unremarkable middle-aged man in a brown anorak was tossing crumbs to a quacking and splashing circle of waterfowl.
‘Recognize him?’
‘No.’
‘He's a policeman.’
‘How can you possibly know?’
‘Because I never saw him before Monday and I haven't stopped seeing him since.
Him and a couple of others out of the same mould.
They're not looking for Sam, Charlie.
They're looking for Maurice's murderers.
And they think they've found them.
Here.
In this house.’
‘That's ridiculous.’
‘Yes.
But they don't realize it is.
And there's nothing we can do to make them.
So, while they watch us watching them…’
Her voice trailed into silence.
Her chin drooped.
The tears she should have shed movingly on television but had not were there now, clear to see, brimming in her eyes, absurdly beautiful in the slanting sunlight.
‘While they play their bloody silly games and force us to do the same…’
She swallowed hard and looked straight at Charlotte.
‘Sam's chances of coming out of this alive diminish all the time.’
Then she raised her head and shouted loud enough to make the man on the other side of the river glance towards them, ‘With every day they waste ,’ before adding in a murmur: ‘The thread Sam's life hangs by grows thinner and thinner.’
12
On Friday, Charlotte went home.
She justified her departure on the grounds that, with arrangements for Maurice's funeral on Monday now in place, there was nothing to detain her at Swans' Meadow.
Ursula did not attempt to persuade her to stay, for which she was grateful.
If pressed, she might have revealed just how eager she was to be gone.
Although she had expressed doubts about Ursula's interpretation of the police's conduct, it had rung truer to her than she had cared to admit.
What worried her most of all was that she might be held in equal suspicion.
By returning to Ockham House, she could distance herself from events and reclaim a reassuring degree of privacy.
She could not escape altogether, of course, as a clutch of telephone calls swiftly demonstrated.
Several  acquaintances and former workmates had seen the television broadcast and wanted to offer their sympathy and advice, which was generally as well-intentioned as it was useless.
Uncle Jack called to complain of being kept in the dark just when his expertise in such matters — of which Charlotte was unaware — might be most valuable.
And Lulu Harrington rang to express her dismay at what had occurred, enabling Charlotte to confirm something Ursula had already deduced.
‘The person in New York you sent a letter to on Beatrix's behalf-could her name have been van Ryneveld rather than van Ryan?’
‘Why, yes, it certainly could have been.
What makes you think so?’
‘She's been in touch.
But Madame V from Paris hasn't.
I don't suppose you've remembered her name?’
‘I fear not.
I've racked my brains, but at my age there are precious few left to rack.
I still can't call more than the initial letter to mind.’
‘You'll let me know if you do?’
‘Most certainly.’
After Lulu had rung off, Charlotte thought about the four letters Beatrix had left with her and reflected that the contents of two were still a complete mystery.
Maurice must have known what was in the one to his mistress.
At least, he must have known what she said was in it.
But she was presumably as capable of lying as Ursula.
Yet the tone of her telephone call to Swans' Meadow had implied she knew nothing of Samantha's abduction — or of what her kidnappers had demanded in return for her release.
If so
The jangle of the telephone, by which Charlotte was still standing, fractured her thoughts.
She grabbed at it in irritable haste.
‘Yes?’
‘Er…
Miss Ladram?’
‘Yes.’
‘This is Derek Fairfax.’
Guilt washed over Charlotte at his words.
She had given his name to Golding on Tuesday but had made no effort to contact him since to explain the situation.
‘I've been ringing you for days.
The police have been to see me.’
‘Yes.
They would have been.
I'm sorry.
That was my fault.’
‘Since then I've seen the broadcast about your niece.
Nothing was said about ransom on the television, but the officer who interviewed me, Chief Inspector Golding, said Tristram Abberley's letters were demanded.
Is that true?’
‘Yes.’
‘But I don't understand.
Who…
Who could possibly —’
‘None of us understands, Mr Fairfax.
If only we did.’
‘And Frank Griffith has denied the letters ever existed?’
‘Yes.
But we can't discuss this now.’
Yet Charlotte did feel the need to discuss it.
And she suddenly realized that Derek Fairfax was one of the few people who would view matters in the same light as her.
‘Perhaps we could meet.’
‘Certainly.
I'd like to.’
‘Can you come to lunch tomorrow?’
‘Yes.’
‘All right, then.
Let's say midday, shall we?’
‘Fine, I'll see you then.’
‘Yes.
Goodbye, Mr Fairfax.’
Charlotte put the receiver down and pondered the mystery of why she had issued such an invitation.
It would be folly to raise his hopes just when the loss of the letters had effectively dashed them.
Yet she badly needed an ally, a friend who would listen and advise.
Why look for one in Derek Fairfax?
Because, she supposed, there was nowhere else to look.
He was her last resort now as well as his brother's.
She wandered into the kitchen and began assembling a shopping list.
Cooking lunch for a guest might at least take her mind off the intractable problem of Samantha for a while.
When the telephone rang yet again, she was inclined not to answer it.
But, when it showed no sign of stopping, she relented.
‘Hello?’
‘Miss Ladram?’
‘Yes.’
The caller's voice was familiar to her, clipped and formal with the hint of an accent.
She realized who it was a fraction of a second before he spoke again.
‘I represent those who are holding your niece, Miss Ladram.’
‘What?’
‘You heard.
And I rather think you understood.
Police surveillance has prevented us contacting your sister-in-law.
We have therefore turned to you.’
‘Who do you represent?’
‘It is better you should not know.’
‘Why did you kill Maurice?’
‘Because he did not deliver all the papers.
And because he had the effrontery to offer money instead.’
‘He gave you everything he had.’
‘There is more.
And we want it.’
‘We don't have it.’
‘Then find it.
We know Beatrix Abberley had what we require.
Therefore it must lie within your power to locate and surrender it.’
‘Tell me what we're looking for.’
‘A document sent by Tristram Abberley to his sister in March 1938, written in the Catalan language.’
‘What sort of document?’
‘I have said enough.
We are patient, but not infinitely so.
We will keep your niece alive for one month from today.
You have until October eleven to procure the document.
When you do, place an advertisement in the personal column of the International Herald Tribune to  read as follows.
Pen pals can be reunited.
Orwell will pay .’
He paused for a moment.
‘You have that?’
Charlotte read back her own scrawled note from the jotter beside the telephone.
‘Pen pals can be reunited.
Orwell will pay.’
‘Correct.
If such a message appears on or before October eleven, we will contact you.’
‘You must give me more information.’
Charlotte knew she should glean as much as she possibly could, but her brain seemed sluggish and uninventive.
‘We're prepared to do anything to get Sam back.’
‘All you have to do is meet our requirements, fully and promptly.
Do not tell the police we have made contact.
If they seem to be drawing close to us, we shall kill your niece without hesitation.’
‘How…
How is Sam?’
‘She is alive.’
‘Can I speak to her?’
‘Enough of speaking.
You agree to our terms?’
‘Of course.
But —’
‘Then our business is concluded.
Good afternoon, Miss Ladram.’
13
Derek's first surprise when he arrived at Ockham House shortly before noon on Saturday was the cancellation of lunch.
Charlotte Ladram was more obviously nervous than he had known her to be on any previous occasion and professed herself reluctant to remain indoors, let alone cook a meal.
She suggested a walk in the open air and he readily agreed.
Her willingness to talk verged on a compelling need and after all his previous attempts to gain her confidence, which had made little headway, he  knew he must not let such an opportunity pass him by.
They drove towards Ashdown Forest, and even before they had found a suitable place to stop, Charlotte had begun to recount the events of the past week in such detail that it was obvious she was holding nothing back.
She slipped, without appearing to notice it, into addressing Derek by his first name and, after some initial awkwardness, he reciprocated.
Her brother's death seemed to have removed a barrier between them.
It was no longer necessary to pretend they knew less or more than they did.
Their obligation to be honest with each other outweighed for the first time whatever they owed to anyone else.
They parked near Camp Hill and walked out aimlessly across the heath amidst the estranged fathers flying kites with their sons and the headscarfed ladies exercising their labradors.
Everyday preoccupations had never seemed more remote, the present never more real, than now.
‘I suppose you think I should tell the police,’ said Charlotte, after describing the telephone call with which her niece's kidnappers had broken their silence.
‘Are you afraid they won't believe you?’
‘I wouldn't blame them if they didn't.
They've seen and heard nothing to convince them.
For all they know, Sam's abduction may be a figment of our imaginations.’
‘But she is missing.’
‘Or hiding.
How are they to know which?’
‘If you don't tell the police, what will you do?’
‘Try to find the document the kidnappers want.
Offer it to them in exchange for Sam's release.’
‘But where is there left to look?
You've combed through Beatrix's possessions time after time.
And I can't believe Frank would be holding anything back if he thought it could save a young girl's life.’
‘Neither can I. Which leaves the two other recipients of letters from Beatrix.’
‘One of whom is still unidentified.’
‘Yes.
But one isn't.
Natasha van Ryneveld.’
‘Maurice's mistress?
Why would Beatrix have sent a document entrusted to her by her brother fifty years ago to her nephew's mistress?’
‘I can't give you a reason.
But she sent her something.
That we do know.’
‘Surely Maurice would have known what it was — and handed it over to the kidnappers accordingly.’
‘Not necessarily.
Natasha may have lied to him about what her letter contained — as Ursula did.
After all, Beatrix wouldn't have sent her anything unless she had good reason to think it would be kept from Maurice.
And I'm pretty sure Natasha knew nothing about the kidnap.
Maurice probably didn't want to risk her objecting to the surrender of Tristram's letters.
So, if what she received from Beatrix is what the kidnappers want, she's not to know, is she?’
‘It still doesn't seem very likely.’
‘I agree.
But isn't it worth a try?’
‘I suppose so.
What will you do?
Visit her in New York?’
‘Well, I doubt she'll come here.
There are some awkward questions she may not want to answer.’
‘About what?’
‘About your brother, Derek.
Who rang him in May to make the appointment for him to visit Jackdaw Cottage?
Not Beatrix, obviously.
But it was a woman, wasn't it?’
‘Natasha van Ryneveld?’
‘Who else?’
They reached Airman's Grave and paused together beside its perimeter wall, gazing in at the poignant tribute to one victim of a long-ago conflict, though not as long-ago, it occurred to Derek, as the conflict which had recently extended its crabbed old hand to touch their lives.
‘Chief Inspector Golding pointed out to me…’ he hesitantly began.
‘Pointed out what?’
‘That Colin's defence, such as it is, collapses completely without Tristram's letters.’
He looked round to her and tried to smile.
‘Sorry,’ he murmured.
‘Don't apologize.
It's I who should apologize to you and your brother — for what Maurice did.’
‘But as Colin is to me, so Maurice was to you.
We can't choose our brothers.
Or cease to care about them.’
‘You reminded me once that Maurice is only — was only — my half-brother.’
‘Perhaps that's what I was apologizing for.’
Before caution could restrain the impulse, he placed his hand over hers where she was resting it on the low wall in front of them.
She made no move to shake it off.
‘You do have my sympathy, you know.
My sincere sympathy.’
She glanced at him.
A smile flickered across her lips.
‘Thank you,’ she said softly.
Derek removed his hand, glad he had been allowed to decide when he should do so.
‘Do you think this is really about the Spanish Civil War?’ he enquired.
‘The document dates from then and is written in Spanish — or Catalan.
What else are we to think?’
‘Nothing.
Which is what worries me.’
‘In what way?’
‘If it — whatever it is — matters enough, fifty years later, for people to kill and kidnap for…’
‘Yes?’
‘Then you need to be careful.
Very careful.’
‘Being careful won't help Sam.’
‘Perhaps not.
But I don't know Sam, I only know you.
I'm only worried about you.’
‘Don't be.’
‘If there's anything I can do…to help…’
‘There's nothing.’
She shook her head.
‘If Natasha will talk to anybody, it's me.’
‘What about Ursula?’
‘There'd be too much tension between them.
Besides, the police are keeping a close watch on her.
I shall tell her  what I propose to do, of course.
If she insists on informing the police, so be it.
But she won't.
Take my word for it.
She'll agree it's best for me to go — alone.’
Charlotte turned away and started back up the slope towards the road.
As Derek caught her up, a possibility came into his mind to which he gave immediate voice.
‘Is Natasha the only person you plan to visit in the States?’
Charlotte frowned.
‘Who else would I visit?’
‘I don't know.
It's just…’
He gritted his teeth, determined to put their new-found trust to the test.
‘I've been thinking.
Why didn't the kidnappers try to obtain the document earlier?
Why wait fifty years?’
‘Because they didn't know where it was.’
‘But now they do.
Or they think they do.
Something — or someone — drew their attention to Tristram's letters.
Who?
Only a few people knew about them.
You.
Me.
Maurice.
Ursula.
Frank Griffith.
And Emerson McKitrick.’
Charlotte did not reply at once.
They walked on in silence for a minute or so, then she said: ‘If you genuinely want to help me, Derek, don't ask about Emerson McKitrick.’
‘All right.
I won't.
But he is another reason why you should be careful.’
‘Then I promise I will be.’
She stopped and looked at him.
‘Satisfied?’
There was no sarcasm in the remark.
Her expression hovered, as Derek suspected his own did, on the brink of admitting what neither of them could quite believe.
‘Not really, Charlotte, no,’ he said with a smile.
She smiled back.
‘Everybody calls me Charlie.’
‘Could I be an exception?’
‘You could be, yes.’
‘Then I rather think I'd like to be.’
Halfway back to Tunbridge Wells, Charlotte said suddenly: ‘I'd like to visit a bookshop.’
Seeing Derek's puzzled look, she added: ‘You mentioned the Spanish  Civil War and I've been thinking about the message the kidnappers told me to use to contact them.’
‘Pen pals can be reunited.
Orwell will pay.’
‘It has to be George Orwell, doesn't it?
Didn't he fight in Spain?’
‘He may have done.’
‘Then he's bound to have written about it.
Park at the railway station and we'll try in Hatchard's.’
Half an hour later, they were scanning the autobiography shelves in Hatchard's.
Orwell was represented by Down and Out in Paris and London and one other volume whose title seized their immediate attention:Homage to Catalonia .
Charlotte lifted it from the row and together they read the note on the back.
This is Orwell's famous account of his experience as a militiaman in the Spanish Civil War.
In it he brings to bear …
‘Orwell will pay homage to Catalonia,’ said Derek under his breath.
‘That must be what it means.’
Charlotte nodded, turned to the front of the book and pointed to the year of first publication.
‘1938.
The year Tristram died.’
‘And the year he entrusted a document written in Catalan to Beatrix.
Maurice was right.’
Charlotte marched to the counter and paid for the book.
Derek waited until they were standing outside, with Saturday afternoon shoppers bustling past them, before asking: ‘What was Maurice right about?’
Something's snaked its way out of the Spanish Civil War — from fifty years ago — to wrap itself round our throats.’
Those were his very words.
I pooh-poohed them at the time.
And less than twenty-four hours later he was dead.’
She turned to look at Derek.
‘He could feel it, you see.
And now I think I can too.’
14
Maurice's funeral was in many respects indistinguishable from Beatrix's.
Both were well-attended and efficiently staged.
Both progressed smoothly from sun-lanced church to manicured crematorium.
And both seemed to be over before they had begun.
Yet there were also significant differences.
Most of those who had come to Beatrix's had done so out of love, whereas duty clearly impelled the score of senior staff from Ladram Avionics who turned out to bid Maurice a corporate farewell.
The same could be said of Miller, Golding and D.C. Finch, who contrived to look more like miscellaneous employees of the undertaker than police officers, let alone friends of the deceased.
And there was not even a pretence of mourning among the reporters and photographers who clogged Cookham churchyard and followed the cortège to Slough Crematorium and back.
Nor did a spirit of affectionate remembrance obtain among the few whom Ursula felt obliged to entertain afterwards at Swans' Meadow.
Aliki had returned from Cyprus in time to cater for the event, but nobody displayed much appetite for the food she had prepared and most departed as soon as decency permitted.
The only exception to this rule was Uncle Jack, who clearly had his sights set on several more whiskies when Charlotte insisted, at Ursula's request, on driving him to the station and seeing him aboard the London train.
When she returned to Swans' Meadow, she found Ursula had embarked on a cold-blooded drinking bout and was reluctant to accompany her into the garden, the one venue where Charlotte felt she could safely disclose  what had happened.
But accompany her she eventually did.
And sobriety was instantly restored when she heard Charlotte's news.
‘You know what this means, don't you?’ she responded, a sudden access of hope lighting up her face.
‘It means Sam still has a chance.’
‘Only if we can find the document,’ Charlotte cautioned.
‘That's why I think it would be worth going to New York.’
‘Thank God you're prepared to, Charlie.
I'd never be able to without the police getting wind of it.
And they mustn't, they absolutely mustn't.’
‘I agree.’
‘When will you go?’
‘As soon as you can supply me with Natasha's address and telephone number.’
‘You propose to forewarn her?’
‘I can't risk her being away.
And I don't think she'll’ refuse to see me, do you?’
‘I really couldn't —’ Ursula pursed her lips and suppressed her evident irritation.
‘No, I don't suppose she will.’
‘Is the…er…the report Beatrix commissioned here?’
‘Yes.
You may as well take it away with you.
After all, I don't need to insure myself against Maurice's treachery any more, do I?’
Ursula flicked a fragment of cigarette ash off the sleeve of her black dress and added, almost as an afterthought, ‘Poor Maurice,’ before turning and walking away towards the house.
As Charlotte started after her, it crossed her mind that this throw-away remark was the kindest thing Ursula had found to say about the man she had been married to for more than twenty years since the day they had found him dead.
She had succeeded in damning him with the faintest of eulogies.
Charlotte did not read the report until she was back at Ockham House.
She wondered how Beatrix had reacted to its revelation of the double life Maurice was leading.
Had it been the final confirmation of her suspicions?
On finishing it, had she realized for the first time that he meant to kill her?
If so, she had prepared for the event more thoroughly than he could ever have imagined.
And she had needed to, for she had known — as Maurice had not — that there was more at stake than Tristram's royalties, far more.
Poor Maurice, as his widow had truly said.
He had expected everybody to abide by the rules he had applied to his own life.
He had expected weakness to yield to strength.
He had expected money to answer every need.
No doubt, even at the end, as he saw the blade of the knife flash in the moonlight, he had assumed his killers would rob his corpse.
But they had not.
Instead, they had fed it with the only food he knew.
Charlotte wept then, more freely than at any time since his death.
She wept for them all — Tristram, Beatrix, Maurice and Samantha.
And lastly she wept for herself.
Then she dried her tears and read aloud the epigraph Orwell had chosen for Homage to Catalonia to make sure her voice would not betray her.
Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou be like unto him.
Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.’'
She was reminded of a remark in Tristram's last letter to Beatrix —‘Such a foolish conceit, in both senses, eh ?’— and she wondered if she was about to succumb to a similar temptation.
To start what she could not finish.
To initiate more than she knew.
‘No matter,’ she said to herself as she walked into the hall.
‘It must be done.’
She picked up the telephone and dialled the number recorded in the report for Maurice's Fifth Avenue apartment.
‘Yes?’
The voice came distantly, accompanied by an echo that seemed to rob it of identity.
‘Natasha van Ryneveld?’
‘Who is this?’
‘Charlotte Ladram.’
‘Why, Charlie, you take me by surprise.’
The accent was superficially American, but beneath there seemed to lie some other tongue, threatening to emerge at the end of every sentence.
‘I hadn't…
Why have you called?’
‘Maurice was cremated today.’
‘Ah.
Was he?
I thought it would be about now.
If only…
But still you don't say why you've called.’
‘I think we should meet.’
There was a lengthy pause before Natasha replied.
‘For what purpose?’
‘You asked about the circumstances of Maurice's death.’
‘And you want to tell me about them?’
‘Yes.’
‘You will come here?’
‘Yes.’
‘Just to satisfy the curiosity of your brother's mistress?
I don't think so, Charlie, do you?’
‘When you hear what I have to say, you'll understand.
And I hope you'll want to help.’
‘Help with what?’
‘We must meet if I'm to explain.’
Natasha sighed audibly and said nothing for so long Charlotte thought she had walked away from the telephone.
But she had not.
And when she spoke it was so suddenly and decisively that Charlotte felt her heart pound at her words.
‘Come then, Charlie.
Perhaps, after all, it's time we met.’
15
Charlotte had never crossed the Atlantic before.
It seemed so quick and easy when the time came that she wondered why she had waited so long.
But as the taxi bore her in from JFK Airport along featureless expressways beneath a gun-metal sky, her wonderment fell away.
This was an alien landscape, man-made in its totality according to a scale she could not comprehend.
When the taxi emerged from a tunnel beneath the East River amidst Manhattan's towering walls of glass, she suddenly felt unequal to the task she had set herself.
She was too small, too weak, too long sheltered from the harshnesses of the world.
But inadequate and ill-prepared though she felt, she knew she could not turn back now.
Already they were on Fifth Avenue, with the open expanse of Central Park on one side and a phalanx of elegant apartment blocks on the other.
The taxi drew to a halt where a purple awning reached out to the edge of the pavement.
She checked the number on the polished brass wall-plaque and knew she had arrived.
As she climbed out and approached, the door was opened from within.
A uniformed doorman smiled in welcome and confirmed Miss van Ryneveld was expecting her.
And so she entered one more hidden compartment of her brother's life.
Natasha was waiting at the door of the apartment when Charlotte emerged from the elevator.
She was a dark-haired woman of medium height with a faintly Asiatic cast to her brow and complexion.
She held her head proudly and, even before she moved, conveyed a feline quality of grace and languor.
She was wearing a loosely belted grey dress and black high-heeled shoes with very  little jewellery or adornment save a jet pendant at her throat.
Charlotte was immediately disconcerted by this hint of mourning and was grateful when Natasha smiled and stepped back, inviting her to enter.
‘Come in, Charlie.
You're exactly on time.
Just as I'd expect of Maurice's sister.’
‘Half-sister, actually.’
‘Of course.’
The smile acquired a glacial edge.
‘Such a fine but vital distinction.’
She led the way down a short and curving hall into the lounge — a rugged expanse of blue and gold that seemed to glow in the light admitted by three high windows.
Couches and armchairs as big as beds were surrounded by Graeco-Roman statuary and Oriental urns.
Vases sprouted flowers on every surface, their blooms multiplied by huge gilt-framed mirrors.
And when Charlotte glanced up, she was astonished to see that the ceiling had been painted as one vast rolling cloudscape.
Beneath it, across the ornately worked rugs Maurice had undoubtedly paid for, Natasha strode purposefully ahead.
She was of about Ursula's age and height, Charlotte estimated, but narrower in the waist and somewhat heavier around the hips and bosom.
She moved in a way that seemed to emphasize the body beneath the clothes, to hint at the purposes to which it might be put.
There was no mystery about what Maurice had seen in her.
It declared itself at every step.
‘Would you care for tea, Charlie?’
‘Er…
Yes please.’
Natasha rang a small bell and, almost instantly, a maid entered through another door.
They exchanged a few words in what sounded like Spanish.
Then the maid retreated.
‘Won't you sit down?’
‘Thank you.’
Charlotte chose one of the least ostentatious chairs, only to find, when she rested her hand on the rounded end of the arm, that it had been carved in the likeness  of a naked woman bending forwards, between whose ample gilded buttocks one of her fingers was dangling.
She pulled it abruptly away and felt herself blush.
‘One of Maurice's favourites,’ said Natasha with a smile.
‘I can see you don't approve.’
‘I'm not…
It's not for me to approve or disapprove.’
‘It's kind of you to say so.
But I'm sure I know what you really think.’
‘I didn't come here to discuss the past, Natasha.
I didn't come to argue about what you meant to Maurice.’
‘Good.
Because I meant a good deal, as a matter of fact.
More than just what money could buy.’
‘Quite possibly.
But Maurice is dead now.
All that's ended.’
‘Yes.
And you promised to tell me why and how it ended.
Well, I should like to know, Charlie.’
She fondled the jet pendant.
‘Even a mistress has a right to understand her grief.’
The maid reappeared, carrying a tea-tray.
Silence was observed as she moved a table to stand between Charlotte and the chair Natasha had sat in, then arranged the china and poured the first cups.
During this interlude, Charlotte reminded herself of the different bluffs and deceptions each was practising.
Would Natasha admit she had known of Maurice's plan from the outset?
Or would she pretend she had never known anything about the letters?
How many lies should Charlotte let go unchallenged?
How much should she reveal, how little assume?
as if determined to seize the initiative, Natasha said as soon as the maid had gone: ‘I was shocked to hear of Sam's abduction.
Ursula must be beside herself with worry.’
‘Yes.
She is.’
‘Maurice told me nothing of it, you know.
Not a word.’
‘Really?’
‘Well, he hardly had a chance, did he?’
‘He came to New York on the fourth.
Didn't he see you then?’
‘No.
I last saw him in August.
I had no idea he'd been since.’
But she should have been more surprised than she sounded.
She returned Charlotte's gaze and sipped her tea, apparently content to let the pretence go undisguised.
‘He gave up the letters, Natasha.
All of them.
They were the ransom — or part of it.’
‘What letters?’
The arch of her eyebrows declared the pretence was to be total.
‘Tristram's correspondence with Beatrix.
The correspondence proving Beatrix wrote his poems.’
‘You have me at a disadvantage, Charlie.
I know nothing of any of this.’
‘I'm not here to accuse you, Natasha.
I suspect we're both well aware who telephoned Colin Fairfax-Vane in May, claiming to be Beatrix.
But, since proving that person's identity is impossible —’
‘All of this is way over my head.’
‘Maybe.
Maybe not.
Either way, I hope you'll do what you can to help us rescue my niece.’
‘Your half-niece, you mean.’
Natasha smiled.
‘I fail to see what help I can offer.’
‘Then let me explain.’
As Charlotte did so, she felt increasingly impatient with the veiled sarcasm to which she had been subjected.
Natasha gazed at her with an expression in which caution and disdain were perfectly balanced.
It was impossible to tell if the plight of a girl she had never met made any impact on her at all.
Even if it did, Charlotte sensed her response would be determined by a fine judgement of how her own interests might best be protected.
When Charlotte had finished, emphasizing how vital it was to find the document the kidnappers wanted, Natasha poured them both more tea before she made any remark.
When she spoke, it was in a guarded tone.
If Maurice  did these…these terrible things…it was without my knowledge.
He mentioned no letters to me.
Nor any accompanying document.
He left nothing here.’
‘The terrible things you refer to were intended to ensure you could continue to live here — in the style you obviously do.’
‘I own this apartment outright.
A gift from Maurice, it's true, but not one I'm in any danger of forfeiting.’
‘He spent a great deal on you, I imagine.
He meant to go on doing so.’
‘No doubt he did.
I'm sorry he won't.
Sorry for him and for me.’
‘But at least you're alive.’
‘Yes.
I am.’
A distant look came into her eyes.
‘I never expected Maurice to die in such a way.
Sacrificing himself for his daughter…’
She shook her head in puzzlement.
‘Won't you help me prevent it being a pointless, sacrifice?’
‘If only I could.’
‘He must have stored things here.
Clothes.
Books.
Papers.
Possessions of one kind or another.’
‘Clothes only.
And not many of those.
You're welcome to search them, of course.’
‘I'd be grateful.’
‘Come this way, then.’
They rose and Natasha led Charlotte out into a short passage.
At the end, through an open doorway, she glimpsed a bedroom, richly hung in peach-toned fabrics, expanded by yet more mirrors in one of which she could see the reflection of a large oil painting.
The subject was a nude, reclining suggestively across a bed.
The picture was of such clarity that it might even have been a photograph.
As to the identity of the nude, Charlotte was just too far away to be absolutely certain.
Natasha moved ahead, closed the door and turned back, smiling faintly.
‘Maurice used this.’
She slid open a fitted wardrobe to their left to reveal a few suits and pairs of  trousers hanging from a rail.
‘They're all he kept here.’
As Charlotte checked the pockets, she knew she would find nothing.
What she could not decide was whether there had ever been anything to find.
She had pleaded for help as eloquently as she could.
She had refrained from criticizing Natasha, far less condemning her.
Yet her restraint had failed to achieve its purpose, perhaps because Natasha was genuinely unable to assist, perhaps because she was too frightened to do so.
They returned to the lounge, but, this time, Charlotte made no move to sit down.
‘I'm sorry if you've had a wasted journey, Charlie.’
‘Is there nothing you can tell me?’
‘Only that you could try the company apartment on Park Avenue.
Maurice might have stored some papers there.’
‘I'm going there when I leave here.
In fact, I intend to spend the night there.’
‘Before flying back to England?’
‘Not necessarily.’
‘I shouldn't have thought you'd have any reason to stay longer.’
Suddenly, Charlotte's patience snapped.
‘You know what this is all about, Natasha.
Why pretend otherwise?
Maurice took you into his confidence from the start.’
‘How can you be so sure?’
‘Beatrix is dead.
Maurice is too.
For God's sake give it up.
There's an innocent man in prison and an innocent girl missing from home.
Don't they mean anything to you?’
‘I've never met them.’
‘What did Beatrix send you?’
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘She sent you a posthumous letter.
What was in it?’
‘You mean the bundle of blank paper?
Maurice surmised it was from his aunt.
It made no sense to me.’
‘Blank paper?’
‘Yes.
Weird, don't you think?
Quite incredible, really.’
Natasha grinned, admitting by her expression that she knew what Charlotte would conclude from this recycling of Ursula's lie.
‘You stole Ursula's husband.
Won't you raise a hand to prevent her losing her daughter as well?’
‘I stole nothing from Ursula, certainly not Maurice.
He found me , not the other way around.
And what he found was a woman who understood him a great deal better than his wife ever did.’
‘Perhaps so.
But —’
‘If you think Maurice ever loved Ursula, you're wrong.
He never loved anybody except himself.
Oh, and maybe you, Charlie.
Maybe he loved you.
I always reckoned so, anyway.’
‘What Maurice did — what you helped him do — was wrong.
By helping me, you'd undo a little of that wrong.’
‘But I can't help you, Charlie.
I can't and that's the truth.’
‘Beatrix was a fine woman.
She shouldn't have died as she did.
Fairfax-Vane is just a glib-tongued antique dealer.
He doesn't deserve to be facing a long prison sentence.
And Sam is a lively girl on the brink of adulthood.
She's entitled to find out what it means, don't you think?
Rather than dying for a reason she doesn't comprehend.’
‘I don't comprehend the reason either.’
‘I'm not saying you do.
But if you'd stop lying, for one second, we might —’
‘That's enough!’
The real Natasha had found both her voice and her face.
She was angry, trembling with rage and maybe with guilt as well.
‘You've no right to come here — to my home — and call me a liar.’
‘I believe I have.
I believe it's my duty.
As I believe it's your duty to tell me whatever you know.’
‘Get out!
Get out this minute!’
She marched into the hall and flung the front door open.
‘I should never have  agreed to meet you.
I shan't make the same mistake again.’
It was futile to linger or protest.
Charlotte could see from Natasha's expression that losing her temper had been counter-productive.
She walked slowly towards the door, struggling to regain her composure.
As they came alongside each other, Natasha said: ‘I once asked Maurice why he thought so highly of you, Charlie.
Do you know what he said?
‘Because she's retained a nai¨ve faith in human nature.’
Not much of a compliment, is it?
But he meant it.
And he did his best to keep your faith intact.
Now he's gone, I think it's time you admitted how false it always was.’
‘Was it?’
‘Oh, yes.
You see, you're the liar, Charlie, not me.
You keep insisting on what you know is impossible.
You keep pretending something can be done.
To rescue Sam.
To free Fairfax-Vane.
To redeem Maurice's memory.
But it can't.
Nothing can be done.
About any of it.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘As sure as I am that you'll leave New York as you arrived — empty-handed.’
16
The apartment maintained by Ladram Avionics on Park Avenue was small but comfortably fitted out in contemporary style.
It was neither homely nor luxurious and Charlotte doubted if Maurice had done more than visit to check the mail in recent months.
Nevertheless, she set about searching it in a methodical fashion, discovering in the process just what she had expected: nothing.
She did find an Italian restaurant a couple of blocks away to dine in, however, and there made a point of drinking enough  chianti to ensure a good night's sleep, which her plans for the following day suggested she would need.
For she was not yet willing to admit defeat and retreat to England.
There was one stratagem left to try first.
She slept longer than she had intended and woke to the glare of full morning and the bleat of the telephone.
As she grabbed for the handset, she guessed it must be Ursula and wondered if there was news of Samantha.
But she had guessed wrong.
‘Charlie?
This is Natasha.
I'm glad I caught you.’
‘Why?’
‘Because I've been thinking over what you said and…
Can we meet before you leave New York?’
‘Is there any point?’
‘Very much so.’
‘Then, yes, we can meet.’
‘Do you know the Frick Collection?’
‘I've heard of it, certainly.’
‘It's on Fifth Avenue, at East Seventieth.
Walking distance from where you are.
I'll meet you there in one hour.’
Only when she arrived did Charlotte realize that the Frick Collection was housed in nineteen separate rooms on the ground floor of the late collector's mansion.
Since Natasha had not specified which room they were to meet in, there was nothing for it but to progress through each, ignoring the paintings and studying only the other visitors.
She was halfway round and beginning to fret when she entered the Fragonard Room and was briefly transported to a French salon of the eighteenth century.
Fragonard's series of paintings,The Progress of Love , was displayed on the walls.
Beneath one of them — in which a maiden seated by a statue was glancing about in fear of discovery as her lover scaled the garden wall to press his suit — stood Natasha, apparently lost in thought.
She was wearing a  short lilac dress and a pale cashmere jacket, beneath which the jet pendant glimmered in inky symbolism.
Charlotte had to touch her elbow to gain her attention.
‘Why, Charlie!’
She smiled.
‘On time again, no doubt.
Though for quite another kind of meeting than this.’
She nodded towards the anxious lovers.
‘What do you want, Natasha?’
‘I come here often.
To this room, I mean, not the others.
The French understand love.
Better than the Americans, anyway, and for certain better than the British.’
‘I don't have very long.
Could we —’
‘You have long enough to lose yourself in Fragonard's world, Charlie.
We all have.
Cherubs and doves frolicking in perpetual summer.
Temptation.
Pursuit.
Consummation.
Nostalgia.
Regret.
Abandonment.
They're all here in these canvasses.’
‘Quite possibly.
But —’
‘Look around for one moment.
Please.’
Irritably, Charlotte looked.
On every wall, Natasha's point was made.
The man offering what the maiden affected not to want.
The man winning her over with gifts and endearments.
Then the maiden alone, with only her melancholy for company.
But it was a point entirely lost on Charlotte.
‘If you have something to tell me, Natasha, I'd be grateful if —’
‘I am telling you.
This is part of it.
There are letters even here.’
She pointed to one of the paintings on the south wall, in which the maiden sat on a plinth beneath bowering trees, reading a billet-doux whilst its author wrapped his arms around her waist and rested his head against her neck.
‘Is he really there?
I sometimes wonder.
Or is she imagining him as she reads?
Is he already somewhere else, betraying her love, preparing to desert her?
Hers is every woman's fallacy and every woman's fate.
She'd do better to throw the letter away unread, wouldn't she?’
‘Perhaps.’
‘As Beatrix should have done with Tristram's letters from Spain.’
‘But she didn't.’
‘No.
And now others must suffer for it.’
She looked intently at Charlotte.
‘I don't intend to be one of them.’
‘Why did you ask to meet me, then?’
‘To give you something.
To act more charitably than I customarily do.
Come with me and I'll explain.’
Natasha led the way through several more rooms until they emerged into a pillared roof-lit court at the centre of the mansion, where a fountain played amidst tropical plants.
They sat on a marble bench near the fountain, into whose plashing water Natasha stared as she spoke.
‘I was Maurice's mistress for twelve years.
He treated me well.
As I'm sure you're aware, he was a generous man.
He made it clear he could never acknowledge my existence to his family and I didn't expect him to.
I was his secret.
Or one of them.
He had many, of course.
Many more than either you or I will ever know about.
But I found out his real secret a long time ago.
I found out what made him tick.’
‘What was it?’
‘Secrecy itself.
The greatest pleasure I gave him was the fact that nobody knew about me.
It was the biggest thrill for him in everything we did together.’
‘But Beatrix found out about you.’
‘Yes.
She did.’
Natasha sighed.
‘I'm not going to admit anything, Charlie.
I'm not going to incriminate myself.
What Maurice did he did.
You'll never force me to say I was a party to it.’
‘I'm not trying to.’
‘Good.
Then don't challenge what I'm about to tell you.
Any of it.’
‘All right.
I won't.’
‘Let's walk.’
Natasha rose abruptly and began a slow circuit of the court, with Charlotte beside her.
‘If Maurice had possessed what the kidnappers want, he'd have given  it up.
I'm absolutely certain of that.
He left nothing of the kind with me and never made any reference to such a document.
You drew a blank at the Park Avenue apartment, I assume?’
‘Yes.’
‘There you are, then.
No, I fear I can't help you in this search.’
She glanced round at Charlotte.
‘Honestly.
You can believe what I say.’
‘In that case —’
‘What do I have for you?
Firstly, my apologies for becoming angry yesterday.
We shouldn't have met at the apartment.
There were too many reminders of Maurice.
Here I can remain calm.
Secondly, to tell you what Beatrix really sent me.
Not blank paper, obviously.
But a tape, on which she recorded a conversation she had with Maurice a few weeks before her death.
Their last face-to-face conversation, as a matter of fact.
In it, she confronted him with evidence she'd unearthed of a conspiracy against her and accused him of being behind it.
Maurice didn't know their discussion was recorded, of course.
And I never told him.
I taunted him with the same lie Ursula used.
He didn't know which of us to believe or disbelieve.
Now, I suppose I regret holding out on him.
But perhaps it's as well I did.
He'd have destroyed the tape for sure.’
‘Why did you hold out on him?’
‘Because the tape was evidence I could use against him.
If I needed to.
Or wanted to.
And mistresses always anticipate desertion.
Unlike Fragonard's star-struck damsels, we keep one eye permanently trained on the future.
Beatrix must have known that.
She was a clever old — Well, let's just say she was cleverer than Maurice thought, though not as clever as she needed to be.
Or maybe her friends weren't.
If they'd done exactly what she asked, she'd have outmanoeuvred Maurice completely, as she assumed she would.
That's why she sent me the tape.
Because, without the royalties, he'd have abandoned me.
But, with the tape, I'd have been able to extract a pretty  pension from him, as Beatrix calculated.
It would have been a double twist of the knife.
Neat, don't you think?’
‘Yes.
But Beatrix was.
Very neat.’
‘With the private detective's report on Maurice's finances and the tape, you should be able to clear Fairfax-Vane.
I'm afraid he's the only one of your innocents I can help.
But the tape's no use to me now, so he might as well benefit from it.’
She took a miniature cassette from her pocket and slipped it into Charlotte's hand.
‘Maybe this will help me jump the queue in Purgatory.’
‘I'll make sure it reaches his solicitor.
This is…very good of you.’
‘It's not such a big deal.
There isn't the ghost of a case against me in anything you have.
I'm not stupid.
But I'm not vindictive either.’
They paused by the bench they had left earlier, with one revolution of the court complete.
Natasha licked her lips, uncertain, it seemed, how to conclude their encounter.
‘Where will you go from here, Charlie?’
‘Boston.’
‘Ah.
To see Emerson McKitrick, I suppose.’
‘Yes.’
‘It'll be a wasted journey.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘But you'll go anyway?’
‘Yes.’
‘Be careful.’
‘People keep telling me that.’
‘Because it's good advice.
On the tape, Beatrix says something I didn't pay much attention to when I first heard it.
She tried to warn Maurice he was playing with fire.
But he wouldn't listen.
He didn't take her seriously.
Neither did I. But I do now.
And so should you.’
‘I'm bound to do what I can to help Sam.’
Natasha gazed at Charlotte and shook her head.
‘Maurice always said you had his share of virtue as well as your own.
I wish you luck.’
‘Thank you.’
‘For myself —’ She glanced wistfully into the fountain.
‘I think I'll take another look at the Fragonards before I go.
He died in poverty, like most artists.
I don't plan to.
But I'm no artist.
Be sure you don't become one, Charlie — like Maurice's father.
It doesn't pay in the long run.
As Maurice found out.
Just too late.’
She smiled, patted Charlotte's arm and walked slowly away, the clip of her heels on the marble floor lingering even after she had turned a corner and vanished from sight.
17
BEATRIX: Come into the lounge and make yourself comfortable, Maurice.
Did you have a good journey?
MAURICE: So-so.
Too many Sunday drivers for my liking.
BEATRIX: Of course, it's Sunday.
Do you know, I'd quite forgotten.
One tends to at my age.
MAURICE: Really?
You hide it well, Aunt, I must say.
BEATRIX: Now you're flattering me.
But it's true.
My memory's failing.
Names.
Faces.
Dates.
They're all going.
For instance, is it the thirtieth of May today or the thirty-first?
MAURICE: The thirty-first, as I suspect you know.
You're going to Cheltenham tomorrow.
I'm sure you haven't forgotten that.
BEATRIX: No, no.
It's why I wanted you to come this afternoon.
So we could meet before I went away.
MAURICE: To discuss something important, you said.
BEATRIX: Quite so.
Oh!
There's the kettle boiling.
Would you mind filling the pot, Maurice?
There's tea already in it.
Then you can bring the tray in.
MAURICE: Leave it to me.
BEATRIX: Don't forget the biscuit-barrel.
I have some of those fruit Shrewsburys you like.
MAURICE:(from a distance ): I hope you didn't buy them just for me.
There was no need.
BEATRIX: But I wanted to.
And I always make a point of doing as I please.
It's one of the few privileges of old age.
MAURICE: Are you trying to tell me something, Aunt?
BEATRIX: Put the tray down here.
Let me clear these magazines.
MAURICE: When you phoned, I thought you might have changed your mind.
BEATRIX: About what?
MAURICE: You know full well.
BEATRIX: Do I?
As I explained, I'm growing more and more forgetful.
I wouldn't want us to find ourselves talking at cross-purposes.
Why don't you remind me?
MAURICE: You don't need reminding.
BEATRIX: Humour me, Maurice.
MAURICE:(sighing ): I thought you might have changed your mind about publishing the letters.
BEATRIX: Tristram's letters, you mean?
The ones he sent to me from Spain?
The ones proving I wrote his poems for him?
MAURICE: Yes, Aunt.
Those letters.
BEATRIX: Well, I wouldn't want there to be any misunderstanding.
MAURICE: There isn't.
Have you?
BEATRIX: Have I what?
MAURICE: Changed your mind!
BEATRIX: Pour me some tea, would you?
I don't want mine to stew…
Thank you.
MAURICE: Well?
BEATRIX: It's perfect.
Just as I like it.
MAURICE: For God's sake!
BEATRIX: Drink your tea, Maurice.
And help yourself to a fruit Shrewsbury.
Then listen to me.
It's important you shouldn't interrupt me.
MAURICE:Interrupt ?
BEATRIX: Quite so.
I'm not a quivering junior at Ladram Avionics, you know.
So, do I have your attention?
MAURICE: Undividedly.
BEATRIX: Excellent.
It's nearly six months since you broached your scheme to me.
During those months you've frequently explained how we would both benefit from informing the literary world of the trick Tristram and I played on it.
And I've frequently explained how fame and wealth mean very little at my age.
Less, indeed, than my late brother's good name, which I consider to be more important than any financial inconvenience you may be caused by the expiry of copyright.
It's not that I begrudge you your father's royalties.
Far from it.
It's simply that I'm not prepared to see him branded a fraud and a charlatan merely in order to prolong your receipt of them.
MAURICE: You haven't changed your mind, then?
BEATRIX: I did ask you not to interrupt, didn't I?
MAURICE:(sighing ): Sorry.
BEATRIX: To proceed.
About ten days ago, an antique dealer called Fairfax-Vane came to see me, claiming to have an appointment to value my Tunbridge Ware.
He has a shop in Tunbridge Wells.
You may remember him.
Ah, yes, I see you do.
In connection with some furniture poor Mary was ill-advised enough to sell him last year.
Well, I'd made no appointment with him, of course.
I assumed he was chancing his arm.
So, I sent him away with a flea in  his ear.
Then, last Monday, who should I see skulking — yes, I think skulking is the word around Church Square but your former chauffeur, the bibulous Mr Spicer.
He beat a hasty retreat when he spotted me approaching, but it was not hasty enough.
You look surprised, as well you might, though more by his incompetence than his presence in Rye.
That, I feel sure, is scarcely news to you.
MAURICE: I don't know what you mean.
BEATRIX: Please be quiet, Maurice, and attend to what I'm saying.
Mr Spicer was not in Rye for the purpose of a seaside holiday.
I think we may take it as certain he had business here.
Business which necessitated some preliminary reconnaissance.
So I concluded, anyway.
It was a conclusion reinforced by a subsequent telephone conversation with Mr Fairfax-Vane, who convinced me an appointment had indeed been made for him to come here — by a woman clearly younger than me, who spoke with a faintly American accent.
And the appointment, I realized, was timed to ensure Mrs Mentiply would be here with me.
As a witness, so to speak.
I began to see a pattern to these puzzling events, a distinct and disturbing trend.
Perhaps I might not have done but for information which has recently come my way concerning your financial circumstances.
However, since
MAURICE: My what ?
BEATRIX: Your financial circumstances.
And kindly do not bellow.
It really should not strike you as odd that I have been enquiring into your affairs — if I may so phrase it.
Your persistence — nay, your vehemence — on the subject of Tristram's letters suggested your need of the royalties was greater than you were prepared to admit.
When I hired  a private detective to test this hypothesis
MAURICE: A private detective ?
BEATRIX: There's no need to repeat everything I say.
I feel sure you can hear and understand me.
The report I commissioned on you makes for interesting reading.
Particularly in respect of the mistress you maintain in New York.
No doubt her charms are as considerable as they are expensive.
MAURICE: Good God, this is
BEATRIX: What you have driven me to.
It is useless to beetle your brow in what you clearly believe to be a threatening fashion.
I am only ensuring we both know where we stand.
I have developed a theory to explain recent incidents in the light of what I have learned about you.
Would you like to hear it?…
I shall take your glowering silence to indicate you would.
If Mr Spicer's dismissal for drunkenness last Christmas was a charade; if he is still in fact in your employment though not as a chauffeur; if your American mistress telephoned Mr Fairfax-Vane and lured him here; if I should happen to fall victim to a break-in apparently arranged by Mr Fairfax-Vane in order to lay his hands on my Tunbridge Ware but actually carried out by Mr Spicer in order to bring about my death; if my demise should leave you in possession of your father's letters and free to publish them…
Well, if I am right in all this — and I rather think I am — then you have decided to override my objections to publication in the most effective and heartless manner possible, haven't you?
MAURICE: Of course I haven't.
This is all — every word of it — the most preposterous nonsense.
BEATRIX: Is it?
Is it really?
MAURICE: Yes.
And if the only reason you asked me here was to inflict this on
BEATRIX: But it wasn't.
Not quite the only reason, anyway.
MAURICE: Why else, then?
BEATRIX: To ask for time to reconsider my position.
I want to think the whole thing through, very carefully, while I'm in Cheltenham.
To weigh my principles against the risks I appear to be running.
MAURICE: You're running no risks!
BEATRIX: You should be pleased I think otherwise.
It means you may get your way without having to resort to desperate remedies.
MAURICE: Well, if you're having a change of heart…
BEATRIX: Don't count on it.
I'll telephone you when I return from Cheltenham with my final decision.
There's a great deal to take into account.
More than you realize.
Far more.
If your father's reputation were the beginning and the end of the matter, I might have been less intransigent all along.
But it isn't, believe me.
There are other dimensions to this.
Other repercussions.
You would do well to beware them.
MAURICE: How can I beware what I know nothing about?
BEATRIX: You can't, so long as you remain as pig-headed as you have been all your life.
MAURICE: Now look here
BEATRIX: Out of interest, could you tell me what this is really all about?
There has to be more to it than money.
What is it?
Simply your inability to accept that your wishes do not always take precedence over other people's?
MAURICE: Oh, for God's sake
BEATRIX: What?
Leaving so soon?
MAURICE: I'm glad you're having second thoughts, Aunt, whatever the reason.
I'll look forward to hearing  from you after your holiday, hopefully with good news.
But, meanwhile, I've no intention of swallowing any more of your insults.
BEATRIX: As you please.
I believe we've both said what needed to be said.
I believe we understand each other now.
MAURICE: Perhaps we do.
BEATRIX: Don't forget what I told you.
there's more at stake here than you can possibly imagine.
MAURICE: That's eyewash and you know it.
BEATRIX: I know you think it is.
But you're wrong.
Not that I expect you to heed my warning.
I'd be surprised if you did.
MAURICE: And surprises aren't good for delicate old ladies, are they?
BEATRIX: They're not as bad as nocturnal intruders.
MAURICE: No.
But you can take precautions against them, can't you?
BEATRIX: By agreeing to your terms, you mean?
MAURICE: By being sensible.
BEATRIX: I shall certainly endeavour to be that.
MAURICE: Good.
BEATRIX: Can you see yourself out?
MAURICE: Yes.
Of course.
BEATRIX: Goodbye, then.
MAURICE:(from a distance ): Thanks for the tea.
I'll speak to you soon.
Have a nice thoughtful time in Cheltenham, Aunt.
BEATRIX: I'll be sure to.
MAURICE:(from a distance ): ‘Bye.
BEATRIX:(in an undertone ): Goodbye, Maurice.
Thank you so much for your co-operation.
It's been invaluable.
18
Charlotte had bought a pocket cassette player before leaving New York and listened to the tape of Beatrix's conversation with Maurice over and over again during the five-hour rail journey to Boston.
At times she could imagine she was in an adjoining room at Jackdaw Cottage, eavesdropping on what they said.
At others the realization that both of them were now dead rendered their words distant and ethereal.
But the meaning of those words never altered.
Beatrix had set a trap for Maurice and he had walked straight into it.
Nobody who heard the tape could doubt his guilt.
He had even specified the date of his unwitting confessional.
Natasha was right.
It would almost certainly be enough to acquit Colin Fairfax.
He at least would go free.
But Samantha's freedom still seemed a long way off.
‘There's more at stake here than you can possibly imagine,’ Beatrix had said.
And subsequent events had shown just how much more.
But what was it?
What had she held for so many years in trust and secrecy?
What had rendered her and Tristram's literary fraud trivial by comparison?
Charlotte longed to be able to ask her, to turn to her and have every question instantly answered, every problem magically solved.
But she was no longer there.
Only her voice lingered in Charlotte's ear.
And what it said could never be altered.
It could be heard at the press of a button.
But it would always be the same.
Charlotte booked into a hotel in the centre of Boston and hunted down the telephone directory in her room as soon as the porter had left.
Emerson McKitrick's address was clearly shown, at a place called South Lincoln.
Tomorrow, she would have to find him, there or wherever he was hiding.
Tomorrow, she would have to forget the humiliation she had suffered at his hands and plead for his help in what threatened to be a hopeless task.
When tomorrow came, Charlotte faced it with as much resolution and efficiency as she could muster.
She bought a map, hired a car and drove nervously to Cambridge, where the opening week of Harvard's autumn semester was in frantic progress.
At length, she located the literature department and, entering, asked the first student she came upon where she might find Dr McKitrick.
‘Not here, ma'am.
He works at home most Fridays.
Do you want the address?’
‘No thank you,’ Charlotte replied.
‘That won't be necessary.’
She was, in fact, relieved to learn he was not there.
Confronted in his domestic environment, he would find it more difficult to fob her off.
An hour later, she had reached Drumlin Hill, South Lincoln, a lushly wooded cul-de-sac of executive residences beyond Boston's western suburbs.
McKitrick's house lounged on a maple-strewn ridge, sleek and contemporary, with a gable end sporting one huge circular window that stared down at her like an unblinking eye.
The door was answered by a slim blonde-haired woman of about her own age dressed in jeans, trainers and a candy-stripe shirt several sizes too big for her.
Bending one knee to restrain an enthusiastic red setter, she unzipped a dazzling smile.
‘Hi!
What can I do for you?’
‘Good morning,’ Charlotte ventured.
‘I'm looking for Emerson McKitrick.’
‘He's not here right now.’
‘Will he be back soon?’
‘Any minute, I guess.
What…
Is he expecting you?’
‘No.’
‘You're English, aren't you?’
‘Yes.
I'm sorry.
My name's Charlotte Ladram.’
‘Ladram?
Don't I know…
Hey, Ladram Avionics, right?
The corporation Maurice Abberley ran.’
‘Maurice Abberley is — was — my brother.’
‘Your brother ?
You'd better come in.’
She opened the door wide and held back the dog, whose tail was beating wildly on the wall behind it.
‘It's OK.
He just gets overexcited.
Come on in.’
Charlotte stepped into the hall and grinned down at the dog.
‘Hello, boy.’
‘Go on through.
I'll get rid of this brute.’
The woman led him away, leaving Charlotte to wander into a long pine-panelled room with a huge stone fireplace at the far end and a picture window to her right commanding a view of the terraced front garden and the curving drive up which she had walked.
The seating was low and yielding, the decoration largely subordinate to a vast abstract oil painting on the longest wall.
Charlotte was gazing at its aimless explosion of colour when her hostess returned, still smiling broadly, and extended a hand in formal greeting.
‘Sorry about the dog.
I'm Holly McKitrick, by the way.’
It was probably Charlotte's frown of puzzlement that prompted her to add: ‘Emerson's wife.’
‘Oh.
I see.’
As soon as the handshake was complete, Charlotte turned away, eager to look elsewhere for the instant it took her to absorb the simple fact of his marriage.
He had lied about this as about much else and she knew she should feel neither hurt nor surprised.
But in reality she felt both.
‘You have…er…a lovely house,’ she said, glancing back at Holly McKitrick to find her blue eyes trained studiously upon her.
‘Glad you like it.’
‘I expect you're…er…wondering what brings me here.’
‘Well, we heard about your brother's death through Emerson's British publisher.
It sounded awful.
And his  daughter's been kidnapped, hasn't she?
She's your niece, right?’
‘Yes.’
‘If you've come all this way at such a time…’
‘It's because Emerson may be able to help us secure Sam's release.’
‘You made his acquaintance when he was over in July researching Tristram Abberley?’
‘Yes.
I did.’
‘Well, I'm sure he'd want to help any way he can, but I don't rightly see —’
‘We have to try everything.’
‘Yeh.
Of course.’
She smiled.
‘Would you like some coffee while you wait?’
‘Er…
Thank you.’
‘It won't take a second.’
Left alone, Charlotte walked slowly down the length of the room, debating with herself how much or how little Holly McKitrick might know.
By the time she reached the fireplace, she was also beginning to wonder whether Maurice had known McKitrick was married.
If so — But speculation was cut off when, turning round to retrace her steps, she caught sight of a red sports car winding up the drive.
She moved to the window and watched it pull up.
Emerson McKitrick climbed out, dressed casually in jeans and a tennis shirt.
He looked relaxed and carefree, singing under his breath as he lifted a bulging paper sack from the back seat, then started towards the house.
But something made him glance up at the lounge window as he approached.
And the sight of Charlotte, staring down at him, stopped him in his tracks.
What followed was for Charlotte a demeaning and ultimately frustrating experience.
She had planned to appeal to Emerson's better nature, or, if this failed, to argue that he owed her whatever assistance he could give in return for his earlier deceit of her.
But Holly's presence  ensured she could do neither.
Instead, she was obliged to subscribe to Emerson's misleading account of their acquaintance.
This he unveiled with grinning blatancy whilst clasping his wife ostentatiously round the waist.
In defying Charlotte to contradict him, he was on safe ground, for she knew — as she felt sure he did — which of them Holly would believe.
The worst of it was that Charlotte had intended to emphasize how she had come in search of information, not confrontation.
But the lies Emerson had told sprang up as a barrier between them, insurmountable because they could not be acknowledged.
When she explained what the kidnappers were after and asked if he had any idea where or what the document might be, his reply was predictably negative.
Heard in the context of his and Holly's gushing sympathy, it sounded very like the truth.
But Charlotte would have needed to be alone with him, decks cleared of their differences, for certainty on the point.
And that he seemed determined to avoid.
‘I can't help you, Charlie.
I've never heard of any of this before.
A document written in Catalan and entrusted to Tristram by a friend.
Which friend?
About what?
And why, all these years later, would it suddenly matter so much?’
‘I don't know.
But the kidnappers know about the letters.
So, they must have learnt about them from somebody.
You're one of the few who was aware of their existence.
If you mentioned them to a colleague or —’
‘But I didn't.
Holly here's the only living soul I told.
The letters knocked a hole in my book about Tristram.
Why should I publicize them?’
‘Charlie's not saying you did, honey,’ his wife put in.
She smiled across at Charlotte.
‘You're just checking every possibility, aren't you?’
‘Yes.
It's…er…not been made public, but the kidnappers have set a deadline of October the eleventh for handing over the document.’
Emerson's eyebrows twitched up.
‘Failing which?’
‘They say they'll kill Sam.’
‘Oh, God,’ murmured Holly.
‘So you see —’
‘That's tough,’ said Emerson.
‘She's a good kid.
It'd be a tragedy if…’
He shook his head.
‘If there was any way I could help, believe me, I would.’
‘But there isn't?’
‘No.’
He met Charlotte's gaze for a moment and it seemed to her that in this at least he was sincere.
‘No way in the world.’
When she left, Emerson volunteered to escort her to her car at the bottom of the drive.
Charlotte realized he was still stage-managing their encounter, moving Holly into and out of the wings as and when it suited him.
Now, when there was a strict limit to how long he would have to talk to her, it was convenient — perhaps even imperative — to do so unimpeded by a third party.
No sooner had they set off than he said, in a tone completely different from the one he had used in Holly's presence: ‘You shouldn't have come here, Charlie, you really shouldn't.
You could have phoned.
There was no need for this.’
‘I wanted to see you face to face.’
‘Well, now you have.
What have you gained from it?’
‘Nothing.
Unless you count nailing another of your lies.’
‘Pretending I was unattached was Maurice's idea.
He reckoned it would make you more…susceptible.’
‘It's easy to say that now he's dead, isn't it?
Easy to blame him for everything.’
‘Yuh.
It is.
But it also happens to be true.
He is to blame — for starting whatever the hell it is Sam's kidnappers mean to finish.’
‘And you really have no idea what that might be?’
‘Not a clue.
My researches into Tristram's time in Spain were geared to the effect it had on his poetry.
They never touched on anything even remotely like this.
And I'm glad they didn't, if what happened to Maurice is any guide.
One word of advice —’ They reached the foot of the drive and paused.
‘All I do know about the Spanish Civil War is it left a lot of scars that never healed.
Feuds.
Vendettas.
Debts of honour.
And some of blood.
If Maurice succeeded in calling one of those in…’
‘Yes?’
‘Then the only smart thing to do is to stay out of it.
Right out.’
19
Charlotte had telephoned Derek from Boston late on Friday night to ask if he could meet her off the plane at Heathrow on Saturday morning.
Naturally, he had agreed.
Only later had it occurred to him to wonder whether he should feel alarmed by Charlotte's anxious tone or flattered that she felt she could turn to him for advice.
There was something about the mystery she seemed determined to solve which both excited and enthralled him.
Until, that is, he remembered what had happened to Maurice Abberley.
Then the profit-and-loss column of his mind blared out its warning.
And sometimes he was inclined to listen.
Not, however, when Charlotte sat opposite him in an eerily empty airport cafe and described her experiences in the United States while gazing at him with an expression implying what he most wanted to believe: that she trusted him unreservedly.
It was a miracle, given how often her trust had been betrayed of late.
But it was a miracle, he well knew, born of desperation.
‘I wanted to speak to you before I saw Ursula,’ she concluded, ‘because she might object to my giving you the private detective's report on Maurice's finances.’
‘You're giving it to me?’
‘Yes.
And the tape I obtained from Natasha.’
‘But…why?’
‘Because they should persuade the police of your brother's innocence.
Or at least make them doubt his guilt.’
‘Yes.
They should.
But it's your brother's reputation that will pay the price.’
‘It can't be helped.
Maurice brought it on himself.’
Her mouth set in a stubborn line.
Her decision represented the final abandonment of a lifetime's loyalty and could not have been easy to take.
For though it was true Maurice had brought it upon himself, he had also brought it upon her.
And she did not deserve to suffer because of it.
‘I'm grateful.
I'm sure Colin will be too.
But what about Ursula?
She won't thank you for blackening her late husband's name.’
‘Then she must curse me.
I want to put an end to every consequence of Maurice's scheme.
And this is one end I have the power to bring about.’
She reached into her holdall, pulled out a large buff envelope and slid it across the table.
‘The report.’
Then she unzipped her handbag, took out the cassette and placed it on top of the envelope.
‘And the tape.
They're yours.
On one condition.’
‘Which is?’
‘Don't use them until Sam's been released or…
Well, another few weeks in prison won't make much difference to your brother, but it might to my niece.
I don't want to encourage the police to ask any more questions.
And I don't want to have to lie to them.
The kidnappers have given us until October the eleventh to deliver the document and I haven't despaired of finding it before  then.
But if the police learn I've been to America, they'll ask why.
And if I refuse to tell them, they'll become suspicious.’
‘Then don't worry.
I'll keep these safe.
But I won't breathe a word about them until after October the eleventh.’
Charlotte's expression grew suddenly sombre.
‘I've just thought.
It's three weeks tomorrow.
I wonder what those three weeks will bring.’
‘Your niece's safe return home.’
‘Really?
At the moment, I don't see how.’
‘While you were away, I remembered something which might just help.’
The flash of hope in her eyes made him wish he could report a more substantial discovery than the meagre piece of intelligence he had to contribute.
‘The document's written in Catalan, right?
Presumably, therefore, by a Catalan.
The capital of Catalonia is Barcelona.
Tristram's last letter to Beatrix implied the document had been given to him by a friend.
What friends did he have in Spain apart from other International Brigaders?
Like Frank Griffith and —’
‘Vicente Ortiz!’
‘Yes.
Ortiz.
According to Frank, he was a native of Barcelona.’
Charlotte leant back in her chair.
‘You're right.
It must be Ortiz who wrote it.’
‘That's what I thought.
I'm not sure it takes us very far, of course.
Ortiz is long dead.’
‘Not necessarily.’
‘But Frank said —’
‘He didn't see him killed!’
She was so eager to embrace the chance of Ortiz being alive — of him holding the key to Samantha's freedom — that she shouted the words, rousing the waitress from a slumped reverie by the till.
She blushed and lowered her voice.
‘Frank must be told,’ she whispered.
‘This alters everything.’
‘He may not agree.
And even if he does —’
‘Could you come with me to see him?
Tomorrow, perhaps?’
Uncertain whether to admit his pleasure at being asked to assist, he said merely, ‘If you'd like me to.’
‘I would.
Very much.’
‘Then certainly I'll come.’
She looked doubtful for a moment.
‘You don't have to.’
‘I know.’
‘If you're only agreeing because of the tape and the report, then I'd rather you refused.
I didn't expect anything in return for them.’
‘I know that too.
But I'd still like to come with you.’
Recognizing much of his own diffidence in this display of it on Charlotte's part, he added: ‘I'd be honoured to.’
‘Thanks.’
She smiled warily.
‘Right now, I think I need…’
‘A helping hand?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then look no further.
’ He reached out to touch her fingers where they rested on the table.
‘You've found one.’
20
‘You did what ?’
The violence of Ursula's reaction convinced Charlotte she had been wise to meet Derek Fairfax before going to Swans' Meadow.
There would have been no possibility of winning her consent to handing him the tape, let alone the private detective's report.
It might have been different had Charlotte been able to claim any success for her American trip.
As it was, she could not.
The hopes Ursula had nourished in her absence had been  dashed.
All of which would have been bad enough without Charlotte's final revelation.
‘You gave them to Fairfax ?’
‘He has a right to them, Ursula.
His brother is completely innocent.’
‘So's Sam, in case you've forgotten.’
‘I haven't.
But this has nothing to —’
‘How do you think she'll feel when she knows you helped brand her father a murderer?’
‘Badly.
As I did when I found out what he'd done.’
‘But the report was mine .
Beatrix sent it to me, not you!’
‘And you were prepared to let Fairfax-Vane go to prison despite having the means to prevent it.
That might have been forgivable while Maurice was alive.
But not now.’
‘This has nothing to do with Maurice.’
Ursula's voice dropped.
Her eyes narrowed.
‘Or some washed-up antique dealer.
You've done this to hurt me , haven't you?’
‘Of course I haven't.’
‘Yes you have.
This is your way of getting back at me for Emerson.’
‘Don't be ridiculous.
I'm simply trying to repair some of the damage caused by Maurice's greed.’
‘And I suppose you know nothing about greed.
Or envy.
Or lust.
They're total strangers to you, aren't they, Charlie?
They've never crossed your virtuous path through life.’
She stepped closer.
‘What a nauseating little Miss Perfect you are.’
‘Insulting me isn't going to help Sam.’
‘No.
But nor is letting your conscience govern my life.
I trusted you with that report — and with the information it contained.
If I'd known what you intended to do with it, I'd never have told you it existed.’
‘Then I'm glad you didn't know.’
A stinging blow from the back of Ursula's hand caught Charlotte round the mouth before she was aware of it  being aimed.
She rocked back on her heels and clutched at the bureau for support.
‘What…
What are you doing?’ she cried.
‘Get out of this house, Charlie!
Get out of my bloody sight!’
‘But…
We need…
We need to talk.’
‘I don't need to talk to you.
That's the very last thing I need to do.
Now, for Christ's sake, get out!’
‘What about Sam?’
‘Let me worry about her!’
‘But there's so much —’
‘I'll handle this on my own, as I should have done all along, without any interference from your bloody conscience!’
They stared at each other for a moment, then Ursula added, emphasizing every word: ‘Please leave my home.
Now !’
Charlotte could find no answer.
There suddenly seemed to be nothing between them except the hatred flaring in Ursula's eyes.
The pact they had silently concluded after Maurice's death stood exposed as a sham.
Their alliance was at an end.
If, indeed, it had ever begun.
Without another word, Charlotte turned and hurried from the room.
She drove across the bridge into Cookham, scarcely able to see for tears of shock and anger.
There she stopped in a car park to dry her eyes and dab the blood from the tear at the corner of her mouth.
She guessed Ursula's diamond-encrusted eternity ring had inflicted the damage and recalled being shown it for the first time nearly ten years ago.
‘Look what Maurice has given me ,’ Ursula had cooed, displaying her ring finger for Charlotte's admiration.
‘He's such a darling, isn't he ?’
Everything about those distant days had been false and fraudulent — every gift, every smile, every declaration of love and loyalty.
Yet at times such as this Charlotte wished she could still believe all the lies she had been told.
They were so much more  comfortable than the truth she was left with in place of them.
And had now to face.
Alone.
21
Derek collected Charlotte from Ockham House early on Sunday morning.
He had looked forward to the long drive to Wales as an opportunity to push out the boundaries of their friendship, to gauge whether it might flourish in more normal circumstances than those in which it had begun.
But the opportunity proved to be illusory.
Charlotte seemed too distracted to give him much attention.
Every word had to be prised from her, every smile coaxed.
In the end, he fell victim to her gloom and lapsed into silence.
On nearing Hendre Gorfelen, however, Charlotte was suddenly transformed into the alert and confident young woman Derek thought he knew.
She even apologized for having been poor company on the journey.
‘I've a lot on my mind.
Too much, I sometimes feel, for it to hold.’
Derek assured her he understood.
And so he did.
But still it was clear that, amidst her preoccupations, there was scarcely room to think of him as anything more than a temporary ally.
Hardly a friend at all.
The dog was in the yard and barked a desultory warning of their arrival, but made no attempt to stop them approaching the house.
The door was open and orchestral music could be heard from a radio somewhere within.
Charlotte knocked, then shouted: ‘Frank!’
The radio was switched off, but there was no other response.
The sound had come from the kitchen and Charlotte led the way through to where Frank Griffith sat smoking over the remains of a bread and cheese lunch.
He stared at them without speaking, conveying his meaning by the blank coldness of his gaze.
‘The document the kidnappers want was written by Vicente Ortiz,’ said Charlotte in a rush.
‘We've come for your help.’
Frank's eyebrows bunched into a frown at the mention of Ortiz's name, but still he did not speak.
‘It's true,’ said Derek.
‘They've specified a document written in Catalan by a friend of Tristram Abberley.
Who can it be but Ortiz?’
‘Vicente's dead,’ Frank responded at last.
‘Let him rest in peace.’
‘He may not be dead,’ put in Charlotte, drawing from Frank a withering glare.
‘If you're trying to link poor Vicente with your niece's abduction…’
‘Nobody's trying to do that,’ said Derek.
‘But we have to do everything we can to find whatever it was he gave to Tristram before October the eleventh.’
‘The date they say they'll kill Sam,’ explained Charlotte, ‘unless the document is delivered to them.’
‘Kill her?
For something Vicente may have written nearly fifty years ago?’
‘Those are their terms.’
‘They make no sense.’
‘We know,’ said Derek.
‘But they're the terms they've set.’
Frank stared at him.
‘What's your interest in this?’
‘I'm just trying to help.
Won't you do the same?’
‘Please , Frank,’ said Charlotte.
Frank looked at each of them in turn, then sighed.
‘I can't.
You come here talking to me about Vicente Ortiz, about a document he may or may not have given to Tristram and which Tristram may or may not have sent to Beatrix.
It's meaningless and long ago and far away and —’ He tapped his pipe out aggressively in a saucer.
‘They're all dead, for God's sake, every last one.
What can it matter now?
Who can it matter to?’
‘Didn't Vicente ever say anything to you?’ asked Derek.
‘Or Tristram?
Or Beatrix?
Didn't one of them imply or  suggest something — however vague — that might explain this?’
Frank thought for a moment, then said: ‘No.
If they shared a secret, they kept it from me.
Perhaps deliberately.
Perhaps —’
‘A Spaniard visited Beatrix in Rye during the summer of 1939,’ interrupted Charlotte.
‘Uncle Jack told me about him.
He was looking for something.
He must have been.
Could it have been the document?’
‘Describe him,’ said Frank.
‘Cold and forbidding, according to Uncle Jack.
Tall and thin with a hooked nose.
And a touch of the Nazi about him.’
‘A Fascist by the sound of it,’ murmured Frank.
‘Not Vicente, for certain.
Your Uncle Jack would have been all over him.’
‘Do you recognize the description?’ asked Derek.
‘No,’ Frank replied.
‘But why should I?
He could have been anybody.
Or nobody.
It's as if …’
His words petered out.
He leant back in his chair and thrust the unlit pipe into his mouth, holding the stem in that strange but characteristic grip between the first and second fingers of his left hand.
Charlotte glanced quizzically at Derek, who shrugged back at her.
Then she said promptingly, ‘Frank?’
He raised his right hand to silence her and continued to stare at the tabletop before him, head cocked to one side.
Fully two minutes must have passed before he plucked the pipe from his mouth and said: ‘I don't know what the document contains.
Something important, obviously.
Something dangerous.
Vicente might have entrusted it to Tristram because he was being evacuated from Teruel and was expected to go back to England.
And Tristram might have sent it to Beatrix when he realized he was dying.
None of them told me about it.
None of them breathed a word.
Even Tristram.
I suppose he thought it was safe with Beatrix.
As presumably it was.
Until  Maurice hatched his benighted scheme.
So, what did she do with it?
Send it to me?
No.
Send it to Maurice's wife?
I hardly think so.’
‘She didn't send it to Natasha van Ryneveld either,’ put in Charlotte.
‘She's who Lulu misremembered as van Ryan.
A mistress Maurice maintained in New York.
I've spoken to her — and seen the contents of Beatrix's letter to her.
It isn't what we need.’
‘Then it must be Madame V in Paris, mustn't it?’
‘Yes.
But who is she, Frank?’
‘I don't know.
I've no way of knowing.
Or of finding out.’
‘Nor have we.
It's why we came.’
‘Then you've had a wasted journey, haven't you?’
A crushed grimace of defeat crossed Charlotte's face at his words.
Derek saw it and saw also Frank's reluctant flinch of sympathy.
The old man rose, walked to the back door, pushed it open and inhaled a lungful of air.
Then, without turning round, he said: ‘I'm sorry I lied to the police.
I suppose I shouldn't have.
But I'd had a bellyful of your family and I just wanted to stay out of the whole rotten business.
And to keep my promise to Beatrix.
Not that she would want me to keep it now it's gone this far.
She'd want me to help your niece, not a doubt of it.
The trouble is I can't.
None of us can.
Your only hope is to find Madame V — and pray the letter Beatrix sent her contains what the kidnappers want.’
‘But if it doesn't?’ asked Charlotte in a flat and weary tone.
‘Or if we can't find her?’
Frank did not answer, other than to shake his head and sigh.
Nor did Derek.
There was, in all truth, no answer to give except what they were not yet quite despondent enough to admit: that Samantha was beyond their help.
They returned to Tunbridge Wells via Cheltenham, where Lulu Harrington gave them tea and her fulsome apologies for being unable to remember the full  name and address on Beatrix's fourth letter.
Something neither short nor long, beginning with V. Somewhere in or near Paris, though how near could be at the mercy of French postal zoning.
There was even the possibility that it was Mademoiselle V rather than Madame.
As to the addressee being a woman, she was adamant.
Or was she?
The more they pressed her, the more confused she became.
They left with their path ahead no clearer.
Indeed, the path ahead could scarcely be said to exist.
In every direction lay dead ends.
Even the route they had followed to this point seemed now to have closed behind them.
22
Charlotte passed a glum and largely sleepless Sunday night, unable to restrain her mind from rummaging again and again through the clues that always led, however often they were re-examined, to the most hopeless of conclusions.
Monday dawned still and misty, with a promise of autumn sunshine.
Gazing out at the grey sky turning slowly blue, or glancing aimlessly through the newspaper's parade of politics, fashion, commerce and sport, Charlotte felt a numb remoteness from the wider world.
It would whirl on regardless to October the eleventh and beyond.
And at some point in those looming weeks space would be found to report what had become of Samantha Abberley, only daughter of the recently deceased chairman and managing director of Ladram Avionics.
MIRACULOUS RESCUE.
UNEXPLAINED RELEASE.
STILL MISSING.
FOUND DEAD.
Charlotte could almost suspect the headline had already been selected, the outcome already determined.
It was as if only she was not yet to be told which it was to be.
When the doorbell rang shortly before ten o'clock, she assumed it was the postman and answered it ill-prepared for the face that greeted her.
It belonged to Chief Inspector Golding.
And he was not smiling.
‘Could we have a word, Miss Ladram?’
‘Certainly.
Come in.’
They went into the lounge.
An offer of coffee — even of a seat — was declined.
‘What can I do for you, Chief Inspector?’
‘I'll come straight to the point, Miss.
Your sister-in-law, Mrs Abberley, has informed us of your recent contact with her daughter's kidnappers.’
Charlotte was aware of Golding's eyes watching her closely to gauge her reaction.
She could not suppress a reddening of the face, though it was occasioned more by anger than discomfort.
However anxious Ursula might be, there could be no excuse for this.
If she had insisted on telling the police, Charlotte would not have objected.
But to do so in this way was to make her appear the villain of the piece.
As was perhaps the purpose.
‘I take it you don't deny speaking to them?’
‘No.
I don't.’
‘Or trying to persuade Mrs Abberley to keep it to yourselves?’
‘We agreed…for the present…in view of the doubts you'd expressed…’
‘The doubts I'd expressed?’
Golding treated her to a scornful look.
‘Have you any idea how irresponsible you've been, Miss Ladram?
Mrs Abberley is under a great deal of stress.
By taking advantage of her vulnerable condition —’
‘I didn't take advantage of her.
And I didn't persuade her to do anything against her will.
Irresponsible or not, it was a joint decision.’
‘That's not Mrs Abberley's version of events.’
‘I'm sure it isn't.’
He frowned at her.
‘Have you and she…fallen out?’
‘You could say so, yes.’
‘About what, might I ask?’
‘You may already know.’
‘Ah!
You mean the private detective's report and the tape recording which Mrs Abberley said you passed on to Mr Fairfax?’
‘Yes.’
‘I see.’
He deliberated for a moment, then said: ‘Whoever persuaded who, the fact is you both behaved very foolishly.’
‘Perhaps we did, but —’
‘Not to mention criminally.
You could be charged with obstructing the police in the execution of their duty.’
Charlotte made to reply, but suddenly felt exasperated and wearied by the hoops she had been obliged to jump through.
With a tired little toss of the head, she turned away and sat down in an armchair, motioning for Golding to do the same.
After some hesitation, he did so.
‘Well,’ he said, more moderately than before, ‘there won't be any charges of course.
But it's as well Mrs Abberley made a clean breast of it when she did, especially since the tape recording confirms — so she tells me — the existence of the letters which…which has been called into question in certain quarters.’
‘Yes.
It does.’
‘I must ask for your assurance that there will be no repetition of this kind of conduct.’
‘You have it.’
‘And your co-operation in the monitoring of all future calls to this number.’
‘You have that as well.’
‘Finally, I shall require the immediate surrender of the report and the tape.’
‘Mr Fairfax has them.’
‘Yes.
But I thought you might like to explain to him why he must give them up.
Rather than let me do it.’
‘Thank you.
I would.’
‘Very well.
If you and Mr Fairfax come to my office at’— he glanced at his watch —‘four o'clock this afternoon, bringing those items with you, we will regard the subject of your withholding them until now as closed.
Is that agreed?’
‘Yes.
It's agreed.’
‘I can only express the hope that you've not endangered your niece's life by such behaviour.’
‘So can I.’
‘I shall of course require a full statement from you concerning your contact with the kidnappers.’
‘I'll make one out this afternoon.’
‘Good.
Well…’
‘Is there something else?’
‘No.
Nothing else.’
He rose.
‘Until four o'clock then.’
‘Yes, Chief Inspector.
I'll be there.’
‘I'll see myself out, Miss.’
Charlotte waited until she heard the front door close behind him.
Then she hurried into the hall and picked up the telephone, intent upon speaking to Ursula and demanding an explanation.
But even as she framed the words in her mind, confidence deserted her.
What was the point of further recrimination when Ursula's motive was plain to see?
The tape — and her disclosure of its existence — would gain her Golding's confidence.
It would focus his attention where it should be focused: on finding Samantha.
To that extent, what she had done was understandable.
Letting Charlotte take the blame was merely a side-effect, almost an afterthought, though one she might well have relished.
Why give her the satisfaction of knowing her ploy had succeeded?
Why give her anything at all?
Charlotte pressed the receiver down, then dialled the number of Fithyan &Co.
23
An early lunch and a failure to return to the office afterwards was not how Derek would have wished to start the week at Fithyan &co .
Once he had heard of Charlotte's predicament, however — explained to him in a quiet corner of the Beau Nash Tavern, Mount Ephraim — he realized there was nothing else for it.
Reluctant as he was to part with evidence that went a long way to exonerating Colin, he knew surrendering it voluntarily was vastly preferable to having it seized.
Accordingly, he drove Charlotte to his house straight from the Beau Nash.
There they collected the report and the tape recording — and Derek paused long enough to telephone Carol with a flimsy excuse for his absence.
Then they headed for Newbury.
Their reception at the police station was a bewildering mix of the gruff and the polite.
Golding asked to speak to Charlotte alone and Derek was left on an uncomfortable chair in a busy corridor studying a LOCK IT OR LOSE IT poster for more than an hour before being summoned to join them.
Golding's office was grey and cheerless, with the disorientating feature of being substantially higher than it was wide.
The only source of colour was a multi-hued venetian blind, in front of which Golding sat at his desk, with a female officer beside him.
On the other side of the desk sat Charlotte.
Beside her was an empty chair towards which Golding flapped his hand.
‘Take a seat, Mr Fairfax.’
‘Er…
Thanks.’
Derek looked at Charlotte as he sat down, but all she could manage was the faintest of smiles.
‘Sorry to have kept you waiting so long, sir.
There's been a great deal to discuss.
As I'm sure you can imagine.
But I think I have the whole picture now.
Wouldn't you agree, Miss Ladram?’
‘I've certainly told you everything I know, Chief Inspector.’
‘Quite so.
Better late than never.’
Golding grinned sarcastically.
‘I've listened to the tape recording and I've perused the report.
As I assume you've also done, Mr Fairfax?’
‘Yes.’
‘I'm not investigating the murder of Miss Beatrix Abberley, but I shall certainly pass on my tentative conclusions to the Sussex Police.
They may well feel the case against your brother is substantially weakened by what's come to light.
This fellow…’
He sifted through some notes.
‘Spicer.
The late Mr Abberley's former chauffeur.’
‘He phoned Ursula the day Maurice's murder was.
reported in the press,’ said Charlotte, glancing at Derek.
‘I'd forgotten about it till now.’
‘Which means we can find out where he called from,’ said Golding.
‘Mrs Abberley's phone was being monitored by then.
All calls were automatically traced.’
‘I see.’
‘I have one of my men working on it.
We should have the result soon.’
‘Er…
Good.
I…
I'm grateful.’
‘I think you can rely on my colleagues in Sussex dealing with the case energetically.
It promises to be rather more straightforward’— he grinned —‘than my own enquiries.’
‘How will those be…taken forward?’
‘I can't be specific at the moment, sir.
No doubt we shall consult the Spanish police, since it seems clear matters Spanish lie at the root of this.
We may also ask the French police for help in tracing Madame V. But it's a tall order.
There's not much time left and a great deal we still don't know.’
‘I've already apologized for withholding the information, Chief Inspector,’ said Charlotte edgily.
‘Several times.’
‘So you have, Miss.
Nevertheless —’ He was interrupted by a knock at the door.
A middle-aged man eased his way into the room.
‘Yes, Barrett?’
‘We've traced the call, sir.
He rang just before midday on Tuesday the eighth.
Identified himself as Spicer.
Which is how Mrs Abberley addressed him.
He was calling from a pay-phone in a pub at Burnham-on-Crouch in Essex.
The Welcome Sailor.’
‘The Welcome Sailor,’ mused Golding.
‘And the missing chauffeur.
Thank you, Barrett.’
The door closed again.
‘Well, Mr Fairfax, as you can see, we've already made more progress than you managed on your own.’
‘Yes.
So it seems.
I —’
‘Mr Fairfax only did what I asked him to do,’ put in Charlotte.
‘He didn't persuade me any more than I persuaded Ursula.’
‘Maybe so.’
The sarcasm drained from Golding's face and was replaced by a steely earnestness.
‘But I want to make it clear to both of you — as I shall to Mrs Abberley — that any further information you come across touching on this case should be communicated to us immediately.
We shan't be so tolerant if this happens again.
There must be no more going it alone.’
‘I'm sure —’ Derek began, only to be cut short by Charlotte.
‘There won't be, Chief Inspector.’
‘Good, because —’ Golding broke off, then made a vague temporizing gesture with his hand and said: ‘Well, perhaps the point is made.’
He sighed.
‘You can go now, Mr Fairfax.
I just need Miss Ladram to sign her statement.’
‘Oh, right.
I…’
Derek rose, looked uncertainly at Charlotte, then turned to confront Golding's slack-jawed stare.
‘Well, thank you, Chief Inspector.’
‘Don't mention it.
Only doing my job.’
His stare hardened.
‘My job.
Not yours.’
Derek waited for Charlotte in the car park.
When she emerged, looking tired and exasperated, he made various consoling remarks, most of which she seemed not to hear.
She had lapsed into gloomy self-absorption, perhaps in reaction to Golding's interrogatory methods.
Whatever the cause, it placed her beyond Derek's reach.
He could only wait patiently for her to draw closer once more.
‘Do you want to go home, Charlotte?’
‘Not yet.
Unless you're keen to get back.’
‘No.’
‘Then could we drive to Walbury Hill?
It's only a few miles away.’
‘Where your brother was…
Where you found him?’
‘Yes.’
‘Are you sure you want to go there ?’
‘I'm sure.’
It was a cool and breezy evening of clear air and limitless horizons.
There were only a few other cars in the lay-by at Walbury Hill and their occupants had scattered far and wide.
Of the scene Charlotte and Ursula had confronted two weeks before there was neither sign nor trace.
Charlotte stood on the spot where Maurice's car had stood that morning and gazed to the north, her coat buttoned to the collar, scarf wound around her neck.
She looked cold and Derek wanted to put his arm round her, to give her some measure of warmth and comfort.
But he only shifted his feet uneasily beside her and broke the silence with a banal remark.
‘Golding seems a good man.
I'm sure he'll do his best.’
‘There's nothing he can do.’
Charlotte did not phrase her response as a rebuke, but it had much the same effect.
‘They are the experts.’
‘Not in what's befallen Sam.
They'll question Frank again and maybe Lulu.
They'll consult the Spanish police.
And time will slip by.
And come October the eleventh, they won't know any more than we know now.’
‘You mustn't give up hope.’
‘Why not?’
She turned to look at him.
‘I've been thinking about Sam in the same way as Maurice and Beatrix recently.
No longer here.
Nor ever likely to return.’
‘But Sam isn't dead.’
‘Not yet.
That's what makes it worse.
I can't help it, Derek.
If nothing can be done to save her, I almost wish she was already dead.’
Her chin drooped.
‘There, I've said it.
I've said what I should never even have thought.’
‘It's understandable.’
‘No.
It isn't.
Nothing has been since…’
She swung round, confronting the patch of chalk and turf where the Mercedes had been.
‘Since Maurice heard them coming for him that night.’
‘I'm sorry, Charlotte.’
Tentatively, Derek touched her elbow.
‘Really, I'm so very sorry.’
She pulled away.
‘It's September the twenty-first today,’ she declared.
‘Three weeks from now, it will be all over.
Maurice's folly will have run its course.’
Her tone altered as she glanced at Derek.
‘I'd like to walk to the top.
It's only a little way up the track.
Will you wait for me in the car?’
She did not want his company.
She had no use for it.
That was clear.
He murmured his agreement and watched her walk across to the bridlepath and start up it towards the dome-shaped summit.
Did it end here? he wondered.
Was this a more than merely temporary parting of the ways?
The wind was tugging at her hair, the setting sun turning it to false and fleeting gold.
His brother was to be given a second chance.
But for her brother there could be no reprieve.
On this hilltop, she walked in his shadow.
And in the shadow of events yet to be.
Which Derek could neither alter nor prevent.
Part Four
1
Every morning was the same.
Samantha woke and for a split second imagined she was still at home, still free to stretch and rise and walk and wash, still at liberty to heed her instincts and indulge her whims.
Then reality closed its cold hand around her and she remembered her captivity as one seamless procession of days that had begun just like this.
The air was chill.
She could see her own breath as she exhaled.
Each day the sun rose later and weaker and with it her strength too seemed to ebb.
Along with hope in a future not bound by the rough blankets rubbing at her chin, the cobwebbed ceiling above her head, the tiny window, the table in the corner, the hard wooden chair, the threadbare rug, the wax-choked candlestick, the bucket, the crucifix, the chain trailing from the bed-post to her wrist beneath the covers.
As she stirred, so its heavy links sounded their familiar reminder.
What was the date?
Wednesday the thirtieth of September or Thursday the first of October?
She had felt so confident at the outset in her ability to keep track of time, but now it was beginning to desert her.
She could ask Felipe, but he would probably only shrug and pretend he did not know.
As for Miguel, he would treat her to a long stare with those soulful eyes and mutter something she did not understand.
Not that it really mattered.
Whatever the precise date, she knew she had been here for the best part of a month, confined in this tumbledown shepherd's dwelling among the mountains.
Which mountains was another question, but they were not so very far from the coast, to judge by how long it had taken to drive here from whatever  port they had arrived in.
Northern Spain, then, which the steadily falling temperature tended to confirm.
Spain for certain.
That much Miguel had volunteered to her at an early stage.
‘You are in España, señorita.’
‘Where?
Where in Spain?’
‘You will stay here — with us — until we have what we want.’
‘What is it you want?’
He had not replied, then or later.
Was it money?
If so, surely her father would have paid long since.
Or her mother would have forced him to.
Either way, ransom would have been no problem.
Yet a problem there undoubtedly was.
For the first few days, they had been calm and relaxed.
Then something changed.
A man she had never seen before or since came at night.
He was thin and softly spoken and smoked an expensive cigar.
He had asked how she was.
He had smiled.
He had been a model of courtesy.
Yet he had argued with Miguel.
In Spanish, of course.
She had not understood a word.
Except her own name.
Abberley .
Repeated over and over again.
‘What did he say?’
‘He said you will stay here.’
‘How long?’
No answer.
No answer to that or any other question.
She stayed and they waited.
Every day the same.
Or almost.
Occasionally a third man, Jose, would take Felipe's place for forty-eight hours.
But Felipe would always return.
She became more anxious than usual in his absence.
Jose stared at her with greedy eyes and touched her and muttered suggestions of which no translation was necessary.
Miguel often went away for hours on end, but never when Jose was there.
Perhaps he too felt anxious about what might happen if he did.
After the coming of the man in the night, Miguel had grown glum and thoughtful.
He too stared at her a lot, but in pity, it seemed, not lust.
As for Felipe, perhaps  his ignorance was not feigned.
They played chess and draughts and she helped him improve his English.
He was cheerful and good-natured.
But even he was being worn down by the uneventful march of days.
‘What do you mean to do with me?’
‘Do not worry.
It will be OK.’
‘Has my father paid the ransom?’
‘I know nothing about ransom.
I know nothing about anything.’
‘Why won't you let me go?’
‘We play chess again, yes?’
‘I don't want to play bloody chess!’
‘But you will, yes?
Just for m e.’
She raised her hands behind her, grasped the brass rails of the bed-head, and squeezed them tightly, wondering how long it would be before Felipe came in with her breakfast.
He and Miguel were up.
She could hear them yawning and coughing as they moved around.
How she hated the weary familiarity of those sounds.
If only she had realized in time what was happening.
Her only chance to escape had been at the beginning, when Miguel had loomed above her as she lay in the garden.
She could have screamed or run.
He had a gun, of course, but now she thought he would not have used it.
Maybe not, at all events.
She could have refused to write that note to her parents or walk obediently to the car and climb into the boot.
She could have…
But she had been so frightened, so shocked, so bewildered by the sudden invasion of her life.
And she had wanted so badly to stay alive.
Fear had been at its pitch during the first few hours and days.
It was the fear of death and all the ways in which it might arrive: shooting, strangulation, suffocation.
At night, she still dreamt of the endless drugged hours she had spent jolting and rolling in the darkness of the car-boot, the hours of motion on land and sea of which she had only been dimly aware.
All they had led to was the squalor and isolation of this room they  kept her in, and the one beyond, and the yard outside they sometimes let her walk in, and the empty hillside, and the whitewashed wall of the barn against which she had stood to be photographed, clutching the International Herald Tribune for 4 September.
Even 4 September seemed an age ago now, part of a deluded past when she had believed her abduction was a simple crime committed for gain, when she had thought her release was imminent, her restoration to the pampered life she had led merely a matter of time and money.
She knew better now.
Or worse.
‘When are you going to let me go, Miguel?’
‘When we are told to.’
‘Have you spoken to my father?’
‘You ask too many questions, señorita.’
‘He'd pay you well to release me.’
‘It is too late for that.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘I mean…
We wait as long as we have to.’
‘But how long?’
Always the same circular conversation, leading, through every variation, back to where she had started and seemed likely to remain.
She sat up in bed, rubbed the sleep from her eyes and blew irritably at a hanging strand of her hair.
It was filthy, she knew, and quite possibly lousy.
As were her clothes.
As was her whole body.
When she thought of the baths she had wallowed in at home, the scented soaps and thick towels, the perfumes and the lotions, she wanted to cry.
At least here there was no mirror to show her what she looked like.
Though the lack of one gave her little comfort as she glanced at her arms and noticed the fresh red flea-bites of the night.
Why was she still here?
Why had her father not yet bought or won her freedom?
‘What are you waiting for?’ she murmured, imagining his face set in a stubborn frown.
‘Get me out of this.
Please.
For God's sake.
I don't think I can stand much more.
What are you waiting for, Dad?
What is it?’
Abruptly, the door opened and Felipe advanced into the room, carrying a tray.
He smiled at her and said, ‘Buenos dias, señorita ,’ as blithely as if he were bringing breakfast to her room in a Costa del Sol hotel.
He set the tray down on the table and she identified the predictable ingredients: coffee in a bowl and a hunk of bread smeared with honey.
‘Is there any news, Felipe?’
‘Bilbao won last night.’
‘What?’
‘El fútbol .’
He grinned.
‘About me!’
‘Ah!’
He scratched his stubbly chin.
‘Lo siento .
There is no news about you.’
‘How much longer is it going to be?’
‘I do not know.’
‘You must have some idea.’
Ignoring her, he turned away.
‘What's the date today, Felipe?
The thirtieth of September or the first of October?’
He looked at her and shrugged.
‘Why won't you tell me?
It's not much to ask.’
‘La fecha ?
I do not know.’
‘It's one or the other, isn't it?
Which?’
There was a hint of weakness in his expression.
She decided to persist.
‘Please, Felipe.
Just the date.’
He moved to the bedside and leant over her.
She caught a gust of cigarettes and stale garlic on his breath.
‘You will say nothing to Miguel?’ he whispered.
‘Nothing.
You have my word.’
He deliberated a moment longer, then said: ‘Es el primero de octubre .’
2
‘I'm afraid Chief Inspector Golding's out, Miss Ladram,’ came D.C. Finch's voice down the telephone.
‘Can I help?’
‘I'm simply calling to see if there have been any developments.’
‘None, I'm afraid.
Hasn't Mrs Abberley been keeping you up to date?’
‘I haven't liked to trouble her.’
‘Ah.
I see.
Well, there's been no response so far to the appeal in the French press for Madame V to come forward.
And nothing's come to light in Spain either.
So…’
‘We're none the wiser.’
‘I wouldn't say that.
Urgent enquiries are continuing.
No effort's being spared.’
‘I'm sure.
But it's a month today since my niece was kidnapped, isn't it?’
‘Er…
Yes.
Yes, it is.’
‘And still nothing.’
‘Would you like Chief Inspector Golding to call you when he returns?’
‘No, thank you.
I have to go out myself.
I'll ‘phone him.
Later.’
They were doing their best, Charlotte knew.
But their best was pitifully inadequate.
As soon as she had put the telephone down, she headed for the door.
A journey to Rye lay ahead of her.
She had not visited Jackdaw Cottage since putting it on the market two months ago.
But the estate agent had now found a buyer, one who was eager to move in as soon as possible.
The emptying of the house could therefore no longer be postponed and Charlotte had  decided to put matters in hand without further ado.
Part of her was glad to have a practical task to address.
It was a distraction her mind badly needed.
At Lewes Prison, Colin Fairfax was grinning broadly at his brother across a bare table in the visiting room, which was otherwise deserted.
‘Word's got round,’ he announced.
‘I can do virtually whatever I like here now.
They know I'm not staying long.’
‘According to Dredge,’ Derek replied, ‘things certainly look promising.’
‘Promising?
I should say so.
Spicer's been arrested, hasn't he?
It's only a matter of time now before they find some forensic evidence linking him to the scene of the crime.’
‘Is that what Dredge told you?’
‘They know he did it, Derek.
Where did he get the money to set himself up with a yacht in Burnham-on-bloody-Crouch if it wasn't a pay-off from Maurice Abberley for services rendered?’
‘You don't have to convince me.’
‘No.
But I do have to thank you.
Dredge tried to hog the credit, but it's clear to me where it really belongs.
With you.
You've done more to help me than I ever deserved.
And to think I doubted your commitment!
You've come up trumps, Derek.
I'd be proud of you if I weren't so grateful.’
‘There's no need to thank me.’
‘But there is.
It's why I was so glad you could come today.’
‘I was on my way to an auditing job in Newhaven.
It was no problem to stop off.’
‘Tough job, is it?’
‘Not particularly.’
‘Then why are you looking so glum?
To judge by your face, you'd have thought I'd just been sentenced to hang, not thrown a lifeline.’
‘Because…
Well, it was Charlotte Ladram who supplied the tape recording and the private detective's report.
Without them, the police would never have started looking for Spicer.’
‘And it's good to know one member of that family has a conscience.
But so what?’
‘So what ?’
Derek bridled.
‘She's lost her brother as well as her aunt, Colin.
And her niece has been kidnapped.
None of this was her fault.’
‘Nor mine.’
Colin sat back in his chair and cocked his head.
‘You haven't taken a shine to the girl, have you?’
‘Of course not.
I'd just like to be able to repay her generosity.’
‘By riding out on a white charger and rescuing her niece?’
Derek stared hard at his brother.
‘Imprisonment hasn't blunted your sarcasm, I see.’
Colin raised his hands in mock surrender.
‘Sorry.
I don't mean to pry.
If you and she…
Well, what can you do to help?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Hence the gloomy physog?’
‘I suppose so.
Besides…’
Derek leant forward and lowered his voice.
‘It hasn't been made public, but the kidnappers have said they'll kill the girl if they don't have what they want by the eleventh of October.’
Colin whistled.
‘And today's the first.’
‘Exactly.
Time's running out.
All too quickly.’
3
Charlotte had just begun to take stock of what needed to be removed from Jackdaw Cottage when Mrs Mentiply arrived, intent on discharging her housekeeping duties  to the bitter end.
Well-intentioned though the dear soul undoubtedly was, Charlotte had hoped to avoid her, since they had not met since Maurice's death and Mrs Mentiply could be relied upon to be as curious as she was sympathetic.
In the end, it seemed easier to surrender to her eagerness for information, to let her make coffee for both of them, then answer her innumerable questions as best she could.
‘Mr Mentiply and I were terribly shocked to hear about your brother, my dear.
And your niece as well, of course .
How is Mrs Abberley bearing up under such an awful strain?’
‘Remarkably well in the circumstances.’
‘Is there still no news of the girl?’
‘None, I'm afraid.’
‘Perhaps it's a blessing dear old Miss Abberley isn't alive to witness such sad times for her family.’
‘Perhaps it is.’
‘Whether she'd approve of the people who'll be living here I don't know.
Have you met them?’
‘No.
But the estate agent said —’
‘Stuck-up lot.
None of Miss Abberley's refinement.
I shouldn't care to work for them even if they asked me.’
‘Well, that's for you to decide, of course.
But they made a good offer.
I couldn't —’
‘Oh, I didn't mean you should have turned them down.
Not on my account.
You have more than enough to worry about without pandering to my likes and dislikes.’
‘It is a worrying time.’
‘Of course it is.
And if there's anything I can do — or Mr Mentiply — anything at all, you've only to say the word.’
‘It's kind of you, but —’
‘Haven't the police any clues as to what's become of the poor girl?’
‘Precious few.’
‘Or why she was kidnapped?’
‘They're trying to find a recipient of a letter Beatrix sent.
A woman in France whose surname begins with V. They think she may know something.’
Mrs Mentiply clicked her tongue.
‘Sounds like looking for a needle in a haystack.’
‘It is, rather.’
‘I mean, whereabouts in France?’
‘Oh, in or near Paris.
It doesn't narrow the field very much, does it?
If Beatrix had ever mentioned knowing somebody in Paris, it might be different, but she never did.
I don't suppose she ever said anything to you about Madame V?’
‘No.
I'm afraid she didn't.
V, you say?’
‘Beginning with V.’
‘In Paris?’
‘Yes.’
Mrs Mentiply shook her head dolefully.
‘It means nothing to me.’
Then she summoned a smile.
‘Would you like another cup of coffee?’
‘No, thank you.’
‘I'm sorry I didn't bring any biscuits.
If I'd known you were coming…’
‘It really doesn't matter.’
‘Only it's always nice to have a biscuit with coffee, isn't it, or a choc-’ Mrs Mentiply broke o Her face slowly compressed into a frown.
‘What's wrong?’
‘Or a chocolate,’ she said slowly.
‘Are you all right, Mrs Mentiply?’
‘What?’
She looked across at Charlotte, then down at her empty coffee-cup.
‘Why, I've just had the strangest thought.’
‘About what?’
‘Miss Abberley used to give me these chocolates, you see, Christmas and Easter, regular as clockwork.
‘You have them,’ she'd say.
‘They're from a friend.
I haven't the heart to tell her I don't like them.’
Well, as you  know, she didn't have a sweet tooth, not her, but I — They were sent to her twice a year for as long as I can remember.
A gift from a friend.’
‘I don't quite —’
‘They were French chocolates, Miss Ladram.
From a shop in Paris.
And the name of the shop began with a V. I'm sure it did.’
Charlotte felt the sudden acceleration of her thoughts almost as a physical sensation.
She sat forward and clasped Mrs Mentiply by the wrist.
‘What was the name?’
‘Vac…
Val…
Vass…
Something like that.’
‘You must remember.
For God's sake!’
‘I don't think I can.’
Charlotte clamped her eyes shut for an instant to stave off frustration.
‘Please try,’ she said as she re-opened them.
‘It's absolutely —’ Then she stopped.
Mrs Mentiply was smiling.
‘There's no need for me to remember.
They came in smart green tins with a label inside the lid showing the name and address of the shop.’
‘Quite possibly.
But —’
‘They were too good to throw away when the chocolates had been eaten!’
Mrs Mentiply's smile broadened.
‘You mean…’
‘I've got several at home.
I use them to store all sorts of bibs and bobs in.
And I'm sure the labels are still on them.’
Mr Mentiply had already departed for his lunchtime imbibition at the Greyhound Inn when they reached the bungalow.
Without pausing even to take her coat off, Mrs Mentiply bustled into the sitting room, yanked down the flap of the bureau and pulled out a round tin about six inches in diameter.
It was dark green, edged in gold.
In her eagerness to remove the lid, she spilt most of the contents — pens, pencils, rubbers and paper-clips — on to the floor.
But she paid them no heed as she  held out the lid for Charlotte to see.
On the inside, as promised, was a label, printed black on gold, scratched and ink-stained but clearly legible.
CONFISERIE VASSOIR 17 RUE DE TIVOLI 75008 PARIS
Visiting Colin had left Derek more uncertain than ever how to bridge the gap ten days of contrasting fortune had opened between him and Charlotte Ladram.
He wanted to give her help and support, but in practical terms there was none he could offer.
Nor could he avoid reminding Charlotte of the hopeful turn Colin's case had taken — a turn to which she had made a significant contribution — while her niece's plight seemed only to worsen by the day.
Yet he was also reluctant to let events stifle their friendship before it had properly begun.
It was the sort of mistake he had made too often in the past and accounted for him standing on the brink of a lonely middle age.
Driving back from Newhaven to Tunbridge Wells that afternoon, he had only to think of the empty house and the solitary evening awaiting him at Farriers to rebel against caution and risk a diversion to Ockham House.
But his small rebellion did not bring him even a modest reward.
Charlotte was out.
Where she might be he could not imagine and the gap between them seemed perceptibly to widen as he sat waiting in his car for a doleful hour of encroaching twilight.
When he eventually gave up and drove away, he was weighed down by a leaden conviction that he would never return.
4
Charlotte's response to her discovery had been so instinctive, and the action it had prompted her to take so urgent, that it was not until late afternoon, aboard a train drawing ever closer to Paris, that she began to consider the difficulties and possible consequences of the task she had set herself.
She had, after all, promised Chief Inspector Golding she would pass any information she obtained on to him immediately.
In the event, however, she had not even thought of doing so.
Instead, she had sworn Mrs Mentiply to secrecy, driven back to Tunbridge Wells to collect her passport, then raced to Dover just in time to catch an early afternoon hovercraft to Boulogne.
She had justified her behaviour to herself on the basis that the police would have been much slower and more painstaking.
Their heavy-handed approach might also have deterred Madame Vassoir — if there was such a person — from co-operating, whereas Charlotte was uniquely well placed as Beatrix's niece and Samantha's aunt to appeal to her on behalf of the whole family.
But there was, as she had realized, another less worthy motive driving her on.
She wanted to find the solution to the mystery on her own and to flourish it beneath the noses of those who had doubted her ability — or her right — to do so.
She wanted to finish what Maurice had begun.
Wanting and achieving, however, were not the same.
She had looked no further till now than finding Confiserie Vassoir, trusting to luck and French shopping hours that it would still be open when she arrived.
The train reached Paris at half past six.
A drizzly dusk was settling on the city and the imminence of nightfall had an instantly erosive effect on her confidence.
But she succeeded in  holding it at bay.
From the Gare du Nord she took a taxi, stating her destination as ‘Dix-sept, Rue de Tivoli’.
Fortunately, it was not far.
She was set down in a quiet side-street near the Madeleine.
Most of the shops seemed already to be closed and her heart sank as she identified the unlit frontage of number seventeen.
All she could do was stare glumly at the sign hanging inside the door — CONFISERIE VASSOIR:Ouvert 9.30–18.30 Mardi à Samedi — then glance at her watch, which confirmed she was fifteen minutes too late.
Suddenly, there was the hint of a reprieve.
It took the form of a blaze of light at the back of the shop.
A stocky male figure entered from a room at the rear and began looking for something beneath the counter.
Charlotte rapped on the window with her knuckles.
He looked up, made a shooing gesture with his hand, then returned to his search.
She rapped again and shouted ‘Monsieur Vassoir !’, praying he was indeed Monsieur Vassoir and could hear her.
But, having found what he evidently wanted, he only frowned and waved her away once more.
‘Monsieur Vassoir !’ she bellowed, striking the glass so hard she thought it might break.
‘S'il vous plaît!
Très important !
’ He stared, then, with an enormous shrug of reluctance, he walked to the door, unbolted it and edged it open.
‘Nous sommes fermés, madame !’
He was a short balding man of late middle age, with a bristling black moustache and a gruff voice.
He was clearly annoyed.
‘Monsieur Vassoir?’
‘Oui, mais —’
‘I hope you speak English.
I'm looking for Madame Vassoir.
Your wife, perhaps?
It's vital I find her.
A matter of life and death.’
His frown deepened.
‘My name's Charlotte Ladram.
I —’
‘My wife does not know you,’ he retorted.
‘No.
But I think she knows — knew — my aunt.’
‘Please go away.’
He made to close the door.
Desperately, Charlotte thrust her shoulder into the gap.
‘Beatrix Abberley!’ she shouted.
‘My aunt was Beatrix Abberley.’
He pulled back and squinted at her, pushing out his lower lip in a gesture combining pugnacity and deliberation.
‘She sent a letter to a Frenchwoman in June.
Arranged to have it sent, I should say, immediately after her death.
The Frenchwoman's name began with V. If your wife was the recipient, then I must speak to her.
There was an appeal in the papers here, I know, for Madame V to come forward.
But they won't have explained why it's so urgent.
My niece has been kidnapped and the letter may hold the key to her freedom.
To her very life!’
‘What makes you think my wife is this…
Madame V?’
‘She sent Beatrix chocolates every Christmas and Easter.
She was a friend.
Beatrix said so.
The label on one of the tins is what brought me here.’
He hesitated a moment longer, then grunted and opened the door sufficiently for Charlotte to enter.
As he closed it behind her, the lingering aroma of rich chocolate emerged from the gloom around them.
The counters and display cabinets were empty, save for a few of the distinctive green and gold Confiserie Vassoir tins.
‘What has the letter — if there is a letter — to do with your niece's…enlèvement ?’
‘It's the letter her kidnappers want.’
‘They have said so?’
‘Not exactly.
But when I spoke to them —’
‘You have spoken to them?’
‘Yes.’
‘What do you know about them?’
‘Nothing — except that they're Spanish.’
‘Espagnol?’
‘Yes.
Definitely.’
‘Espagnol , ‘he repeated in a disbelieving murmur.
‘Wait here,madame .
I will telephone my wife.’
He hurried into  the back room.
Charlotte heard him dial, then, a moment later, announce himself.
‘Ma chérie?
C'est moi.
Oui.
Au magasin. Écoute bien .’
His speech accelerated beyond Charlotte's comprehension, though she caught her own name — and Beatrix's — on several occasions.
Vassoir said less — and listened more — as the call proceeded.
It drew to a close with expressions such as‘Oui, oui ’ and ‘Immédiatement ’.
Then he put the telephone down and rejoined her in the shop, frowning solemnly.
‘My wife wants me to take you to her,madame .
She is at our home in Suresnes.
It is not far.
Will you let me drive you there?’
‘She is the Madame V Beatrix wrote to?’
‘Oui.’
‘Then, yes, please take me to her.
Straightaway.’
‘My car is parked at the back.
Come this way.’
‘One thing,monsieur .
When I mentioned Spain, it seemed to make a big difference.
Why?’
‘Because my wife is Spanish.’
‘I see.’
Guesswork prompted her to add: ‘What was her maiden name?’
‘Pardon?’
‘Her surname — before you married.’
‘Ah, je comprends .’
For the first time, he smiled.
‘Ortiz.
Isabel Ortiz.’
‘And Vicente Ortiz was…’
‘Her father.’
5
The Vassoirs lived on two floors of a gaunt town house west of the Seine.
Charlotte was aware of high ceilings and dark passages, large rooms decorated with a restraint bordering on austerity, but only dimly so.
Somehow the surroundings seemed blurred by her thirst for knowledge.
The answer was close now and the minutes remaining before it was revealed to her were harder to bear than the days and weeks that had gone before.
Isabel Vassoir was a slim elegantly dressed woman in her late fifties with grey hair tied in a bun, immaculately poised between delicacy and frailty.
She greeted Charlotte in a drawing room strewn with plants and pictures where an impassive bloodhound dozed before a blazing fire.
Marriage to a Frenchman seemed to have erased her Spanish origins completely.
There was no breath of the south in her mannered metallic voice.
She spoke much better English than her husband and looked at Charlotte with a farther seeing eye.
Henri Vassoir left them alone together and Charlotte felt increasingly uncomfortable as she explained how and why she had found her way to Paris.
When she concluded by asking if Madame Vassoir still had the letter from Beatrix and if its contents could have provoked Samantha's abduction, her hostess poured them both a glass of sherry before replying.
‘Yes, Charlotte, the letter — and what came with it — answers all your questions.
As what you have told me answers mine.
I read the appeal in the newspapers for Madame V to come forward, but they said nothing about abduction or ransom.
Even so, you will wonder, why did I not respond?
Well, when you have read what Beatrix sent to me, you will understand.
I disclose it now only to help you save your niece.
Otherwise, I would refuse.
Otherwise, it would be safer to keep it hidden.’
‘Why?’
‘First, I must tell you how I came to know Beatrix.
She was a good and generous person.
She was kind to me and to Henri and to my mother.
Too kind, it seems, even to tell us she did not like chocolate.’
‘I don't recall her ever referring to you.’
‘You would not.
She kept her friendship with us secret.
Why?
Because, she said, her family would not approve.
Well, it may have been true, but, since receiving her letter, I know there was another reason.
But I must begin at the beginning.
I was born in Barcelona in 1929.
My father, Vicente Ortiz, was a lorry driver and mechanic.
I hardly remember him and what I tell you about him was mostly told to me by my mother.
She died eight years ago, here, in this house.
According to her, he was too clever for his own good.
A kindly uncle with no children of his own had paid for him to be educated, but education only made him discontented with his lot in life.
He worked for a furniture manufacturer and was an active member of CNT, the anarchist trades union.
When the military rising began in July 1936, he joined the CNT militia and went away to fight.
From then on we saw little of him.
‘You must understand I left Spain before my tenth birthday and have never been back since.
It is almost as much a foreign country to me as it is to you.
I have studied its history because it is the land of my birth and I feel I know it well, but only as a student, not as a patriot, not even as an exile.
It was different for my mother.
She regarded herself as a Catalan first and last.
She remained loyal all her life to the things Franco swept away.
She cheered the day he died.
She would have danced on his grave if she could.
The Civil War never ended for her.
It went on burning inside her head.
For me it is just a childhood memory of noise and confusion.
‘We lived with my mother's parents in the Gracia district of the city.
My mother worked as a seamstress at the Fabra and Coats factory.
My grandmother took in laundry and looked after me and my grandfather.
He walked with a stick, trailing one leg.
It had been damaged in an accident at the locomotive works where he had been employed in his youth.
We were poor, but happy, at least as far as I was concerned.
After the rising, the workers took control in Barcelona.
The revolution had come.
Or so it seemed.
Certainly my family believed it.
Until the following spring anyway, when it began to disintegrate in squabbling and fighting between factions.
Stalinists and  Trotskyites and Anarchists all putting their feuds first and the fight against Fascism second.
Food started to run short around the same time.
Franco's noose began to tighten round Catalonia's neck.
A cold winter and blanket bombing finished the job.
‘That is how my mother said it was and the history books tell the same story.
When the army rose, the working classes of Barcelona united to defend themselves — and to change society.
But they succeeded in neither.
Germany and Italy were funding and equipping the Nationalists.
To combat them, the Republican government had to seek help from Russia.
And Russia's price was the suppression of revolutionary socialism.
The Anarchists were one of the groups they moved against.
So, my father ended by fighting for a different cause from the one he had volunteered to defend.
‘I knew nothing of any of this.
My recollections of Barcelona are a jumble of hooting cars and waving flags, whining bombs and derelict buildings, food queues and rats and ragged clothes and my hands going blue with the cold of the last winter we spent there.
My father came to see us just before Christmas.
By then he had been transferred to the remnants of the British Battalion of the International Brigade.
I cried all night when he went back to the army.
And so did my mother.
We never saw him again.
News came in March that he had been captured and probably killed during the retreat from Teruel.
It was the sort of news a lot of wives and daughters were receiving.
The whole Republic was in retreat.
And it was not only at the front that people were dying.
The Italians began bombing Barcelona in February of 1938.
I remember the sheer terror of those raids, of seeing dead bodies lying on the pavement, of witnessing what no nine-year-old girl should ever have to.
It was the beginning of the end.
But the end was a long time coming.
And, meanwhile, a strange thing happened.
My mother received a letter.
From a woman in England she had never heard of.’
‘From Beatrix?’
‘Yes.
From Beatrix.
It arrived about two months after the news about my father, although it was only much later that I was told what was in it.
Beatrix wrote to say her brother had served with my father and in his last letter to her before dying had asked her to find out whether his old comrade was still alive.’
‘Which is exactly what Tristram did ask her to do — in the only one of his letters to Beatrix I've read, sent from Tarragona in mid-March 1938.’
Charlotte frowned.
‘But hold on.
How did Beatrix know your address?’
‘She said Tristram had told her.’
‘No, no,’ Charlotte objected.
‘He didn't.
It wasn't mentioned in his letter.’
‘It was in the document accompanying the letter.
As you will see.’
Isabel Vassoir smiled.
‘Let me finish my story.
Then you will understand how all the pieces fit together.
My mother wrote back to Beatrix, telling her my father was almost certainly dead.
She expected to hear no more.
But Beatrix wrote again, offering her sympathy — and her help, if we needed it.
Well, we certainly needed it.
Catalonia was cut off from the rest of the Republic by then and slowly being strangled to death.
But what could an Englishwoman we had never met do for us?
My mother did not reply.
She told me later she could not see the point of such correspondence.
And I suspect also she did not want to be reminded of my father.
So, she let the matter drop.
‘In the autumn, my grandfather died, worn out by the struggle for survival.
Then, just after Christmas, the Nationalists launched their final offensive against Catalonia.
By the middle of January, 1939, they were within reach of Barcelona.
The bombing intensified and panic began to spread.
Anybody linked with the Republican cause would be in peril of their life under the Fascists.
Franco's ruthlessness was legendary.
So, the only thought was how to escape.
As the widow  of a known Anarchist, my mother had to get away.
France had opened its border to refugees and people began streaming north towards it.
We joined them, my mother, my grandmother and I, pushing our few belongings in a hand-cart.
The journey must have been a torment for them, though for me it was a merciful chaos of trudging along muddy roads, of running for shelter from German fighter planes, of waking in the cart caked with snow while my mother and grandmother strained at the shafts.
‘When we reached France, we were put in a crowded camp with no shelter.
It was, in fact, the clearing centre at Le Boulou, but nobody had any idea then where we were or where we were going.
After a few days, we were taken to a camp for women and children north of Perpignan, where there was food and shelter, although not enough of either.
My grandmother fell ill and there were times when my mother said we should have stayed in Barcelona.
She could see no end to the squalor and harshness of life in the camp.
Then, in her desperation, she remembered Beatrix's offer.
She wrote a letter to her, asking her to help us in any way she could.
She persuaded a Red Cross representative to send it on.
She did not know if it would reach Beatrix, of course, nor whether she would respond even if it did.’
‘But it did reach her?’
‘Yes.
And she responded, though too late to save my grandmother, who died just before Easter.
A few weeks later, Beatrix arrived at the camp and took us away.’
‘Just like that?’
‘For my mother it was a prayer answered, for me like dreaming of paradise and waking to find I was there already.
A tall and smartly dressed Englishwoman took my hand and put me in a chauffeur-driven car and, suddenly, after three months of confinement behind barbed-wire fences, we were driving away, through the barrier and down the lanes thick and bright with the leaves and  flowers of spring.
I cried and laughed and stared and could not believe it was happening.
But it was.’
Into Charlotte's mind came what Uncle Jack had said concerning Beatrix's whereabouts in the spring of 1939.
‘She'd been to the French Riviera — or it could have been the Swiss Alps — or it could have been both — for a good couple of months .’
She knew now it had been neither.
Isabel Vassoir was right.
All the pieces were beginning to fit together.
‘How Beatrix arranged our release I do not know.
But I imagine the authorities were grateful to anybody who was prepared to take a couple of refugees off their hands and assume responsibility for them.
And that is what she did.
She rented an apartment for us in Perpignan and bought us food and clothes.
She stayed with us for a month while we regained our strength, doing all the cooking and washing until my mother was fit enough to take over.
She was our saviour.
She was my fairy godmother.
She paid for my mother to take French lessons and helped her find work as a seamstress with various drapers in the city.
She put us back on our feet and made it possible for us to live again.
We owed her everything.
It was one of the reasons why I was anxious to learn English at school: so that I could tell her in her own language how grateful I would always be.’
Another beneficiary of Beatrix's generosity had emerged from her hidden past and sat now smiling faintly at Charlotte across a French drawing room.
Beatrix had rescued Vicente Ortiz's only surviving relatives from the aftermath of a war.
She had done what nobody could have expected her to do.
And she had done it in secret.
‘Did she tell you about Frank Griffith?’
Charlotte asked after a moment's thought.
‘Did she tell you how your father sacrificed himself to save Frank?’
‘Yes.
And she also told us she did not know where Frank was.
She said she had lost touch with him.
So, even if my mother wanted to contact him, there was no —’
‘But that wasn't true!’
‘Exactly.
Beatrix helped us, but she also lied to us.
Or perhaps I should say she did not trust us with everything she knew.
But, then, who did she trust with everything ?’
‘Nobody,’ Charlotte replied.
‘But…
Why?
Why all the secrecy?’
‘When you read what she sent me, Charlotte, you will understand.
She gave no hint of its existence during my mother's life.
She remained our friend and advisor.
She sent money to pay for my education.
When I married Henri, she was generous to him too, putting up some of the capital he needed to open a confiserie in Perpignan.
And she helped again later when we moved to Paris.
So, you see, we owed her far more than an occasional box of chocolates could repay.
But they were all she would accept.’
‘What did she send you?’
Charlotte heard the note of impatience in her voice, but was helpless to restrain it.
‘A document my father had given to her brother.
In the accompanying letter, Beatrix said it would be sent to me by a friend in the event of her death.
She also implored me not to contact her family.
She said she had held the document back for so long because she was afraid it would re-open old wounds for my mother and because she felt sure it was better for us not to know what it contained.’
‘And what did it contain?’
‘See for yourself.
The original is in Catalan, but Tristram translated it into English.
I will fetch both versions now and let you read the translation.
It is time, I think.
High time.’
Madame Vassoir rose and walked quietly from the room, patting Charlotte on the shoulder as she passed.
The door clicked shut behind her and Charlotte listened intently to the ticking of the clock and the rhythmic snoring of the bloodhound.
It would not be long now.
A fragment of the damp Paris night — a portion of heavy-curtained solitude — stood alone between her and the  truth.
When the door re-opened, Beatrix's last secret would be hers.
