7
Culture
Introduction
Finally, there is a function…that is none the less fundamental: the transmission of a common culture and common standards of citizenship…
It is a proper function of higher education…to provide in partnership with the family that background of culture and social habit upon which a healthy society depends.
For the Committee chaired by Lord Robbins, there was an essential link between higher education and culture.
So much so, that the cultural function of higher education was one of the four functions identified as the core of Robbins' idea of higher education.
Looking back a quarter of a century to that statement, perhaps the most obvious awkwardness today lies in its easy assumption that there was, in the 1960s, a common culture to be transmitted.
As writers like Leavis and Raymond Williams saw it, although educational institutions had a duty to do what they could to sustain it, the common culture was almost irredeemably lost.
Let us put that difficulty aside, at least for now, for there is something much more significant in the silences within that passage.
The Robbins report looked to the culture of the wider society and the relationship of higher education to that.
In looking for its cultural bearings, the report correspondingly failed to give any serious attention to the internal culture of higher education.
This is a striking omission, because the inner life of higher education institutions was, for Robbins, an essential ingredient in the development of the system.
The failure to engage in that kind of self-reflection was part of a self-assurance over the wider common culture.
It never occurred to Robbins that there was any need to describe the internal culture of higher education; it was taken for granted that everyone knew what it was, or at least what it should be.
As we approach the year 2000, with an increasingly complex system of higher education, with more students, more kinds of institutions and more kinds of courses, we cannot make such assumptions.
In addressing the inner culture of higher education, we must not forget that inescapably it will and should have some relationship with the culture of its host  society.
It would be a contradictory state of affairs to believe that higher education could maintain one kind of culture within itself and could underpin a quite different kind of culture within society at large: there could not be any fundamental incongruity between these two cultural functions of higher education.
It follows that, in offering a view of the cultural characteristics of higher education, we must also keep an eye on the wider culture and say something about their interconnections.
Two levels of internal culture
The inner culture of higher education works on two distinct levels.
First, the idea of culture has application in relation to the academic community.
So, we can ask questions like: What, if anything, is characteristic about the culture of academics?
Is there one, in fact, or are there now only the multitude of disciplinary sub-cultures?
Can we, at a deeper level perhaps, identify elements of a form of life, with its own values, which is distinctive of the academic community in general?
That set of questions has to be distinguished from those we can pose on the second level of culture.
This is the level of the process of higher education itself, the level which comes close to that of the student experience.
The questions this analytical level raises include: What kind of cultural enlargement, if any, can higher education hope to offer the individual student?
Is it a matter of exposing students to some kind of culturally rich material (like the American ‘great works’ approach) or is it more a matter of a particular educational experience?
In other words, is it a matter of content or process?
If it is a matter of process, what are the limitations on the process of learning considered as a human transaction, if the sought-for cultural enlargement is to take place?
For example, a traditional assumption was that a genuine higher education experience could only be offered in a collegiate setting, with its communal and residential qualities.
Red-brick universities, inner-city polytechnics and the Open University have dented that assumption; but perhaps there are still features of the student experience which we should hold on to if higher education is to offer a cultural enlargement?
On the other hand, if it is a matter of content, does the idea of culture only have meaning for students in the humanities and the social sciences?
Or do those taking science, technological and professional courses also deserve some kind of cultural experience?
Before moving on, two brief observations.
First, at the level of the student's developmental process, culture as process seems prima facie to offer the prospect of an integrative element working across disciplinary cultures.
Culture as content seems to point, on the other hand, to different answers for different kinds of educational programme, and even begs the question as to whether it makes sense in some subject domains.
The other point is that, while I have distinguished between the culture of the academic community and the cultural dimension in the student's educational experience (and this book is mainly about the second of those), there has to be a  strong connection between them.
Logically, and as a matter of fact, the quality of the student's experience is affected by the character of the life of the academic community.
Individual members of the academic community will also often readily admit that their own continuing development is heavily influenced by their interactions with their students (a symbol of which is the dedication ‘to my students’ to be found in many of their books).
With these two levels of culture within higher education having been distinguished, let us look in more detail at them.
The academic culture: One culture or many?
The idea of culture suggests a shared set of meanings, beliefs, understandings and ideas; in short, a taken-for-granted way of life, in which there is a reasonably clear difference between those on the inside and those on the outside of the community.
Part of the sharing, and sense of community, resides in the taken-for-granted aspects of the culture.
The unquestioned stock (of dominant ideas, concepts, theories, research practices) bestows personal identity and sustains the community as a community.
Consequently, those on the inside recognize each other as one of themselves.
The recognition takes several forms, including modes of communication.
All these features of a culture are apparent in the academic community.
However, they are less obviously to be seen in the academic community as a whole than in the discrete disciplinary sub-cultures, where they take different forms (Becher 1989).
The point can be made in the form of a question.
What, if anything, do the following members of an academic institution have in common: the business studies lecturer, the philosopher, the pharmacist, the nuclear physicist, the archaeologist, the civil engineer, the social work lecturer and the law lecturer?
Other than their having the same employer, what does it mean to say that they are each members of the same community?
For, if pressed, many are likely to say that they feel more in common with others in the same discipline in other institutions — even on the other side of the world — than with academics in the same institution but in different subjects.
Indeed, there is a greater likelihood that they could give the names of more researchers in the same field in another country than they could give the names of staff in other disciplines in the same building.
The invisible college is a more influential community than the visible college (or so it might seem).
One of the enduring terms which speaks directly to the academic culture is that of the ‘community of scholars’.
Although heavy with its medieval resonances, it can still be encountered, especially — and perhaps surprisingly — in American books on higher education.
‘Surprisingly’ because it is the large American universities that typify most obviously the apparent disintegration of the academic community into a multitude of discrete disciplinary cultures.
Clark Kerr put it aptly enough in his famous observation that the ‘multiversity’, as he called it, had become ‘a series of individual faculty entrepreneurs held together by a common grievance over parking’.
The unity of purpose across the academic community comes through, too, in the term ‘university’, with its suggestion of a single universe of knowledge.
It reminds us of the idea that, while we have carved up knowledge and put it into the hands of separate academic professions, ultimately all knowledge is bound up together.
There may be, as Paul Hirst claims, different tests for truth in the various forms of knowledge, but at least those different corpuses of knowledge all make a contribution to the total sum of knowledge.
And that entire pool of knowledge then becomes a single resource on which we can draw in solving our problems.
Many of the divisions between disciplines are not arbitrary, for they have a logical basis.
That, though, should not stop us losing sight of the partiality of single disciplines.
Their development is strengthened, not weakened, by being placed in the proximity of other disciplines under the epistemic umbrella offered by the university (and its sister institutions).
It has to be admitted that signs of an internal common culture, of a shared unity of purpose, and of a common means of communication are not immediately apparent.
Perhaps the most significant aspect of any culture is its language, and there, above all, we encounter the most obvious signs of difference across the disciplines.
For while it is the case that the academic community is distinguished by its ‘elaborated’ discourse (Gouldner 1976), it is more to the point that each disciplinary community has developed its own elaborated discourse.
This is not just a matter of words: one does not become a member of a disciplinary community simply by having access to the latest dictionary or even the fullest encyclopaedia on the subject.
The discourse reaches beneath concepts, theories and ideas, and beyond the practices intrinsic to the discipline, to background assumptions, beliefs and even ideologies.
There are ways of going on (in Wittgensteinian vocabulary) that mark out one discipline from another, with their tacit rules that can only be learned by being active in that community.
For example, it is almost a requirement for publication in some academic journals that diagrams (and high-quality diagrams at that) be included; in other disciplines, diagrams are simply unacceptable.
These editorial policies are not the result of idiosyncratic requirements on the part of journal editors; they are simply part of the disciplinary culture, which every aspiring academic has to pick up.
The question, though, remains: given these differences, is there any sense in which we can still refer today to a single academic community?
If there is, it has to be at a deeper level of thought and interaction than we have so far identified.
Disciplinary cultures: Conservative or revolutionary?
We can begin here by reflecting that the account so far given of the internal culture of the academic community is somewhat misleading.
Any culture, because it has to retain traditional customs and beliefs, has to be in a sense a conservative institution.
In this respect, academic disciplinary cultures are no different; they impose their own boundaries on what is acceptable from their  adherents.
But disciplinary cultures are not just conservative in character, fixed for all time.
Change takes place continually.
Arguably, more change takes place in disciplines than in any other kind of culture.
This is hardly surprising, for part of the rationale of the academic enterprise is a refusal to take aspects of its culture as given.
Theories, concepts, models, practices and interior assumptions are all, supposedly, on the table for debate, for approval or rejection.
Certainly, this picture deserves to be qualified.
Following Kuhn, we cannot but be aware of the internal resistance to change that disciplines exhibit, even in the supposedly open-ended inquiry of science.
The point, though, remains.
The disciplines are always on the move, generating new meanings and insights.
In theory, every aspect of their constitution is a candidate for reassessment by the disciplinary grouping charged with its custodianship.
Each sub-culture of the academic community, then, declines to be a culture in the normal sense, for each sub-culture is potentially critical of just those elements which constitute its culture.
The taken-for-grantedness of those practices around which a conventional culture is formed represents closure; a genuine academic community, even one built round a well-defined discipline, on the other hand, abhors closure.
Towards a common culture
We seem to have reached a contradictory position.
The groupings that form around academic disciplines are both cultures and anti-cultures.
Both views are true.
From the outside, the immediate impression is one of a traditional culture, with its own way of going on, more or less impenetrable to an outsider.
Just under the surface, though, we can see signs of a willingness to take nothing on trust, to maintain a permanent self-vigilance, and if necessary to overturn the cultural idols.
But does this observation not give us an insight into a deeper foundation on which the individual disciplinary culture is based, a foundation which is common to all disciplinary formations permitted entry into the academic community?
Recalling the analysis contained in Chapters 3 and 4, the tests of truth, the relationship between theory and practice, the degree of objectivity and the human element, all vary across the disciplines.
But they all share a common interest in self-reflection.
They each exist as an organic entity, with an internal dynamic.
The movement of thought happens not directly through any outside intervention, but through the sub-culture's inner compulsion to reflect on itself, if only at the level of current findings, theories and views.
Occasionally, the form of thought itself comes up for reassessment, and usually then as the result of some external influence (as we see in the case of modern technology-driven medicine beginning reluctantly to embrace complementary medicine).
Nevertheless, whatever the scope of this self-examination, it remains a constituent part of every disciplinary sub-culture.
Each disciplinary sub-culture is, then, a critical enterprise; but with the critique turned in on itself.
It follows that, underlying the variety and very real  differences across disciplines, there is a common interest in self-criticism as such.
It is this propensity to engage in self-critique that is perhaps the key distinguishing feature of the academic community.
It is on this level that members of different disciplinary cultures can recognize each other as engaging in a common activity, if at all.
Picking up Jurgen Habermas' analysis of truth-oriented discourse (Chapter 4), we can go further along this path.
That kind of discourse, which after all is the kernel of academic discourse, contains within its own deep structure implicit claims as to veracity, sincerity, coherence and comprehensibility.
Any speaker, claiming to offer some definite view on the world, can be questioned in any of these domains, for all truth-directed speech acts have this inner structure.
If this is so, then academic discourse contains this hidden structure as a kind of metadiscourse.
Even if none of the domains is invoked against the speaker, it is still there, within the discourse.
Even where a definite assertion is made, there is an implicit invitation to the reader or listener to assent or dissent.
But to say this is to reinforce the point already made: that academic discourse has a common foundation in being self-critical in its inner structure and underlying interest.
Gouldner was just three-quarters right in describing it as a culture of critical discourse; for it is essentially a culture of self-critical discourse.
It may be felt that this analysis has only theoretical value at most.
Precisely because academics have their identity, language and conversation within their own sub-culture, there is little if any sign of a shared discourse.
The idea of each institution forming a coherent academic community seems to have little purchase in reality.
In medieval times, Latin provided a lingua franca, a common means of communication for scholars from different countries.
Where, though, do we see evidence today of any analogous common grounding, and of a felt shared set of interests running across the academic community and its various disciplines?
Admittedly, we see the academic community being collectively self-critical within the disciplines, e.g. through the peer review system which operates in research activities.
We also see, occasionally, the academic community rising up en masse to defend itself against some perceived external threat — usually further diminutions in its autonomy.
But these are not instances of the academic community acting concertedly as a single corporate body, being self-critical about its own internal affairs and activities.
Restoring an academic community
Still, the idea of an academic community, with its connotations of sharing and common commitment, dies hard.
Even the state believes in it, quite apart from the academics themselves.
Recently, we have seen in the UK, in the Lindop Inquiry, not only a group of academics subscribing to the notion of a ‘coherent academic community’, but also the government in its response accepting that the best safeguard of ‘standards’ lies in the maintenance of a ‘coherent, self-critical academic community’.
Is this just the state having been convinced by the academics' own rhetoric about themselves, or hoping that the academics  will actually be prepared to keep their own house in order (for instance, by closing down a course of their own volition)?
It is worth pursuing this example.
The Lindop Inquiry was set up to examine the maintenance of standards in the polytechnics and colleges sector of UK higher education.
Its principal focus was the work of the Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA), the body established in 1964 with the task of ‘quality control’ in the public sector of higher education.
Essentially, the Inquiry found that the major institutions in the public sector (many of which were larger than some universities) should be exercising much more responsibility for the standard of their work, and be accountable for that task.
It was wrong, so the Inquiry judged, to expect a central body to possess the primary responsibility for maintaining standards, particularly if the institutions had now reached ‘maturity’.
The institutions themselves, being closer to the work in question, were much better placed to fulfil that responsibility.
The argument was, as we have seen, founded on the notion of an academic community.
The assumption was that each institution would behave like a mini polis, in which all full members of the community would be actively involved in its corporate life.
How could this be, given the fissiparous nature of academic life, with its discrete disciplinary sub-communities?
Where lay the basis for the belief that there was a corporate life, a level of interchange over academic matters in which all could feel themselves to be involved?
When Lindop was talking about ‘academic community’, it was against the background of a CNAA-directed national peer review system.
This system was based on an examination of individual courses by external academics and others drawn from the subject or professional area in question.
There were two ideas at work, then, in the proposal that public sector institutions should be self-validating, ideas which did not obviously hold together.
On the one hand, the public sector institutions were thought of as being capable of maintaining the subject-specific national peer review system for themselves.
On the other hand, there was the reflection that all universities, through their senates — composed of academics drawn from all subjects taught in the university — were responsible for keeping a self-critical eye on their own work, and it was time in this sense that the public sector caught up with established university practice.
Now, irrespective of the soundness of believing that universities did actually work vigorously to review and develop the quality of their courses and did in practice operate as self-critical academic communities, these ideas are not immediately compatible.
Were the public sector institutions being urged to develop a modified national subject-specific review system, or a new kind of system drawing on their own internal intellectual resources as academic communities spanning a wide range of subjects?
Surprisingly, out of this mish-mash has come a positive development, in which the public sector institutions are giving the idea of ‘an academic community’ a completely new reality.
It has three ingredients: the retention of a face-to-face critical dialogue between the course team and a review panel; the inclusion in the panel of some members external to the institution; and the incorporation of panel members internal to the institution, usually from  disciplines other than that of the course up for review.
The review is normally chaired by an internal member of staff, often a head of department unassociated with the course; and it may take the form of two or three meetings with the course team, enabling the course team to go on developing the course in the light of advice from the panel.
These changes are shifting the character of the dialogue between the course team and the validation panel.
It takes on more of the form of a consultation, aimed at course development, rather than simply being a judgemental exercise.
In addition, the inclusion of academics from a broad range of subjects or chosen for particular expertise (in student learning, for example ) means that a wider range of critical questions are more likely to be explored.
With growing confidence, members from outside the immediate disciplinary fraternity can raise issues not just over resources (important though these are), but over assumptions taken for granted within the discipline.
So matters such as the teaching process (Is the student given sufficient autonomy?)— the fundamental aims of the course (Is the course designed to promote the student's general education?
Has the professional body exerted too dominant, and too narrow an influence?); the learning process (Is there an undue balance towards the student having to assimilate and memorize material, rather than engaging in active reflection and exploration?); and the examining process (Will it allow the student to demonstrate his or her higher-order abilities?) are often more likely to come to the fore, when staff from outside the immediate discipline are sharing in the course review process.
We are seeing, in this development, none other than a new embodiment of the idea of an academic community, and one that is at the heart of the higher education enterprise.
The message is that all staff of an institution have more than an ‘academic’ interest in the activities of staff in other departments.
There is, here, the view that the student experience on every degree course is a collective responsibility, across the whole institution.
Staff, in offering a course, are becoming directly accountable to colleagues in other subjects, not in an abstract sense, but face to face.
This development is quite new in British higher education (and there are signs that it is being incorporated in some universities).
It offers nothing less than the prospect of giving substance to the idea of ‘an academic community’, unknown since the medieval foundation of the university.
It does justice to the belief that the teaching activities of an institution of higher education are proper matters for collective responsibility.
And it legitimately widens the scope of who can count as an academic peer: no longer can peer review amount to a cosy chat among academics sharing but not exposing taken-for-granted assumptions.
The individual course, and the student experience on that course, cannot constitute a ‘secret garden’, but must be open for critical examination by the staff acting together as a corporate body.
This development is, though, a delicate innovation.
It will need to be watched, encouraged and supported.
There are no guarantees that it will survive.
If the new higher education funding bodies established by the Education Reform Act (1988) were to rely over-heavily on numerical ‘performance indicators’ in assessing the extent to which institutions have fulfilled the  contracts for which they are funded, institutions are likely to develop course appraisal systems which record performance in just those terms.
Internal review will then be just a matter of mechanically scrutinizing numbers on a balance sheet, rather than engaging in a critical dialogue over the educational effectiveness of courses.
There are also signs that in the new era of competitiveness between them, institutions are becoming reluctant to open their course offerings to the critical gaze of panel members drawn from institutions competing for contracts with the funding bodies.
More familiar than detailed critical self-reflection on the level of individual courses are the corporate processes of decision making at the institutional level.
The senate or academic board, with its central committees, is the outward sign of a willingness on the part of academic staff to engage in cross-disciplinary dialogue for the general benefit of the institution.
There are, however, some caveats.
First, academic institutions have made only moderate progress in developing internal processes which encourage self-reflection and self-criticism at the institutional level.
For example, every institution would claim to accord high priority to the quality of teaching.
As evidence, one might point to the staff appraisal procedures being introduced across the system; or to the units for staff development, which many institutions (especially in the public sector) have organized; or to the ‘teaching week’ run successfully by some polytechnics, where staff are encouraged to experiment with teaching styles as a means of enhancing the student experience.
But these developments, while welcome, do not usually amount to a cross-disciplinary vehicle for systematically reflecting on the quality of the student learning.
There are certainly other signs of institutional self-reflection worth recording.
For example, we see individual universities establishing their own central committee for overseeing academic standards across all disciplines.
We see (again, particularly in the public sector) institutions collectively framing their own mission statements, as they seek to define the particular role they see themselves fulfilling in the national system of higher education.
We can also see some colleges and institutes of higher education, in trying to develop distinctive degree courses for the first time, taking pride in acting as ‘coherent, self-critical academic communities’ when difficult choices are made in determining where effort and scarce resources are best applied in the short term.
Very occasionally, too, we see the formation within an institution of an overarching committee to monitor and evaluate degree results and the examining process.
These are welcome indications of the academic community enhancing its capacity to engage collectively in self-criticism.
They show that institutions of higher education have the capacity to go on developing as self-critical corporations.
Drawing on Habermas' analytical framework, we can say that in developing in this way, institutions of higher education are expanding the scope of their self-reflection and, in the process, are increasing their own self-understanding.
They are learning about themselves, with the internal academic community growing as a community.
In theory, there is no limit to this evolutionary process of self-development.
If the first caveat is that these processes are at a relatively embryonic state, the second caveat is that such movements towards greater institutional self-reflection are liable to be arbitrarily arrested by external pressures.
The drive towards numerical and managerial performance indicators has already been mentioned.
In addition, in the wake of the current managerial approach to institutional governance, we see signs that the role of the committee structure is being reduced, whereas that of the executive (the vice-chancellor or director) is being increased.
At the same time, the powers of the Court or Board of Governors, with its lay representation, are being reasserted, while, in universities at feast, new small planning committees under the chairmanship of the vice-chancellor are being established.
Whatever their merits, these developments must have the effect of diminishing the extent to which policies and strategic decision making are the expression of the will of an institution's academic community.
This is, then, a critical moment in the history of higher education institutions in the UK.
There are real signs that institutions are ready to advance to new levels of self-understanding and self-criticism.
There are also ominous indications that these positive movements are coming under the severest threat.
The medieval idea of a community of scholars, of an internal culture of sharing, of a common set of interests, of a common discourse, has a unique opportunity of being realized in a completely new and exciting form.
It is doubtful, though, that that hope will be allowed to be fulfilled.
Instead, the governance of academic institutions is liable to be reduced to mere technique, under the control of managers with an eye on the bottom line.
The student experience
I have been arguing for institutions of higher education to do justice to the idea of a culture of critical discourse (as Gouldner puts it).
I now turn to the other dimension of culture within higher education; namely, higher education as a cultural experience for students.
In depicting higher education as a cultural experience, it might be helpful to take a historical approach.
It is often pointed out that higher education was centrally seen in this way in the nineteenth century, but that very different models were on offer.
Whereas England (i.e. Oxford and Cambridge) evolved, through its tutorial system, an educational process in which the student's character was developed, Germany (following von Humboldt) sought to raise the quality of the student experience through immersing the student in an atmosphere of the pursuit of knowledge.
The contrast was stark: the English system was founded on a social interaction, with knowledge as the vehicle of communication; the German system was founded on a personal interaction with knowledge, and any human interaction rode on the back of that experience.
The balance in the two models between human interaction and knowledge interaction was inverted.
These models were derived from quite different perceptions of the cultural  function of higher education.
The English model looked primarily to the eventual social role of the graduate as a ‘gentleman’, and the face-to-face interaction between student and tutor was crucial.
The German model looked to the elevation of mind being attained by the student in personal pursuit of knowledge.
It was a more austere and intellectually demanding conception of the role of the student, though one which removed the student even more from the culture of the wider society.
Any proper examination of those models would need to set them in their philosophical and social contexts.
Connections would need to be drawn, for example, between empiricism and the English model and between idealist thought and the German model; and between each form of higher education and the social class system and roles for which their graduates were intended.
Here, though, rather than distinguishing between them, I want to assert that the two conceptions had important common aspects.
The key common element is that both systems took seriously the possibility that, whatever students were studying (for specialization had begun in the nineteenth century), higher education offered a general enlargement of the mind.
Newman himself used the term ‘enlargement’(as we saw in Chapter 2), but it is equally applicable to the German conception.
Ultimately, there might have been differences between them in what enlargement meant, but the point is that higher education stood for an overriding and widening development of the mind.
On this conception, higher education was a cultural experience in several senses.
First, there was an assumption of an integrating culture informing the student's experience and studies, which ran across subjects and institutions; it was a common inheritance in which students were being invited to share.
Secondly, in so far as it spoke to a general enlargement of the mind, the student experience was not confined to the acquisition of mere technique.
It was a developmental enrichment.
Thirdly, both conceptions of the higher education enterprise were developed and indeed articulated within the framework of a set of wider philosophical values and meanings.
(Again, ‘philosophical’ was a term employed by Newman.)
Finally, in both forms, the student was conceived as being actively and personally involved in a process larger than himself, whether in interaction with others or directly with knowledge itself.
In all these senses, the nineteenth-century formulations of the idea of higher education had to be accounted a cultural experience in their own right.
These ideas and the systems associated with them carried over well into the twentieth century, but we also see steadily developing the view that higher education has more limited functions.
This was by no means simply a matter of higher education becoming more utilitarian.
Previously, I emphasized how the academic community had taken knowledge unto itself and, in proliferating disciplinary sub-cultures, had ‘professionalized’ knowledge.
The result has been that ‘in the modern university, the product [has become]knowledge as much as students’(Scott 1984: 63).
In this, there was both a narrowing of vision of what higher education had to offer and a compartmentalism of that offering.
The major shifts have been quite recent.
Although the sciences had begun to develop in English universities in the nineteenth century (following Scottish  innovations), it is probably fair to say that the dominant culture of the universities was founded on the humanities up to and even a little beyond the Second World War.
We have only to look at the disciplinary background of vice-chancellors over the past 30 years to see evidence of the modern superior position of science and technology.
From the point of view of the educational process considered as a cultural experience, this shift would not, in itself, necessarily have been an issue.
After all, Snow forcefully reminded us that science had at least an equal claim to that of the humanities in the full development of the mind of the student: they were two cultures, formally equal in status.
The problem was that the cultural experience offered by an education in science and technology was in practice a completely different kind of experience.
It was a move from a concern with the intrinsic character of the student's experience to an interest in what the student knew and could do at the end of the course.
In other words, in the contrast between a humanities and a science and technological education, there was an underlying gulf in the conceptions of what a higher education stood for; and it was Snow's failure to recognize that that lay at the heart of Leavis' attack on Snow's association of the two cultures.’
This is not to say that a science and technological education had to take on this character, for clearly there were and always have been those who are committed to inspiring in students a love of, and a care for, their subjects in those disciplines.
It is to observe the way in which things have in practice turned out, an outcome not unconnected with the logic of those disciplines in supplying means to fulfil ends, rather than inquiring into ends themselves.
Another way of making the point is that higher education traditionally formed a culture of the written word, albeit a kind of literacy which embodied a restricted code, understood by the few.
With increasing rapidity, though, as technological and professional education develops, and as bodies such as the National Council for Vocational Qualifications attempt to point higher education towards the acquisition of ‘competencies’, higher education becomes a culture of technique.
Again, though, it is the acquisition of stratified techniques in which, at the highest level, only the few are competent.
Knowledge elites and technical elites are now emerging from our higher education institutions.
In this way, higher education is sustaining a societal stratification characterized by different levels of understanding and of performance.
It was against the background of these tendencies that the ‘counter-culture’ and ‘counter-course’movements of the late 1960s and 1970s took off.
While these movements may still have residual effects in the attitudes of some staff in academic institutions, they are largely defunct.
One suggestion for their short-lived character comes out of Gellner's view that they were parasitic on the very society to which they pretended to offer a counter.
Far from providing a new kind of experience and ‘meaning’, at bottom (on Gellner's view) these counter-cultures depended on the existence of mainstream society and culture for their critiques to have any purchase.
I believe that Gellner's criticism is misplaced.
The main reason that these alternative approaches failed to gain any substantial long-lasting purchase is that they were naive.
They seriously  underestimated the dominant interests (of the state, industry, the professions and the knowledge industry itself) against which they were contending.
They did not deserve to be taken seriously because they did not take seriously the main currents of the culture they were attacking.
The extra-mural cultural function of higher education
I began this chapter by pointing out that much of the talk about the cultural function of higher education concentrates on the interconnections between higher education and society.
As a result, the way in which higher education can support and even develop the general cultural base of society is given attention before the internal culture of higher education.
This is putting the cart before the horse.
Having made some observations about the internal culture of higher education — both that of the academic community and that of the student experience — we are now in a position to say how, if at all, the internal culture bears on the wider cultural relationship.
Like it or not, there is at work a sociological aspect of this particular cultural dimension that is insidious and is probably unshakeable.
I refer to the way in which higher education, as an institution within society, acts not just as a vehicle for economic reproduction within the social classes, but also as a means of ‘cultural reproduction’.
This is, of course, the territory mapped out in detail over many years by the French sociologist, Pierre Bourdieu.
It brings home the manifold and almost surreptitious ways in which the internal life of academic institutions serves to sustain, reinforce and reward class-related forms of style, language and behaviour.
There is an unspoken recognition of a certain disposition or habitus among the social classes.
It will be said that all this is long past, that academic institutions today are much more egalitarian in their evaluations and actions.
We only have to look at the interest being shown, especially in public sector institutions, in recruiting their students from a wide social background.
But the objection makes precisely the opposite point.
For it is the non-elite institutions that are in the vanguard of recruiting non-standard students.
There is a hierarchy of academic institutions that is founded much more on their social status than on their academic reputation.
A first-class honours degree from a college of higher education still counts for less in the world than a third-class degree from Oxbridge, and even less than a sporting ‘blue’ from the ancient universities.
It might be countered that that is because the Oxbridge graduate has more to offer in social ‘maturity’, in interpersonal skills, in self-confidence, and in being articulate.
But again, the objection only serves to make the point.
Our academic institutions help to maintain a flow of the kind of cultural capital on which our wider social institutions are based.
The difficulties that public sector graduates have in getting into the senior positions in the professions have little to do with their academic accomplishments and much to do with the cultural stratification in society of which academic institutions are a part.
A more substantial criticism of this line of thinking is that, being sociological and stating what is the case, it does not offer us any positive conception of what could be the case.
The picture it offers is, too, a negative one.
So can we conceive of a more positive relationship between the culture of higher education and that of society?
I have said that this is a theme that has attracted the attention of past thinkers.
We started the chapter with a quotation from Robbins; it might equally have been drawn from other writers, such as Ortega y Gasset, F. R. Leavis or G. H. Bantock.
Each has argued for higher education to preserve the cultural fabric of society.
But whether it is Ortega's ‘vital system of ideas of a period’, or Leavis' sense of an ‘organic life’ which it is the university's function to foster, or Bantock's concern that the organic relationship between education and (what he admits to being) a minority culture was being attenuated, or Robbins' view with which we started, we are in each case being asked to accept an unduly conservative function.
Although we can see elements of a critical function (especially in Leavis), the dominant approach of these writers is founded on a base of a certain set of social ideas which it is the duty of higher education to guard and transmit.
The function is essentially largely passive and uncritical, and addresses a minority culture.
Couple this with the earlier sociological observations about the students' experience being describable in terms of intellectual, technical and general cultural hegemony.
Couple it, too, with the reflections about the abortive and incoherent nature of the counter-culture and counter-course movement in higher education, and we seem to be emerging with a depressing set of conclusions about the wider cultural function of higher education.
All is not lost, however.
Recall the first section of this chapter, where we outlined ways in which the academic community has the chance of revitalizing its self-critical capacities.
The original (i.e. medieval) idea of the university looked to a self-governing community of scholars, in which there was no distinction in kind between those who mainly taught and those who mainly learned — all were embarked on a process of intellectual discovery.
The Socratic dialogue was another example of this openness and collaboration, as was the Humboldtian conception.
We can generalize from this: there need be no fundamental distinction between the culture of the academic community and that of the student experience.
The culture of the student experience is one of a self-questioning voyage, not in any self-indulgent form, but rooted in a rigorous self-critical examination of what is being taught, learned and achieved.
But this also describes, if only in ideal form, the character of the academic community.
What, then, to pick up our last theme, is the carry-over of this conception into the culture of society?
The answer follows through: it is, as a minimum, to provide the graduates of higher education with the capacity not merely to go on learning, but also to go on being critical of all they encounter in thought and action.
The transferability and the value of the culture of higher education to society lie not in the acquisition of specific competencies, but in the propensity of graduates to take up a sceptical stance to what they come across (in truth claims, in concept, in value, in ways of going on).
The steady injection into the wider culture of such a questioning and critical element will be uncomfortable to  society.
The value of higher education, on this view, is in direct proportion to the critical capacities of its graduates.
In an age where there is no common culture, but where there are threats to open debate, the strengthening of the culture of critical discourse is all we have.
8
Rationality
Introduction
Higher education and the life of reason are inseparable.
At the very least, the idea of higher education implies an educational process in which students are not simply initiated into forms of thought, but are encouraged actively to engage with them.
Students should come not merely to know that such and such is the case, or that this procedure works, but should be able to offer their own account of why it is the case or why it works.
They should be able to offer reasons for their beliefs and actions.
In short, rationality is a condition of the full realization of the meaning of higher education.
The general argument of this book is that the idea of higher education has been undermined both philosophically and sociologically.
Philosophically, we cannot provide any absolute epistemological underpinning for our knowledge endeavours; and, sociologically, higher education and its manifold forms of thought have lost any pretensions to occupying an independent position in relation to the modern state.
Both these underminings have their impact on the life of reason, and how we view it.
Seen against that double undermining, reason seems no longer to offer its traditional security.
What counts as reason stands in the dock accused, on the one hand, of being mere appearance (the emperor never had any clothes syndrome) and, on the other, of representing vested interests of the academic community and the wider society.
How, then, can we reconceptualize the idea of rationality within higher education so as to convey something of its traditional promise, while confronting the dual problematic it faces?
The attack on reason
What are the forms of threat to rationality?
I will cite just a few examples, without any claim to being comprehensive.
First, all societies develop their own ideas as to what is to count as rationality.
This holds for modern society as well.
Our ideas about rationality, within a pluralistic society, are bound to be complex and fuzzy, but even so we can readily see that certain kinds of  rationality are dominant.
At one level, this exhibits itself in the place that mathematics and science have come to occupy, mainly in virtue of their underpinning of technology in all its forms, including information technology and computerization.
One consequence is that the thought patterns of primitive society, being felt to lack a scientific approach, are generally felt to be beyond the bounds of reason.
As we saw in Chapter 3, witchcraft and astrology are generally not available in the higher education curriculum, except as objects of study by anthropologists and sociologists.
But, and secondly, what counts as rationality takes on much more subtle hues.
Even within the legitimate forms of reason in society, some are ranked as being more ‘reasonable’ than others.
With mathematics and the natural sciences occupying such a dominant position in the culture of modern society, other forms of thought are obliged to jockey for position somewhere behind.
It is hardly surprising that we emerge with ‘a crisis in the humanities’.
The general point is this: what counts as rationality in modern society is a selection from the total available forms of rationality and that, even within the legitimate forms of rationality, some acquire a higher authority than others.
Thirdly, forms of rationality are actually multiplying within modern society.
The French theorist Lyotard has recently pointed to the fragmentation of intellectual culture.
New sub-disciplines are taking off at an extraordinary rate, associated in particular with the integration of computer systems into society's systems of communication, management and finance.
One reading of this situation is that society's thought patterns are developing in an anarchic fashion, with their adherents less able to communicate meaningfully with each other.
This multiplication of forms of life is without obvious integrating features.
Seen in this way, the post-modern society is increasingly anarchic and irrational.
Fourthly, one of the hopes behind reason considered as a historical project is that rationality offers the prospect of establishing a realm of thought and, therefore, ultimately of life, pure of ideology.
There is the belief that even if criteria of rationality differ across forms of thought, at least individual forms of thought could be said to contain discrete pools of rationality.
But one of the striking lessons of much of social theory over the last 30 years (picked out in Chapter 4) is that science — the apparently supreme epitome of rationality turns out to exhibit various kinds of non-rationality.
From Polanyi's account of the tacit knowledge with which scientists operate (they ‘know more than they can tell’), through Kuhn's picture of incommensurable paradigms (their proponents ‘practise their trades in a different world’) to Feyerabend's idea of scientific growth through unbridled Machiavellianism (‘anything goes’), it has emerged that even science cannot live up to its self-congratulatory belief in its own reasonableness.
The general lesson to be grasped from these observations is clear.
Rationality, both in its definition and in its realization, is not ‘given’ in any absolute sense.
But if this is a feature of modern society and its thought patterns, then inescapably the point holds for higher education as well.
In short, we cannot assume that higher education is a site of pure reason.
Critique of rationality
The points just made have their imprint on higher education in fairly obvious ways.
However, it is worth making a further point about the link between modern society's sense of rationality and higher education, which emerges from the analysis of rationality offered by Jurgen Habermas.
Habermas has argued that there are essentially two different forms of rationality, and that these are intimately linked with different forms of action.
‘Cognitive-instrumental rationality’ is linked to ‘action oriented to success’; and within this form of rationality can be distinguished two sub-forms.
Habermas calls action oriented to success ‘instrumental’ when it can be understood as following technical rules, and can be evaluated in terms of efficiency (typically when operations are being performed on the physical world).
He calls action oriented to success ‘strategic’ when it can be understood and evaluated in terms of its effectiveness in influencing the decisions of other social actors (typically in the worlds of politics or business).
Alongside these forms of ‘cognitive instrumental rationality’, Habermas argues for a realm of ‘communicative rationality’.
The associated form of action here is one in which actors work jointly to understand each other, and to influence each other purely by the force of argument.
Habermas, in developing his analysis of rationality, is not interested in disparaging ‘cognitive-instrumental rationality’ as such.
Rather, his purpose is to do two things.
First, to show that the means-end rationality which has come to dominate the thought of modern man as the form of rationality is simply one kind of rationality.
Secondly, to open up the possibility for modern society of a rational discourse, freed from artificial domination, in which participants share equally in the conversation.
His analysis also allows him to argue that the rationality which typifies our social institutions, and our transactions within them, is tending to take the form of strategic (i.e. cognitive-instrumental) rationality, rather than a genuinely interactive communicative rationality.
The consequence is that reason in modern society has been reduced in scope to a means-end form: debate is too often a technical discussion among experts about the means.
The ends are seldom on the agenda for serious debate, for society is unable to handle that kind of discussion.
We see precisely this happening in higher education.
Discourse about higher education focuses on structure, finance, numbers and performance indicators: it is about means, method and systems for planning and resource allocation.
The values or ends for which higher education stands are seldom raised as a serious matter for discussion.
What appears on the surface as a reasoned form of life is in reality a mask for a partial approach to reason, if not sheer irrationality.
The question facing us, then, is simple enough.
How can we justify our practices, our structures of knowledge, and our interactions in higher education as manifestations of reason?
At best, our claims to reason in all these spheres seem to be limited or partial, and at worst ideological.
If we are to confront these matters, they need to be worked out at the levels of the individual student experience, the curriculum and the institution as a whole.
The limits of rationality
One way of summarizing the general points of the previous section is to say that there is a dynamic interplay between reason and non-reason.
We can see this dynamic at work at different levels within forms of thought.
First, bodies of thought take on a solidity through being structured around dominant paradigms.
This is not to say that all members of an epistemic sub-culture — say economics or anthropology or even nebulous professionally oriented clusterings of knowledge such as pharmacy or business studies subscribe to the dominant concepts, theories and approaches of the corpus.
But even where there is debate and conflict, there is usually a consensus over the central questions.
By and large, there is general agreement as to what counts as doing economics or pharmacy.
To attempt to change the dominant perceptions of what the corpus is all about will literally be irrational, because such a move would run counter to the form of life represented by the discipline.
Being part of a disciplinary community is partly a matter of following a set of rules; stepping outside the conventions of the discourse invites opprobrium, if not downright excommunication.
If knowing how to go on in a discipline is largely a matter of rule-following, it remains the case that the rules are as much socially imposed by the disciplinary tribe as they are by epistemic considerations (Becher 1989).
It is hardly surprising, therefore, if disciplines are largely characterised by inertia, for substantial change very often counts as heresy.
Secondly, the very act of generating new ways of seeing and doing things is itself non-rational.
The traditionalists have a point.
To break totally new ground is to abandon the conventional rules.
The creative act is indeed anarchic.
There are no rules for that kind of process.
However, it is not purely random.
Where significant innovations have happened, it is astonishing how often through history other individuals or groups have been working along parallel lines of thought.
The desire to establish that one was the first to arrive with the finding, and the priority disputes which are part of the scientific game, are testimony to the point.
The old ways of going on within a discipline may, from time to time, become inadequate; but finding new ways forward is not totally without direction.
Thirdly, at a higher level still, we can see the dynamic between thought which is rule-governed and thought which is far less bounded where different forms of reason collide.
The complexities of modern society not only cause new forms of thinking to emerge; in due course, they also compel them to interact with others.
Professionals, we are frequently reminded, have to be sufficiently ‘flexible’ to work alongside other professionals and possibly even with them in ‘multidisciplinary teams’.
The presence of different styles of thinking, being brought together and being compelled to intermesh, provides the basis for even further innovations in thought and action.
Such new admixtures of cognition provide unforeseen resources for conceptual, theoretical and practical innovations.
In effect, this is to widen the sense among practitioners of what is reasonable within a mode of thought.
Finally at the highest level, the limits of reason are exposed when a critique is  mounted of a form of thought as such.
Forms of thought are bounded; they occupy but a portion of intellectual space.
A critique of a form of thought will attempt to mark out its location, describe its boundaries, indicate its limitations and bring out its implicit assumptions and any ideological undercurrents.
To those on the inside, the critique will probably seem unreasonable.
To the critics, however, it is the corpus itself which is irrational.
Ultimately, what counts as rationality is partly a matter of where one stands, and what intellectual position one is taking up.
So, whether we look purely to the way in which a corpus sustains itself internally, or to the production of new perspectives for the corpus, or to the intermingling of different corpuses, or finally to standing outside a corpus altogether and developing a critique of it, we can see that reason is exhibited within and given sense by a framework with its own tacit rules.
Those rules are not immutable; at each level, the rules can be bent and perhaps have to be if progress is to be made.
Equally, innovation and critique require, if not irrationality, then the adoption of different kinds of rules.
It transpires, therefore, that the boundary between reason and non-reason is far from absolute.
The ethics of reason
Minimally, reason implies method.
It means using evidence, making deductions, seeing conceptual connections and drawing conclusions.
It also means, as we have seen, following the conventions of the discipline, whether it be conducting experiments and assessing the results, or engaging in a case study in management studies, or constructing a model in studio-based work.
But this is all technique.
Following reason in this way shows that one knows how to go on (to use again Wittgenstein's phrase) within the discipline.
The term ‘discipline’ implies, after all, following a particular set of rules and being prepared to stick to them.
This reason is the reason of the bureaucrat or the accountant.
It is devoid of values and judgement.
That cannot be said to be a full description of reason within the disciplines, for they cannot be sustained without values and judgement.
Indeed, if we are going to give a full account of what practitioners do within a discipline, we are bound to use such terms as deciding, assessing, evaluating, judging and criticising.
These are all value terms and point to valuing activities.
They are not activities which can be accomplished with a slide rule or computer or calculator.
In other words, the routine operation of reason is not just a matter of routine.
It is not simply that comparisons and choices have to be made; for computers can sometimes do that.
It is, to put it another way, the difference between quality and standards.
We can reach for the tape measure or stopwatch to see if a standard has been reached; but we turn to our inner judgement to assess the quality.
Even within a discipline, values are not all of a piece.
We saw in the previous section that there are limits to rationality, and that thought can and does break through those limits on different levels.
The rules break down, or can be  circumvented, both within disciplines and between them.
These movements of thought have their parallels in the sphere of values.
First, the truth criteria within a discipline will often be value-laden.
From mathematics to sociology (as we saw in Chapter4), offerings are judged partly in virtue of such features as comprehensiveness, elegance, simplicity, neutrality, social impact or wit, the criteria varying not only across disciplines but also within a discipline over time.
This means that our assessments of what is on offer are not governed solely by what is before us.
Those assessments partly reflect values.
In turn, those values are partly constitutive of the form of life held to be valuable by the adherents of the discipline.
Ethical choices, then, enter into a discipline at all sorts of levels, from its overarching framework of values, through the specific truth criteria in current use, to their application on specific occasions.
It follows that our practices and assessments in the disciplines carry ethical layers within themselves: were our choice of values at any of the levels to be different, our practices and our evaluations of truth claims would also be different.
Secondly, the ethical dimension of reason is apparent in the communicative process of a discipline.
This is so whether we have in mind disciplines which are largely cognitive in character, or those — such as in the performing arts — which are built around action.
For the term ‘reason’ implies the giving of reason, and a recipient who understands both the reason that is offered, and that it is a reason (inviting a response).
‘Reason’ points to a particular kind of discourse.
We saw in Chapter 4 that the academic community is built around a structured conversation, with its members adhering to certain norms: they are truth seeking; they are sincere in their utterances; they offer understandable propositions; and they adopt appropriate forms of communication.
But this analysis (from the work of Habermas) shows how ethics enter inescapably into the processes of rational communication.
Although truth criteria and the rules of discourse vary across disciplines, members are obliged to speak the truth as they see it, to put it in a form that other members of the discipline will comprehend, and to mean what they say.
What follows from this is that reason cannot survive unless general values of this kind are maintained.
To enter the life of reason is to accept its values.
The hierarchy of rationality
I have been talking about the different levels at which reason operates in relation to individual disciplines: we can take up stances within disciplines, across disciplines, and in being critical of disciplines as a whole.
But there is an even more profound way of differentiating reason, and that is in terms of its meaning for, and impact on, those who pursue it.
It was part of the Greek conception of reason, after all, that reason was not just a purely intellectual affair but carried over into the life-world, with considerable practical implications.
Three Levels on which rationality has practical significance may be distinguished, which I shall call groundedness, enlightenment and emancipation.
Groundedness
In its most basic form, rationality is a matter simply of giving reasons for one's beliefs or actions.
Minimally, therefore, it conveys the idea of giving grounds for what one is saying or doing.
What is going on when we give reasons for our beliefs or actions?
It is, surely, a way of giving legitimacy to what we say or do, of providing some kind of backing or security.
It deflects the charge that ‘that is simply your view’ or ‘that is simply the way you prefer to do it’.
Giving reasons, therefore, raises our thoughts and actions from the here and now and from their singularity by placing them in the context of a wider perspective or tradition.
It is a way of making connections within a public discourse.
To employ Popper's terminology, it is to move from the world of subjective knowledge to the world of objective knowledge.
What counts as giving a reason?
As I have just implied, reasons have their home and meaning within a tradition of thought.
Disciplinary sub-cultures are real cultures in this sense (see Chapter 7).
They contain their own perspectives meanings and values.
A reason makes its point by having resonances in such a wider set of meanings.
But my argument seems to be running in opposite directions.
I have just said that giving reasons is a move in the direction of objectivity.
Now, though, I am saying that being reasonable is partly a matter of falling in with the conventions — in time and place — of an intellectual form of life or culture; and this surely raises the spectre of relativism.
This is, in fact, precisely the situation.
Objectivity has its limits (Chapter 3).
There is a strong element of conventionalism in rationality.
There are two obvious moves which could be made to counter this argument.
First, at least in the kinds of knowledge on offer in higher education, it could be said that knowledge ‘progresses’.
In other words, the knowledge which is the stock-in-trade of the academic community has a degree of reliability to it and is not pure whim.
The rejoinder to this is to accept that the counter is pointing to a real feature of academic thought, which is that the consensus of the relevant disciplinary community does indeed offer some measure of reliability and raises knowledge claims above mere whim; but that does not in itself amount to a demonstration of the ‘progress’ of knowledge.
The work of Feyerabend and Kuhn suggests that unqualified talk of progress even in the natural sciences is going too far.
Neither in Feyerabend's image of theory proliferation nor in Kuhn's paradigm shifts is there any simple model of progress.
The second move which might be made to counter the relativistic flavour of my earlier argument would be to argue that, despite the changing discipline-bound truth criteria, the intellectual enterprise as a whole is founded on certain context-independent truth criteria.
Unfortunately, while superficially attractive, those context-independent truth criteria which have been suggested turn out to be vacuous or tautological.
In fact, the search for universal criteria of rationality has so far proved fruitless.
So, giving reasons for our thoughts and actions does not perhaps have the solidity and universality that we might believe.
None the less, a person who gives reasons is engaging in a valuable activity.
The person is implicitly saying that he or she subscribes to the network of rules of the discipline in question.
There is a tacit affirmation in a form of rule-following.
The academic who describes himself at cocktail parties with the words ‘I am a physicist’ or ‘I am a historian’is saying something about his self-perception (essentially a researcher, not a teacher); but is also saying that he subscribes to the disciplinary code imposed on its practitioners.
Even granting the limitations of the rules in question, the giving of reasons implies the willingness to engage in a structured conversation.
This adherence to a discipline-specific set of rules, which we can term substantive rationality, places demands on the individual of a worthwhile kind.
In parallel to this substantive rationality (giving particular kinds of reason according to the discipline), the rational life also requires, as we have seen, the participation in a certain kind of dialogue.
In order for the dialogue to function effectively, there are rules of procedure which all participants have to accept.
To recall and build on the earlier analysis, these rules have to do with truth-telling, sincerity, intelligibility, empathy and active listening.
Significantly, while the particular rules of what counts as a reason (substantive rationality) vary across disciplines, the rules of procedural rationality (as I will call it) are more or less universal across disciplines.
They are binding on all academics engaged in their profession, whatever their discipline.
This is hardly surprising, for the disciplines of the academic community have an underlying unity in open communication, which is what procedural rationality is all about.
On this analysis, it follows that irrationality could mean either a reluctance to adopt the particular norms within a mode of thought (i.e. a disinclination to fall in with the substantive rationality of the discipline in question) or a determination, perverse or otherwise, to impose a constraint of some kind on the open discourse of the discipline (in other words, to distort the procedural rationality of the academic community).
Enlightenment
Beyond groundedness, there is a level of rationality which reflects an idea almost lost to modern thinking.
The central belief is that by being immersed in, and contributing to, the life of reason, one can attain a truer level of understanding and perspective on the world than is ordinarily available through personal experience.
There is the sense here that reason is more than the sum of its parts, and that the serious pursuit of truth can, over time, generate a way of looking at the world and an approach to forming judgements on it that stands over and above any particular truths that may be assimilated on the way.
We encountered this view at the beginning of this book, in the dialogues of Plato, where we found talk of ‘the ascent to see the things in the upper world [which]you may take as standing for the upward journey into the region of the intelligible’.
More modern views of this kind have dispensed with the metaphysical baggage of a pure Platonic universe of knowledge way above the senses of the uneducated, but the idea that reason can bring a new level of understanding still  persists.
We saw, for example, signs of it in Popper's differentiated model of the three worlds of knowledge, with objective knowledge residing in a quite different world from those of human consciousness and of physical objects.
More recently, Habermas has distinguished a domain of critical thinking separate from the two domains of purposive means-end thought and thought founded on human interaction.
Admittedly, Popper and Habermas may seem to be strange bedfellows; for they have entered the lists against each other precisely over their views on knowledge and reason, both of them seeing the other as an unwitting ideologue.
None the less, the striking point here is that they have this central feature in common : not just that they both see the life of reason as important, but also that there is a distinctiveness about the quality, character and significance of reason when it is taken up seriously, which marks it out from conventional human experience.
Put simply, it is (to recover the Platonic imagery for a moment) a matter not just of seeing the light, but also of living in the light.
The underlying idea here is that reason can be more than going through the techniques and operations that reason demands; and more than paying attention to particular truth claims.
It is that reason can come to play a central part in one's life, so that we can properly talk of ‘a life of reason’.
That form of life, with reason as a constitutive part, brings with it a larger transformation in the way individuals approach, view and take up stances towards all their experiences.
It is in this sense of ‘cognitive perspective’(as Peters puts it) that we can talk of the transcendence which comes through the life of reason, without resort to the metaphysical world picture of heavenly spheres of intellectual existence.
In a word, the life of reason offers the prospect of enlightenment.
This idea of enlightenment, of living in the light, takes on particular importance alongside the notion of ideology (Chapter 6).
One of the strands of that concept is that even rational thought may not be just what it seems on the surface.
It may harbour undisclosed interests or values.
Enlightenment, considered as a continuing enterprise, warns us to be perpetually on our guard; and not to be seduced, even by apparently rational thinking.
It suggests the need to keep our distance, especially from those bodies of thought to which we are most drawn.
Whether we get interested in mainly cognitive pursuits (such as philosophy or chemistry) or more practical endeavours (like physiotherapy or graphic design), we should try to avoid becoming dominated by them, and being identified with them (as a chemist or graphic designer).
Enlightenment demands that we should not simply engage in the practices that are part of these rational pursuits (submitting to their different forms of ‘groundedness’), but that we should maintain our own integrity.
Every so often, rational pursuits need to be ‘seen through’; and their practices and concepts, which all too easily take on the form of rituals, need to be demystified.
But it is the practitioners themselves who can do this most successfully, for only they carry authority with their peers.
So a degree of scepticism is required from practitioners towards their own forms of thought, with their associated practices and values.
Enlightenment, then, points to a level of reason above the routines, conceptual manipulation and judgmental procedures of a corpus of knowledge and its  associated practices.
Beyond competence, there is insight.
Can we see the wood for the trees?
Emancipation
The third and highest form of rationality is emancipation.
The term ‘emancipation’ reminds us of the liberal aspiration — and indeed the Marxist claim — that self-knowledge and self-understanding can offer new possibilities for thought and action.
The essence of that hope is that through self-knowledge, existing constraints on thought and action can be better appreciated and thereby overcome.
When fully carried through, self-knowledge can bring new freedoms.
But how do we get to the ideas of self-knowledge and self-liberation from the two previous levels of rationality — groundedness and enlightenment?
The link is quite simple.
If the giving of grounds is seriously taken on board by the individual as an integral part of this valued form of life, then the individual will be led to pose to himself or herself some of the likely questions from an external observer.
In other words, groundedness, taken seriously, leads to an internal dialogue.
In that process of internal dialogue, discoveries are made by the person about himself or herself.
Rationality at the level of enlightenment should lead on, then, to self-awareness, self-reflection and self-criticism.
In turn, this continuing dialogue with oneself provides the basis for self-transcendence, for the development of the self, such that entirely new possibilities of thought and action are opened up.
In short, the life of reason is a process of self-development.
The internalized dialogue that it brings acts on the mind so as to generate a continuing cycle of reflection and intellectual advance.
Pursued further, as a form of enlightenment and emancipation, it opens up the possibilities of critical self-reflection, of seeing one's central pursuits in a new perspective.
Even more ambitiously, it can prompt new kinds of practices.
A lawyer might be encouraged to work for, say, professional arrangements which opened up the profession's services to the general public; or a chemist might seek to reduce the impact of the chemical industry on the environment; or a doctor might act to bring about a new balance between preventive and restorative medicine, as practised by the profession.
Ultimately, then, reason can have emancipatory effects on thought and action, through the power of self-reflection and self-understanding.
In this section, I have offered an analysis of rationality, by showing three levels on which rationality can have practical effects.
At each level, the examples have picked out individual academics and professionals.
But these levels of rationality also have applications in terms of the development of thought, of social institutions and of society.
Rationality is not just a matter for individuals as individuals becoming reasonable people.
We can enquire into the extent to which a form of thought is rational (How open is it?
To what extent does it have rules of debate and procedure?); we can ask about the degree to which our social institutions are rational; and we can assess how far society itself is rational.
Conclusions: Rationality and higher education
This analysis has implications for higher education on several levels.
We can look to our institutions of higher education becoming more rational in their inner processes, with their members working together in articulating a shared view of an institution's aims and fulfilling them in a corporate way.
We can justifiably expect that academics will adhere to the demands of rationality in their professional work, developing the open character of their discipline.
And we can expect to see the curricula they offer encouraging students to enter the highest levels of the rational life.
To take these points in reverse order, the initiation of the student into the rational life should occur in two directions.
First, the student should go beyond simply acquiring the particular forms of reasoning within a mode of thought (i.e. go beyond what I have termed ‘groundedness’), and should even go beyond embracing the life of reason as such (‘enlightenment’).
Ultimately, the student should reach the stage of continuing self-reflection and self-transcendence in thought and action (‘emancipation’).
This process cannot be achieved solely by the student working away diligently at the programme of studies before him or her.
On the analysis offered here, rationality is partly a matter of engaging in a dialogue with others in an appropriate way.
So we come to the second implication, which is that the student has to understand the practical aspects of the life of reason.
In short, the student comes to an insight into both the cognitive and the practical dimensions of the life of reason.
What does this mean in reality?
Cognitively, it means that students will go on examining their own beliefs, thoughts, values and practices, and will make connections between those intellectual activities and their wider life and their general values.
Out of that self-examination, other actions in their lives may follow.
Practically, it means that students have to become used to expressing a point of view and exposing it to the critical evaluation of their peers, and in this way take on the ethical demands of rationality.
Not just truth-telling, but sincerity; not just intelligibility, but empathy; these are values which ought to be taken on board.
There is a double-bind at work here.
The corpus of knowledge in which the student is most interested will be neither interest-free nor value-free.
So the emancipatory promise of higher education cannot be realized through students stepping onto a plane of value-freedom and interest-freedom.
It is simply not available.
But even if it were, the attempt would misrepresent the character of higher education.
For the cognitive and practical forms of emancipation sketched out here are also neither interest-free nor value-free.
Turn now to one of the other levels of rationality in academia — rationality within the disciplines.
Each discipline can be assessed for its rationality.
We can, for example, assess the degree to which a form of thought incorporates an element of self-reflection.
Is it considered legitimate for members of a discipline to reflect critically on the discipline which provides them with their intellectual identity and status?
We can also enquire into the extent to which a discipline promotes an open debate.
Is there a range of journals, with contrasting editorial  policies?
Is the discipline controlled by the big guns, or can individuals — even those without tenured posts in institutions — really expect to get a hearing?
To what extent is dissent tolerated?
Finally, institutions of higher education can be seen as being more or less rational in their organization, their internal arrangements and their managerial processes.
As we have seen, it is all too easy for institutions to be governed by means-end purposive models of rationality, rather than by those of communicative discourse.
ideas of efficiency, numerical performance indicators and managerial top-down decision making can seem to be justified in terms of their ‘rationality’.
But this is artificially to restrict the sense of what it is to be a rational institution.
And this restriction is ultimately anathema to an institution of higher education, which must be founded on a continuing conversation about its ends and its values, and their fulfilment through its internal human transactions.
(Chapter 7 contains an attempt to follow through the implications for the internal life of institutions of their practising such a Habermas type communicative rationality.)
‘These reflections carry over into institutional appraisal.
Assessing the performance of this kind of institution cannot be solely a matter of adding up figures on a balance sheet, whether they are the finance officer's financial data or the registrar's data on student performance.
Ultimately, we can only know our institutions of higher education by coming to understand the quality of their internal life.
In drawing this chapter to a close, there are two riders, both significant.
The first is that whether we have in mind the student taking on the demands of the rational life, or the individual discipline considered as a rational endeavour, or an institution of higher education: for each of them rationality is neither static nor a definite end-point.
In each domain, what counts as being rational can go on being developed.
Students can pass through the stage of giving reasons for their beliefs and actions to enlightenment and emancipation; disciplines can become more open and more self-critical; and institutions can go on becoming more and more rational.
The second rider is that just because, in all these senses, higher education is the supreme site of rationality in society, higher education can become the model of rationality for society.
There are tendencies towards closure, partiality and sheer irrationality in society, and these admittedly affect higher education.
It is not an island and not immune.
Still, higher education contains within itself, if only it would realize, an essential rationality: academics, students and disciplines have to be rational.
But institutions of higher education do not.
They can either follow the path of instrumental reason or they can recover their true character as a modern polis, a site of developing communicative reason.
As communities sharing a common but critical discourse over ends, values and achievements, institutions of higher education can become a microcosm of the rational society, a reminder to society of what society itself might be.
9
Research
Introduction
What is the relationship between research and higher education?
Is there one?
By speaking of a relationship, I want to raise the question as to whether or not there is a conceptual connection between the two.
Clearly, much research goes on in institutions of higher education.
Indeed, we can probably find some kind of research in progress in each of the 200 or more institutions which offer some kind of higher education in the UK.
The question, though, is whether or not,qua institutions of higher education, they have an obligation to sponsor research.
Is it part of the meaning of’ institution of higher education', such that we would not be prepared to grant the name to an institution in which there was no research taking place?
This issue has formed a key element in the historical debate over the idea of higher education.
Or, rather, over the idea of the university.
Views are to be found on both sides.
Among those who have argued that the university need not or, indeed, should not engage in research, we find Newman, Ortega y Gasset and Sir Walter Moberly.
On the other side, in arguing that research is induced part of the meaning of ‘university’, we see Jaspers, Phillips Griffiths and Wegener.
So there is no unanimity of view on this issue.
Today, this is not just a philosophical issue: it has political importance.
The UK government has suggested that universities should be separated and funded on the basis of their research capability, so that we might have ‘research’ universities and ‘teaching’universities.
However, our concern in this book is higher education.
It might make sense to argue that no bona fide university could exist which did not also conduct research.
But even if that were the case, we could still maintain that research is not part of what we understand higher education to be.
That is the argument I shall make here.
Before we get into the argument, however, there will be two objections to what I have just said.
First, that making a conceptual distinction in this way between ‘university’ and ‘higher education’is to engage in philosophical pedantry.
Secondly, that it is politically naive, because such an argument could be said to justify the kind of political move I have just mentioned, in which some institutions of higher education might be denied research funding.
Research  might then be seen to be a mere luxury add-on, not an essential part of ‘what it is to be an institution of higher education.
Against the first objection, I hope to show in this chapter that the conceptual distinction is far from mere pedantry.
It forces us to consider what we mean by higher education and, indeed, I shall argue that research is not an essential part of the process of higher education as such.
So far as the second objection is concerned, any such political argument would be missing the point.
Precisely because my focus is the relationship between higher education and research, I am not concerned with research per se .
Consequently, in distinguishing higher education and research, nothing said here will imply that research is not worth conducting or supporting.
Indeed, I shall argue that while research is not part of the idea of higher education, it is presupposed by higher education.
Any attempt to withdraw research funding on the basis of the argument I am offering would, therefore, be quite illegitimate.
The ideology of research
Over the last 30 years, research has become big business, and has been a key element in the formation of new academic disciplines.
The aspiration to conduct research on the part of the academic community has been a vital ingredient in the process of ‘academic drift’, of new institutions of higher education measuring their performance against the more established and elite institutions.
Being a costly enterprise and having many uses to the modern state, research has at the same time come under increased scrutiny from the paymaster.
The debate over research has become the battleground for the competing ideologies of the academic community and of the state.
Quite apart from the rhetoric, what is the character of research in reality?
Clearly, there are differences across subject areas, and so general observations are fraught with difficulty.
None the less, certain aspects stand out.
First, a significant element of research is not only funded by the government, or quasi-governmental agencies, but also organized on a customer-contract basis.
The initiative for a project very often comes from the funding agency, which adopts a ‘proactive’ stance (in the jargon), setting the agenda, administering a steering committee and ensuring that the project is running towards the desired end.
Under this set of structural conditions, research has taken on an instrumental character, extrinsically oriented to external goals.
Accordingly, in many fields, the conventional idea of a disinterested researcher having his or her own idiosyncratic interest and pursuing it wherever it might lead is a matter of history.
Secondly, this form of research endeavour can all too easily produce a state of alienation in those conducting the research.
I use the term ‘alienation’ in its marxian sense of the workers being separated from their work; for literally their work is not their own.
This is especially the case where large budgets generate research ‘teams’ with different grades of research workers, the individual members having little control over their work.
Thirdly, research is largely uncontrolled by democratic means even though it is directed by state agencies.
The fiction is that those state agencies are able to and do exert democratic influences; or at least, they impose a measure of accountability to the public.
But the argument should be recognized for the fiction it is.
Finally, research is increasingly conducted outside institutions of higher education.
It is pursued not just in specially funded research institutes, but on a large scale in industry, and by private foundations and policy institutes.
How do these broad-brush sociological observations help us to understand the conceptual connections between higher education and research?
On the picture just conveyed, research appears to have something of the character of a commodity, largely unconnected with ‘improvement’, whether improvement of society or of the individual.
The metaphor of commodity suggests itself (with its marxian overtones) precisely because research has become part of academic currency, bestowing credibility on those who possess a curriculum vitae listing their research publications.
That kind of curriculum vitae brings a reward in terms of career advancement, with the inevitable monetary gains.
And those rewards bear more of a relationship to the length of the list of publications than its quality.
There should be nothing surprising about this: in a competitive market, where the number of would-be senior academics considerably exceeds the posts available, an ‘objective’ means is required to allocate the scarce goods.
The list of publications meets the bill: it is a form of intellectual capital, bartered in exchange for the sought-for advancement.
The general point of all this is very simple: knowledge in the context of discovery and knowledge in the context of transmission are entirely different enterprises.
Sometimes they are to be found in close proximity; and there are certainly empirical connections between them.
Curricula which are project based can be linked to staffs' research programmes.
Alternatively, curricula which are weak in certain areas may prompt the need for particular kinds of research.
The key point remains, however: research is seldom driven by curricular considerations, but is normally given direction by an interest structure based on academic careers and the public use of knowledge.
The significance of career advancement in driving research is evident enough, but the use of knowledge in determining the shape of research should not be overlooked.
In an age of the commercial exploitation of discoveries, and the marketing of research work, the division between pure and applied research has almost vanished.
Certainly, there remain some domains of research which are disinterested, but the incentive to have an eye to the main chance grows.
Not only in biotechnology and in computer science; even in archaeology and fine art, we see that academics (advising new museums and making television films) are finding with no little alacrity that their intellectual capital is highly marketable.
Research, then, is born by a coincidence of social interests: of the academic community, of industry and of the state.
Whether it is the academics' interests in the livings that come in the wake of a research career; or industry's wish to produce new drugs or insecticides; or the state's desire to develop new military armaments or better traffic flows or even to reduce truancy in schools; these  are motivations quite unconnected with the education of students in higher education.
All this leads to a distortion in academic life.
Academic excellence comes to be defined in terms of research excellence, irrespective of an academic's qualities as a teacher.
Correspondingly, high-level achievements in research all too easily serve as a sufficient criterion for academic excellence.
We have to see through this framework of thought for what it is: nothing short of academic ideology.
The logic of research and higher education
By the logic of research and higher education, I mean the general conceptual relationships that exist between these two sets of activity, and I should like to explore those relationships in the following six theses.
First thesis: Research is public whereas higher education is private
Research and higher education share much in common.
Both activities are built around structured inquiries, which are persistent, deliberative, more or less organized, and set within a context of present knowledge, and which contain elements of interaction, dialogue, problem solving, creativity and criticism.
This is such a formidable list that we might be tempted to assume that research and higher education must at least be species of the same genus of activity, even if not actually identical.
But such a conception is to overlook a fundamental distinction about the two activities.
Research is an attempt to produce objective knowledge, independent of personal viewpoint.
It is the knowledge which inhabits world III of Popper's schema.
(I argued in Chapters 3 and 4 that knowledge cannot attain the state of disinterestedness implied by the schema, but here I am concerned with intentions.)
The point of research is that it is a systematic human endeavour intended to produce a level of impersonal knowledge, standing outside individuals.
And, as Popper reminds us, this is so in a literal sense: we can find the outcomes of research on the library shelves, or on the computer disc.
Its public character has a solidity and a substance to it.
Higher education, on the other hand, is oriented differently.
It is directly concerned with individuals, with their minds and with their own way of looking at things.
In that sense, it is deliberately idiosyncratic.
This is a genuine kind of knowledge, but it is shot through with subjectivity.
To return to Popper, his schema allows for this form of knowledge, but as forming the inhabitants of world II, the personal knowledge contained in the human consciousness.
Qua researcher, the academic may inhabit world III; but qua teacher, he or she works in the realm of world II.
Admittedly, from time to time, the development of the student's mind is assessed, and the student is required to give a  semi-public demonstration of the extent to which his or her consciousness has advanced.
But in the end, higher education is a matter of what goes on in the mind of the individual; it is essentially a personal affair.
Second thesis: Research is a matter of outcome whereas higher education is a matter of process
Research is a painstaking business.
Much time is spent getting anywhere.
Progress is often slow, and can be counted in years.
Sometimes, the model or theory being examined leads into a blind alley or the methodology turns out to be faulty, and the researcher feels as if the effort involved was worthless.
Outcome is everything.
And not just any outcome.
The outcome, whether a journal article or a book or a commercial patent, has to be significant and recognized as such.
First, it has to get past the gatekeepers, the publishers and the journal editors, the referees and reviewers.
Secondly, it has to beat the clock.
Particularly in the sciences, time presses heavily as research teams around the world struggle to be first to the finish, and then engage in priority disputes to determine just who was successful.
But other areas are not without their temporal aspects: even philosophy has its intellectual fashions.)
Then, if a new thought does see the light of day, it still requires the approval of the researcher's peer group within the academic or professional world.
The outcome can be conventional or revolutionary; to develop another of Popper's metaphors, it can amount to mere filling in of the mortar, an additional brick or two, or even a completely new building.
Either way, in research, the outcome is all.
Except for the historians and the sociologists of knowledge, the process of getting there is signally uninteresting.
In higher education, it is entirely the other way around.
There, there is no outcome as such.
This may seem odd.
After all, the government, employers and other agencies are talking precisely about student outcomes.
That is understandable, given the desire of those agencies to ascertain that the 3 years or more spent in higher education lead to some definite outcome.
Higher education, though, is a matter of getting students launched on a process of self development, in which they take responsibility for enlarging and deepening their own consciousness.
Admittedly, after graduation, many students go no further in their reading and thinking.
But at least they have sufficient grounding to do so, if they wish.
Seen in this way, the moment of graduation is just an arbitrary point in the formation of the individual's consciousness.
Graduation day symbolizes no end-point; merely perhaps a getting-off point, or an interlude, or a marker in the continuing process.
The degree cannot be an outcome; for the development of the human consciousness has no outcome.
It is a process which can be continuous, or halted, or intermittent.
In one sense, though, there is an outcome.
And that is — perhaps when receiving the undergraduate degree — that the student has reached the point when he or she intellectually can take off on his or her own, if so desired.
The BA or BSc is a symbol to the world that the student  has attained a level of intellectual independence.
But the key point remains: higher education is a continuing developmental process.
Third thesis: In higher education, learning is intended whereas in research, it is a by-product
In higher education, the focus is the mind of the student, and its development.
For the moment, let us call this developmental process ‘learning’(although, in Chapter 1 l, I shall show that there are problems in using the term).
It is the private world of the student's mind that is at issue, a world that should expand and take on a rich array of colours, within the course of studies.
In research, however, with its emphasis on demonstrable outcomes and the public world of knowledge, we are completely uninterested in the mind of the researcher.
Still less do we want to know if the production of the book or research paper represented a learning experience for the academic concerned.
Even if we were, there would be no necessary relationship between research as public outcome and research as personal learning.
A modest journal article might have produced for the author a significant learning experience.
In reverse, we can imagine a researcher producing a paper which had a profound impact on the research community and even the wider society, but for some strange reason had little personal impact.
In reality, of course, such events are rare; researchers do undergo a process of intellectual development in the course of their work.
But this is incidental, for it is not a condition of research taking place.
Research and learning, then, are conceptually unrelated, whereas higher education and learning are conceptually interwoven.
Fourth thesis: Higher education is open whereas research is closed
Research is highly specific.
The researcher has to have some idea of what he or she is looking for, even though the outcome may be unpredictable.
Sometimes, the sought-for object may be entirely predicted in advance, as with the ‘discovery’ of the planet Neptune in 1846 (which in reality was just the astronomers' confirmation of the mathematicians' predictions).
On other occasions, a model or theory may emerge in an act of discovery; but that is the result of deliberate endeavour, perhaps over several years, devoted to some particular inquiry.
Higher education, as the opening of a person's consciousness, is in contrast unpredictable.
Certainly, that movement of mind normally takes place in a bounded framework of study, i.e. the student's ‘course’.
The very term ‘course’ implies a definite path of study; the student is not going to go wandering all over the intellectual map.
But higher education produces a dynamic interaction between the mind of the student, the teachers, the other students on the course  and even on other courses in other subjects, and the array of resources the institution has to offer.
And students are expected to make their own responses to what is put in their way.
There is, accordingly, an element of uncertainty about the educational processes in higher education.
Indeed, the better the course, the more the students will feel welcome to offer their own insights, reactions and ideas to which the staff will want to respond in turn.
Higher education, as we have seen, has the character of a conversation: the participants may have their own roles, but improvisation breaks out continually as they interact with each other.
One way of putting this difference between the bounded nature of research and the comparatively unbounded nature of higher education is to say that, in research, the researcher starts off with a fairly hazy idea of what might emerge and ends with a precise formulation or conclusion, whereas in higher education, this is reversed.
The student starts off with a fairly definite hold on the world, built on reasonably stable concepts and ideas, but at the end of the course has grasped that very little of the intellectual world has enduring substance and that there are always more cognitive spectacles to put on.
In theory, students should always be welcome to go beyond the immediate limits of their studies, and ‘read round their subject’.
The pity is that we do not sufficiently encourage them to conduct those explorations.
Fifth thesis: Research is a necessary but not a sufficient ingredient for higher education
Precisely because others have conducted research in the past, and knowledge has ‘exploded’, the opportunities for the development of the student's mind have grown and widened.
Not all research is important in this way: it is not the accumulation of detailed findings, but the occasional additions to our conceptual frameworks which make possible the expansion of the student's understanding.
The position that Newman held, in seeing higher education as unconnected with the search for new knowledge, is no longer tenable.
Over the last 150 years, the world of knowledge and understanding created through research has opened up infinite possibilities for higher education, and so research has become undeniably linked to our modern understanding of higher education.
For a genuine higher education to take place, research has to have been undertaken somewhere, upon which programmes of study will in part be based.
It does not follow, though, that an institution offering a course of study should be conducting research in that topic.
It does not even follow that the research base should have been developed in any institution of higher education.
(It could be established in research institutes and, in some branches of science, it largely is.)
While, then, higher education and research are separate and separable activities, higher education inescapably draws on research.
But if institutionalized research is a necessary condition of higher education taking place, it cannot be a sufficient condition.
Introducing research into the curriculum is justifiable  provided that it is used to expand the student's intellectual horizons, and not because it propels students towards becoming embryonic researchers.
The relationship between research and higher education is such that someone, somewhere, should have engaged in research; but that does not mean that research is part of the meaning of higher education.
Sixth thesis: The academic community is directly related to research, but indirectly related to higher education
Earlier in this book, we saw that there is no single group which forms the academic community.
Academics are intertwined in networks which operate at different administrative levels, from the department to the institution itself.
More importantly, they are locked into their own epistemic community, composed of others who are working in the same subject areas.
That community not only traverses frontiers, to form an invisible college; it also extends, for some subjects, beyond institutions of higher education to include research institutes, industrial laboratories, professionals working in the field, and the individual scholar who (no longer based in an institution) still goes on contributing to the literature.
Kogan and Becher have argued that, beyond the individual academic, the department is the basic unit of academic life.
Certainly, academics will tend to identify with their department more than their institution; but there is a sense in which the worldwide subject-based invisible college could be said to be basic.
For academics qua researchers can operate without a department in an institution of higher education; many academics are located in quite different settings, as I have just mentioned.
As researchers, though, they cannot operate without reference to that wider community of others who are active in research, wherever those others are based.
It follows that the academic community and research are directly interrelated.
The academic community figures much less prominently in higher education.
Clearly, students are not (or only exceptionally) full members of the academic community.
Occasionally, a student — perhaps in mathematics or logic — can be seen actually to make a contribution to the research literature, but that is so rare as to appear precocious.
Many of their teachers will certainly be making a contribution to research, but in their role as researchers, not as teachers.
And the process of higher education is not, or should not be, intended to produce new cohorts of researchers.
We have seen, however, that it is entirely proper that the results of research will be drawn on, within that educational process.
It follows that we can describe the human transactions between students and staff that constitute the processes of higher education without mentioning ‘the academic community’.
The academic community is not directly part of that process.
It is on the fringes of higher education, through its contribution to research, which provides an educational resource for students.
Accordingly, we can say that the academic community stands in a direct relationship to research but in an indirect relationship to higher education.
Teaching staff and students
What are the implications of these rather abstract remarks for the key people in higher education?
Teaching staff
We have seen that for effective teaching in higher education to take place, someone, somewhere should have engaged in research.
This does not imply that all teachers should engage in research.
It does suggest that teachers corporately have a responsibility to assist in keeping alive the research tradition, but that there is also only a minimal obligation on individuals to participate in the research enterprise.
On the other hand, every teacher has a professional obligation to understand the key conversations going on in the research community.
This is sometimes called ‘scholarship’, but that term carries unfortunate overtones of separateness and aloneness.
A better term might be ‘informed eavesdropping’.
Some might be willing to grant the general thrust of what has been said, that teaching and research are different kinds of activity, but still be reluctant to accept that teachers in higher education do not have a major responsibility to conduct research.
Is that not one of the distinguishing characteristics of an institution of higher education, that its staff do, by and large, conduct research and feel themselves under an obligation to do so?
As an empirical observation, that is normally the case; that set of shared norms is part of the culture of institutions of higher education.
But my argument is that that culture should not be accepted uncritically.
Indeed, the balance between teaching and research obligations as they are felt is weighted too much towards research, for, in some respects, the research culture can have deleterious effects on the teaching process.
I have in mind, for example, that research can often consist of narrow problem-solving routines, with little theoretical content and even with little empirical content.
Researchers, too, can sometimes be carried away in delving deeply into some issue in the minutest detail.
This may be entirely proper for the evolution of knowledge in a particular field; or it may be simply that the researcher has developed a tunnel vision, and is unable to see beyond a very narrow focus.
Whatever the reason, that kind of perspective is anathema to higher education, where we are trying to widen students' horizons.
Another counter to this argument might be to point out that one of the defining characteristics of higher education is that students are brought to the ‘frontiers of knowledge’ in a particular field.
Students, the argument continues, can hardly be brought to this level of understanding unless their teachers are active in research.
But the argument does not work.
The notion of bringing students to ‘frontiers of knowledge’ is tendentious.
A corpus of knowledge does not have a single well-defined boundary; it has many fuzzy debates going on.
Secondly, as a matter of fact, it is accepted in many areas of the higher education  curriculum that the basic conceptual understanding cannot be fully accomplished at the undergraduate stage, in which case the ‘frontiers of knowledge’ can be shown only to students who follow on to a postgraduate programme.
But apart from these largely empirical objections, the argument is flawed theoretically.
One can reach a frontier without crossing it.
Teachers in higher education are bound to have a close understanding of much of the current thinking and work in their intellectual field.
They have professional obligations to engage in that kind of scholarly work; and, in that sense, be right up against the ‘frontiers’.
It does not follow that the teacher has to be engaged in actually moving the frontier.
The relationship of the teacher to research is analogous to the relationship of the musical soloist to the score.
There is no demand on the soloist that he or she be a composer, and therefore be able to produce new scores.
But it is paramount that the soloist be so directly acquainted with the score that he or she is able to offer us a personal interpretation of it; in a sense, a critical commentary on it.
Indeed, being a composer may even be a drawback, for it might lessen the critical distance that the soloist needs to maintain in order to bring a fresh interpretation to bear.
Put this analogy into the teaching situation, where the argument often runs that the teacher in higher education should not just be doing research, but that that research should be brought into the curriculum.
The musical analogy suggests that there is no general obligation of that kind; the responsibility of the teacher lies much more in having an intimate understanding of other academics' research and in being able to give an interpretation of it.
But the musical analogy also suggests that the picture of the teacher giving an interpretation of his or her own research is likely to reduce the chances of an independent viewpoint being brought to bear.
This is vital, for ultimately we want students to branch out on their own, to develop their own viewpoints, and not simply to imitate the views of the teacher bound to a particular research methodology or paradigm.
Higher education is notorious for producing disciples, as students take on the mantle of a teacher who has created a great impression.
The teacher in higher education should be trying to promote genuine independence of mind, rather than act in the guise of a pied piper.
The point I have just made, about the dangers of the teacher being so bound up in her or his research that a genuinely critical perspective is made more unlikely, links to another argument that is often heard.
This is that the research effort in a department should underpin the courses it offers.
There are two assumptions at work here.
First, that there should be a direct transfer of that knowledge base into the curriculum and, secondly, that there is a more general ‘spin-off’ in terms of the intellectual energy and commitment which staff will put into their teaching responsibilities.
I have partly dealt with the first argument.
It is simply undesirable for there to be a direct transfer of research findings into the curriculum, particularly the undergraduate curriculum.
Course design should be led by educational objectives, and not by research perspectives.
The second argument is more diffuse and therefore more difficult to counter.
If it were true that research effort in the area of the curriculum promoted teaching commitment, few would quarrel with the proposed obligation on the department.
But is there any evidence for it?
It admittedly makes intuitive sense, and fits in with the general observation about staffs' professional identities being a function of their research identities.
If that is the prime source of their professional motivation, then the more their research is oriented towards their students' courses, the more likely is their commitment to those students.
So, yes, if staff are conducting research, the more they can be persuaded to work in areas which directly ‘underpin' the curriculum, the less is the intellectual distance between their teaching and research activities.
But this is an argument about departmental and institutional management, as much as it is a matter of professional ethics.
It does not amount to an argument that staff should be conducting research as such; merely that if they are engaged in it, there is an advantage to it being undertaken with an eye to their teaching commitments.
Some may think that these are just nice debating points, and that they bear little relationship to what actually happens.
For, in reality, the research and teaching activities are so closely interwoven that they are inseparable.
There is good reason for this; at its best, the teaching situation takes on much of the character of the research process, with an open dialogue between the students and teacher, the teacher being the first among equals.
The teacher may lead the discussion or the activity, but he or she is also learning from the students.
That is a very common situation.
Indeed, not infrequently, a teacher in higher education will use a set of lecture notes — polished over the years through interactions with students — as the basis of a book.
This kind of close integration between research and higher education is obviously highly desirable: discussion with students so advancing the teacher's understanding and insight that a stronger publication emerges.
That being so, suppose we have another member of staff who is equally as effective as a teacher but who does not work up the lecture notes in the same way: could we not say that his or her teaching is integrated with research to the same degree?
Critical reflection is there; so too is the dynamic dialogue with the students and with it the continuing development in the teacher's own thinking.
The only difference is that the work simply does not get published.
That difference, while immaterial from the point of view of teaching, is vital from the research point of view.
It is the difference between worlds II and III, between the private and the public worlds of knowledge (thesis one).
Getting one's work published and counted by one's peers as a contribution to the intellectual debate is a significant step in its own right.
The individual teacher may well have made a significant development in his or her own understanding, but that is not a sufficient condition of securing publication (thesis three).
That is why the academic community has erected its appraisal systems, with anonymous referees and appraisers.
But to go down this path of analysis is to put things in an unreasonably negative light.
It suggests that the difference between the successful teacher and the successful researcher is that the teacher is a failed researcher.
It misses the  point that being an effective teacher, leading students to a measure of intellectual and professional independence such that they are able to articulate with others their own viewpoint, is a major achievement.
There are many gifted teachers who are extraordinarily successful in this way, who are not just animated interpreters of complex concepts and theories, but who are able to galvanize their students into grappling with the issues for themselves.
From the student point of view, and from the point of view of their higher education, whether the teacher is also involved in research is quite irrelevant.
From all this, we can say quite simply that the roles of teacher and researcher are distinct.
Individuals may perform either role by itself; or they might be active in both roles, and successfully at that; or they may be strong in one but not in the other.
I here is nothing odd in that, for the two activities call for separate sets of accomplishments.
If we sense that academics could improve the quality of their teaching — if, for example, we find that there is a high rate of students failing to complete their courses — the attention of the academics concerned should be directed to their teaching rather than their research activity.
It is a truism, but worth stating for all that: as teachers, academics’ first responsibility is to their teaching (i.e. to their students); it is not to their research.
The student
I have tried to indicate that the role of the student should not be construed as that of embryonic researcher.
The intellectual, emotional and practical development that goes on — or should go on — is much wider than that.
For that reason, it is a second-order matter whether the student is actually brought to the ‘frontiers of knowledge’, even putting aside the tendentiousness of that notion.
It is much more important that the student is given an understanding of a conceptual structure, and is able to take up stances within it, to understand something of the fundamental debates taking place within it, to see the difference between sense and nonsense, and to stand back and form critical evaluations of the wider social role of the form of thought.
Certainly, in writing essays, conducting experiments, citing sources, marshalling one's findings, reading part of the relevant literature, and finding one's way around information sources, students are undertaking tasks which are found in the research enterprise.
But these tasks are not expected of students because they are quasi-research activities.
Rather, being quasi-research activities, they are a means of promoting in students the higher-order thinking and reflection that are characteristic of a higher education.
Those higher-order levels include being critical, forming independent judgements, authenticity of thought and action, and problem setting and problem solving by the student.
It is in these higher-order achievements that we can talk of a logical correspondence, although not identity, between the roles of student and of researcher.
So the idea of the student as an embryonic researcher turns out to be a metaphor referring, at its best, to just some of the activities employed by the  student.
At its worst, the metaphor is misleading and dangerous.
It can reflect an academic ideology, seeing the student programme of study as a narrow training which initiates the student into the world of research.
On the contrary, the higher education experience should be a challenging and unsettling experience, opening the student's mind to a sense of ever-widening possibilities, in concept, supposition and approach to the world.
The research student
Even if all this is granted, even if it is accepted that higher education and with it the roles of teacher and student are in principle separate from the world of research, the sceptic still has one final card to play.
It could be suggested that my argument has merit in relation to undergraduate education, but that it makes no sense at all at the level of postgraduate education.
There, research and education are surely intimately connected.
We would have to say, for example, that staff responsible for research students have a definite obligation to engage in research.
The point appears to come through even more strongly in the role of the postgraduate student, particularly the research student.
For that looks like a situation in which research and higher education are one and the same process.
There we have a student who is in receipt of a higher education (almost by definition) and, at the same time, an individual who is engaged in research.
This counter has point to it, but it is a one-sided reading of the situation.
In preparing a thesis at the master's or the doctorate level, the student is clearly engaged in research.
Indeed, particularly in the humanities, and perhaps in the social sciences and in professionally related fields, it will be a substantial work of research when considered against any criterion.
But it is still wrong to think that here research and higher education are one and the same thing.
To see research students in that way is educationally shortsighted.
Given the way that research is structured, where for instance research students in the sciences and social sciences are often engaged to assist staff in large-scale research projects, research students as a matter of fact are part of the total research enterprise of the academic community.
That much has to be admitted.
But precisely on that account, it is all too easy for the work of the research student to be governed by the interests of the director(s) of the research project.
As a result, the student is directed into exceedingly narrow channels, and the work is a matter of going through some methodological routines and writing up the results.
Pressures of this kind have led the PhD work to become a narrow research training, rather than a proper educational process of making ever-wider connections and expanding one's intellectual compass.
In other words, the pretence that research and higher education are inseparable results in driving out higher education.
Is it possible now, given the huge weight of academic ideology and the interests of the research councils bearing down on it, to inject an educational dimension into the work of the research student?
Or is the situation beyond retrieval?
This is not to press for a reversal of the present position, but to understand that if the work of research students is to  be understood in educational terms, then the first step is to accept that the role is a hybrid of research and of higher education.
The point also holds for those postgraduate courses which are hardly more than programmes of professional training.
If they are to be more than mere training, then a process of informed reflection has to go on at the same time.
Research theses and postgraduate courses can fulfil ends other than purely educational ones; but they cannot become, as part of higher education, simply instrumental, whether in the direction of academic careers or professional careers.
They also have to fulfil the higher-order objectives implied by the title ‘higher education’.
Conclusion
Institutions of higher education do not need to conduct research in order to justify the title ‘institution of higher education’.
We have so distorted our conception of higher education that it is difficult to realize the point.
Research and higher education seem so inseparable that they are almost synonymous.
Admittedly, there is some substance in this way of thinking.
A genuine higher education today cannot be offered entirely separately from some kind of research base.
But that does not mean that either institutions of higher education or their staff are obliged to conduct research.
Staff, though, do need to have the time and resources to so keep up with their field of study that they are immersed in its conversations.
The argument here is not just theoretical, therefore; it has policy implications.
There are, however, major forces at work sustaining the present occlusion of research and higher education.
Research is the fulcrum of the academic community.
It is the point on which the academic community turns, and it is by their research performance that academics take on their professional identity and are judged by their peers.
Teaching accomplishments take a back seat.
One justification for this has been given: research is public, whereas higher education is private.
Exposing teaching performance is tantamount, in Lawton's phrase, to invading ‘the secret garden’ of the curriculum.
But if we are seriously interested in promoting the quality of higher education, of improving the effectiveness by which teachers teach and students learn, it is to the teaching process that we must look.
In short, if we are concerned about higher education, it is to higher education that we must turn, rather than research.
10
Academic Freedom
Introduction
It may be no surprise to see a chapter given to ‘academic freedom’, in looking at key concepts in higher education.
But pause for a moment.
Does academic freedom necessarily have anything to do with higher education?
Or at any rate, with higher education as sketched out in this book?
For on the argument here, higher education is essentially a developmental process experienced by students; staff and institutions are largely incidental.
That being so, what connections exist between academic freedom and higher education?
The question makes particular sense given the way the debate over academic freedom has been cast both in the UK and in the USA.
For academic freedom is usually seen on both sides of the Atlantic as a matter of rights which owe to fully paid-up members of the academic community.
Issues of academic freedom attract heated public discussion when academic staff see themselves as being prevented from pursuing the research in which they are personally interested.
In discussing the topic, the academic community also talks of its right to teach as it wishes, although it is remarkable how seldom, in reality, the right to teach arises as an issue over which the academic community feels especially aggrieved.
The naive observer might be forgiven for believing that this contrast has something to do with the different weight given by members of the academic community to their research interests compared with their ‘teaching interests’(the very awkwardness of the term makes the point).
None the less, it remains the case that academics' public debate over academic freedom is grounded in their wish to defend their rights — as they see it — to conduct their own activities in the way they see fit.
This is entirely in keeping with the theoretical debate over academic freedom which we find in the literature.
Not surprisingly, different viewpoints have emerged over the range of activities which can be justified under the name of academic freedom, over the kinds of threat which are most felt to be present, over the circumstances in which appeal can be made to academic freedom, and over the justifications which academics employ to claim a right to ‘academic freedom’.
Irrespective of these differences, though, we can — I think — encapsulate the whole debate in a simple principle: That academic pursuits, carried out in academic settings, by academic persons, should be ultimately directed by those persons.
Admittedly, this formulation is relatively empty, for questions can be asked about each of its main terms.
Does the killing of an animal in a laboratory for research purposes count as an academic pursuit (over which the academic concerned should enjoy some measure of academic freedom)?
Does the television studio, in which a group of academics are gathered together for a discussion on an ‘academic’ issue, count as an academic setting?
Do research assistants count as academic persons (and should they be entitled to publish as freely as the research directors who carry contractual responsibilities for their research activities)?
These questions are worth asking, but they must not be allowed to detain us here.
I believe that the formulation just offered does amount to a shorthand summary of much of the somewhat tortuous justifications that are available in the literature on academic freedom.
From the fact that it leads on to all sorts of other questions, we can reasonably infer that many of the justifications given in the literature are indeed question-begging.
The traditional discussions of academic freedom, whatever their superficial differences, are also depressingly uniform.
They frequently exhibit the following characteristics: a lack of specificity; a concern for the academic freedom of staff and not students; a defensive proclamation of the rights of academics; and a disinclination to say anything about the duties that should accompany academics' rights.
Where the rights in question are spelt out, they are often lumped together, as if they were all of the same kind.
In particular, freedom to teach and to conduct research are often mentioned in the same phrase, as if the authority by which an academic engages in the one activity is exactly the same as the authority under which the other activity is undertaken.
But the expertise by which an academic may justify embarking on research is not the same as that by which teaching is undertaken.
Correspondingly, the authority by which research expertise is acknowledged is that of the academic peer group, the relevant epistemic community; in contrast, teaching authority comes at least in part from the students.
To return to the main point, the debate over academic freedom, whether in the columns of the quality press, or in academic conferences, or in the academic literature on academic freedom itself, is conducted by reference to the felt interests of the full members of the academic community.
It is characterized by concerns over the threats they perceive to their right to conduct their own activities (as they see all three-threats, rights and interests).
Excluded almost universally from this debate is any consideration of the students' rights.
Because debate is framed in terms of those who are fully competent to exercise academic freedom, and because students almost by definition are not felt to be properly ‘competent’, the exclusion from the debate of students' rights is hardly surprising.
It is precisely that exclusion that I want to address in this chapter.
Whatever happened to Lernfreiheit ?
It was not always thus.
Most notable of all, the German universities from the early nineteenth century onwards were founded on a conception of inquiry, and  of educational development, in which the student took centre stage.
Admittedly, the definition of the student role that emerged in that conception of higher education had much to do with the idealist epistemology in which von Humboldt and the other founders of the modern German university were themselves scholars and contributors.
It was an epistemology in which knowledge was ultimately not grasped, or uncovered, but was attained through debate.
Today, the idealist baggage — of entering a world of spirit, for example— seems at least obscure, if not downright obscurantist.
However, rather than serving to dissuade us from finding some base for the notion of students' academic freedom, the epistemological grounding of the German universities holds some definite clues that are worth pursuing.
Indeed, those who recall the account of knowledge developed in the second section of this book may feel that there are definite similarities between the epistemology underlying the formation of the German universities and the epistemological position we find ourselves in today.
In both, there is an absence of absolute authority, and of definitely grounding our claims to knowledge independently of the knower.
There is also a sense that what counts as knowledge is negotiated through a discourse allowing a critique and a counter-critique by participants subscribing to the conventions of a shared form of life.
That being so, it is worthwhile recalling the view of the student that went with that earlier epistemology and which generated the idea of students' academic freedom (or Lernfreiheit , as it was known).
On the idealist view, knowledge was not to be simply read off the world but was to be gained through entering a critical dialogue with others.
Consequently, there was no difference in kind in the formal position of teachers and taught.
Both were engaged in the same kind of activity, in exploring accounts of the world through participation in a conversation.
Given this epistemology and this view of the role of the student, it was entirely apposite for the notion of student academic freedom to arise.
For, if students were to fulfil the role cast for them, they had to be free — institutionally and intellectually — to pursue their own inquiries and cognitive interests.
It would be wrong not to acknowledge the allegation that that educational philosophy had, in practice, many damaging results in modern European higher education, for example the separation of students from professorial staff, so that the students were often left too much alone by professors who were much more interested in their own inquiries; the free movement of students across universities and its impact on the coherence of the students' programme of studies; and the slow completion and very often non-completion by students of their courses.
Whatever the validity of these observations, they are salutary warnings in moving over-boldly in the direction of student self-learning; and they may point to the value of ensuring the existence of an adequately supportive learning environment.
Even so, these cautionary comments should not dislodge us from the main point.
If the formation and acquisition of knowledge has the character of a conversation, then students must be accorded an appropriate measure of freedom to engage in that conversation in their own way.
No doubt, most will  require considerable assistance to be able to participate effectively; but no-one can be forced to engage in a conversation with sincerity.
The students have to pick up the threads of the conversation, to make sense of it, and to make a contribution — if they wish — in their own way.
The shorthand way of putting this is that students must have the freedom-the academic freedom — to exercise due responsibility for their own learning.
These reflections amount to no less than this.
The conventional concept of academic freedom as adumbrated in the UK and the USA is completely inadequate.
It needs to be recast, so that it extends beyond academic staff to embrace the student body.
Or, to put it slightly differently, in characterizing academic freedom in terms of the rights of the academic community, we need to draw the bounds of the academic community widely enough to include students.
Students need to be rehabilitated in our idea of academic freedom,and in the practices associated with the idea.
Precisely what, in the modern age, does this amount to?
Exactly what academic (as opposed to, say, more general civil) rights might students legitimately claim?
They are simply those rights which underpin the conditions under which it is meaningful to talk of the student's right to learn.
And, just as with academic freedom for academic staff, we can distinguish negative and positive rights for students.
Among negative rights , we should include the rights: not to be indoctrinated; not to be subject to unnecessary ideology; not to experience racialist, sexist or religious bias; and not to be subject to unprofessional practices by teaching staff in admissions, in teaching and in examining.
Among positive rights , we should include the rights: to have all one's experience and knowledge assessed in the admissions process; to determine the subjects studied; to have a legitimate measure of control over the pace and the methods of study; to be able to follow a particular academic interest, or develop a point of view of one's own; to be examined in ways which do justice to the student's achievements; and to be credited with those parts of a course which have been passed successfully (should the student wish or need to move to another institution, or to take a break in the programme of study).
Certainly, there could be argument over some of these suggested rights, if only in their extent and their implementation.
Additionally, other rights might be invoked.
That kind of detailed examination could and should go on.
That further exploration, though, is second order to recognizing that students need freedoms of an academic character if their learning is to be fully effective.
There are two parallel considerations at work here.
The first is that students are adults, and enrol and attend their courses voluntarily.
However it may feel at times to them as individuals, and whatever compulsions they sense from relatives and friends to ‘get through’ their course, the fact is that they could withdraw without any legal penalty at least.
Attending their institution of higher education betokens a degree of ‘wittingness and voluntariness’ on their part.
That being so, their continuing participation in their programme of studies represents a contract between them and the providing institution.
By ‘contract’, I mean an educational contract, in which the institution is in effect  undertaking to provide the student with the kind of programme that he or she wants, in return for the student's active participation.
The second consideration is that students require a degree of intellectual space if they are properly to develop their own intellectual maturity.
The abilities not just to comprehend, to take things into one's own understanding, and to make something of them, but also to be able to evaluate critically the available theories and traditions, and to be willing and have the mental toughness to take up a stance of one's own: all these abilities point to an intellectual independence, requiring real academic freedom for their realization.
We have, then, student wittingness and intellectual maturity both pointing in the same direction.
If students are really to be involved in their own Learning, then they must feel they do, in part, own it.
They not only must enjoy negative freedoms (freedoms not to be unduly constrained), but also must experience positive freedoms (of the kind sketched out above).
The freedom to learn cannot be an empty slogan but must be made real for every student on every course of study of higher education.
In practice, most students do experience many of the positive freedoms I have cited.
The question is whether something approaching a Bill of Rights for students would not be worthwhile, spelling out the academic freedoms which all students have the right to expect.
This would act as an agreed convention against which programmes of study could be evaluated.
An educational Bill of Rights would not stand in place of students' legal entitlements; students would, as now, still have the right to pursue a legal claim if they felt themselves to be the victim of an in justice.
A Bill of Rights would fulfil a different and a prior purpose.
It could, indeed, help to establish the kind of ethos which might make recourse to legal remedies unnecessary.
Legal and quasi-legal moves are made when things have gone wrong, where expectations have not been fulfilled on both sides, and often where students have not played the compliant role expected of them.
Those manoeuvres arise in a situation of unequal power.
It is surely time that students, as adults in part responsible for their own higher education, were formally accorded the rights and academic respect they deserve, and the social relations between teacher and taught were made more equal.
A student ethic
The enjoyment of special privileges, such as the freedom to learn, carries with it corresponding responsibilities.
If the kinds of academic freedom for students just outlined are to be vigorously sustained by the academic community (as they should), then students have to play their part in the exercise of those freedoms.
There is nothing odd in this; the academic freedoms that the academic community enjoys generate their own academic ethic which members of the academic community should fulfil if they are to warrant those privileges (Shils 1984).
Academic freedom, whether for teachers or students, cannot mean academic licence; the role of the academic, in whatever capacity, is a demanding one, with its own obligations.
Among the responsibilities that accompany academic freedom for students are the following.
First, there are the substantive responsibilities which go hand in hand with the moral virtues that are inseparably part of the intellectual life.
These include sincerity, honesty (not to indulge in plagiarism or cheating), truthfulness, the avoidance of self-contradiction, a determination to be comprehensible, the intellectual courage to develop and hold a position of one's own, a willingness to be subject to the demands of reason and evidence, an openness to other viewpoints or ways of going on, and according due (but not undue) respect to teaching and other staff.
Secondly, there are the procedural responsibilities associated with the conventions of the student role.
Among these are the completion of assignments on time, attendance for appointments (including tutorials and examinations), undertaking the necessary groundwork for the course — whether in the laboratory, studio or library — and accepting the customary house rules, such as not interrupting (or barracking) the lecturers.
Significant measures of freedom are necessary if the student is to acquire the virtues of intellectual independence, toughness, empathy with others' views, and willingness to engage in meaningful conversation.
But the acquisition of those very virtues requires the student to submit to the demands of intellectual life, as experienced within an institution with all its vicissitudes.
With the best will in the world, the library is not always going to have the book on its shelves that the student is after; and nor are members of staff always going to be available to answer students' enquiries.
All this is tantamount to saying that, even in the role of student, the academic life exerts particular and considerable demands on the individual.
The image of the irresponsible student may have a basis in various periods of higher education (in medieval times, in eighteenth-century Oxbridge, and in the late 1960s across the Western world).
None the less, the moral imperatives that are intrinsic to the student role will always reassert themselves.
If students' academic freedom imposes responsibilities as well as rights, how might we understand student radicalism?
Here, as with academic freedom for teaching staff, we should distinguish between freedoms which derive from civil rights and those which derive from the character of academic life.
Student action on the streets — as in China or South Korea — does not as such raise issues of academic freedom.
That kind of action is defensible or not in terms of the students' civil rights, and in terms of the constraints such activities present to the civil rights of the general public.
(Even if the activities do present curbs on the rights of the general public to go about their business, street action might still be justified where, for example, it brings to public consciousness some injustice that would not otherwise receive a public hearing.)
Student action on the campus, on the other hand, does raise issues of academic freedom, and in a double sense.
First, it raises issues of the academics' academic freedom (Lerfreiheit ): are the academics' rights to teach and research constrained?
Just this, indeed, happened in the student radicalism of the 1960s.
Secondly, the other students' own right to learn (Lernfreiheit ) can be called into question.
Whatever mitigating justifications could be cited in favour of overt action on the campus, in much of the 1960s' action, students were often reducing  other students' right to learn, were therefore abusing their freedoms and were, as such, forfeiting their own rights as students.
To say that the student role must be confined within the boundaries of the academic ethic does not mean that the student role is a docile one.
On the contrary, if the student body were to take its right to learn (Lernfreiheit ) seriously, and were to be vigilant in seeing that it enjoyed the kinds of academic freedom I spelt out earlier, it would necessarily take on an assertive role.
The trouble today is that the student body has moved so far away from asserting its academic rights that it has become largely passive, simply accepting the fare put before it.
Although individual students may seek to press the system to its limits, whether in securing credit for prior learning in the admissions process, or in pursuing a formal appeal against a felt injustice over assessment, or in taking advantage of such open learning arrangements as are available, the student body as a whole seems depressingly unconcerned about its academic rights.
It would rather mount a protest over student grants (probably in the UK the most generous in the world per student) than attempt to frame a Charter of the academic rights which should fall to every student.
Even if students were to conceive of their role in this way, the academic freedoms and the associated student ethic could not be maintained solely by the students.
Implications follow for their lecturers and other teachers.
If students' freedom to learn is to be made a reality, academic staff must provide the intellectual conditions for students to be intellectually free.
Again, there has to be a balance.
It is right that students be initiated into the conceptual apparatus, skills and ways of going on within the teacher's own discipline; and it is right that students therefore acquire the discipline required for the necessary understanding and competencies.
But it is not right for a member of the teaching staff to so present that disciplinary framework that the student is unable to view it from the outside or is discouraged from officering an alternative perspective from another discipline.
Student academic freedom and its associated academic ethic imply a high degree of intellectual maturity not only from the students but also from the academic staff.
The teacher needs to be open to, and supportive of, the student who has an alternative view to present, even if it does not fall squarely within the teacher's own disciplinary expertise.
In the learning enterprise, everyone has a share in it, the teachers as well as the taught.
Finally, there is another student freedom to which the teacher in higher education needs to be especially alert.
It is the freedom for the student to make his or her mistakes.
This is not simply a matter of learning through one's own mistakes.
I argued a moment ago that if the student is to enter into his or her own work, and is to be committed to it, he or she simply has to be given the intellectual space — to a degree — to follow his or her own inclinations.
But this means that, from time to time, the student will pursue hunches which lead nowhere, or adopt a method of analysis which turns out to be unfruitful.
This may sometimes prove inefficient, seen from the perspective of crude performance indicators.
But it is a necessary price to pay, if we want students to emerge with minds of their own, who do not merely know but understand in some depth what they know, and who are able to form and develop their own ideas.
Institutional autonomy
We have seen that, if students' freedom to learn is to be a reality, it has to be acknowledged by the academic community in all the academic processes that affect students, from the time of applying for admission through the course arrangements and the curriculum experience to the final assessment.
Another way of putting this is that students' academic freedoms should be reflected in the internal culture of institutions of higher education.
But we saw in Chapter 5 that, as key institutions in the modern state, institutions of higher education cannot attain a position of pure autonomy.
That being so, are these institutions in a position, even if they so desire, to guarantee the student freedoms argued for here?
In the context of the conventional debate over academic freedom, a standard move in response to this point is to claim that academic freedom is a concept applicable to individual persons, and that academic autonomy is a concept applicable to institutions.
It is certainly possible to argue both on empirical and on conceptual grounds that there are institutions — for example, German or Swedish universities — which are not autonomous, but offer academic freedom to their academics.
And it makes obvious sense to say that autonomous institutions are not necessarily homes of academic freedom.
In other words, you can have one without the other: academic freedom and academic autonomy are distinctive concepts.
This is neat, but it does not work entirely.
The lack of academic autonomy will show itself in some form or other.
Perhaps in the selection of students for admission; or the promotion of the faculty; or the apportionment of priorities for institutional expenditure; or the direction of research projects; or the range of teaching and research subjects pursued in an institution; or the character of the curriculum.
Now, the latter three are clearly matters of academic freedom, given the way in which academic freedom is commonly understood.
Whether or not we describe the three preceding ones as activities that fall under academic autonomy or academic freedom is a matter of judgement.
It looks, therefore, as if there is at least an empirical connection between academic autonomy and academic freedom.
Take the first away, and effects will be felt on the second.
We can still retain the conceptual distinction; we can say that academic autonomy is descriptive of the relationship between the institution and the state, while academic freedom characterizes the institutionalized accountability of the individual academic.
But, in practice, it appears that a degree of academic autonomy is a necessary condition of academic freedom.
Secondly, the same point can be turned round.
Academics have their livings in institutions established to conduct academic activities.
As they are practised in the modern world, high-level teaching and research only make sense in institutions.
Higher education has been thoroughly institutionalized; an Illich-style ‘deschooling’ is simply not on.
This means that, for most academics at least, research and teaching require an institutional framework.
The logic is that academic freedom requires academic autonomy if it is to mean anything  more than rhetoric.
Again, then, we see a close interweaving of the two features of academic life.
Thirdly, autonomy at any rate can be applied to an individual academic.
In one sense, admittedly, it has a disparaging overtone, implying something of a freewheeling character, adrift from his or her institutional or collegial obligations.
But it might also be used to convey the idea of an academic willing to take up a bold independent stance, outside the disciplinary currents of the age.
Indeed, autonomy has been seen as a general virtue in philosophical thought of the Western world.
Much ink has been spilt within the philosophy of education in proclaiming the virtues of promoting autonomy among those on the receiving end in the education system, from the youngest of school pupils.
There is, though, something of a paradox here.
Educators want to develop autonomy in those who pass through.
But there seems something faintly quirky about trying to describe someone who is well-educated as ‘autonomous’.
Where does all this get us?
In many respects, over the past 40 years, UK academic institutions have experienced a significant loss in their autonomy.
As the new funding councils for the universities and for the polytechnics and colleges develop systems of contracting, the institutions' room for manoeuvre in the subjects they offer may diminish further as their programme performance and their accounting arrangements are subjected to ever closer scrutiny.
Both sectors have long experienced the eye of professional bodies, which accredit the degree courses designed to produce recruits for their profession.
It is not impossible, too, that an overarching agency with responsibility for quality assurance will eventually be established to perform for the whole system something of the role performed by the Council for National Academic Awards for the public sector.
And the part played by Her Majesty's Inspectorate in monitoring and advising on the quality of work in higher education has recently begun to increase in a remarkable way.
All these interventions have an impact on the internal life of institutions; and, arguably, not all are of a deleterious character.
But academics are not yet told who to admit, precisely which books or theories to teach or to avoid, how to teach and which methods of assessment to adopt.
The question ‘Can academic freedom survive?’ is a matter of determining whether academic institutions can reach a modus vivendi with the state.
For the moment, most essential academic freedoms remain, and the question can be answered in the affirmative, with the tongue only slightly in the cheek.
The present position, then, is that institutional autonomy is still such that there are no serious external constraints in the way of students' right to learn.
Academics have no excuse not to provide students with the academic freedoms outlined earlier.
The onus lies with them in the first place, because the design of the programmes of study is their responsibility.
Given a willingness on the part of the academic community, all the student freedoms I have cited — from the right of applicants to have their experiential learning taken into account in the admissions process, through allowing students a significant measure of control over their curriculum, to submitting to an assessment regime which is explicitly designed to allow students to do justice to the higher-order abilities they have  acquired — could be assured to students.
There are no state controls forbidding such developments, although we should acknowledge that some professional bodies do act in just this constraining manner.
Admittedly, providing these essential conditions for the students' growth will not by itself ensure that the sought-for maturation takes place.
Students' personal autonomy cannot be guaranteed even by the best curriculum in the world.
In the end, students in higher education have to give something of themselves.
An achievement concept
The debate over academic freedom has been structured as if attaining academic freedom is part of a zero-sum game.
All too often, academic freedom is thought to be of such a form that its possession by one group implies its denial to another group.
If the members of the academic community do not possess the rights in question, then they must belong to some other grouping, whether agencies of the state, local councillors, professional bodies or even students.
It is as if academic freedom were a largely fixed commodity that was passed around among the groups contending for the right to make the key academic decisions.
In this chapter, I have shown that we do not have to think of academic freedom in this way.
Although my major concern has been to rehabilitate the idea of students' academic freedom, I have also said sufficient to show that academic freedom cannot just be granted by one group or agency towards another.
Ultimately, it has to be worked at so that its possibilities are realized fully by those who possess it.
We saw earlier that academic freedom means not just rights, but responsibilities.
To put it in more formal philosophical language, we can say that academic freedom is an achievement concept.
If it is not to be mere rhetoric, then its scope has continually to be exercised and its limits stretched.
Otherwise, the freedoms that it implies are likely to atrophy through lack of use.
But we can say more than this.
Far from being a zero-sum game, far from being fixed in the amount that is technically available, those in possession of academic freedom can go on continually expanding its scope.
Just as the notion of civil rights has not been fixed in its eighteenth-century formulation but has undergone continuing expansion, so too with the rights that go with academic freedom.
Our notions of who constitutes the academic community, the freedoms at stake, and the ways in which they might be protected, all develop over time.
There is a further point to be made.
The academic community depends upon, as the term implies, communication among its members.
The forms of communication and the subjects thought proper for comment by members of the academic community also widen through time.
For some years in the public sector and just beginning in the university sector, we see academics willing to have their teaching activities subjected to the face-to-face evaluation and commentaries of their peers.
On top of this, it is always possible for the form of  discourse to be made more open, so that all academics have a hearing, irrespective of their rank or reputation.
All this translates to the situation of the students and their right to learn.
Indeed, we have already noted that allowing students the rights spelt out earlier is not sufficient for students' academic freedom to be taken up.
That requires students to explore and exploit the freedoms given to them.
Indeed, as in social history generally, the rights are likely to be given to them partly through the students pressing for them themselves.
And the retention and widening of those rights — as we approach a new wave of expansion of higher education — will require a continual vigilance on the part of students.
In the end, whether applicants have their experiential learning counted in the admissions process, or whether students go on expanding the degree of influence they exercise over the curriculum, will be up to them.
In short, in the domain of Lernfreiheit as well as Lerfreiheit , academic freedom is an achievement concept.
Personal autonomy
Finally, I return to my earlier comments about autonomy, in so far as they apply to students.
The reader may have found those remarks somewhat quizzical, for I pointed out that while philosophers of education have advocated ‘autonomy’ as an outcome for the educator to aim at, there seemed something quirky about describing, say, a graduate who had just successfully completed a course as autonomous.
I believe this discussion about academic freedom has helped to resolve the puzzle.
In effect, I have been saying that students' academic freedoms are necessary conditions in the realization of the emancipatory promise of higher education.
What that points to, minimally, is a developmental process in which students are enabled to be critical and to be self-critical in an informed way.
That kind of independence is not to be achieved by the student acting purely independently.
Becoming educated in the way being argued for in this book requires a willingness and an ability to participate in a discussion oriented towards truth.
It implies a sharing and an interchange of viewpoints.
Certainly, to a degree, it is possible to educate oneself; and teachers in higher education often overestimate their own importance.
But the independence being sought for in higher education, and for which the rights to learn are necessary conditions, is an independence of thought which is exercised within a dialogue with others.
Ultimately, if it is to count, the independent thought or action has to be offered or at least to be open to others for their evaluation.
In the world of work, this is one of the distinctions between the professional and the technician.
Students' academic freedoms are reminders, then, of our hope that students will develop their own autonomy, but it is an autonomy exercised within a shared form of life.
11
Beyond Teaching and Learning
Introduction
No book which offers an overarching educational theory of higher education can afford to neglect teaching and learning; or so it must seem.
For surely they lie at the heart of higher education.
Certainly, these matters — and particularly the student's learning — are unjustly neglected in the debate on higher education.
We look at research, at structures, at planning, at evaluation, at the curriculum and, to a lesser extent, at teaching.
Learning, though, seems hardly to figure, unless it is in technical discussions about its psychological character, and how it might be improved.
The place of learning and how we construe it is barely on the public agenda.
We are not asking critical questions about Learning.
This chapter might have been called ‘higher learning’.
Two reasons suggested otherwise.
First, the phrase will appear odd to many, particularly in the UK.
And some would think it pretentious.
That reaction is a little parochial.
It is certainly not so unusual in the USA, where we find books bearing the phrase in their titles.
One reason for its presence in the USA might be that the American higher education system is so heterogeneous, fulfilling such different functions and admitting such a diversity of students, that questions about the character of the learning experience arise naturally.
Analogously, as the comparatively uniform character of British higher education begins to dissolve, so questions are arising in the UK about the aims and character of student learning.
In this context, the phrase ‘higher learning’ is particularly helpful, because it prompts us to ask whether in higher education there is anything especially ‘higher’about the learning we expect students to achieve.
I shall argue that there is.
But my argument will be double-edged; and this brings me to the second reason for discounting ‘higher learning’ as a chapter title.
Strictly speaking, learning as such is not part of the idea of higher education.
Obviously, learning has to go on in our institutions of higher education, but the idea of higher education points to a separate aspect of personal development.
The Learning that goes on in higher education justifies the label ‘higher’ precisely because it refers to a state of mind over and above conventional recipe or factual learning.
Learning is necessary; but it is not part of what is meant by higher education.
What counts for the sake of higher  education is the student's ability to understand what is learned or what is done, to conceptualise it, to grasp it under different aspects, and to take up critical stances in relation to it.
Learning, then, is a misnomer, or at least an inadequate way of construing higher education.
That much the reader may have gathered from the argument so far.
But there are issues here worth exploring further.
The concept of learning
There is a weak sense of ‘learning’ in which the student is taught or the student reads that x is so and so.
Tests would show that the student can recall that x is so and so, can write it down and can repeat it orally.
Perhaps much learning in the natural sciences, in the medical sciences and in technology is like this.
The student is faced with an overwhelming amount of material to get through, in an exceedingly short time.
(Medical students are given just 8 weeks for a unit on obstetrics and gynaecology, for example.)
There is also a strong sense of' learning', in which the student identifies with the truth claim he or she is faced with, and can offer it (for example, back to the consultant physician) as something with which he or she had personal experience (having had an opportunity to examine some patients).
This stronger sense of learning also carries with it the idea that ultimately the student is able to evaluate it for him or herself, and form a personal view about its validity (by reading the relevant articles, by listening to the different views of the authorities on the topic, and perhaps by assisting in a clinical trial).
Some will say that that is all very well as a conceptual distinction.
But, the critic may sense, in some subject areas it is simply not appropriate to expect students to form a view of their own.
In medical education, or in the teaching of some scientific or technological subjects, it could actually be dangerous.
When it comes to saving lives or building bridges, the last thing we want is for uninformed and inexperienced students to form their own ideas.
Well, yes and no.
It is obvious that students should not believe that their own ideas by themselves are valid.
In our earlier discussion of truth (see Chapter 4), we saw that it is not available in any absolute sense; but this does not mean that ‘anything goes’.
Students' views are not necessarily as good as those of recognized authorities, but it is still essential that the ideas to which students hold should be their own.
They should enter into those ideas, and see them from various angles.
This is, after all, what we mean by ‘understanding’.
The ideas might even have come from elsewhere-their tutors, or books, or perhaps a tape/slide presentation — but the student has to embrace them as his or her own if he or she is claiming them to be true.
It is in this sense that we can speak of students forming their own ideas.
And that is a general point, which holds across all disciplines, whether English or engineering, whether mathematics or medicine.
Admittedly, disciplines vary in the extent to which a personal response is expected of students.
In poetry, it is the student's direct response which is called  for.
Any response which is offered as a result of reading it in a work of literary criticism would be unacceptable.
In medicine, however, it is precisely the current thinking in the field that one is after.
But these differences mask more important underlying similarities in student learning.
Take English literature, and recall Leavis' point to which I have referred before.
In offering his or her response, the student should be doing so in a spirit of ‘this is so, isn't it?’
Students should stand ready to explain and to defend their views; and to listen to counter views and take up a further position if the balance of the contending positions points that way.
That, as we saw in Chapter 4, is the nature of truth: it is a continuing discourse, in which rival views are taken forward.
So, in the humanities, students' views are neither the beginning nor the end; they are based on evidence and understanding, and are subject to assessment by the students themselves and by others.
Move back now to medical education.
Even though we want the judgements of young doctors to be securely based on the evidence, we want to feel that they have not just assiduously acquired the necessary knowledge, but also have immediate first-hand understanding of it in practice, having conducted patient examinations, observed relevant operations, and so forth.
When more or less alone at night in the casualty ward, the doctor needs to be able to make up his or her own mind, and exercise judgement about the particular features presented by the accident victim just wheeled in.
There has, then, in the higher education curriculum, to be major elements of immediate experience and personal responsibility even in the fields where students are having to work extraordinarily hard simply to acquire formal knowledge.
All these elements can be found in the best of medical education, most notably in McMaster University in Canada, where students pose their own problems and use the resources of the university to solve them.
What does all this amount to?
Simply that in higher education, we expect students to go beyond the material they encompass and to form their own affinity with it.
Learning that x is not sufficient — simply being able to recall a Shakespearean play, or a formula for a chemical compound, or the artists who were members of a particular school of painting, is not what higher education is about.
We want students to show that they have entered into what they have learned.
Insight, involvement and reflection are called for, not learning as such.
The Learning has to be transcended.
Students have to show that they understand what has been learned so deeply that they are able to look down on it and assess it critically for themselves.
Even if the student is not able to come up with alternative offerings of his or her own, at least he or she can say with some honesty: ‘I believe that to be the case, and this is why.’
What bearing does this have on practical parts of the curriculum?
It cuts in opposing directions.
Whether we have in mind the student teacher, or the art student in the studio, or the student nurse, practical experience necessarily calls for a degree of personal involvement by the student and to that extent it is desirable.
But practice can mean going through the motions just as much as accumulating factual knowledge.
Admittedly, not all practical activities are as routine as many laboratory techniques; they often have a degree of open-endedness  built into them, demanding a personal response from the student.
Even so, the student can respond in a relatively unthinking or unreflective way.
For that reason, the model adopted in medical education where the student is continually asked to articulate his or her experience and give reasons for acting in a certain way is particularly valuable.
It is an approach now being taken up increasingly, too, in teacher education; and could be countenanced much more in other practically oriented curricula.
The general point is this.
Whether we have in mind the student learning that such and such is the case, or learning how to do such and such, we look to the student to rise above the learning.
There is the learning, and there is the critical evaluation of it.
Logically, critical reflection is ‘higher’ because it calls for a state of mind reflecting on that learning.
And it is to that higher-order state of mind that Learning in higher education must lead.
Given these observations, ‘higher learning’ may appear an attractive term.
But it is full of snares, for it can all too easily lead us to think that the learning characteristic of higher education is a sub-set of conventional learning.
I have tried to show in this discussion that higher learning is not learning at all in any familiar sense.
Ordinarily, learning allows us to go on in the same way, to repeat what has been learned, whether it is a matter of fact(that London is the capital of England) or an action (driving a car in familiar circumstances).
The question is whether the student can go on in unfamiliar circumstances, can exercise judgement, can be his or her own person.
Some who follow this line of thinking argue that if there is a form of learning wrapped up in ‘higher learning’, it is learning how to learn.
There is truth in this, but it needs to be construed correctly.
It is misleading if it means simply that students learn how to acquire conventional encyclopaedia-like knowledge for themselves.
It is an acceptable shorthand if we understand by it that students learn how to form a relationship with what they learn.
For the learning which students acquire is learning how to respond to what they encounter.
They learn not to take things on trust, but to make sure they fully comprehend in order to make their own assessments.
They learn how to form informed critical evaluations.
And they Learn how to place their learning in a wider context.
All these forms of learning are not learning that such and such is the case, but learning how to do such and such.
In short, to borrow a voguish term, they acquire the competencies which are characteristic of higher education.
On this reading of higher learning, it is no accident that philosophy, fine art and the humanities generally are feeling the need to justify themselves.
It is there, above all, that we see these independent intellectual capacities encouraged, and it is there that the gaze of the state is felt most keenly.
One consequence of the bleak winds sensed is that the advocates of these disciplines turn to showing just how useful they really are; or could be, with a little tinkering of the curriculum, with a little information technology here, an element of ‘transferable skills’ there.
Such manoeuvring, though, is symptomatic of the distrust which they face, and reflects less on them than on the dominant culture of the age.
It needs to be firmly said that these essentially non-instrumental disciplines do not constitute a dilettante add-on to higher education, unnoticed  if lost.
Precisely because they promote higher-order capacities from the students, where the students are expected to place their experiences in a wider context of values and social affairs, these studies contribute vitally to the expansion of the collective consciousness of society.
Any diminution in their role within higher education is bound, therefore, to have the effect of ‘closing the British mind’.
But to make that observation is nothing less than to point to one way in which the UK is becoming a less open society.
Authority
Surely, in higher education if nowhere else, we find people who are rightly termed authorities.
They have demonstrated publicly, through close scrutiny by their peers, that they know what they are talking about.
They have mastered some corpus of knowledge, however small, and have probably made some contribution of their own to its development.
In turn, so it might seem, they are rightly in authority when it comes to teaching.
That, after all, is part of what we mean by ‘professor’:x is so on top of his or her subject that he or she has something to profess, to convey, to teach.
Even if the premiss is sound, the conclusion does not follow.
If we recall the earlier section on knowledge, the idea of a single individual reaching a secure position of authority in relation to knowledge is dubious to say the least.
But put aside the question-begging character of the premiss, and turn instead to the conclusion.
It by no means follows from the fact that x is a recognised authority in a discipline or professional field that x has authority to teach.
Richard Peters once distinguished between a teacher being an authority and being in authority.
I would put the distinction I am making slightly differently.
The authority which x derives from his expertise in a particular subject — as granted by his peers in the academic community — and x 's authority to teach are different kinds of authority.
In higher education, students are present normally of their own volition, whatever the pressure felt from parents and their own social circles.
Also, as the 18-year-old cohort dips, students become a valuable commodity: institutions of higher education are increasingly conscious that students could up sticks and transfer to another institution.
And students are, after all, adults, with many entering higher education for the first time in their middle age, or even beyond.
All this brings out that teachers in higher education teach partly on sufferance.
If the students do not value their learning experience, they can go elsewhere.
As a matter of fact, their programme of studies is a legal contract with their institution, the institution being required to provide a reasonable quality of course.
But irrespective of the legal position, the character of the teaching process is such that higher education teachers have to pay attention to the expectations and perceptions of their students.
What is so special about higher education as opposed to any other part of the educational system?
In one sense, there is nothing special about it.
Whether  primary, secondary or adult education, the teaching situation is a human transaction, an interchange between persons.
For any teaching to be effective, learning and understanding have to occur on the part of the pupil or student.
This in itself is a salutary reminder that x's authority in a discipline is not sufficient to generate her authority as a teacher.
For that, there has to be some evidence that the pupils or students are responding to what is put before them.
In all educational settings, authority as a teacher has to be earned in one's effectiveness as a teacher.
There are additional dimensions to the authority of teachers in higher education.
There is the point already implied.
Higher education students are adults.
They have minds of their own and will form their own views on what is put before them.
This means that lecturers and tutors will have to find ways of connecting with their students' outlooks.
Any falling short in doing so reflects more on the teaching than on the students' preparedness to respond.
The onus of making that interpersonal connection between their differing maps of the mind must rest in the first place with the staff, not with the student.
There is an even more telling reason why, in higher education, the teacher's authority has to be won and cannot be presumed.
This connects with my earlier account of truth.
I have said that for a student to make a truth claim, whether original or not, the student has to own it.
He or she has to believe it, and to be able to back it up with reasons which he or she also believes.
Commitment and sincerity both enter into truth claims.
This is so whether we have in mind the validity of a prepositional truth claim, or the satisfactoriness of an action in the domain of professional education.
But if this is to occur, the teaching relationship must be sufficiently open for students to invest something of themselves in what it is they say or do.
It follows that authoritarian teaching relationships and the passive assimilation of knowledge can have no part in higher education.
And the fact that we have a particular vocabulary of ‘tutor’, ‘lecturer’, ‘professor’ and indeed ‘student’is testimony to the particular character of the teacher-learner relationship.
There is, however, a difference between teacher and taught.
Recognizing the non-absolute character of knowledge does not mean that the lecturer and the student are equal in their epistemological authority.
But if students are to be encouraged to weigh things up for themselves, to form their own views, and to articulate them with their own reasons, then it is also incumbent on their lecturers and tutors to offer their own truth claims to their students in the spirit of ‘this is so, isn't it?’(to use again Leavis' central question).
To borrow an important phrase from Paulo Freire, there has to be a ‘dialogic relationship’ between tutor and student.
Admittedly, the epistemological weight of the relationship will almost always rest with the lecturer.
However, with open learning and project work in undergraduate work, and with postgraduate work, the relationship will often approximate to one of equality.
The conclusion to be drawn from this discussion is that, in higher education, authority has a reciprocal aspect.
And in two senses.
First, the authority of the lecturer in the teaching relationship has to be to some degree granted by the  student.
Students have to be willing to work under the direction of the lecturer.
They have to agree that what they hear and see is meaningful to them, connects with their universe of meanings, and is offered in an acceptable way.
To this extent, the teacher's authority is conferred by the student; the student can always say ‘no thanks’.
Secondly, students have to make their own connections in understanding what they experience on their programme of studies.
The student has to be able to say: I understand this for myself; I can assent to this, but not that.
In other words, students have to reach a position of some authority themselves.
These are not just nice philosophical points.
They have practical importance.
In Chapter 9, we saw how expertise in research is different from expertise in teaching.
This discussion has confirmed that view, though from another angle.
Teaching effectively in higher education calls for the extraordinary ability on the part of the teacher to bring students to the point where they can distinguish sense from nonsense for themselves, where they can say and do things for themselves and give reasons for so doing which are full of insight, and where they have the intellectual resources to take off under their own steam.
This means that whatever a lecturer's status as an authority in his or her own epistemic community, the lecturer also has to possess as a successful teacher the authority to manage effectively his or her students' learning.
Stages of higher learning
One of the exciting occurrences in higher education is seeing students becoming ‘hooked’(in Marjorie Reeves' evocative terminology) on something of lasting value.
Where it occurs, we see students wanting to be immersed in a body of knowledge on their own account and in their own way.
This has both positive and limiting aspects.
From a positive standpoint, that kind of happening brings with it an educational experience with a particular degree of vitality.
Words we might employ to describe that experience would include authenticity, first-handedness, liveliness and immediacy.
In a higher education curriculum, second-handedness is eschewed.
Whether in performing experiments, or in being directed to primary sources of evidence in history, or in becoming acquainted with the journal literature, or in designing artefacts to meet a design problem, we encourage students along the path of their own immediate experience.
All this is desirable and, indeed, essential; but higher education cannot rest there.
A genuine higher learning is subversive in the sense of subverting the student's taken-for-granted world, including the world of endeavour, scholarship, calculation or creativity, into which he or she has been initiated.
A genuine higher education is unsettling; it is not meant to be a cosy experience.
It is disturbing because, ultimately, the student comes to see that things could always be other than they are.
A higher education experience is not complete unless the student realizes that, no matter how much effort is put in, or how  much library research, there are no final answers.
Indeed, the realization should come that there are all sorts of rival positions, and that there is no absolute way of choosing between them.
Some observers describe this process as one of ‘cognitive dissonance’.
The term is certainly helpful, conveying something of the psychological unsettling that can occur, but it does not capture the full extent of what might take place.
The notion of cognitive dissonance suggests the countering of one entrenched view of the world with another; so the student is faced with a difficult choice.
That happens.
But even more, the student should come to understand that there are an infinite number of frameworks with which to describe the world; and that none has any binding claim over the others.
In short, knowledge is ‘relative’.
Again, though, higher education cannot rest there.
The student may come to appreciate that each concept, or theory or professional practice is set within a particular framework of thought or action.
The student may be able to stand back and to relativize his or her own learning.
But it is crucial that the student is not, as a result, paralysed into inaction.
The student has to be able to take yet a further step, and to be able to take up stances, hold to particular theories, or simply to act.
There has to be a moment of personal insight, in which critical evaluation is not put aside but is transcended.
In that moment, the student is freed to make decisions, to make judgements about the balance of the evidence, or to opt for a particular course of action.
Far from being insipid, fence-sitting or unduly critical, a fully effective graduate student is able to choose, to believe and to act with ‘authoritative uncertainty’.
This sketch of a student's intellectual development has followed the student through the stages of assimilating encountered knowledge; deep understanding; recognition of its provisionality and contested character; exercising critical judgement; being sensitive to other knowledge forms, and relativizing one's own experience; and taking a personal stand.
There is here a progressive intellectual maturity, whereby the student gains but breaks through relativism and critical thinking, to attain a position of creative independence.
This conception of progressive intellectual maturity has emerged from the philosophical argument of this book, but it is far from being a purely philosophical viewpoint.
It bears a close affinity to the work of W. G. Perry, whose detailed analysis of student development is based on considerable empirical work in the USA.
A deep learning experience
Admittedly, not every student passes through all the intellectual stages I have just identified.
Also, courses in some subjects are perhaps more prone to arrest their students' development.
The evidence is unclear as to whether there is a science-humanities divide here.
It would not be surprising if there were; if science courses tended to act as a brake on students' intellectual formation.
Science courses are overpacked with factual material which students cannot evade.
Those courses also tend to confine students' reading to purpose-written textbooks, which contain applications of currently espoused theories.
Those  texts are not intended to promote students' engagement and critical thinking but, instead, are intended to initiate students into the culture of the scientific discipline in question.
As Kuhn describes it:
science students accept theories on the authority of teacher and text.
What alternatives have they…?
The applications given in texts are not there as evidence, but because learning them is part of learning the paradigm at the base of current practice.
However, other subjects may not be immune from corresponding limitations.
Courses in the humanities may encourage a personal response from the students, but do they always open up a full range of rival positions?
Courses in the technologies and the professions may encourage action but, again, is it always action based on an awareness of the alternatives, their value positions and their social consequences?
Arguably, the most productive area of research into higher education over the past 20 years is that concerned with student learning.
It has been an international effort, with key work conducted in England, Scotland, Sweden, the USA and Australia.
The conceptual framework it has produced is particularly pertinent to the discussion here.
The research has focused on students' learning strategies, and has developed a typology of them.
Two pairs of concepts have been elaborated in the light of empirical work conducted in actual curricular settings.
Learning strategies are described within a surface-deep axis, depending on whether students simply attempt to cover the ground, routinely assimilating and reproducing what is put before them; or whether they are interested in gaining a deep understanding of the material.
Learning strategies are also characterized along a holistic-atomistic axis, corresponding to attempts by the student to form a view of a programme of study as a whole; or to an approach geared merely to understanding each element as it is encountered.
This research programme is of fundamental importance for higher education.
It has practical significance, because much of the work within the programme has shown how the total curriculum experience — of which teaching methods are a part — affects the strategies which students adopt.
Their learning strategies are not just personal responses, but partly predictable and rational responses to the situation in which they find themselves.
Talk by lecturers of students developing their critical abilities is just cant when students are obliged to adopt atomistic and surface approaches just to assimilate and reproduce the course content, and where they are expected to spend many hours every day in the laboratory or to complete an essay every week, and to sit ten or more 3-hour papers in 2 weeks.
The deep and holistic approaches adopted by students to their learning are very much implied by the conception of higher education developed here, which has stressed the importance of personal understanding and critical insight.
What is regrettable, though, is that the research programme has continued to describe such a wide range of student responses under the same term ‘learning’.
Describing, both passive assimilation and critical reflection as ‘learning’— and therefore all student efforts as ‘learning’— overlooks the wide gulf between the responses students can make.
This has two unfortunate results.
First, the conception of what might pass under the heading of ‘learning’ falls short of the possible process of intellectual development.
The range of student ‘learning’ strategies explored covers only some of the lower and intermediate stages of intellectual growth I have just outlined.
The work of Perry, with his stages of cognitive growth, is acknowledged within the research programme but justice is hardly done to it.
Gaining and breaking through a relativized understanding of knowledge requires a conception of human intellectual independence and an epistemological sophistication which the term ‘student learning’ cannot sensibly be stretched to cover.
Secondly, the use of the single term ‘learning’ fails to suggest the radical change in approach and attitude required of staff in institutions, if students are to be enabled to pass through all the possible stages of intellectual growth.
For what is being implied is nothing short of a paradigm shift wherein students and their intellectual capabilities come to occupy the central ground.
We need to move from the concepts of knowledge, teaching and learning to the idea of students making their own journey ultimately to a position of intellectual independence.
Knowledge, teaching and learning are only justified in so far as they contribute to that much more ambitious end.
Theory, practice and competence
In Chapter 2, we saw that the tension between liberal education, with knowledge considered ‘as its own end’, and a more utilitarian conception of higher education was central to the nineteenth-century debate.
That tension is still with us, but overlaid on it are two others.
The first is that of the relationship between theory and practice, about which much has been heard since the Second World War as higher education has been used more and more as an entry route by professions seeking higher status.
The second is more recent still.
I t is the growing clamour from industry for the graduates it employs to have more work-related skills, and the ensuing tension with the mainstream curriculum.
The demand is not always expressed in consistent terms.
Sometimes, occupation-specific skills are called for; on other occasions, more diffuse skills are sought.
A number of national or quasi-national bodies have entered the arena, each with its own vocabulary.
We have seen that, in the UK, the Training Agency has initiated a major Enterprise in Higher Education scheme.
Other comparable UK initiatives are taking place: the Royal Society of Arts is sponsoring a Higher Education for Capability programme; the National Council for Vocational Qualifications, with its ideas on a competency based curriculum, is beginning to turn to higher education; and the Council for Industry and Higher Education talks of developing the students' personal transferable skills.
These are signs of what may turn out to be a dramatic, if almost unnoticed, revolution in the higher education curriculum.
We are long past the stage where talk about the curriculum could be left to the academics; beyond the stage where the views of the professions and the wider society had to be sought.
Now we have  reached the situation where, in effect, external agencies are having a major and virtually direct impact on the curriculum.
I argued in Chapter 5 that the image of the ivory tower in no way describes the contemporary position of higher education.
These recent developments are testimony to that view.
How can we make sense of these developments in terms of the student experience?
First, it should be clear that the idea of higher education being developed here is not opposed to a curriculum oriented to the worlds of action, of work and of the professions.
From its medieval origins, when it provided an intellectual grounding for those intending to earn their living in the law, the church and medicine, higher education has been ready to acknowledge the wider society which sustains it.
So the development of skills, whether relatively broad or occupationally specific, is not an issue in itself.
The state is now determined to move the curriculum further in that direction, and it may well have to be accepted as a fact of life, of sheer survival.
The question, though, and this is the second point, is the relationship of those utilitarian elements with the curriculum.
The medieval student's studies included rhetoric; and today we see institutions preparing to develop ‘self presentational’ skills in their students.
But the practical components of the curriculum, whether in the medieval university or in courses of professional education as they developed after the Second World War, have been subsidiary elements in a much wider programme of studies;and they have an internal connection with the general programme of theoretical studies.
We might expect students of dance or music to engage in practical activities, but their theoretical studies are, by and large, directly related to those activities.
The danger of the current developments is two-fold: that they are likely to lead to the curriculum becoming dominated by technique; and that the techniques in question are imported from the outside world, and are imposed arbitrarily upon, and unconnected with, the curriculum.
One polytechnic has resolved that all its humanities degree students shall acquire some appreciation of computers and information technology.
This makes perfectly good sense,provided that that understanding is organically linked to their studies.
This may well be possible: there is hardly a field of study in which computers do not have a valuable role to play.
But if it were simply a matter of providing skills to make their students more employable, that would be a much more dubious enterprise.
The UK polytechnics have performed a signal service to higher education by showing how professional education can be developed, with practice being placed firmly in a framework of systematic intellectual exploration.
Now, though, a tendency is developing in which the idea of ‘polytechnic education’ is being reduced from ‘many arts, many skills’to simply ‘many skills’.
‘Practice’ need not be eschewed as part of higher education; but its presence in the curriculum must be justified in terms of the opportunities it affords for the student's critical reflection.
Some of the present developments seem to be running counter to that fundamental principle.
The student as reflective practitioner
Over recent years, in the field of professional education, Donald Schon (1983) in the USA has developed an idea bearing the name of ‘the reflective practitioner’.
The idea has become both powerful and productive, but is in essence simple.
It is that, in their various fields, professionals rarely act through any explicit theory or articulated principles governing professional practice, and much more on the basis of tacit principles and knowledge which are embedded in their professional behaviour.
In Schon's terminology, if you want to find out how professionals act, look not to their ‘espoused theories’ but to their ‘theories-in-use’.
This way of conceiving of professional practice has profound implications for professional education.
It implies that a curriculum which first offers students theoretical components, and then expects them to put the theory ‘into practice’ in the practical situation, is misconceived.
Instead, it suggests that the balance of curriculum elements should be reversed, with the student learning how to practise as a professional, and that the ‘theory’ should be derived by inviting the student to reflect on the practice to tease out the principles embedded in it.
This way of looking at professional education is having a considerable impact on many fields.
For example, both student teachers and student nurses are being expected to spend more time in the professional setting, and are being encouraged to appraise their own actions and to be explicit and articulate about what they are doing and why.
The point of mentioning this development is not to launch on a digression about professional education, important though that is.
Its presence here has a different purpose.
The argument of this chapter amounts to the proposition that every student is or should be a ‘reflective practitioner’.
The student has his or her subject field with its own knowledge corpus, and is, it is to be hoped, sufficiently interested to become immersed in it.
But the promise of the student's higher education is realized when the student is able to raise him or herself out of that state of ‘delight’(to borrow again from Marjorie Reeves) and to reflect on what he or she is doing and thinking.
Only in that moment of self-reflection can any real state of intellectual freedom be attained; and then only to a limited degree.
Only through such a position of critical self-evaluation can the restricted epistemological validity of one's position, and its possible ideological strains, be recognised for what it is.
Only through becoming a continuing ‘reflective practitioner’ can the student and graduate — avoid succumbing naively to conventional ‘wisdom’.
And only in that way will the student gain a measure of personal integrity.
Conclusions
There are welcome signs that teaching and learning are being taken more seriously in improving the quality of higher education.
Staff development, focused on teaching effectiveness, is now undertaken systematically by many  institutions of higher education.
There are signs, too, of an interest in the character of student Learning.
Two qualifications are needed, though.
‘Learning’ has always been, and continues to be, subservient to ‘teaching’, in higher education debate and action.
Sometimes, to show that learning is not forgotten, the two terms are run together in the phrase ‘teaching and learning’, as if they are the same kind of activity with similar aims.
That assumption, as we have seen in this chapter, is illegitimate.
The other qualification is that the manifold capabilities which fall under the umbrella term ‘learning’ are not sufficiently understood.
These are not accidental oversights on the part of the academic community.
For if learning was put ahead of teaching in the discourse of higher education, and if the independence, creativity and personal endeavour which are part of learning were addressed; if both were taken on board seriously, what would be implied would be a major challenge to the power relations in higher education, between those who teach and those who are taught.
The learning that is characteristic of higher education is not all of a piece; some of it is not properly described by the limited concept of learning.
Each student should be embarked on a journey involving succeeding stages of intellectual maturity and independence.
For that to happen, students have to be given some space in which to develop intellectually in their own way.
From time to time, curricula should be reviewed and, if necessary, pruned even of so-called necessary material.
If students are to exercise personal judgements, they have to be given a measure of personal responsibility for their work.
And if they are to develop critical abilities, and to see their work in a wider perspective, that too must be built into the curriculum and not just expected to happen.
Serendipity is no substitute for the exercise of self-denying decisions on the part of those who see themselves as being paid to teach.
12
A Critical Business
Introduction
If there is a single key concept in the idea of higher education, it is ‘criticism’.
That, by itself, is not saying very much.
Almost everyone these days seems to be in favour of developing students' critical abilities, from the students themselves, through the academic community, to the government, employers and professional bodies.
The reason that so many different interest groups, with their contrasting standpoints, can apparently unite in this way is obvious enough.
The notion of ‘critical abilities’ is susceptible to a wide range of interpretations.
As with most things of interest, it depends what we mean by critical abilities.
It could mean students developing a flexibility of mind and attitude that is appropriate to their future careers in the worlds of commerce, industry and the professions.
Given the challenge of competitive international markets, the corporate world, at least in its rhetoric, is keen to recruit bright graduates who as managers will be able to turn a critical eye on established practices.
Many professions, too, are very ready to affirm their weddedness to the value of the critical attitude: there is a growing sense, at least among the senior echelons, that tradition is all very well, but it can act as a brake on necessary change.
A third perception of ‘critical abilities’ comes from the disciplines of the academic world.
There, an awareness exists that the critical attitude is fundamental to the growth of academic knowledge.
A further formulation might come from those who hold to a wider sense of the mission of higher education.
For some, the development of the student's critical abilities is central to liberal education, with its emphasis on developing the student's autonomy.
Finally, there are those of a Marxist persuasion, who look to higher education enabling students to form a critical perspective on society and social affairs, and on that basis to effect radical social change.
So, there are a range of senses which attach to the idea of the student's critical abilities, reflecting different value positions.
However, in this chapter, I do not want to tackle any of those perceptions head on.
Instead, I want to try to develop a further view of what it means to see criticism as a significant feature of higher education.
Despite their manifest differences, all five views that I have just sketched out  are united in that none of them hangs or falls on the notion of critical abilities.
While, for each, the idea of critical abilities is important, it is one feature among others.
For example, in professional education, professional competence is equally important, if not more so.
In the Marxist idea of education, attention is also given to open access, and to combining theory with practice for all students with a view to effecting social change.
And in the liberal idea of education, equal account might be taken of student choice and breadth of study.
Here, the argument I want to make is more than that critical thought is an important feature of higher education.
I want to develop the stronger thesis that criticism is the essence of higher education.
The idea of criticism
One cannot be critical in the abstract: one has to be critical of some thing , And the act of criticism takes place in the context of standards.
So much so, that in the conventional use of the term, ‘being critical’ has come almost exclusively to mean that the object or action in question has fallen short of the standards in question.
This is as much unnecessary as it is undesirable; critical evaluation can lead to positive assessments, just as much as to negative ones.
The assumption that criticism has to lead to a negative evaluation is particularly unfortunate in higher education.
For students all too easily feel that they have to come up with negative assessments if their appraisals are to be worth anything.
They fail to grasp that what is required is their own detailed response to what is before them.
Granted a context of standards, what is the logic of appraising something?
Why, in higher education, do we tend to associate this kind of intellectual activity more with the performing arts, the humanities and the social sciences, and with professional education, than with the pure sciences and the technologies?
There is a logic to this differentiation, for critical evaluation only makes sense where the object in question could be other than it is.
The standards we bring to bear in the act of appraisal have their purchase precisely because the act, or artefact, or creation, or social institution is not fixed, but has a degree of mutability about it.
For that reason, the exercise of critical abilities in the sciences is bound to be more restricted than in the arts and the humanities.
But it is far from being absent.
While it makes little sense to talk of criticism of the physical world, it makes every sense to talk of criticism turned on to the theories and concepts which science has produced to explain the external world, for they could certainly be other than they are.8 Unfortunately, we sometimes give the impression in science and technological education that the current models, terms and theories of science are given and have merely to be assimilated by students.
There are, then, no fields of knowledge or endeavour where critical thought does not have a purchase.
Criticism has application, therefore, in a relatively open situation where things could be otherwise, but there is more to it than that.
Language is a social institution of a kind; and self-evidently it is open to all sorts of change.
It is also  subject to all kinds of criticism; not just listeners to Radio Four, but the employers of graduates speak disapprovingly of the way the English language is spoken.
But the deep grammatical structure of language, as revealed by Chomsky for instance, is not susceptible to criticism in quite the same way.
Why is this?
The answer is that it lacks human agency or human intention.
This suggests that critical evaluation has point where the object in question is attributable to some person or group of persons.
That is why we find it employed in relation to an action, a belief, a theory, a performance, or an artistic creation.
For in all those cases, human agency is clearly at work.
Let us go back to the point about criticism taking place against a background of criteria.
Often, the criteria — even in the academic world — are assumed, and are hardly brought out into the open.
Polanyi, we saw earlier, has drawn attention to the ‘tacit’ knowledge by which even scientists with their supposedly elaborated codes proceed in their work.
Look, too, at the process by which students are assessed: very rarely do examiners in higher education try to identify explicitly the criteria by which they are going to examine.
Evaluation, then, may require prior criteria against which the evaluation can be made; but that does not mean that we can give a full and detailed account of those criteria.
Another way of putting it is that even though the academic community is founded on a culture of critical discourse (see Chapter 7), normally it gives little thought to the criteria by which its critical judgements come into play.
Why is that?
The answer is that the criteria are built into the traditions of the separate disciplinary communities.
And being part of the tradition, they are part of the way of going on in those sub-cultures.
Physicists and historians do not, by and large, spend much time reflecting on their own criteria, the criteria by which their form of thought moves on.
They just get on practising their trade.
It is only in embryonic forms of thought, or professional fields trying to establish themselves (paramedical areas), or subjects where there is a lot of infighting (sociology), where the standards of critical judgement come up for much review.
Two concepts of criticism
This leads us to a fundamental distinction in the character of critical judgements, a distinction between what I shall call internal and external criteria of judgement.
For the most part, criteria of critical reasoning are internal to disciplines or professional fields, and rightly so.
They may vary even within branches or specialisms.
The tests of acceptability of the durability of a physical structure for a civil engineer may not be the same as those for an electronics engineer; the criteria in assessing human activity used by an experimental psychologist will contrast with those employed by a Jungian psychotherapist.
But the key point is that the criteria by which academics approach theories, or artefacts or human actions, are criteria which are part of the discipline itself.
In higher education, we naturally believe that a fundamental aspect of the student's programme of studies consists of getting the student on the inside of just such internal standards of reasoning in the discipline he or she is studying.
But in higher education, we hope that students will not just beaver away, in however committed a fashion, at their chosen discipline or profession.
We also hope that, by the end of their course, students will be able to stand back, to see their core subject in a wider context, to have a sense of its development and how it relates to other subjects, and to have a due sense of its contribution to the world.
For that level of critical reasoning to be reached, criteria of evaluation which are internal to a discipline are inadequate.
Whether the students (or the staff, for that matter) realize it, external criteria have to be taken on board.
There is nothing extraordinary in this: it is a feature of any course which invites students seriously to reflect on whatever is in front of them.
It could involve a civil engineering student considering the social effects of a new construction — in other words, taking on a sociological perspective; it could be a student of English trying to answer the question ‘What is literature and why do we assume that it is a good thing?’— and so embracing the thinking of moral philosophy; it might be a student in the performing arts trying to understand how and why a particular tradition had evolved — so embarking on a historical study; it could be a chemistry student being invited to consider the effects on the natural environment of industrial or agricultural chemicals — so adding a biological approach to the subject; or it might be a social science student keen on human perspectives being encouraged to look at underlying statistical patterns.
There is nothing outré in any of this.
All these examples are part and parcel of what we can encounter in higher education courses.
In one sense, it simply reflects the notion of getting students to read widely in and around their subject.
But the examples all have this feature of getting the student to appreciate that it is possible to approach the objects of interest within their subject — chemicals, human behaviour, literature, technology — from the perspective of an external discipline, and that it can be illuminating to do so.
How far external evaluation of this kind is introduced into a course must be a matter of judgement.
The student has a legitimate interest in pursuing his or her own cognitive or practical interests, and in getting to grips with the internal demands of the core discipline.
It is understandable if the core discipline(s), with their internal forms of evaluation, constitute the majority of the student's course.
But a course which only consisted of getting the student on to the inside of one or more disciplines would not count as a course of higher education; it would merely be a training in those disciplines.
The training, however high-level, is converted into higher education only when the student is able to form an independent evaluation of what he or she has learned or mastered, is able to put it into some kind of perspective, and is able to see not only its strengths but also its limitations.
What is the justification for this claim?
How can the essence of higher education lie in those elements of the student's course which may well form a minority of his or her studies?
The answer has two connected elements.
First, the status of this kind of critical evaluation by the student: it is literally a higher form of cognitive perspective, in which the critical reflection enables the student to form a view of his or her learning.
Secondly, there is a fundamental  connection between critical reasoning of this kind, and the idea that the process of higher education can bring with it a new level of intellectual freedom for the student.
In Chapter 2, I argued that the emancipatory conception of higher education — as I termed it — is to be found historically in the deep structure of the concept of higher education (and I developed the idea in Chapter 8, in discussing emancipation as the highest form of rationality).
What, though, are the connections between criticism and this sense of intellectual freedom embedded in higher education?
At the basic level, of criticism internal to a discipline, the connection is straightforward.
The first requirement in getting students to adopt a serious orientation to knowledge is that they come to care about truth.
Actually arriving at truth is more complicated than staff and students normally recognize (see Chapter 4).
The requirement, though, is for the effort to be made, so that students come to appreciate the standards of truth and evaluation internal to the discipline.
In being able to discriminate truth — or something approximating to it — from falsehood or nonsense, the student enters a state of intellectual freedom in relation to that portion of the world which is the focus of his or her studies.
The idea that the acquisition of truth brings with it freedom from dependency on naive perceptions, falsehoods and ignorance is a key ingredient in the liberal conception of education.
This is retained in the critical approach to knowledge.
But the critical approach to knowledge goes further for, through it, the individual is even freed from uncritical acceptance of the intellectual view of the world.
The graduate, for the rest of his or her life, will not be tied to glib or unsupported statements which might be encountered in the discipline.
The graduate will not even be tied to the current set of accepted truths about the world in the discipline.
He or she will be sensitive to the negotiated status of those truth claims; and will be aware that the truth claims are claims , subject to dispute by the disciplinary community in its continuing conversations.
In the critical approach to knowledge, both the commonsense view and the academic view of the world are seen as views and not as an absolute account of the world.
The critical approach to knowledge brings with it a state of intellectual freedom, in which the individual is freed from unquestioning faith in any view of the world.
I have also pointed to external critique, where we try to get students to form a view of the object of their studies, employing a perspective other than their home discipline.
The connection between this form of critique and freedom is more far-reaching still.
Whereas the basic orientation of internal critique (of theories, propositions, practices, artefacts) is truth, the basic orientation of external critique is freedom itself.
For external critique is intended to show up the limitations of a form of thought as such.
Specifically, it can uncover disciplinary partiality, ideology, hidden interests, professional skullduggery, deception and illusion.
The examples of external critique I gave earlier show how this works in practice, but other more pointed examples can easily be identified.
For instance, Gellner's attack on analytic philosophy from an anthropological perspective; the exposure of eugenics in 1930s psychology; the connections between certain kinds of research in chemistry and the agricultural and food industries; the models of human motivation — often little more than employee manipulation to be found in management studies; Illich's critique of medicine; and the underlying interest in control over the natural environment within the physical sciences.
All these indicate the kind of critique that is possible when we employ a perspective other than that provided by the immediate discipline.
External critique is absolutely educative.
It imparts a fresh way of seeing the familiar.
It can also amount to a fundamental critique of the student's core discipline and, therefore, has to be handled with care, as it can be unsettling.
In practice, this is seldom a worry.
The more immediate concern is that the student's lecturers, who are themselves practitioners of the discipline, are hardly likely to mount a penetrating attack on their own intellectual home.
They are not normally going to bite the hand that feeds them.
The question for an institution of higher education, therefore, is how such an external perspective can be built into the curriculum.
Built in — in some way — it must, if the full emancipatory promise of higher education is to be achieved.
For, through that form of criticism, students can be freed from dependence on their own discipline, being able to see it for what it is, warts and all.
It is through this form of critique that the student will reach the highest level of intellectual independence.
And that, after all, is the ultimate point of higher education.
Critical thinking
Particularly in the USA, but also in the UK, we can see the signs of a movement developing around the belief in the value of critical thinking.
That movement is highly suspect, for two reasons.
First, at its core is the idea that critical thinking is a particular kind of intellectual activity in its own right.
This is correct; but its adherents then go on to assume that critical thinking consists of a set of intellectual skills that can be exercised by themselves.
We have, accordingly, a ‘critical thinking’ industry, with books and exercises intended to improve individuals' critical thinking; and other individuals who profess expertise in the field, and who claim to be able to teach it.
But this is a non-starter.
Any serious kind of criticism, as we have seen, is about something.
There has to be something already in existence — a theory, a practice, an artefact — for criticism to have any purchase.
As Richard Peters once remarked, ‘Critical thought is vacuous without anything concrete to be critical about.’
This leads to the second point.
The belief that critical thinking can be practised meaningfully by itself, far from promoting critical thinking, as its proponents assume, only results in emasculating it.
When turned on the major achievements of humanity, it can help to illuminate them, and can carry our understanding of the world forward.
If kept in a small cul-de-sac by itself, it will be utterly benign.
That much may be granted, that critical thinking has to have something to  work on if its impact is not to be marginalized.
But a further response is sometimes encountered from those who seem to fear its potential power.
This is the view that, because criticism works by being directed on existing knowledge claims, it follows that nothing in general can be said about criticism.
The form that criticism takes has to be specific to its object.
The kind of criticism that is appropriate in the performing arts is quite different from that in technology, which again differs from the nature of criticism in philosophy.
In each field, the criteria are specific to the discipline in question.
There is some truth in this argument, but it should not be pushed too far.
Obviously, the first requirement in developing students' critical abilities is to get them immersed in the disciplines they are studying, and bring them to appreciate and to respect the internal criteria of evaluation — the kinds of evidence, criteria and values that are particular to each discipline.
But the kind of criticism which I termed external critique is much less conditioned by the object under review and its conventional disciplinary home.
Indeed, that is its point, that it draws on other criteria of evaluation.
The key tools of critique
So, external critique is both open and structured.
We encourage students to draw on whatever disciplines will shed new light on the topic before them.
In principle, any discipline can be called on in this way, as an intellectual resource which has the power of showing hidden ways of perceiving the object in question.
There are, though, two disciplines in particular which are especially powerful in generating an external critique of a discipline: philosophy and sociology.
They are the most powerful because they can most effectively expose the discipline for what it is.
Again, this need not be a destructive exercise.
Philosophy can, for example, bring to light a discipline's tests for truth, and the criteria by which truth claims are normally evaluated.
Sociology, especially if coupled with a historical perspective, can help reveal the positive social interests which lie behind the effort invested by society in the discipline and the inclusion of the discipline in courses in institutions of higher education.
In gaining those insights, students may well develop an enhanced appreciation of their home discipline; they will certainly gain an improved understanding of its inner composition.
In suggesting that philosophical and sociological perspectives be added to the curriculum, I am not proposing that discrete packages of philosophy or sociology be introduced.
On no account should that happen, for it would simply bring additional corpuses of closed knowledge into the course of study.
Nor is it being suggested that students become embryonic philosophers or sociologists, adroit in handling the concepts and techniques of those disciplines.
Students can be introduced to epistemological issues without ever using the term ‘epistemology’.
What is required is that students are helped to see beneath the surface appearance of their core discipline; and that the concepts and perspectives  of philosophy and sociology are valuable in bringing about that exposure of the discipline.
Philosophy has value in two ways: first, in helping the student to form an understanding of the character of knowledge claims in the student's discipline; and, secondly, in giving the student a framework in which to pose value questions of the course of studies.
The types of question a philosophical perspective could prompt might include:
1.
What is the dominant mode of knowledge within the discipline?
Is it propositional or non-propositional?
If it is rooted in a view of man interacting with his environment, what is the character of those interactions?
Or is it a more contemplative picture of man?
2.
What are the criteria or values by which the student's home discipline ‘progresses’?
To what extent are they inconsistent?
Are there examples of favoured theories which reflect some criteria, while other-perhaps discarded — theories reflect others?
Are there examples of successful theories which have not done justice to any of the espoused criteria?
3.
To what degree is the knowledge corpus of the discipline ‘objective’?
4.
What are the modes of reasoning of the particular epistemic community?
5.
What are the tacit presuppositions of the discipline?
Do they assist the progress of the discipline, or act as an undue constraint?
The value of the sociological perspective is that it enables students to see why society believes in the discipline in question.
The student can understand that the discipline is not given in any absolute sense, but has been socially formed and reflects interests both of rival factions within the disciplinary culture and of the wider society.
Typical of the questions a sociological perspective might prompt are:
1.
How extensive across the world is the discipline?
What different forms does it take in different societies?
What is its place in the social hierarchy of knowledge?
2.
To what extent is it an open discipline?
How many journals does it have?
What are their editorial policies?
Can individuals with a distinctive point of view get a hearing?
3.
What are the rival viewpoints within the discipline?
Are the competing views purely academic debates, or do they also reflect wider social interests?
4.
What are the fundamental social interests of the discipline?
To what extent is it one of control (whether of the natural environment or of the human environment)?
There are three points to be made about these examples.
First, the questions are at least as important as the answers.
Simply in being posed, and their force understood, the students' education is advanced.
At the same time, students are freed from a blind faith in their home discipline, and their intellectual perspectives are broadened.
(To borrow a metaphor from Chapter 2, they come out of Plato's cave.)
Secondly, these are critical questions in two senses.
On the one hand, the  questions are oriented towards exposing the discipline, bringing into the open its hidden character.
On the other hand, the student comes to realize that the discipline could be other than it is (and, indeed, historically has been wedded to different values and presuppositions).
Finally, introducing inquiries of this kind into the curriculum has to be accomplished by being thoroughly integrated with the student's core studies.
It is not that students will get turned off by being given unconnected dollops of philosophy and sociology, and it is not that bringing in specialists in philosophy and sociology will lead to an incoherent curriculum, although both are true.
It is that such questions can only be properly pursued in the company of the disciplinary studies.
The critical questions have to be turned on to the discipline and relevant examples furnished from within the discipline.
For that reason, too, such investigations should be directed by the mainstream staff themselves.
It will be said that many lack the competence, or the vision, or the self-confidence (for such critical inquiries turned on one's own discipline can be unnerving).
That would be a pity, for here is an area of study in which the staff can share and learn with the students, all working collaboratively together, perhaps on carefully designed mini-projects.
It turns out, then, that we can say something in general about critical thought after all.
Our critical strategies do not have to be bound by the nature of the object of our attentions; they do not have to be discipline-specific.
Our critical strategies can range far wider, and in doing so can take on a general character.
Some critical approaches have application across all disciplines.
It is perfectly proper to raise aesthetic questions in courses in biological sciences or (in courses on occupational therapy) on the aesthetic quality of aids given to patients; or to ask moral questions about work in nuclear physics or (in legal studies) about sentencing policy in the courts; or to find out the historical development of any subject.
Many disciplines can be called up to impart a critical perspective, and questions and strategies can be mounted which have use across a wide variety of courses of study.
My own preference has been made clear.
Where time is short, and choices have to be made, philosophical and sociological perspectives are likely to prove to be the most valuable in developing the critical approach to knowledge.
They can provide the makings of a common framework for a critical understanding of knowledge which any student on any programme of study should have at least some acquaintance with.
The exercise of critical reason
What is going on when we get our students seriously to reflect in this way?
How can we conceptualize this process?
In essence, it is quite simple.
What we have is a critical discourse, constituting the core of the student's studies.
Then we have the student's critical reflections on that discourse.
Those critical reflections take their bearings from a discourse of their own, whether it be epistemology, moral philosophy, sociology, aesthetics, history or whatever.
We have here a critical discourse operating on another critical discourse-in a word, metacriticism.
If  the idea of higher education being argued for in this book can be summed up in one word, that is it.
Exercising critical reason in this way, and at that level, is not a luxury, a mere add-on to the student's programme of studies.
Nor is it a sheer intellectual exercise, a modern form of the Glass Bead Game , as depicted by Hermann Hesse in his novel.
What is at issue here is nothing short of a genuine educational process, in which the student's perception of his or her studies is transformed.
The familiar is suddenly seen in a new way; the student's core discipline is illuminated under a different cognitive perspective.
The student comes to appreciate that the hold on the world offered by the immediate discipline is simply one hold on the world.
There is no absolute way of describing or engaging with the world; only an infinite number of ways of doing so.
But, as we have seen, there is more than the student's gaining a relativize sense of the knowledge encountered on a course.
The critical attitude affects not just one's perception of knowledge out there (Popper's world III), but also one's perception of one's own knowledge (world II).
The critical approach to knowledge leads to a critical perspective on the knowledge acquired, so that the individual comes, as it were, to put brackets round it.
Criticism leads to critical self-reflection, where students are able to stand back and place their knowledge and accomplishments in a larger perspective.
This is the hallmark of a genuine higher education: the ability to conduct a critical dialogue with oneself.
The student acquires knowledge, understanding and a range of competencies in a particular domain.
But the student also comes to the point of being able to look continually over his or her shoulder and ask critical questions of his or her own position.
This internal dialogue will not be confined to technical questions framed within the discipline.
The properly educated student will ask of him or herself: not only ‘is that so?’, but also ‘what is the point of it?’
In principle, there is nothing strange in this.
The ability to keep an eye on oneself-a critical eye, at that — is the taken-for-granted sine qua non of a higher education.
We assume that graduates will do and say things in a considered way and not proffer the first thing that occurs to them.
We expect them to have some degree of self-awareness, and self-regard, in their knowledge claims.
This means, for instance, that they will admit the limit of their understanding, and forbear to offer a view in an area beyond their competence.
We so much take these matters for granted that we forget that these abilities are constitutive of what we mean by ‘higher education’.
So, at one level, all the idea of ‘metacriticism’ does is to remind ourselves of what we ordinarily take higher education to be.
In suggesting that the idea of higher education is hinged on self-criticism, I am not so much developing a personal concept of higher education, therefore, as drawing to the surface our common (though largely hidden) understanding of higher education.
At another Level, I am pointing to the hidden potential in the idea of critical self-reflection.
In Chapter 8, I sketched out three different levels of rationality: groundedness, enlightenment and emancipation.
Critical self-reflection does not have to be confined to self-questioning over the grounds of one's beliefs and actions.
We can take our students beyond that stage of technical feedback and  on to the levels of self-enlightenment and self-emancipation, through encouraging ever-wider and higher levels of self-criticism.
And, as we have seen, for that to happen, the student has to transcend the confines of his or her own discipline, to take a dispassionate view of it from the outside.
I have been examining the exercise of critical thought, but the account up to now has largely concentrated on critical thinking by the individual student.
I here is good reason for this, because the internal dialogue is by definition a dialogue within the individual; and that, I am arguing, is the essence of higher education.
But the internal dialogue is greatly aided by dialogue with others.
This means that the student's learning has to be an interactive affair, the student working together with other students.
Criticism from one's lecturer is one thing; criticism from the student's peers is quite another.
However open it might be, the social relationship in the teaching situation is bound to produce a natural deference in the student.
The real question is, how does the student respond to critical evaluations of his or her work from other students?
It is entirely right, therefore, that we are beginning to see the signs of peer assessment being employed as part of the formal assessment procedure in some institutions of higher education.
In concluding this section, let me tackle a potential criticism.
The argument just offered may gain agreement in principle, but it could be said that in practice it is unworkable.
For what is being implied is that graduates should be able to internalize the whole universe of knowledge, because in theory all knowledge is interconnected and critique can draw upon any domain of knowledge in the act of placing or evaluating a discipline.
Nothing short of the resurrection of Renaissance man seems to be on the cards, in command of all knowledge.
This criticism is misplaced.
What is being called for is that graduates should have gained the beginnings of the ability to stand back from their studies and to take a view of it.
This will require some widening of their studies, and that needs to be handled with care in ways connecting with their interests.
In a 3- or 4-year programme of studies, and with the broadening elements occupying a minority of time and probably concentrated towards the latter half, graduates will have only just begun on this voyage of critical reflection.
But they will be on the way.
Criticism and society
Within liberal thought, institutions of higher education have long been held to offer an independent source of critical commentary on society.
In a democratic society, the academic community is the location of a dissenting voice.
The 1960s saw a disenchantment with this view, academia being seen instead to be an accomplice in the mainstream projects (industrial, military, political) of society.
For a brief moment, the liberal belief in unconstrained thought was hijacked by the radicals and converted into the idea that higher education should become the base for mounting social action .
That frenzied period has passed and, if anything, the pendulum has swung in the other direction.
By and large, the academic community seems content simply to accommodate to the instrumental  needs of post-industrial society.
It is time that the idea of higher education as a critical commentator on society was restored because, without it, higher education is itself impoverished.
This claim has to be justified in a way which maintains the internal integrity of the process of educating students.
Students have their courses to follow, courses which are often set in disciplinary frameworks that have little or nothing, on the surface, to do with society.
Can any kind of social critique be inserted into those courses without being superficial, jejune and irrelevant to the students' interests?
The answer has already been implied.
Forms of knowledge, even the most pure and theoretical, do not exist in a vacuum.
They have emerged in, and been sustained by, society, and are on offer in institutions because they reflect certain kinds of social interest.
Their objects or products are useful to society.
Astrology and witchcraft, as we noted earlier, are not available.
If students really want to understand a form of thought or a professional domain, they ought not to graduate without some inkling of those wider connections.
The social dimensions of knowledge can come through in various ways.
It might be that there are technological, industrial or military products or processes associated with a discipline.
Social affairs may also be the actual object of the inquiry — as in the social sciences or humanities.
Or social activities and institutions may be an important adjunct of study — as with many professional courses.
Or there may be ideological elements worth teasing out, either in the object of study (in the social activity or institution brought into purview) or in the corpus of knowledge itself.
For example, it would be wrong to allow a chemist to graduate without an understanding of the uses and misuses of chemicals in the modern world, both on the natural environment and on the human body (anabolic steroids used by athletes, for instance ).
Or for a civil engineering student not to appreciate the environmental implications of large-scale works such as the channel tunnel.
Or, following Chernobyl, for physics students not to develop a sensitivity to the biological and environmental dimensions of their studies.
Or for a student studying literature not to grasp a wide range of ‘readings’ of the works of Jane Austen, for instance(including Marxist, feminist and post-structuralist readings).
Nor can it be assumed that professional courses always tackle the social aspects: How much do accountants or pharmacists consider the professional client relationship?
Why is this social dimension important?
There are two reasons.
First, it is important to the student's intellectual well-being.
The idea of higher education as ‘liberal’ turns into a fiction so long as courses are determined solely by the introverted stance of the student's core discipline.
For the student will be in no position to understand the way in which the knowledge corpus impacts on the world.
And, in that case, the student will be unfree, unable to form a coherent critical assessment of the social uses of his or her own knowledge in the wider society.
Graduates, after all, pass into society and take up significant posts of managerial or professional responsibility.
The question is whether they are going to fall in line uncritically with the dominant interests of the sectors in  which they work, or whether they are going to act constructively with a larger view — a view with a grasp of the general public interest.
Secondly, and even more importantly, knowledge's in modern society are becoming increasingly separated from each other, with experts unable to communicate with each other .
Under those conditions, the ability of society to understand itself and democratically to direct its own future is being diminished.
It is vital, therefore, that graduates are able to connect their cognitive and professional interests with those of other networks and to begin to develop genuine communicative structures in society.
‘The knowledge society’ requires new forms of dialogue between professionals and citizens, if society is to comprehend and effectively confront the problems facing it.
So the idea of higher education as a fulcrum for critiquing society can be resurrected —must be resurrected — and still allow us to do justice to the internal integrity of students' programmes of study.
By subjecting the curriculum contents of higher education to criticism, we subject much of society's cognitive structure (and thereby much of modern society itself) to criticism.
This is no self-indulgent intellectual luxury: it is a condition of the maintenance of an open society in the modern age.
