Women and Tears
Surely, surely, they should both…be embracing each other and comforting each other and weeping.
But human beings are endlessly ingenious about promoting their own misery.
Even in catastrophe mysterious barriers can isolate them, barriers of fear and suspicion and sheer stupid moral incompetence.
Iris Murdoch
Even the most loving woman is sometimes angry and feels passionately that there are things she lacks which she is entitled to have.
Many have been taught that in a relationship they have no right to make demands on a partner; to say clearly what they want may lose his affection.
It can be even more complicated.
A woman may feel that if she expressed herself honestly, she would not only lose her partner's affection but her self-respect by being selfish and unfeminine.
So often her only resource is tears, and those tears will more likely arouse panic rather than understanding from the man with whom she is trying to communicate.
For her the tears are a language, for him they are a threat.
Woman after woman has told me how their partners couldn't bear them to cry.
‘If I cry, he just walks out’, said one.
‘If I cry, he gets so angry that I can't bear it’, said another, ‘and I go away and find somewhere by myself where I can go on crying’.
‘But it's a terrible feeling’, said another, ‘not to be able to cry with the most important person in your life.
The tears aren't the same somehow if you've got to cry alone.
They don't heal you in the same way if you can't share them’.
These women saw their tears as an important source of release from tension, yet they had been unable to persuade husbands or partners to be comfortable when they were crying, just to be there and let them cry.
‘He always wants to do something to stop me crying’, was a frequent comment.
‘If I'm crying because someone's been nasty to me, he'll want to rush away and knock their block off’, said one woman, ‘for anything else he'll just sit there and look  miserable and uncomfortable until I feel I'm supposed to comfort him’.
It became clear talking with women that many men find it difficult to offer comfort.
They seem unskilled in the simple acts that console women when they are distressed — like being held gently for as long as they need to be held, making murmuring noises rather than using words (or even worse, forming sentences), wiping tears away and blowing noses…in other words giving the same comfort which you would give to a child.
The experience, from what women say, is most helpful when it is non-verbal.
Sounds are all right but words, particularly logical words, tend to activate those parts of the brain that include judgemental and evaluative awareness of the self.
For some of the initial stages of crying, the length of time needed simply to weep, varies from person to person, it seems that the important thing is an unhurried, quiet, non-judgemental and shared experience.
Most women offer this to each other when they cry together.
To watch women comfort each other can be a deeply moving experience which rolls back centuries of shared experience of the burden of living.
Such precise understanding of their needs, expressed by many women, may be related to earlier good experiences of being comforted by their own mothers.
But presumably men were comforted in the same way, so why are they, unlike women, unable to pass it on?
For some men, the tears of women with whom they are closely involved may arouse anxiety, provoking memories of their mother crying.
This may reactivate feelings of helplessness and fear because the person to whom they look for comfort is herself vulnerable.
Some unhappy women, whose husbands are unable to offer them emotional support, quite inappropriately turn to their sons.
The conflict aroused in these male children can induce an emotional paralysis in later life.
But equally, the buried incestuous temptation invoked by the seductive mother may result in the same man being profoundly moved and sexually attracted to distressed women for whom he has no emotional responsibility.
Few things are more infuriating for a woman who is denied comfort for her own tears than to see her partner being sympathetically and sensually attracted to a strange woman who is grieving.
This is often what lies behind the suspicion which is aroused by widows, divorcees, and unhappily married women whom men who already have partners are so keen  to help.
What the widow, divorcee or sorrowing woman fails to realize is that if the grieving were to stop the interest might diminish, or if intimacy were to develop to the point of involving responsibility, comfort would be withdrawn.
It may be that the defences against their own feelings which they learned makes it impossible for men to tolerate the intense show of feeling from their women partners which is implicit in weeping.
If you are not allowed that kind of release for yourself, it may be intolerable for you to see someone else using it.
There is an additional double bind for men in that they are very often the cause of the woman's tears; it may well be their behaviour that has caused the distress.
How do you comfort the person to whom you have done an injury, particularly if you reject the idea that your behaviour carried any cause for reproach?
Men are taught from their earliest days to value autonomy, the right to do what they want to do, when they want to do it.
Women, because of the nurturing and caring roles allocated to them, the responsibility they are given for the well-being and happiness of children and of men, are much more likely to be taught the value of submitting to one's fate and considering the needs of others before their own.
I have stated those two positions very crudely: in fact both are extremely complex and each represents a sophisticated view of the world.
They can be described in many other ways, as yang and yin, as materialism and spirituality, as individualism and cooperation.
They can be blended, but too often in our secular society, they are poorly-understood styles of behaviour acted out between men and women in conflicting ways.
Tears from the woman, which with more understanding could create a bridge between the two positions, more often intensify the barriers.
There are, of course, many men who have the capacity to offer comfort and who are at ease with their partner's tears.
We know little about them, presumably because their partners do not complain.
It is fair to speculate a little about what kind of men these may be.
They are probably at ease not only with women's tears but with a range of private feelings and needs for dependency and intimacy.
They have enough inner strength not to feel threatened by the demand for child-like dependency implicit in tears; they will recognize it for what it is, a temporary rather than a permanent threat to their autonomy.
They will not automatically feel manipulated.
Most importantly, the event will be experienced by them as a  reality which is happening in the here and now and not as a replay of frightening and damaging early experiences.
They will ‘see’ the woman who is crying as herself and not as some emotional ghost from the past.
They will probably be able to respect their own tears and if they have children they will be able to respect their tears.
One young woman who talks lovingly about her tears, told me how her father used to say, ‘It's Fred inside you watering the iris in his window boxes’.
Many women described the particular pain of not being able to share their tears.
They spoke of the loneliness and sense of abandonment, and the way in which this interfered with the use of tears as a healing experience.
Crying alone, when their partner was actually in the same house but chose not to be with them, was an exhausting and draining experience.
They emerged dry-eyed but also with a dry heart.
After a succession of these experiences their capacity to cry at all may even dry up, along with the relationship between themselves and their partner.
The comparison with the experience of children left to cry alone without being comforted is obvious.
For women who share a home, finding some place to cry is not always easy, particularly if there are children whom you are protecting from your distress.
The bedroom can be a retreat but it can also be a bitter reminder of the comfort you would like to be getting from your partner.
Lying weeping alone on a double bed can impregnate the room with associations which will leave doubts about the validity of the tenderness which is offered along with sexual encounters.
Weeping in the lavatory or bathroom is hazardous because of the chance of interruptions and many women find the setting vaguely demeaning.
‘If I want to cry, I hide in the toilet and feel desperate’, was a common reaction if I asked someone where she cried.
It can also revive memories of childhood tantrums and distress, locking oneself in the lavatory or bathroom and shutting out the adults who came battering at the door.
Children who do this are making a statement about not needing comfort from adults, while at another level needing them desperately and choosing a place where they know they will be forced out.
Some women feel themselves driven out of the house, unable to tolerate sharing space with a partner so palpably ill-at-ease with her tears.
One told me how on a cold winter's day of driving rain, her only refuge was the car parked outside the house.
She was too shaken with sobs to risk driving so she sat there for two hours  weeping her heart out while neighbours and passers-by studiously ignored her obvious distress.
Women with more mechanical confidence will drive off, going sometimes for miles with tears pouring down their face, until they find a quiet lay-by to work through the final stages of their process.
Others with no cars walk through the streets or find a near-by park.
The more fortunate may have a close friend who can offer the comfort unavailable at home.
Some may even go back to mother for comfort, but that can be a double-edged solution.
The complex relationship between mothers and daughters may arouse feelings of dependency and failure which further confuse the issue that sparked off the tears.
One of the hardest things for women to bear is the way men reject tears as silly and irrelevant, when they know them to be important and valuable.
The most powerful function served is the release of tension.
The tension comes from many sources: anger, fear, shame, helplessness, sorrow, repentance.
Why do I cry?
I cry to release huge waves of feelings which can build up, especially when I cannot or dare not put feelings into words.
The dare-not feelings are usually anger.
I fear it will go out of control so I release it in tears either by myself or with someone I love and trust.
If I'm angry with someone I love and trust, I can express my anger in tears with them; if I am angry with someone I do not love, then I withhold my tears — to be expressed later, in a safe situation, or not at all.
If I hold back the tears, the feeling becomes locked or blocked in my body.
A musician adds to the story.
Anger tears are my Beethoven tears, wild and crashing.
Other tears flow more from the solar plexus — my tear fountain — they are my Strauss tears, or more recently Berlioz's Nuits d' Ete , certain pieces by Chopin, Elgar Cello concerto, Brahms violin concerto, the slow movement in Schubert's string quartet, some of Bach's choral music…the list goes on.
These pieces speak to me of boundless beauty and passion and I rejoice in my tears but I use them too, intuitively, when I feel depressed or despairing, to release tears.
Music, tears, song, breath are so closely linked for me — like a great life giving force.
I can't stress too much the value I give my tears…they are  priceless, beyond words, they are the most private part of myself that I can share with those who draw close to me.
They give me life and hope, they renew me.
These are women holding on to the value of their tears, but there are many others who have been made to feel ashamed.
It is such a secret place ,the land of tears .
Antoine de Saint Exupery
The most frequent messages given to women are that tears are a sign of weakness, or instruments of manipulation.
One young woman who uses tears very creatively in her life and also in her work as an actress asserted very positively:
I don't think that crying is a sign of weakness as it's so often made out to be.
I feel very strong when I cry.
It's a sweet strength like my body's poetry.
It's at the edge of things.
Tears are clearly woven through her life in a natural way.
Sometimes I go without crying for some while and then I go through phases of crying rather a lot.
Of course tiredness affects it as do my periods and the time of the day even.
Sometimes my tears are so hot they feel as if they've been baking inside me, sometimes they feel bigger and wetter, sometimes rather lighter and not so salty.
Sometimes I have to make a lot of noise with them and move my body with them like passion — and sometimes they just slide out very gently and don't affect me so much, like a cooling system.
In this extraordinarily intuitive and perceptive account of her relationship with her tears this young woman has confirmed many of the research findings of scientists interested in the physiology of tears.
She sees her tears as meeting a variety of her needs.
She recognizes how they interact with her body chemistry, tiredness or her period.
Even the time of day is relevant.
Different kinds of need alter the quality and the quantity of the flow.
She uses her tears as a natural antidote to tension and stress, which is one of their most important functions.
Women who get relief and even enjoyment from crying can  share this knowledge, given even modest encouragement.
One day, in a Glasgow clothes shop, the assistant, an attractive and helpful young woman, asked what kind of work I did.
I explained that I was trying to understand the part tears play in our lives.
Her face lit up.
‘Oh, I love my tears’, she said.
‘I cry all the time, when I'm happy, when I'm sad, when I'm making love.
It's terribly important to me’.
She told of the one time when the weeping stopped.
When she was about twenty, she worked in an office, one of two women among about thirty men.
Late one afternoon, after a particularly demanding day, she sat down at her desk and burst into tears.
The other woman, whom she described as a man-hater, made her get up and come to the lavatories and once inside shouted vehemently, ‘Don't you ever do that again, if those men see you crying they'll walk all over you’.
The shock was such that she stopped crying immediately, but what was worse, she stopped crying at home as well and felt simply awful, physically and mentally, until able to cry again.
I asked her if her husband minded her tears.
‘He's used to it now’, she said.
‘At first he was frightened.
Especially when I wept after we'd made love.
He'd ask if he'd hurt me, but now he's used to me’, and she laughed with pleasure.
COUPLES
When a woman weeps she weaves snares.
Cato
Women recognize that some of their tears are tears of weakness, and these are the tears which come as an alternative to rage and anger or as a way of coping with their feelings of powerlessness.
Most women find it very difficult to express anger openly and honestly, particularly to men.
They also find it hard to cope with men who are angry with them.
Women learn at an early age that most men do not like angry women living in the same house.
In abstract they may admire and be excited by them, but their day-to-day preference is for women who want to please them and don't make too much of a fuss.
Modern men also stipulate that they mustn't be boring, without seeing any contradiction in that thought.
Girl children learn these messages in subtle ways.
The most obvious is by watching father's reaction to mother's behaviour and the comments of both about other women and other marriages.
But the most powerful is the father's reaction to his daughter's femininity and the part she has to play as ‘Daddy's little girl’.
The more charming, cuddly, loving and even manipulative she is, the more rewarded.
‘She can twist me round her little finger’, is said with glowing pride.
Very few fathers would actually prefer to have a strong-minded, independent daughter who put her own needs before his and was able to criticize his behaviour openly.
Since father's approval is such an important factor in the life of most women they will develop skills to avoid losing that approval.
If the show of anger is unacceptable it is repressed.
But feeling does not evaporate: if it cannot be shown in one form it finds an outlet in another.
This is where that marvellous rag-bag of feeling we relieve through our tears comes to our aid.
Tears can be another face of anger, a form of relief for the intolerable tension and frustration of not being able to show what we are thinking and feeling.
The women who talked to me about using their tears to deal with anger, recognized quite clearly what they were doing.
Most either thought it didn't matter as long as they got relief for their tension and frustration and saw it as a way of keeping the peace, but some were trying through women's groups or assertion therapy to express themselves more honestly.
They had become aware of their fear of sharing feelings with their partners and saw this as an unhealthy way to live.
They were mostly younger women.
But there was a very small group who acknowledged that their unspoken anger was so powerful, they used their tears as a revenge, knowing that their husbands hated tears and knowing that weeping they could discomfort them.
Their marriages had fallen on stony ground but it seemed to me there was still hope.
As long as the tears are coming, energy can be redirected.
The balance of power
For tears have run the colours from my life .
Wordsworth
The powerlessness of women is seldom understood except by  those experiencing it.
‘Robert didn't say I must go back to work after the baby’, Lucy told me, ‘but he began to be reluctant about switching on electric fires and looking disapproving if I did’.
He took over total control of the finances and the cheque book.
I had to account for every penny I spent, but he never told me what he was spending.
He started leaving a ten pound note on the table every morning when he went out to work.
Some mornings he would rush away and forget to leave anything.
If I noticed in time I would have to run after him and ask for it.
I would come back into the house feeling so humiliated that I would just sit down and cry and then the baby would start crying so I had to stop.
For the first time in our marriage I began to tell him lies.
I had a little money saved and I began to use it up.
When I bought something I'd say it was less than it really was.
I wouldn't tell him if I went for lunch with my mother or a girl friend and I paid.
I couldn't bear that they should always pay for me because I didn't want them to know how awful Robert had become.
Then my money ran out and I stopped going out at all.
I got more and more depressed.
Sex was awful.
If I didn't want it he would say that he was keeping me and the least I could do was give him sex.
So after that I just lay there and let him do what he wanted and he would complain about that too.
He would go to sleep and I would lie there with tears running down my face thinking how good it had been before the baby came.
If I tried to talk to him, I used to start crying and he would say, ‘Oh God!’ and tell me I was useless.
With the help of a friend Lucy stopped crying and started being angry.
She found a childminder and went back to work.
She doesn't cry in front of Robert any more, she still tells him lies about what things cost so that she can save some money and make sure she'll never be dependent on him again.
She has also decided not to have a second baby.
Lying in bed, after sex, silently weeping when your partner has gone off to sleep, is an experience many women are familiar with.
The sexual life of the young exhausted mother of a fractious baby takes on a dream-like quality.
‘I'm too tired even to object’, said one drained looking young woman.
‘He just keeps telling me that he loves me and needs me.
All I can think of is not wakening the baby, so I say OK and he goes ahead.
One night I was so tired that I fell asleep when he was still pushing in and out of me.
I wakened up when he started shouting at me.
Then he turned away and went to sleep and I lay there and wept, feeling an absolute failure’.
For women trying to survive in the game of life there are few ways of improving the balance of power within the family (or within the workplace).
The main one is to put pressure on relationships to create anxiety or guilt or the urge to care for and protect the ‘weaker’ partner.
She may need money to buy food for the family, or she may be trying to stop him leaving her and the children.
There is a long list in between.
A woman can present herself in various roles: as a ‘mother figure’, or as a child appealing to her husband's paternal instinct.
The mother image can be either the strict mother who has to be obeyed, or else the loving mother who has been hurt and can now be comforted.
The strict mother can be very effective in getting what she needs if the man's early experience helps him to relate to that kind of woman.
Her style is to bully, not to weep.
But behind the bullying often lie tears.
Behind the loving mother who appeals through tears will lie anger.
Depending on her partner's previous life experience, anxiety or guilt or caring can be aroused.
A few preliminary skirmishes in the early stages of the relationship will make it clear how the man is going to react to tears.
If, as sometimes happens, anger is aroused, the woman's claim is lost and she should save her tears.
Richmal Crompton offered one possibility in the William stories.
Violet Elizabeth dried her tears.
She saw that they were useless and she did not believe in wasting her effects.
‘All right’, she said calmly, ‘I'll thcream then.
I'll thcream, and thcream, an thcream ‘till I'm thick’.
For those unable to be so direct, the bed can become, for the angry woman, an arena of struggle, perhaps the only one in which she has the advantage.
She can if she chooses convert the pain, the humiliations, the tears of every other situation in which she is disadvantaged, into revenge, contempt and victory.
Unless the husband is a violent man, the wife can dictate how often sex will take place.
The cynicism which grows out of not having her tender feelings acknowledged and valued replaces the openness and  tenderness with which she first entered into the partnership.
Twice a month's about right for me.
That satisfies my sexual need which is actually stronger than some of my friends, and it's often enough to take the edge off him.
What I don't want is to do it so seldom that he gets angry; because he does if he has to wait too long.
Also I don't want him to try to have it off with someone else.
I've cried enough trying to get him to understand that there's a difference between a good fuck and a good shit.
Most partnerships involve tentative negotiations until they find ways of communicating that suit each of their needs.
Mostly these are the best that can be managed in what is basically an inequitable relationship.
Tears become a signal to the male partner that the issue under discussion is one that should be taken seriously, and if he is sensitive to his partner's needs he will respond swiftly and allow the woman to weep in ways that affirm her dignity.
One husband described to me how he has learned to interpret the various kinds of tears his wife sheds.
When she's crying with pain for something like a migraine headache, I just sit in the dark with her and hold her hand.
If she's crying for some other reason like because we've been quarrelling and she wants to make up but doesn't know how to I just put my arms round her and cuddle her and let her cry it out.
Until she's done that I know I won't get any sense out of her.
I try to work out if she's got a period due or if she's been having trouble with her mother.
If we've been quarrelling, after she's stopped crying I really try to understand what she was on about.
It must mean a lot to her if it made her cry.
That's a very different response from the man whose anxiety or guilt are aroused by his partner's tears and shouts, walks away or who gives in to a woman's demand without trying to understand what's ‘going on’.
Handling it in this way is likely to leave him with a sense of confusion and resentment.
She in turn may hope that in time she will get the caring response she is really seeking and will pursue the pattern.
This tragic game can go on for the rest of their lives or one of them can decide enough is enough and withdraw.
Conscious manipulation of tears is very rare, although most women acknowledged how powerful tears can be and could  remember the odd occasion on which they had been used as a weapon when all else failed.
Manipulative tears were seldom used with someone close.
It was more likely to be someone for whom they had no personal feeling.
One young woman claimed to have wept her way into a degree but once started on work and a career, never used such tricks again.
What she said she did with her tutors at crisis times was not deliberately engineer tears, which is quite a difficult thing to do, but not hold them back.
Women who told me that their partners accused them of using tears to manipulate them agreed that there were times when they deliberately wept, but said that it was often the only way they could get their partner's attention.
Even then they didn't actively manufacture the tears.
They were always lying just below the surface of their life.
Often the choice was to weep or else to hit their partner over the head with an axe or say really horrible things to them.
In fact many women said it was kinder to cry than to be angry because, they claimed, if they said what they were really thinking their husbands would be so incredulous and so humiliated that the marriage would not survive.
One woman had looked up the meaning of manipulate in the Oxford English Dictionary .
It meant, she discovered ‘To handle, especially with dexterity’.
Only in the nineteenth century did it begin to include the unfair management of people or things.
‘Well’, she said, ‘I have had to manage my husband.
If I hadn't we'd never have survived and we certainly wouldn't have the standard of living we have now.
I should be congratulated not criticized, and if sometimes I've been a bit unfair, played a bit of a game, that's life isn't it.
If he'd been stronger I wouldn't have needed to because then he'd have looked after me’.
Time and time again discussions about tears came back to the central theme of the wish to be cared for-not all the time, the women with whom I talked were quite clear about that.
But what they all wanted was to be cared for some of the time and often their tears were statements about that need.
The need did not seem to me, in most cases, to be neurotic in the sense of being unhealthy.
It was rather a simple and healthy statement of a basic right in a partnership to be nourished by one's partner.
Women at work have a triple difficulty to cope with.
They have fewer opportunities than men to be nourished by their work, since they are more often involved in dull and repetitive jobs; secondly, the domestic and nurturing skills in which they have usually been  trained are held in lower esteem both in the home and in the workplace than administrative or management skills, so what they do is less likely to receive praise; lastly, they are conditioned to value praise from men more highly than praise from women, who are more often their colleagues or first-level bosses.
In an organization, they may rarely come to the attention of a predominantly male management in ways that give them power and encouragement.
These facts make them more reliant than they should be on the good opinion of their partners.
They want to be praised for skills which their partners may see as trivial, like cooking, creating a welcoming and attractive home and the care of children.
If what they do day in and day out is ignored or not valued, they feel not valued.
Depression, which is expressed in tears, can follow or else a sense of outrage at not being taken seriously, which can explode in the form of tears of rage.
A partner may not detect the difference and the woman herself may be confused.
Feminists argue that women should not be so dependent on the opinion of men.
A woman's sense of validity should lie in her feelings about herself.
While this may be true, we should remember the fragility and plasticity of the human psyche.
Even if someone becomes self-confident and inner-directed, that has to be constantly reinforced in the wider society if those attitudes are to be maintained.
A year at home with a small child and no recognition by a partner of the importance and difficulty of that role can reduce the most competent career woman to an anxious or depressed wreck.
It's not only a problem between women and men, though that is where it is most frequently seen.
Exactly the same problems can emerge in gay and lesbian partnerships where there is inequality of power and opportunity.
It is true that women in the main tend to be more lovingly affirming of each other, and use less competitive and down-putting styles of relating than men, but the problem is not only personal: it is embedded in all our social structures.
The new and more powerful roles offered to women in the world of work may diminish their powerlessness before men and change the way working couples relate.
But this change is needed also with couples where the woman caring for children is placed in a dependent role.
Women have to claim their right to be angry, but men have to claim their right to weep and show fear if the balance is to change.
What we need is for all of us, men, women and  children, to be open to and comfortable with all these feelings.
There are times when the way a woman uses her tears in a relationship is a barrier to her growth.
She may not have had any opportunity to understand their capacity to nourish her emotional life.
One woman had used tears and tantrums to get her own way in every conflict with her husband.
This was how she had coped with a desperate childhood of loss.
These were the only weapons she had had against an apparently uncaring world, and through using them she retained a precarious sense of identity and integrity.
When she married she continued to use these techniques although they were no longer relevant in a relationship which required different skills, but for her, this was a foreign country.
The marriage ended when her husband gave up the struggle to find better ways of communicating with her.
She continued her angry and frustrated weeping, but was forced to question herself when her son also withdrew and gave his support to his father.
At this point she showed enormous courage by re-assessing her life, and has now struggled through to what she describes as a liberating philosophy of autonomy and self-determination.
She no longer reacts blindly to every conflict.
She is modest, feeling she has taken only the first steps.
For her at this stage, not crying is a great achievement but she hopes that some day she will reach a better balance so that her tears will be for herself rather than to make an impression on others.
LOVE, LOSS AND TEARS
‘(Wo) man is not destroyed by suffering.
(S) he is destroyed by suffering without meaning’ What Camus might have said.
For most women, the most powerful source of their tears lies in their relationship with men, and particularly their experiences of being abandoned.
To lose love through death is hard but understandable; to lose love and not understand why is intolerable.
For many this situation induces a kind of frenzy.
They may weep until they can weep no more, they may rage, they may scream, they may become ill.
What they want more than anything else is to understand why this has happened to them.
And some of them will go to  extraordinary lengths to try to find out.
If a woman's relationship with a man breaks down, and he abandons her, she will usually blame herself, having been taught that success in personal relationships is her responsibility.
If she has lost her partner to another woman, it will be assumed that she must be more beautiful, more clever, more sexy: in fact she wants her to be.
That would make sense.
A stunning young woman whose husband left her for a woman twenty years older than himself, never forgave him for it.
He had questioned a fundamental tenet of her life, that young women are more attractive than older women.
Her self-confidence never recovered, since if her belief was right there must have been something else wrong with her, some terrible ugliness from which he had fled even into the arms of an older woman.
Where the other woman is not known fantasy can run riot.
The other becomes a witch, an evil enchantress, with amazing powers to seduce the innocent.
Efforts are made to find out more about her, sometimes with extraordinary ingenuity.
The energy put into this can be manic in quality, a white heat of power that other women will understand but most men find frightening.
Ann's lover simply stopped coming to see her, giving her no explanation.
The relationship on his side had clearly been casual, never serious or even regular, but she became very emotionally involved and hoped it would develop.
She tried phoning him with a variety of invitations she felt he wouldn't refuse, but he always made excuses for not meeting her.
Knowing something of his work and leisure patterns, she tried meeting him ‘accidentally’ coming out of his office or at his local pub, all to no avail.
She became convinced that he had found another woman and concentrated on trying to find out who she was.
She sent him theatre tickets for two anonymously and bought herself one for a few seats further back.
Two strangers used the seats.
She took to following him in her car, being willing to sit for hours outside his house waiting for him to come out and then trailing and following him until he came home again.
All her energy was focussed on his life and what he was doing.
Her own life and work faded into insignificance.
One night, waiting in her car outside a pub to which she had followed him, she suddenly found herself crying for the first time.
She says she wept nonstop for an hour during which she gradually began to realize that she had been out of her mind for the last six weeks.
As  she wept she allowed the pain of the loss of her man to become real.
She went home and the next morning began rebuilding her life.
Jane had been sharing her life and home with a partner, John, for four years.
His firm sent him for a month to another part of the country, and at first he telephoned home every night; but three weeks later she got a letter saying that he had met another woman and was planning to marry her as soon as possible.
She can't remember how she spent that day but has a vague memory of being like a wild animal howling through the house, tears pouring down her face, drinking brandy, tearing at her clothes, pulling his clothes out of the wardrobe and holding them close to her, burying her face in them, trying to recover the smell of him.
The prophet Micah's image of desolation is very similar: ‘Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked: I will make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owls’.
Terrified to telephone and hear him say the words he had written on paper, she collapsed ultimately into a drunken stupor — a woman who had never previously drunk more than a half bottle of wine.
For several days she stayed off work and continued to weep helplessly until exhausted.
Her head gradually began to clear.
She resolved to find out about the other woman.
She had almost lost interest in the man but felt obsessed with the woman who had made such an impression in such a short time.
Her partner's passionate hobby was shooting, and she knew from their telephone calls that he had been spending his spare time at a sports club which had a range.
Her brain was more active than ever before.
She hunted down the telephone number through directory enquiries and then rang.
She asked for the secretary and launched on a long story about phoning from a restaurant where a pair of leather gloves had been found apparently left by the lady with Mr Johnston whom one of the waiters had remembered seeing at the sports club.
Would the secretary know if Mr Johnston had a wife who might have been with him?
The secretary laughed and said he thought he could guess who that was.
No it wasn't Mr Johnston's wife, he didn't have one.
His guess was that they belonged to another of their members.
Should he pass a message on?
‘No’, said Jane, ‘but if you could give me her telephone number I'll ring and arrange to have them delivered’.
‘No trouble’, was the response, and the number was found.
Jane could hardly believe it had been so easy.
The next step was to  ‘phone.
When a woman's voice answered she had to hang up, her anger was so powerful.
She sat down to recover, but it was an hour before she could dial again.
This time she was prepared and she launched quickly into a story that she was a freelance journalist doing an article for the women's page of a national newspaper about women who joined sports clubs.
Could she do a telephone interview?
It worked and for the next half hour she was able to quiz the woman whom she saw as having stolen her happiness on every aspect of her life.
What distressed her most was that she began to find herself liking the woman, with whom she realized she had much in common.
She continued to weep and suffer for many months but the tears were no longer helpless but purposeful.
Her initial insane reaction to the loss had eased when she confronted the reality of the other woman and the new tears played an essential part in her healing.
These women and many others behaved in ways that were completely out of character.
They sent anonymous letters, daydreamed about how to damage or poison the other person or find some way of ruining their lives.
What is extraordinary is how seldom the anger is unleashed on the partner, the one responsible for the loss.
Sometimes women turn their anger against themselves as in the pain of bereavement: take overdoses of sleeping pills, cut their hair short, rake their skin with their finger nails, feeling that physical pain is more tolerable than emotional pain.
The tension is most frequently released in tears.
Another woman, whose lover went back to his wife, wept herself to sleep every night for six months.
Every morning, exhausted but able to cope, she struggled to work.
Bitterly ashamed of her failure to hold his love, she couldn't bring herself to discuss what had happened with even her closest friends.
She used her weeping time before sleep for long conversations inside her head in which she began to make sense of what had happened.
If we are lucky we have someone in our lives with whom we can shed healing tears.
Women are fortunate.
They can usually find another woman with whom to share the pain.
Men are less fortunate, since they not only have to cope with the cultural fear of showing emotion, but also with the dismissive and often lewd attitudes to women with which they are surrounded.
They may find someone to talk to, but rarely someone with whom they can actually cry although Damon Runyan claimed that the tears shed on Broadway by ‘guys in love’, would produce enough salt water  to start an opposition to the Atlantic and the Pacific.
This is why men who have been deeply hurt in an extra marital affair often have a compulsion when it ends to tell all to their wives in a great burst of weeping.
The purpose is less to get forgiveness than to get some relief from the tension and the pain.
They turn to the one person who may accept their tears without judgement.
Some, who may be kinder, will find a way of weeping in their wives' arms without explaining the cause.
The wife may have a shrewd idea, but may offer comfort without choosing to seek out the source of the pain.
Shame is at the heart of much of the grieving which women experience when men leave them.
Its core is the sense of rejection of the most private and intimate parts of themselves, because that is what women in love offer so generously to men.
This is what a girl in Borstal meant when she said to me, ‘I gave him everything I had but it wasn't enough’.
It's what my friend working in prostitution meant when she said she lost her self-respect when her husband was attracted to her colleague whom she saw as inferior to herself.
Men in love may offer a great deal but they seldom make such a full commitment.
They are much more likely to hold on to a degree of independence.
This may include the right to give priority to their work, their politics, their hobbies, their nights out with ‘the boys’.
They seldom give to the relationship the commanding priority that women, particularly in the early stages of loving, feel to be appropriate.
The intensity of love which some women feel puzzles many men.
Flattered for a little while, they soon begin to feel embarrassed or threatened by the powerful nature of the feeling that surrounds them.
It seems to arouse expectations they can't meet, it makes demands on their freedom, they want life to be simpler.
For the women on the other hand, this kind of love, if only it could be returned, opens up possibilities of finding a kind of heaven on earth, a healing of past wounds, a gateway into full intimacy with one other person, an end to existential dread and isolation.
But it is a great burden to carry, emotionally-demanding, time-consuming and requiring great dedication and understanding of the self and the other.
It requires a commitment to the art of loving and experiencing feeling that many women but few men are prepared to make.
It is the same intensity of commitment so many women make to their children, and particularly to their sons.
It can be very positive, giving the child a base of confidence from which to move into a creative relationship with the world.
It can be destructive as we see in the black humour centring round the image of the Jewish mother who with her tears blackmails her son's emotional life.
Such behaviour is not confined to Jewish mothers.
It is a temptation for all mothers whose lives are emotionally unfulfilled.
The other side of the story is the pain felt by women when their children suffer, and their bewilderment when that suffering is self-inflicted.
I have hanging in my workroom a painting of the Pieta, that powerful image of the dead Christ, taken down from the cross and lying across his mother's lap.
It is an image which reminds women that the infant child who once lay comfortably on their lap will grow and suffer.
But in my painting, the mother's face is not, as it is in all similar images I have seen, pious and accepting.
Rather it looks down at the scarred and broken Christ figure as if to say, ‘Why?
I carried you in my body for nine months, I loved you and cared for you, why did you do this to yourself?’
It is a question many mothers ask as they receive their dead children home from wars, mountain tops and London lavatories where they died of an overdose.
These are times when the suffering may be too deep for tears.
People, Tears and Institutions
Each man is thrown back on himself alone and there is danger that he may be shut up in the solitude of his own heart.
Alexis de Tocqueville
The next time you visit your doctor, you might ask to see the buff envelope which holds your medical history.
Printed on it you'll see a space for the date of birth already filled in and also a space for the date of death, not yet filled in.
The history of your physical and emotional health lies in that envelope.
In due course the information will be processed and used for all kinds of statistical information.
From the day we are born and our births are registered, we are not only individuals but members of a society which negotiates with us through institutions.
The institutions of health, education and housing powerfully influence our opportunities and choices in later life.
Others influence the kind of jobs we can get, how much we'll be paid, how we behave in public(and even in private ) and how we spend our time and money.
Some will even try to influence how we think and feel.
Often we don't like them and when we like them least we call them bureaucracies and feel they are malignant, that they interfere with our freedoms, that they are insensitive to our needs.
Sometimes this is true.
Often we have a confused feeling that we both need and resent them.
It is the people who work in the institutions who are most exposed to our dislike.
Yet these are the same people who are our neighbours, our friends and those who sit beside us in the cinema or at a football ground.
So why are they different when met over the counter in a social security office or a housing department?
Those dealing with the public are usually confronted with people asking for help.
If we are brought up to think of asking for help as childish, and if our own requests for help have not been  swiftly and cheerfully met, we are less likely to respond in a simple and positive way to demands.
If in addition we have been brought up in the tradition that to show feeling is a vulgar and lower-class way of behaving, we will seek to drain it out of any situations in which we are involved.
The civil service and institutions based on this style see feeling as irrelevant in work performance.
It is a dangerous complication which must be filtered out.
Rules, logic and reason are the principles which govern.
Many would agree but this system ignores the customers who may be full of emotions like fear and helplessness.
If ignored, these feelings turn to tears or anger.
Our institutions were set up by middle-class people and the staff, even when their own origins are working-class, reflect those values.
When customers express feelings, certain behaviour like shouting or swearing is seen as ‘low-class’ and treated with contempt as ‘ignorant’.
Those who manage to present themselves with a cool, unemotional middle-class style have a better chance of their messages being responded to.
Some social workers try to teach their own customers some codes to use when speaking to a doctor or a magistrate or an official in the housing department.
Some cultures — the Afro-Caribbean is one — allow much more open expression of all emotions, laughter, grief and tears.
Some working-class groups are the same, able to have a knees-up in a pub, sing in a bus or appear on panel games on television in which they laugh loudly, show disappointment openly and accept the idea that luck is more important than knowledge.
The middle-class panel game ‘Mastermind’ demonstrates a rather different view of the world, much more low-key, but much more effective in gaining social respect and status.
Middle- or upper-class grief is hidden under controlled facial muscles or even under a black veil, as with members of the royal family.
It is as if to let people see your feelings takes away some of your power.
But at regularly photographed IRA or UDI funerals, or those of victims of tragedies, grieving working-class women are shown with their mouths open, weeping, their bodies distorted with grief, part of a more ancient tradition.
Working-class parents whose children are missing or have been murdered will appear on television asking for help.
They weep openly and harrowingly, unlike middle-class parents who are seldom willing to appear, seeing their grief as more private.
Each of us lies somewhere on a  spectrum of ability to show feeling which is reflected in our behaviour.
This is often closely related to where we see ourselves on the spectrum of social class .
In approaching institutions for help, the appearance of subservience can help people who are clearly powerless.
But it may be difficult for some people to pretend when they are overwhelmed with anger.
Tears are a two-edged weapon when dealing with officials who may be embarrassed by them.
If the official is a man who is uncomfortable when his wife cries or a woman ill-at-ease with her own tears, the weeping customer can seem very threatening.
Some institutions, like the Department of Social Security section which deals with non-contributory benefits, are in a particularly sensitive relationship with the public.
Their customers often come to them under considerable stress, dependent, short of money, embarrassed and afraid of rejection.
They have waited in an unattractive waiting room for long periods and by the time they reach a counter are at breaking-point.
The official may be equally under stress, overworked, resentful and conscious that the administrative back-up of the office is not very efficient.
In this kind of situation neither can say what their real feelings are.
A true conversation might be,
‘I am needing help.
Are you willing to help me?’
‘I can't bear anyone asking me for help.
Who is willing to help me ?‘
But these words are never said.
Two needy people in competition for caring are more likely to end up bitter, hostile and dissatisfied, when what they most need to do is weep on each other 's shoulders.
But that thought is not to be tolerated.
The applicant goes away complaining vehemently about the treatment received, the official retires behind the partition to complain about yet another bad-tempered, ungrateful recipient of state benefits.
Since officials and clerks are not allowed to express their real feelings at work, it is not surprising that they have difficulty tolerating the feelings of their customers.
Any member of staff who sat down at his or her desk and wept with sorrow at the pain they are constantly having to encounter in their customers' lives, anyone who wept with frustration at their helplessness in the face of the world suffering that they perceive would be considered  mentally unstable.
The entire structure depends on denial of pain in the person with whom they are dealing.
Their judgement might be affected.
A nineteenth century Rothschild is reported as saying, ‘Throw out that beggar, he's breaking my heart’.
Any sensitive bank manager must have the same feeling.
This denial of pain extends to all aspects of life within the work place.
If their own heart is breaking it should not be allowed to show.
A parent might be dying of cancer, a love affair might have ended…the pain must not be allowed to leak out.
Some organizations now insist that their staff be constantly cheerful and smiling, no matter how they feel.
Staff working the tills in supermarkets are being told that they must smile as they check out each item and present the bill.
Human beings are expected to be as mechanical as the musak.
Within limits this seems a not unreasonable request.
In Marks and Spencers, as you make your way out of the staff area into the shop, a notice greets you, ‘Smile, you are now entering the public area’.
But Marks and Spencers have a reputation for good employer/employee relationships.
Their staff have good conditions of service and have an inner motivation to relate pleasantly to their customers.
It can be a different matter where staff are overworked and underpaid and still expected to smile constantly.
It comes close to what Arthur Haley described in his novel Roots .
There the black slaves, no matter how angry or unhappy they felt, as soon as a white man approached began to shuffle and smile so as to look harmless and contented.
Not to do so could result in a beating.
Will we see women working on check out tills being sacked because they cannot keep a smile screwed on to their faces for eight hours every day?
This insistence on ‘a brave face’ presents particular hazards for working women, who have traditionally been allowed more public expression of feeling than men.
They have to learn in competing with men for recognition and promotion to suppress any signs of feminine ‘weakness’.
Tears must not be allowed to fill their eyes and under no circumstances run down their cheeks.
The male mafia will close ranks and deem such a woman unstable, neurotic and quite unsuitable for responsibility.
If she has a male boss who has tantrums that would be more appropriate in a three-year-old, a boss who shouts at and bullies her, in the institutional world of male values, she will lose all respect if she cries.
She may know that her tears will relieve her tension more effectively than shouting back or pretending not to notice, or they  may be tears of anger rather than the vulnerability so despised by her colleagues.
Nor will concession be made to a tendency to weep during the days immediately before her period.
To draw attention to that would compound the woman's error.
The mask she has to wear in order to be accepted as an equal is seen to be seriously flawed.
The problem for women is highlighted by a thirty-year-old trainee RSPCA inspector, dismissed because she wept when dogs were put to death.
She appealed against her dismissal under the Sex Discrimination Act but lost her case.
Mary Warnock, the philosopher, argued that the dismissal was justified since professionals must learn to face a work demand like mercy killing with calm, although not necessarily with indifference.
She thought it very bad for the image of women that they should always be seen as the people most likely to follow their hearts and not their heads.
Women, she argued, should practise not crying except in exceptionally worthy circumstances.
Those tears, which led to dismissal, could have been seen as a source of energy and redirected by an understanding supervisor to a powerful commitment to doing the work well.
She might still have shed a few tears when the dogs were put down but those tears could have represented a fitting tribute of respect to lovely creatures whom human beings treat so shabbily.
I would rather have an RSPCA worker who retained the capacity to weep than one hardened to the darker necessities of the job.
Geraldine Bedell, writing in the Independent newspaper, described what happened when the senior partner of a law firm was confronted with tears from an exhausted female at the end of a marathon deal.
‘How can I ever treat her quite the same again', he said.
‘There's always this fear she won't be able to cope, so you don't give her the difficult jobs’.
She describes another incident where a woman, reduced to tears by a senior colleague, began to realize that he was enjoying seeing her cry.
Bedell quotes Coral Morgan Thomson, a director of Role Management, a company which specializes in stress counselling for executives.
She believes it is the ‘fundamentally weedy’ men who like to see women cry, and it is assertive women they attack because they are afraid of them.
Bedell goes on to say that when a man embarks on one of those humiliation rituals which men behind desks have been perfecting for generations, she wishes she had the guts to introduce a bit of power play and weep gently but composedly.
‘Why’, she asks, ‘give up this healthy show of emotion for heart attacks?’
But many men are genuinely afraid of tears.
Some are afraid of their own tears and the abyss that would open in their lives if they once allowed themselves to make contact with their own pain.
For others, seeing a woman cry revives hidden feelings of seeing their mothers cry.
Those memories cover very complicated feelings of helplessness, the awfulness of seeing the most important person, whom you depend on for protection, in acute distress.
Colin White, in a cartoon, shows a woman weeping copiously over a man at a desk who is hiding behind an umbrella and waving a white flag.
There may be feelings of anger against the person who caused a woman to cry.
In his book on Maxwell, Joe Haines describes how Maxwell's normally imperturbable secretary burst into tears after a spell of work when he had been even more demanding than usual.
He walked into her office and found her crying.
‘Who's done that to you?’ he demanded angrily.
‘I'll sack him!’
As women return to work in institutions after child-bearing, they perform extraordinary emotional gymnastics.
In their daily lives with children they engage freely and fully in fundamental feelings of love, anger, frustration, fury, pain and joy often coupled with tears.
They learn to do several things at once, they use skills with their children of conciliation, negotiation, contract.
They recognize the pointlessness of confrontation with a small creature who doesn't understand the assumptions on which the adult is operating, and develop a capacity to catch the passing joy and respect serendipity.
They know how helpful tears are to defuse tension and how constructive their aftermath can be.
The healing quality of tears and laughter is part of their lives.
None of these skills are recognized by their male colleagues in the workplace.
Accordingly, women may abandon them and try to fit into institutional patterns which make no sense to them but which they are constantly assured are superior.
Others may use what they have learned to ‘handle’ male colleagues but few are able to influence the masculine value base of their work places.
These are some of the reasons that women are often happier working together and reluctant to fight their way into senior management.
They reject a driven competitive style which sacrifices family and fun.
We are learning that the way institutions are organized is increasingly a problem for men as well as women.
Institutions which concede no place for feelings and assume that  the two aspects of our lives, private and public, have to be kept absolutely separate, are not healthy for anyone.
But those of us who deal with bureaucratic institutions simply as part of normal life, while we may find it frustrating, even demeaning, can at least retreat into the private institutions of our family where, if we are lucky, we will find acceptance, support and warmth.
This does not apply to those people who spend long periods of time in institutions which they are powerless to leave and with little or no freedom of choice…children's homes, boarding schools, prisons, mental hospitals, homes for people with disabilities.
Some children brought up in institutions are so damaged by these experiences that they cannot live in a family where they have to respond to others' feelings and may escape into work in an institutional setting.
They are particularly unable to cope with the intimacy of marriage and, if bewildered by their spouse's demands, may flare into violence.
What the institutional life does well, if backed up by economic stability or an ideological message, is produce people who cope well in situations where feelings can be a handicap to efficient functioning.
The kibbutz child does well in the army and is comfortable living in a group; the man reared in middle-class boarding schools and residential colleges learns skills of suppressing emotion, and develops attitudes of tolerance and a capacity to work productively with others whom he may not like.
People like this are valuable to the civil service and other bureaucratic organizations.
The British Empire was built on the unshed tears of small boys in preparatory and public schools.
It was a terrible price to pay but most defend the legacy of ideas of fairness, justice and good government they communicated to many parts of the globe.
This system has also produced a remarkable number of idiosyncratic and creative characters who have transcended the rigidity of the system and transformed their pain into poetry, music and literature.
We can now go on to look at two very different institutions, one socially acceptable, the other not, in order to see the extent to which they allow the expression of distress through tears.
TEARS AND HOSPITALS
…to some people, especially those vulnerable to fear and to pain, there sometimes seems no refuge, no support.
Hospital staff rush here and there, tell them to wait, to walk down long forbidding corridors to see a doctor — whose name they haven't even been told — who may not even speak to them by name in a way they can understand.
A receptionist in a new, busy and large district hospital.
In this country a hospital accepts and cares for any person who cannot be cared for in their own home, but to step into their admission halls is not always the loving experience needed.
Few people complain.
How could they?
When our bodies fail us we feel panic and helplessness.
It is a fundamental source of human suffering.
When healthy we are able to look with a cool eye at what medicine offers; when we're ill, we become like frightened children looking at mother and father to make us better.
When we are so ill that we have to stay in bed and be looked after, we are driven back even further into unconscious memories of having to call or cry for help for even the simplest needs.
We have been taught that the only solution for us is to take our sick body to a doctor who will make decisions about it, an all-powerful doctor who carries our life or death within his hands.
No hospital can function well without receptionists, cleaners, administrators, porters and all the other ancillary staff.
But for patients, in the moment of need, the most important people are those who lay hands on them and have power over them…doctors and nurses.
Stephani Cook, writing about her experiences in hospital, describes how when told that she had to have yet another in a series of operations, describes how she cried like a child:
…unashamedly, loudly, wetly — as spasm after spasm of misery washed over me.
What would happen to me?
What would become of me?
What had I done?
Why didn't it stop?
Nobody seemed to be in control…
All these big, strong, wise doctors were supposed to be in charge, they were supposed to be helping me-that was the only compensation for the humiliating procedure I'd had to endure.
Hospital doctors, with some marvellous exceptions, have clung to old patterns of training where the doctor protected himself from the patient's feelings of panic and terror in the face of illness and death.
Medical students who fail to do this, who show their own distress and pain at the plight of the patient, are identified as unsuitable or unprofessional and expected to ‘harden up’.
Many protect themselves even from patients' questions, by always being very busy or emotionally unapproachable.
Patients, particularly women who are conditioned from childhood to be accepting rather than questioning, are given the sense that they mustn't try to invade medical territory.
As long as doctors hold on to the role of being omnipotent, it is not surprising they need defences.
It is a great burden for them if they cannot share their uncertainty in the face of a complicated diagnosis, or their distress if they have to predict an inevitable death or permanent disability.
An oncologist may have to diagnose a malignant tumour several times a day, an ophthalmologist may have to tell five patients, in the one day, that they are going blind.
In any out-patient department patients are daily being given life-or-death judgements about their future.
The attitude of the doctors then usually forces patients to conceal their spontaneous feelings about the information.
Any whose feelings overflow are liable to be seen as weak or ‘difficult’.
‘Courage’ is the response that is admired.
It appears to make life easier for everyone.
One young man, a student, given such a diagnosis wrote privately about that experience:
The ‘something’ in my chest had been identified.
I was told I wouldn't be fit enough to go to college.
What was I to do?
Was the next year to be filled by more unemployment and more chemotherapy?
The future seemed empty.
What was it to be filled by?
The news had been given clearly and simply.
‘All right?
Do you understand?
Any questions?’
I nodded and said ‘Yes’ and ‘No’in reply.
I wanted to cry there and then but I was in the ward surrounded by people who would want to dam up my tears, so I stood up, put my jacket on and walked out.
I found myself somewhere quiet.
As I sat there I recalled the words the Doctor had just spoken to me and the tears came back.
This time I didn't stop them.
I sat feeling his words and the tears came faster and faster, but then without noticing I stopped feeling his words and thought of their meaning.
And as I  thought about their meaning, the tears slowed down until they stopped.
I had received bad news.
I cried because of it, but the time comes when crying stops.
It's not a forced ending, but natural.
So my tears have fallen.
They have fallen since and they'll fall again.
They have fallen fast and slowly.
They have fallen with anger and sadness.
Sometimes they've been bitter and sometimes hopeless, but no matter how they've fallen or why they've fallen, the time comes when they stop and whether you like it or not, or intend it or not, stop they do.
He died a year later.
It is good to know that he was able to share his tears with the hospital chaplain.
I asked an eye specialist, a thoughtful and genuinely caring man, how patients responded to going blind.
‘Do they cry?’,
I asked him.
‘They probably do’, he said, ‘but I can't let them cry with me when I've got a queue of people’.
I tried to find out if there was any place in the hospital where they could have gone to weep and share their distress.
There was no such refuge that he knew of.
It may have had to be a lavatory or else the bus on the way home.
Most hospitals now have chapels, but many are hidden down corridors and are uninviting.
The most common defence against feeling for hospital doctors is to see the symptom but not the patient.
A friend of mine, admitted for investigation of a lump in her breast, refused to give automatic permission for a mastectomy.
On his next ward round the surgeon said, ‘What's all this about?
After all at your age you're not going to need your breast any more.’
She was a very attractive, unmarried woman of forty-one.
Controlling her anger, she looked at him and said, ‘You're older than me.
Do you want to keep your testicles’?
He swept away and she never saw him again in the hospital.
Six months later, having kept her breast intact, she was at a party when the surgeon appeared on the other side of the room.
She made her way over to him.
He had no recollection of her and began to flirt mildly.
Not being a woman to miss an opportunity, she described their previous meeting.
Sadly he didn't appreciate the joke and left the party early.
Not all women are as strong-minded as my friend.
Stories brought back from gynaecological examinations and procedures carried out by male doctors are at best disturbing, at worst horrifying.
It is common to feel treated as an object.
Comments are  made to the perineum rather than the person.
Expressions of pain as the examination takes place rouse irritation or accusations of neurosis.
Many women must have wondered how men would cope if the same scraping and probing techniques were carried out routinely on male genitalia.
One woman writing anonymously to a women's magazine told of her distress at a particularly dehumanizing gynaecological examination.
The nurse was aware of her humiliation and kept throwing sympathetic glances.
She finished her letter by saying that this must seem a very small matter to people suffering serious illnesses but she resented not feeling able to complain because of her fear of being seen as childish or neurotic.
As happens with children, her pain was compounded by being made to feel ashamed.
The greatest problem, particularly for surgeons, is the patient whom an operation has not helped and who is now dying.
There seems to be no place for a dying person on the surgical wards.
It is almost as if having failed, the surgical staff cannot bear to see the patient.
It is too great a challenge to their image of themselves as healers.
They are trained only to cure, to treat and to prolong life.
They are taught nothing about helping people to die.
Their response is sometimes brutal.
It was made clear to a friend of mine who was dying that he was not wanted on the ward, not through words but by the minimum care he was given after an unsuccessful operation and the refusal of any doctor to speak to him.
He knew that staff were avoiding him.
His wife was asked, by a junior consultant who could give no information about the operation and its results, to take him home.
She is herself a nurse, not by any means inarticulate, but she could get no one to speak to or to tell her anything.
She described it as a nightmare.
Ultimately her GP intervened and was told that the outlook was hopeless.
He persuaded her to bring her husband home, where he died within a few weeks.
One of the most distressing factors is the ‘jollying up’ attitude of staff and their expectations that the patients and their families will collude with the ritual pretence that everything is for the best in this best of all possible worlds.
A pregnant woman whose baby had died in the womb was not told that her baby was dead until after it was born.
The staff thought it better to let her go through her labour cheerfully.
One nurse described how she always knocks at the door of a private room if there is a terminally ill patient  in case she should catch them crying.
‘I don't want to embarrass them’.
Roehampton Hospital is, justly, world-famous for its marvellous skills of rehabilitation for people with limb disabilities.
But patients say that in the course of treatment, they are never permitted to express tearfulness or despair.
A relentless cheerfulness and optimism is demanded.
For some patients this seems superficially to be effective, but for men or women whose background or culture more readily allows them to express feeling, this is very difficult.
To be accepted they are forced to develop if not actual defences, then masks against the external world.
Beata Bishop in her book A Time to Heal , which describes her experience of cancer and how she ultimately cured it by using alternative healing methods, writes of her first experience of conventional surgery.
After the operation, her surgeon dropped in to see her every day, often twice a day.
She remembers it in this way,
Looking back, I find it interesting that our exchanges were consistently humorous, as if we had been rehearsing for a Wit and Wisdom contest.
I was acting out the role of the good, courageous patient as I saw it at the time, while Mr Lennox was no doubt pleased to find me co-operative, free from despair and above all, unemotional.
I played his game and he rewarded me with encouraging remarks about my cancer-free future.
Even while this game was being played out, Beata Bishop knew intuitively that she was not cured, had yet to experience the dark part of the cycle of her illness and ‘should not pretend that it was, in fact, light’.
The cancer re-emerged in her groin within a year.
She went into the darkness of that experience, found within herself a healing power which she allied with alternative therapies and is now fully cured.
None of this behaviour adopted by professionals is intended to be unhelpful.
The rationalization is that everything is done in the interests of the patient, but it is also designed to protect professionals from feelings that are, for them, genuinely intolerable.
The rationalization is that it helps patients.
The reality is that it doesn't.
What the patients need is to have emotional fear and pain  acknowledged and expressed through words, tears or in whatever other way they find helpful.
On the hospital wards, nurses have most physical contact with patients.
They wash them, help them perform the intimate functions of relieving bladder and bowels, change dressings on wounds, give medicine, help them take their first steps after an operation, make beds, waken them up, tell them to go to sleep, close their eyes when they die.
They become the parent, the patient the helpless and often frightened child.
Nurses are directly confronted with the reality of suffering, with the fragility of human experience, in ways that few other people, even doctors, know.
They see not only the immediacy of pain but the effects of damage, accident and fate on human lives.
Their work involves tasks which most people find distasteful or frightening — from emptying bed pans, giving enemas, changing dressings on sometimes horrific wounds, to laying out and washing the dead.
Their work arouses strong feelings, sometimes mixed and confused, feelings of compassion, disgust, anger, fear and anxiety.
They may be aroused sexually by the naked bodies they wash and care for.
They may resent patients who rouse these confused feelings.
When they are tired, exhausted or not feeling well they may envy patients the care they give them.
They have to be the good mother, when they themselves may need mothering.
They also deal with the anxieties and guilt of relatives.
It is the doctor's job to tell the patient or the patient's family, when he or she is terminally ill, but once the diagnosis and prognosis have been given, the nurse copes with the emotional effects.
She has probably known what the doctor is going to say and may feel she has betrayed the family or patient and her relationship with them by not previously telling them the truth.
If the relationship has been real, she will have her own grief and difficulty in coping with the diagnosis, as well as her own anger at the surgeon or the doctor.
Her feelings may be complex.
Most nurses are first thrown into these situations at around eighteen years of age, before they have an opportunity to sort out the demands of their own emotional lives.
They come to the job with vague convictions of wanting to care for people, of doing a worthwhile job for which they will be given respect.
It is important to see themselves as ‘good’ people.
To come to terms with the maelstrom of feelings aroused would mean accepting what most have been taught are ‘wrong’ feelings for a ‘nice’person to have.
As with doctors, there are always nurses whose personal strengths are such that they can openly and lovingly respond to a patient's pain, grief and distress without needing defences.
Stephani Cook described one such encounter when at the limits of her courage:
What a relief to be able to complain…openly,…freely, to say how I really feel!
[She]…will not interpret my sharing of my pain as an assault, she will not turn away or urge me to be strong, or murmur some expression of sympathy or swallow hard because there is, finally, nothing to say to someone who is beyond comfort though not beyond caring.
One way of avoiding anxiety is not to be constantly reminded of individuals.
Talking about the patient as ‘the spleen in bed 9’, or ‘the appendicitis in the corner’, or in a maternity unit calling everyone ‘Mother’ removes individual characteristics, neutralizes them and protects the nurse from emotional demands.
Life is particularly hard for nurses on children's wards where the emotional demands can be overwhelming.
A nurse has to learn to control the show of feeling and avoid emotional involvement with the patient.
It is an important protection against behaving in unprofessional ways like procuring an illegal abortion or killing a handicapped baby.
In the past this aspect of training has been overemphasized but efforts are now made to strike a better balance.
Administrative techniques like splitting up contact with patients into ritual tasks, or moving staff from ward to ward, are now questioned.
We know that the patient who can show distress about their condition, talk about it and share anxiety has a much faster recovery rate than one who suppresses such feelings.
Alexander the Great knew this intuitively when, himself having been wounded in the thigh, he walked round his wounded men and asked each to talk about his experience in the battle and how his wound had been received.
This is particularly the case for patients undergoing operations.
The work of psychiatrists such as Maxwell Jones, who established the first therapeutic community, shows that the nurse who is given time to talk with and listen to patients is a most potent healing force for the human spirit.
These practices are being used in marvellous ways in hospices for the dying, both in the independent sector and in the National Health Service.
They  offer great hope.
We need now to transfer this quality of understanding of human need to general hospitals.
For several years a new model for nursing has been researched, written about and tried out which allocates a number of patients rather than tasks to each nurse.
Their role is then to help the patient to meet and fulfil the ‘activities of daily living’.
They prepare individual care-plans for each patient with goals and objectives to be drawn up and revised by both the nurse and the patient.
But if there aren't enough staff to meet this approach, the result is a double stress for the nurse who is taught such an approach, but given no opportunity to put it into practice.
In most training schools little or no individual emotional support is available.
The pressure is inevitably on getting the nursing techniques ‘right’.
The massive anxiety aroused by these conflicts has to be resolved, or else the nurse will either drop out of training as a ‘failure’, or resolve the conflict by reverting to defensive techniques.
Most patients can cope with unacknowledged grief and anxiety because they are in hospital for a short time.
But there are chronic conditions which mean longer stays.
A friend of mine visiting a hospital saw an elderly man wandering around and crying.
A nurse was scolding him and telling him to sit down and be quiet.
On being asked what was wrong, she explained that his wife, on an adjacent ward, had died the previous day.
Perhaps, the visitor suggested, he wants to go to her locker, go through her things, handle them.
‘The locker's been cleared’, she said.
‘There's a new patient in that bed’.
In this same hospital, when relatives come to the mortuary to visit the dead member of their family, they view them through a sheet of glass.
They are given no opportunity to touch the dead person or put something — a flower, a crucifix — into their hand to take to the grave.
The practice started when postmortems were more common than now and the intention was to protect the ‘outsider’ from the smell.
But it still carries on and with it the denial of mortality and humanity.
Chris Heginbotham, when director of Mind , wrote of one sight he had witnessed in one well-known hospital south-east of London:
I came across one of the most pitiful things I have ever known.
This was a man in his late 50s or early 60s, living on a ward with thirty other men.
There was no privacy, the ‘moving wallpaper’ simply ran from the time they returned from industrial therapy to tea-and-bed time at about 9.15p.m.
Indeed, the sound of the tea trolley created a Pavlovian reaction among the 30 men.
Some in pyjamas, others half dressed suddenly lined up to take their tea and pills.
The man I am talking about got up slowly.
He was known to abscond from the ward — this was a bit of a nuisance as there were only two nursing staff on duty at any one time.
Recently he had had to have a catheter fitted for some medical problem and because of his absconding behaviour, the nurses had hit on a really original wheeze — to force him to carry the slowly filling urine bag in one of those four-milk crates one sometimes sees on doorsteps.
Short of outright brutality that is probably one of the most degrading things you can do to a person.
People who are mentally ill, mentally handicapped or old are the most vulnerable.
It is assumed, quite incorrectly, that they have no feelings.
Staff shortages, combined with the patients' helplessness and their invisibility from the general public (few visitors come to these wards), make it easy for private toileting or modesty to be ignored and emotional lives denied.
The patients' response is to behave like automata; awareness of their pain would be unbearable.
Cuts in the amount of money spent on direct services to patients as opposed to buildings mean that in wards where few staff members care for a large number of patients standards of care fall well below tolerable levels.
Wards smell of urine and faeces, incontinent patients may be left unattended for hours — even fed while sitting in their excrement.
Staff who are overworked and overstressed may react to patients' demands with anger or violence.
Everyone's standards of behaviour deteriorate so that all personal dignity evaporates.
Both staff and patients are brutalized, locked in an intolerable embrace.
In the general hospital, where visitors pour through every day of the week, physical humiliation is less likely though ward rounds by some consultants are still an exercise in treating the patient as a malfunctioning piece of machinery.
It is in the outpatient department that many people feel particularly vulnerable as they wait in a cubicle, wearing paper gowns with no idea of what is happening, as staff rush around self-consciously doing more important things than talking to a patient.
One group of workers who often catch the backlog of feelings
not allowed on the wards are physiotherapists.
The whole process of massage involves yielding to another's care.
It rouses far-off memories of infancy, of being handled and given comfort.
It is not surprising that a high proportion of patients burst into tears as soon as the physiotherapist begins work.
Sometimes the patient will talk, pouring out problems and anxieties, but more often nothing is said and tears slowly subside into relaxation.
Some physiotherapists have intuitively incorporated this response into their work.
In one sophisticated Scottish mental hospital the nursing staff have learned to refer patients with whom they are failing to communicate to the physiotherapist.
These are patients cut off from their capacity to feel, presumably to protect themselves from emotional pain.
Frequently, when they feel the physiotherapist's hands on them they will begin to cry.
The massage is not stopped, even to produce a handkerchief, and no reference is made to the cause of the tears.
Before the patient leaves the physiotherapist uses a particular technique which helps work through the big sobs that so often follow crying, believing that the crying has used up oxygen and big sobs restore balance.
Before the patients go back to the ward, they will pat their faces back into place and often ask for reassurance that no-one will be told.
This is a desperate comment on the forbidden nature of tears.
Social workers and chaplains, with a hospital office, also offer opportunities for a few patients to weep and express distress in privacy, in a sympathetic atmosphere.
But important though these opportunities are to individuals, they are marginal to the life of the hospital.
One most distressing aspect of all institutions is the lack of privacy.
If you're a patient on a ward, where can you cry?
There is no place where you can be quiet with a partner or a friend.
About the only place is the lavatory and in the lavatory you cry alone.
How does it make someone like a woman who has just had an abortion feel having to go to a lavatory to express her grief in tears?
A natural and innocent experience like weeping becomes sullied and distorted.
When respect is not given to our tears we are denied the relief they can bring.
TEARS AND PRISONS
But there is no sleep when men must weep who never yet have wept .
Oscar Wilde, ‘The Ballad of Reading Gaol’.
Something was thrown into her cell.
‘Have a cigarette’, the kid said.
‘It helps.
Stops you from crying’.
She saw a box of cigarettes with matches tucked into the wrapper.
So she was still crying.
She hadn't realized that…
‘The thing about it is’, the fellow said, ‘you have to take a deep breath to light up, and that does it, that stops the crying.’…
She inhaled deeply.
He was right.
She had stopped crying.
She felt better, too, toughened, more in command.
As soon as she exhaled, she inhaled again.
‘Its a very simple theory’, the fellow said.
‘It's impossible to cry and inhale at the same time.
You'd choke.
It works like a charm.
Some people sing, whistle, talk — that blocks off the crying mechanism too.’
She nodded.
‘You latch on to these techniques after you've been around a bit’, he said…
‘I've been in and out of a lot of jails in my time.’
Helen Yglesias,Sweetsir .
Sometimes, when driving through a strange place, usually on the outskirts of a town, I see a building immediately recognizable as a prison.
As I look, I half expect to see the air above the building turbulent and violent with the compressed energy of the pain and anger held there.
Prisons are terrible places.
No matter how they are dressed up, modernized or staffed by well-meaning people, there is not a single prison in Britain that we can or should be proud of.
Indeed, we should ask forgiveness of everyone held there.
It is made clear to the prisoner from the moment he sets foot in the institution that his personal feelings are considered irrelevant.
He is given a number, stripped of all personal possessions, made to shower and wash his hair and body with a lice-killing soap and then given uniform clothing.
He has to respond like a well-trained dog to demands shouted at him.
The small cubicle in which he has to strip, hand over his own clothes and don prison uniform is known as the ‘dog box’.
No matter what difficulties he encounters within the system, he can expect no sympathy.
His progress is assessed on his ability to respond promptly and without feeling to whatever is asked.
Prisons, as we know them, are fairly modern institutions.
In earlier, less complicated times an offender might be banished, mutilated or hanged.
Justice was dispensed in a summary way.
Prisons were only used to hold a few people until trial.
Now they hold tens of thousands.
Every process of the criminal justice system, even before a sentence is passed and guilt or innocence established, is designed to humiliate and intimidate the person being held or questioned.
If a sentence of imprisonment is passed the process is intensified.
The object is for the institution to establish, as quickly as possible, its power over the inmate.
This was shown in its most brutal form in a report published following riots in an Australian prison.
An initiation for prisoners had been established where for the first week officers were encouraged to violently beat and humiliate the new prisoner in nauseous ways.
Only after his spirit had been broken did the brutality ease up.
He was then ‘manageable’.
This kind of procedure may work with the majority but the marvellous thing about human beings is that there are always some not subdued.
We applaud this kind of person when they climb mountains, cross deserts, sail oceans and survive against incredible odds.
It is precisely the same quality that makes them resist brutality in prisons but we do not applaud that.
In the Australian prison the inmates succeeded in setting their buildings on fire, an act which led to the enquiry and the report.
An Australian judge, a passionate advocate of the human spirit, has a photograph of the prison burning hanging on his office wall.
It reinforces his faith in human beings.
The ideal prisoner is not a human being but an automaton who will respond immediately to orders, eat when they're told to, work, take exercise, sleep, and in all circumstances be respectful to authority.
Preferably he should not show any feelings; almost the only one considered ‘respectable’ for male prisoners is anger.
Anger is understood in these all-male institutions by both staff and prisoners.
Within reason they are all comfortable with it.
Subservience is also shown because other prisoners see it as a mask, necessary for survival for weaker or less competent prisoners.
Away from the staff, the subservient prisoner will say what he really thinks.
The truly subservient prisoner is respected by no-one, staff or inmates.
No one will cry openly.
The prison hero is the one who most openly shows anger and contempt for the staff.
Equally, the most brutal and aggressive member of staff is often most admired by the inmates as well as being most deeply hated.
Staff and inmates meet in a culture of machismo, of men being tough.
Normally senior staff have become  separated from this but their own experience in the ranks (if they had any) leaves them fully aware of the emotional dynamics between landing staff and prisoners.
Occasionally they are unable to leave it behind.
One story now in the mythology of the prison service concerns a governor who granted an interview to a prisoner but rather summarily refused his request.
He was suddenly attacked by the prisoner with a knife specially sharpened for the purpose.
The officers guarding him stopped him reaching the governor just in time.
Instead of putting him on a charge, the governor took the knife out of his hand and, while the prisoner was still being held by the officers, slashed his face.
It was done, the story goes, coolly and without malice.
The governor became a hero to many of his staff and prisoners, including the one slashed.
They admired him even as they reviled him.
Psychologically there may be little difference between the personalities of some staff and prisoners.
Their different paths can seem as much the result of luck, accident or opportunity as any capacity to distinguish between right and wrong.
Since anger is the only respected currency, it becomes extraordinarily difficult for genuine feelings of distress or even sorrow to be expressed by prisoners.
A frequent comment of observers about a prisoner in for a serious offence like murder is that he shows no remorse.
This becomes particularly important when the staff are writing reports for the parole board.
A desperate prisoner, knowing perfectly well what is expected of him may well offer to a chaplain or prison visitor any amount of repentance; he might even undertake a religious conversion.
But the prisoner who feels integrity and a sense of loyalty to his own group, although he may sincerely repent his crime, might find it difficult to express this publicly.
The whole atmosphere discourages sharing one's more personal feelings.
If prisoners feel they are treated as less than human, without normal instincts of tenderness or capacity for pain, they react as if that is the case.
Pain cannot be contained indefinitely within the person.
It has to leak out.
In prison it leaks out in anger and displays of violence either between the prisoners or against the staff.
This is true both for individuals and groups.
What are seen by the public as the most depraved of men still have profound needs to express their sorrow even when, with the most damaged people, it seems to lie too deep for tears.
St Francis of Assisi wrote about  the ‘gift of tears’, but it was Denis Nilson, a mass murderer who couldn't cry, who wrote ‘It must be the most wonderful gift to be able to throw your arms around someone and just weep’.
If that opportunity had been available to him, who knows what difference it might have made?
But to cry in a setting which allows no privacy is difficult.
The majority share a cell; not even the lavatories are private.
A telephone message may have come to say that a parent has died, a letter saying that a wife is seeking a divorce, but there is nowhere to hide and be alone with sorrow.
Indeed, men are not allowed to display any tender feelings under any circumstances.
Some have been known to shed tears of repentance as part of an experience of religious conversion, and refuge may be found in the brief visits of the chaplain.
This is not always greeted with respect by other inmates or by staff.
This denial of feeling is not difficult to achieve.
A very high proportion of prisoners come from a background of grossly limited educational and economic opportunity.
Before reaching the status of adult prisoner, many have trod a path of minor delinquency which involved time spent in residential care.
These junior institutions are the preparatory schools of the prisons, not because they train criminals, but because they train youngsters to cope with a regime which denies tenderness, warmth and the right to weep with and for your own pain.
This style fits too well into the values and expectations most will have encountered from male relatives and heroes.
‘Real’ men in the world of the socially deprived don't show feelings, especially feelings of tenderness or tearfulness, in public.
What is allowed is sentimentality in drunken songs of nationality and ideal love.
Mawkish videos are legitimate triggers for a show of feeling.
Many of the men in prison have poured their frustrated tenderness onto small children, and this is one reason why offenders against children receive such short shrift.
In prisons which offer art or creative writing classes, inmates will pour out their frustrated feelings in painting or poetry.
This kind of activity is seen as marginal to the work of the prison instead of as a central opportunity to reawaken feelings and capacities which have been stunted.
The Special Unit in Barlinnie Prison has showed dramatically how powerful the influence of art can be.
Instead of prison being used, as it could be, as a living and learning centre for human relationships, prisoners are savagely taught that it is dangerous to let your feelings be seen because they  can be used against you.
Hostile staff or fellow prisoners are known to use the technique of ‘winding you up’ to force a display of feeling, which is then punished or ridiculed.
Each experience of imprisonment, for even the most hardened recidivist, is, until the routine is established which numbs the mind, a wrenching of the spirit.
Except for those few unhappy souls who have so lost their emotional capacities that they are grateful to have all choice removed from their lives, each person who hears the prison door clang feels a desolation at being cut off from the life of the world and from those they love.
Sadness at the loss, and anger against those who, as they see it, have deprived them of liberty — the police, the judge, the prison staff — war within the soul.
The sadness cannot be shown.
Here all the valued qualities are of being a ‘real’ man, a ‘hard’man.
If ‘big boys don't cry’, then male prisoners certainly can't.
The fact that you're frightened (and many men in prison have good cause to be frightened, either of violence from other prisoners and staff or else of homosexual demands) cannot be shown.
If you show it you're finished, without respect from your peers and always an underdog.
The prisoner learns in this jungle to trust no one, and because no one is to be trusted then it becomes additionally dangerous to share feelings because you never know when they will be used against you.
Staff, learning of some intimate aspect of a prisoner's life, perhaps from seeing a file or overhearing a chaplain or social worker discuss confidential information, would be expected to use it to put the prisoner down.
Those who suffer most are the prisoners who allow their mask to sink through all the layers of their personality and blot out the warm, loving, sorrowing parts of themselves.
They will say that they don't have the courage to stay emotionally alive, particularly if they are serving a long sentence.
Some refuse to allow visits from their wives; they will say they don't want letters, to be reminded of birthdays, nor sent a Christmas card.
They would rather play dead than face the pain of thinking about their wives and family and the ordinary small activities of family life which they didn't sufficiently value when they had freedom.
There are other pains too, such as celibacy.
Outside people talk about prisoners missing physical sex and the need for conjugal visits as if they were just animals who needed relief from tension.
It is true that most prisoners miss sexual contact but not just to get relief.
Masturbation is freely practised , even in cells shared by three men and usually homosexual  encounters are possible, but the real loss is not genital sex but the small intimacies that freedom makes possible…the hugging, the kissing, the cuddling, the skin contact, the smell not only of their woman but of their children after a bath.
And there is the pain of jealousy.
The agony of lying locked in a cell and wondering what your wife or girl friend is doing, with whom and to whom.
Imagination runs riot, memories of one's own lovemaking being replayed with another man playing your part.
Masturbation using your own woman in your imagination turns into a nightmare if these other thoughts intrude, and if you carry these thoughts all week and then allow her to visit, you may fail when talking to her to distinguish between reality and fantasy and ruin the visit for both of you.
How much easier to cut yourself off from all these problems and withdraw emotionally into the less demanding machine of prison life.
One prisoner put it like this: ‘I waken up every morning with this pain.
It's terrible.
It's not that I want to die, but I just want to get out of my mind’.
He means this literally.
It is this wanting to get out of one's mind that creates such a strong demand for drugs in prisons.
They ease the pain, creating a private world of peace into which the prisoner can withdraw and temporarily forget the awfulness.
Some patients who exhibit distress in ways interpreted by the nursing or medical staff as some kind of illness, mental or physical, are given drugs officially.
These tend to be prisoners who are a problem for the discipline staff, either because they are excessively violent or because they are suicidal.
Excessive violence can conveniently be interpreted as paranoia, which makes drugging an acceptable way of handling the behaviour without having to examine anything in the prison system which is causing that behaviour.
Suicides in prisons are administratively very tedious, so to avoid this risk drugs again become a way for personal issues on the part of the prisoner to be avoided.
The rest of the prisoners have to rely on drugs being smuggled in occasionally by visitors as a gift or by prison staff.
A new phenomenon is identified in some prisons.
There is an increasing number of young inmates so cut off from their feelings that they have no fear and no sense of compassion.
They don't even have anger.
The offences which brought them into prison tend to be extremely cold-blooded.
They feel nothing about seriously mutilating someone for a trivial reason.
When in prison  they blackmail staff with threats to their family and children if not supplied with drugs.
This apparent lack of feeling is, in every case, reinforced by the prison way of life.
Visits from the prisoner's family may be limited to one half-hour twice a month, but since that may involve a 400 mile round journey even such infrequent visits may not be possible.
A day's journey with small children, or alternatively getting someone to care for them for the day, is not easy.
If the prison is reasonably liberal, the family will meet in a large hall with perhaps another 100 people trying to talk to each other.
Few prisons have play areas for children.
In a less liberal setting, communication may only be possible through a wired pane of glass with an air inlet at the bottom of the pane.
In order not to have to shout above the babble of noise around you have to spend the visit bent sideways so that your mouth and ear can alternately be pressed against the open mesh.
It is degrading for both parties, and makes any serious or intimate conversation impossible.
When the expression of intimacy becomes impossible it has to be withdrawn.
No one can go on indefinitely yearning for what is not available.
In male prisons, while homosexual relationships exist they are less likely to be tolerated if they involve truly loving feelings.
A ‘hard’ man may have a powerful homosexual aspect to his personality which can only be indulged in prison, but must be demonstrated as a power relationship, as the taking by force young, attractive prisoners.
One such young man, who was forcibly raped three times in what is seen as one of the ‘better’ Scottish prisons, has just had it confirmed that he is HIV positive.
His offence had been a minor fraud.
It seems a heavy penalty.
When sexual tenderness is denied it is replaced by crudity and pornography.
Cell walls are covered with fantasy women, always available, pouting and meaningless, two-dimensional figures available for any kind of degradation and brutality you want to inflict.
The only kind of conversation about women permitted is crude and obscene but in a strange way this is a bridge between the prisoners and the staff who share these attitudes.
The prison landing office is sometimes decorated (inside the cupboards) with unusually squalid pornography.
When prisoners are released and return home, the institutional defences cannot easily be given up.
Yet it is impossible for an ordinary woman, perhaps with two or three young children, or  by now middle-aged, to live up to the sexual fantasies built up within the containing cell.
The reality is often a disappointment that cannot be discussed.
Another frequent difficulty is that over a period of years, constant masturbation, sometimes desperately engaged in for emotional comfort rather than sexual release, results in desensitization of the penis.
The gentler grip of the female vagina, combined with a natural initial unwillingness to use prison pornographic imagery to achieve a climax, as in masturbation, may cause difficulty in reaching orgasm in the initial weeks or months after release.
The man is forced back into masturbation, and may become convinced that he is permanently disabled.
The woman may think she is no longer desired but neither may be able to discuss what is happening.
Since for many men sexual capacity lies at the root of self-esteem, the chances are high that he will try to find another woman to reassure him.
An encounter without real warmth, without loving feelings, but exciting in its strangeness, may help achieve his climax within the woman but will only reinforce the message of prison that life is simpler without feelings.
By creating and maintaining institutions that deny feelings of warmth and tenderness, by encouraging male competitive and aggressive styles of human encounter, prisons are killing off in prisoners those qualities most likely to help re-establish them in the community.
(They also damage staff.)
Simple social skills like apologizing are given no place because the most important thing is not to lose face.
Yet I have seen innumerable jobs lost by ex-prisoners because one morning they came in late and when challenged couldn't give a simple explanation and express regret.
Instead they bridled, told employers to stuff their jobs and walked out, cursing themselves.
The same macho attitudes have an effect on their family life.
The denial of tenderness cuts them off from communication with wives and children.
At one time, no matter how they behaved, wives would accept it.
That is no longer the case.
She will leave, take the children with her and is often in no hurry to take on another man who cannot give her caring in return.
So marriages break up, the man becomes rootless and homeless, and can either end up in prison again within a short time or else drift into destitution.
But many men succeed in a remarkable way in keeping their feelings alive in the most unlikely settings.
They are loathe to admit it, but those few who have single cells will weep into their pillows  at night.
Men on the point of death by execution will call for their mothers.
It is the capacity to feel, to reflect, to regret, to repent that distinguishes us from other creatures.
It is often said about notorious criminals that they have no feelings.
This could be turned on its head.
It may be that they have feelings stronger than law-abiding persons, which is why they have committed crimes.
From infancy they may have wanted more than they were given, indeed, they may have needed more, more love, more attention, more education, more stimulation, more explanation about the nature of this world in which they found themselves.
The institution should not deny these needs even more drastically but offer, at no matter how late a date, opportunities.
For some it will be too late to fully recover more creative ways of asking the world to help them find what they need, rather than taking it brutally by theft, rape, or murder.
Most men and women would be better off for not going to prison at all.
Since the penal institutions were built we have learned better ways of non-custodial punishment, such as fines, community service, compulsory weekend reporting and attendance.
Other European countries use prison sentencing much less than Britain, and use it for shorter periods of time.
For people who must be detained for the protection of the public because of the horrific nature of their crimes, we should be designing units which will genuinely help them to change to whatever extent is possible.
The women's movement in America, using its principles of non-violent confrontation, is developing some of the most hopeful ways of working with prisoners accused of rape and violence against women and children.
They are concerned with the politics of male violence and the ways in which our patriarchal structures feed abuse of women and children.
Going into the prisons, they meet and talk with the men responsible for these violent acts, demystifying the fantasies which have often been built up in isolation from women, and sharing feminine responses to feelings with the men.
Simply locking up sex offenders is useless.
We have to help them live in the world without causing harm to others.
There are some people so damaged that as yet we don't know how to help them live more creative lives.
We know a little but not enough.
What we do know is that it is impossible to write any human being off as permanently damaged.
The human capacity to grow and develop from even the smallest seed of hope is a constant miracle.
If we need any prisons — we certainly need far  fewer than we have — it is around that miracle they should be designed.
Instead of warehouses of pain and anger, they could offer experiences of community, responsibility and self-respect to both inmates and staff.
Tears could be allowed onto the agenda of living.
If everyone in society outside had opportunities to be in touch with their feelings in work, education and creative living, fewer would end up in prison.
Tears and Grief
‘I find myself weeping alone after the service.’
A church minister talking about his feeling that he shouldn't cry while doing his job of taking a funeral service even when he has known and loved the dead person.
A Zen monk travelling through a village, was told that the head of a family he knew had died.
He sat down and wept.
The villagers abused him, saying, ‘You should help these people, not sit there weeping’.
He answered, ‘How can I help them if I am not able to weep?’
GRIEF AND COMMUNITY
Weeping alone is painful.
Grief is most powerfully eased when it can be shared.
We all find it difficult to walk alone in dark places, the forest, the deserted city streets, through the mysteries of death and our unanswered questions.
We look for a hand to hold, a shoulder to weep on, another body to cling to — anything that will reassure us that we are not alone, abandoned and helpless in the face of forces we do not understand.
Death is the most powerful of these forces.
In 1989 this was seen in Liverpool where the pain of the deaths of ninety-five football supporters was transformed into a collective sense of mutual caring and support.
The Liverpool mourners were most fortunate than most.
It is not a coincidence that their football supporters’ song is ‘You'll never walk alone’.
That city, which has a long history of communal grief in the memories of Irish immigrants and desperate experiences of unemployment, knew, intuitively, how to behave.
There was no attempt to hide the grief; it exploded, raw and naked.
It was powered, as so much grieving is, not only by the act which had triggered it, but by community memories of other griefs.
Ordinary life was halted to allow time for  realization of the sorrow to penetrate the layers of defence that we all set up to blunt the terrible pain of loss.
Rituals showed honour and reverence for the dead, not only the traditional laying of flowers, but the weaving into the fence of scarves and team colours which had intimate meaning for this occasion.
John Sweeney, writing in the Observer on the Sunday after the disaster, described ‘the shrine’ created at Liverpool's Anfield football stadium:
Their faces tell the story.
Some weep publicly; others walk high up into the stands and sob quietly.
Still others are there to show their sympathy and respect, but also to see for themselves the spectacle of a city's mass grief…
And after a week, when the football ground had acted as a family home visited by friends from near and afar in what was a traditional wake, the flowers which had been laid were ritually burned.
Then the more intimate funerals took place, the city began to return to normal and grieving continued at a more private level.
The private level, while inevitably painful, had been given meaning and dignity by the first experience of community support.
We forget that early experiences of grief must have been communal, and still are in many societies.
Where people have value as group members, our lives are not only our own or our immediate families'; in one sense they belong to the whole community, therefore each death is a loss to everyone.
A public show of grief acknowledges that fact.
The more significant the contribution of the dead person, the more powerfully the grief has to be shown, even if it means, as in some eastern countries, hiring women to act as professional mourners following the funeral procession, weeping and wailing.
Until very recently in Ireland, keening, an indigenous form of wailing by women, was an important accompaniment of village funerals.
Here we see traces of the power earlier societies attributed to women's tears as an aid to resurrection.
Since the earliest times religious rituals have surrounded the experiences of death, the disposal of the body of the deceased and formulas to aid grieving.
In Judaism the bereaved person must be surrounded with friends and relatives for the first week and cared for.
The Roman Catholic wake has served the same purposes.
Protestantism brought more impersonal social sanctions for the  bereaved, emphasizing behaviour rather than feelings, but continued to provide a strong framework within which grief could be experienced.
In a secular society these practices have been weakened for many, leaving us bewildered about how to handle our grief.
BEREAVEMENT
We know an enormous amount about the processes of grieving for bereavement.
We know only a little about how, in this more secular society, we should try to minimize the damage for people going through the grieving process.
No one comes through it undamaged; the wound never wholly heals.
Like a wound too, it has to be allowed to bleed, which is the function of our tears.
It is an essential part of grieving that they be allowed to fall at some point, without restraint, if the healing process is to start.
We can hope, in time, again to give our love and commitment to some aspect of life.
It may not be for a person's death or betrayal that we are grieving.
We grieve also for the loss of an ideal or a belief, for changes in our body, a place we had to leave, an animal companion, even an illusion.
Grieving can be for the loss of any person, idea or object giving meaning and significance to our lives.
we may not even have loved them.
It can be as important, sometimes even more important, to grieve for people whom we hated.
For it is for ourselves and our own lost years that we grieve years, happy and sad, that will not come again.
But bereavement is usually linked to the death of someone close, like our parents.
Even if you are sixty or seventy years of age when that finally happens, your relationship with the world changes.
You are now at the head of the personal queue filing toward the inevitability of death.
None of us can conceive that we might die before our parents.
They are a bulwark against that dark night: the candle that protected us in childhood.
Now it is extinguished and we are alone in the dark.
Your relationship with the world changes in another way.
You are now a ‘man’ or a ‘woman’, rather than still being able to think of yourself as a child.
We take into ourselves aspects of our parents that we may have denied previously.
We may become more like them in our styles and habits; we may begin to look at our children as our parents looked at us; we may even  assume that we will die at the age at which they died, and of the same disease or in the same way.
But reactions to parental death are not the same for everyone.
We are more complicated.
My first reaction to my mother's death was of relief.
It took me a long time to admit that, but I gradually realized that many people were grateful to me for sharing the thought with them.
It is more common than we realize.
Some relief came from having the burden of exhaustion lifted.
My mother's final illness had been long and painful for her and emotionally and physically demanding for me.
But the whole of our relationship had been fraught with tension.
Even when she was well, I had never been able to relax because I never knew from one day to the next how I was going to find her.
Early in life she had managed to change roles with me, so that I felt responsible for her, rather than she for me.
It was only long after her death that I realized how much anger lay under my acceptance of that responsibility and how much energy I had used holding that down.
At first I couldn't let myself grieve.
On the afternoon of the funeral, not knowing what to do with myself, I went to a cinema which was practically empty.
I sat in the front row of the balcony with tears rolling down my face and feeling nothing at all.
My body was crying but my heart was empty.
I couldn't let myself feel the pain until many years later and with the pain came anger.
No relationship is without conflict yet we rarely talk honestly about the faults of the person who has died.
‘Do not speak ill of the dead’, we are told, yet it is a great comfort to be with a friend who shares knowledge of how awful the dead person could sometimes be.
Ministers, priests and those taking secular funerals need to find ways of giving a realistic rather than glamourized picture of the dead person.
Some national newspapers have begun, in their obituary columns, to acknowledge that their subjects, no matter how distinguished, have been like the rest of us, part saint, part sinner.
Dr Cameron Macdonald, physician and therapist, talks about the three Rs that dominate our responses — Regret, Reproach and Relief.
We regret the things we failed to do, we reproach ourselves for things we did do and feel relief that we have moved on.
An inability to move through these feelings with some gentleness to ourselves can result in unresolved grief and even illness.
In this country we have lost many rituals that in the past supported us through the various stages of grief.
We no longer wear mourning clothes for a fixed period of time, we don't refuse to go to parties for the first six months after the death of someone close to us, we don't take time immediately after the death for intensive grieving.
As a result we don't give signals to our friends to sympathize in obvious ways.
On the contrary we openly challenge the old rituals.
We turn up to funerals in everyday clothes, we refuse to let people send flowers so there is no opportunity for a communal expression of feeling, we are reluctant to take more than one day off work on the grounds that we're better getting on with life as if weeping and mourning had no part in real life.
Worse, we give no signals to ourselves that we need time to grieve.
We abandon the support of formal steps that move us out of that grief back into loving life.
The funeral ritual is particularly important in providing an end point.
Even in the Lockerbie disaster, where a plane exploded in mid-air, and many bodies could only be pieced together in fragments, relatives came from the other side of the world searching for something, anything that gave a focus to their grief and over which they could weep.
Terrible problems arise for survivors of death at sea or explosions where not even fragments are left.
One group who also suffer deeply are secret, adulterous lovers where one partner is killed and the survivor is unable to see the body or go to the funeral.
Sometimes they are unable to tell any other human being of their loss.
The relatives of those who commit suicide face great conflicts.
They are expected by friends and neighbours to follow the normal passages of grieving, yet often they are consumed with anger.
It is as if the dead person had killed themselves in order to get away and as a punishment.
The act of suicide among younger people is indeed often an act of anger against those with whom they live, and who have failed to solve their problems.
Some people seem to stage their suicides in ways which punish the survivor.
I knew one family where the husband hung himself facing the front door so that his body would be the first thing his wife would see as she came in.
The mixture of anger and guilt which overwhelmed his widow made it impossible for her to grieve and weep for the loss of the good things shared in the early days of their marriage.
For the children of suicides there is an equal if not greater burden to bear.
At some level every child is aware of being their parent's future and by this act, the parent is rejecting what they offer.
They have turned aside from pride and pleasure in their  child, they have withdrawn any investment in their future, they have foregone the potential joy of grandchildren.
How can a child or young person immediately grieve for someone who denies their existence in that way?
There are many layers of hurt to peel off before they can see their parent as a human being seeking a way out of a private torment.
One owes respect to the living ;but to the dead one owes nothing but the truth .
Voltaire
It is not surprising that, in these jungles of feeling, other people's responses to our grieving is awkward and embarrassed.
Other people's grief stirs our own unshed tears.
Because there are no rituals to handle this confusion of feeling, friends may avoid us, even by crossing to the other side of the street.
Part of this comes from a superstitious but unacknowledged sense that grief is contagious and unlucky.
The bereaved are dimly aware of these feelings, and are equally embarrassed about displaying tears.
They can avoid their friends and, when they see them, hide signs of distress, not wanting to be a ‘nuisance’.
A nameless sense of guilt accompanies some bereaved, as if they are mysteriously to blame.
Women traditionally show their grief more than men.
This makes it more likely that they will be avoided.
This can include a reluctance to ask them to visit, or to come for a meal and even the fear, felt by some women, that a grieving woman may attract their own husbands.
Grieving men are easier to deal with.
It is acceptable to ask them over for a meal they are not expected to be able to manage without a caring woman.
They arouse protectiveness in women and are not seen as a threat by other men.
The fact that they show little grief does not mean they are unmoved, but they may have been less inclined than are many women to see their relationship with their partner as the fulcrum of their lives.
One profession which sees more of the bereaved than the rest of us are undertakers.
Perhaps twenty times a week each one has to confront a dead body; they have to meet, talk with and help relatives and friends cope with the practical arrangements posed by the death.
No matter what the feelings of the bereaved, the body has to be got out of the way, buried or burned, and much of the richest information from earlier societies comes from the importance accorded to that act.
All other creatures on the planet  leave the dead bodies of their own kind to rot in the open air.
Only humans have devised complicated rituals which convey mystery and respect, along with mourning and tears.
The code of practice of the Association of Funeral Directors describes every step of their procedures for dealing with a dead body but constantly emphasizes the need to behave with respect, the need to act ‘as if the next-of-kin were standing at their elbow, or act as they would if the deceased were a member of their own family’.
We all recognize how important these conventions are.
For those of us who, after the Second World War, sat riveted to cinema screens up and down the country as we watched the opening up of the concentration camps, watched the piled-up heaps of dead bodies, our whole perception of civilized behaviour was outraged.
It was a fundamental assault on our sensibility and aroused a horror almost too deep for tears.
But the equally necessary professional detachment of undertakers gives them a valuable view of human reactions.
They see the range of responses from deep and bitter grief to awkward attempts to simulate grief where it no longer has relevance for the relationship.
They identify people who need counselling help and may refer them to the priest or minister; they recognize their own rituals as important aids to grieving.
Denial and anger — the cycle of despair
The first reaction to the death of someone important to us is usually disbelief, just as to news of our own impending death.
The human psyche finds the idea of its own destruction intolerable and another's death can be a threat to our fantasies of immortality.
This comes even when death has been expected for some time, but is even more dramatic when the death is sudden.
Powerful public examples of this were seen in photographs taken after the death of the American president J.F. Kennedy who had become a great folk hero to the American people.
His death was seen on television by millions of people, but for days afterwards they were caught by the cameras staring unbelievingly into space.
They couldn't believe what had happened.
We saw the same unbelieving stares on the faces of the Americans who watched the ‘Challenger’ failure.
We go into a state of shock to protect us from the knowledge.
A kind of numbness acts as a shell against not only death itself, but  against all the implications of loss that go with it.
Occasionally the shell cracks, awareness creeps in and normally tears and bitter weeping come.
When the pain becomes intolerable, the numbness and disbelief take over again to protect us.
The cycle keeps repeating.
At this stage you are normally expected to experience grief when the main feeling is shock.
Real grief comes later: only then are you ready to share your deep suffering.
People in contact with the bereaved (and the bereaved themselves) find this time-lag disconcerting.
The grief can be displaced and a man unable to cry at his father's funeral may find himself crying for days three months later when his spaniel dies.
But the story is unfinished.
Another normal step in the process of grieving, one which often follows closely on numbness, is anger, often just free-floating anger without specific focus and likely to last until around the anniversary of the death which caused it.
This is often the feeling the bereaved find most difficult to acknowledge, their anger against the dead person for abandoning them to face the world alone.
Rationality is irrelevant.
Under our sophistication we are simple souls.
When we were small our loved parents would sometimes leave us when we didn't want them to go.
We were bereft.
We didn't understand the good reasons why they couldn't be with us.
All we knew was that they were not there when we needed them, and we blamed them.
Why should we not?
Old habits die hard.
Scratch any of us and you will find a small child.
The loss of anyone close and deeply loved rouses the same feelings of anger.
In the confusion of this anger both men and women may turn to a friend or even a stranger for a sexual encounter, often to the scandal of friends and neighbours.
Few people try to understand how, if the bereaved truly loved their partner, they can behave in this ‘shameless’ way.
Yet it is because they loved their partner so deeply that they are driven to seek ways of easing their pain and fear.
One middle-aged woman whose husband died suddenly of a heart attack reacted with a storm of sexual behaviour with a succession of younger men.
Her family was scandalized because she made no effort to hide what she was doing.
She was amazed by her own behaviour and between episodes was bitterly ashamed of what was happening to her.
For about fifteen months after her husband's death she felt driven into these encounters.
She came out of the need quite suddenly one afternoon when, after sex, her partner held her tenderly, which none of the others  had done.
She began to cry, not the angry, resentful tears she'd cried after her husband's death, but like a small child seeking comfort.
Fortunately the man was able to let her weep and talk about the pain.
After this experience she was celibate for about three years.
Later she married a man of about her own age, in many ways very like her former husband.
She can now talk about her anger at being suddenly deserted, and see that her behaviour was a shouted defiance of the world she no longer felt able to trust.
Anger against the person who has died can be experienced as dangerous and may not be tolerated by the bereaved, so other outlets for our anger and sense of loss have to be found.
It is not always realized that the pain of loss is experienced physically as well as mentally.
Many people can point to the part of their bodies where the pain is felt.
In order to ease it many diversions are tried.
Some women attack their own bodies, scratching and tearing at their skin until the blood runs.
They tug at their hair, pulling it out at the roots, roll around the floor and bang their heads against the wall.
The physical pain brings a temporary sense of relief.
All these activities are also seen in the behaviour of children grossly neglected and deprived of affection and attention.
Other people turn their anger outwards.
Doctors and hospitals are a good target, ‘they should be made to pay’; the man driving the other car ‘should go to prison for life’; the murderer should be hung.
After the Sheffield football disaster, within a week we heard accusations against the police, against the clubs, against the fans themselves who were accused of being drunk and causing trouble.
In seeking revenge, we seek to rid ourselves of pain.
We seek to rid ourselves of the awful thought that we might have some responsibility for what has happened.
The thought of our own guilt threatens our very existence.
Our lives are miserable as we remember times when we might have been kinder, we might have been more loving, less impatient.
We wake up during the night with desperate thoughts of what horrible people we are and how if others knew what we were really like they would never want to see us again.
Some people get stuck at this point.
They move backward and forward between denial and anger and depression, unable to break out of the circle of despair by acceptance of what has happened.
They are unable to enter into a total experience of mourning where they acknowledge loss and pain without needing to deny it or blame anyone.
Only when that has been fully experienced can the  bereaved person take what had been the good parts of the lost relationship and find a new relationship into which those positive feelings can be renewed.
We all know widowers and widows who have failed to recover from loss, whose family or friends can find no way of breaking into their misery and sadly, but inevitably, become tired of trying.
Visiting them becomes a draining experience which is avoided.
It is often partners who have been most able to express their feelings, who are more likely to find new partners after a bereavement by investing feeling in a new relationship.
The dark night of the soul
We have to go through the ‘dark night of the soul’, and that involves using both our minds and our bodies.
We have this remarkable gift of tears, which will in time ease both our physical and emotional pain.
One woman described how she had gone back to work after the death of her husband, determined to be brave.
She kept maniacally busy so as not to feel sorrow and set herself the goal of working so hard that at night she fell into bed exhausted.
She would wake in the night hearing sobs, then realize they were hers and immediately stop.
After some weeks, instead of taking a sleeping pill she decided to lie awake and feel what her body was telling her.
She began to think of her husband and how much she missed having the comfort of his body in bed.
She began to cry, deep powerful gut-wrenching sobs, more painful than anything she had ever known.
They went on for three hours before she fell asleep, exhausted but more relaxed than since her husband died.
She said later that it was the same kind of relaxation the body feels after a really satisfying orgasm, every muscle relaxed and a marvellous sense of peace.
She stayed off work that morning and for the rest of the week.
She stayed at home, weeping intermittently but never again with the same passion and desperation of that first outburst.
She went over the whole experience of first meeting her husband, their courtship and marriage and life together.
She talked to friends, not only about the happy times they'd had together but the inevitable disappointments.
She faced her anger at being abandoned at an earlier age than anyone would have expected, and talked about loneliness.
Hour after hour, the thoughts she had been pushing back came pouring out.
Weak but feeling, as she put it, ‘lighter’, she returned to work.
She was able to warn her manager that for a while she might be a bit slower and occasionally a bit tearful.
Her colleagues were relieved that the tense, frantic performance given since her husband's death had stopped.
They hadn't known how to get through to her, and were happy to give support.
Each of us brings to grieving everything else that has happened in our lives.
Somewhere in our heads we carry every grief experienced, and in any new loss, each comes to life again.
We are likely to repeat previous styles to get us through the pain, but a point can be reached where the old ways no longer work.
Our capacity to deny or block out the pain can wear thin.
Sometimes our bodies and minds seek excuses to experience griefs that we may have put aside or denied because we couldn't face them at the time.
Ruth Rendell in her novel The Face of Trespass , describes how a man burns his hand on an iron:
When he looked at his hand there was a bright red weal across the palm…he held his hand under the cold tap.
The shock was so great that it brought tears to his eyes, and when he'd turned off the tap and dried his hand, the tears didn't stop.
He began to cry in earnest, abandoning himself to a storm of weeping, sobbing against his folded arms.
He knew he wasn't crying because he'd burnt his hand, though that had caused the tears.
Full release had never come to him before, the release of all that pent-up pain.
He was crying now…for loneliness and squalor and waste.
A child's right to grieve
He was also crying as a child cries when hurt, with the whole of itself.
If, as children, we were given healing opportunities to grieve for a range of losses, whether it was falling and losing our precariously-achieved sense of balance, the death of a cat, the breaking of a doll or having to move house, we will have learned skills which will stand us in good stead later.
Many children are not helped.
‘Don't be silly’, ‘don't make such a fuss’, are the messages from parents who don't appreciate the intensity of children's grief.
When parents exclude children from their own grief it can make the child feel that the awful event that has taken place is a punishment for which they are in part responsible.
The parent's intention is often to protect so they hide tears and sorrowing putting on a ghastly pretence of cheerfulness.
A child who has lost its father either by death or divorce is not helped by a mother who denies her own sadness.
One young woman whose husband was killed in an air crash described how all her friends had said she mustn't cry in front of her six-year-old daughter.
They said she must stay cheerful for the child's sake.
So she saved her tears until she was in bed.
After about two years she met a man whom she loved and agreed to marry although worried that her daughter had stayed very withdrawn from him.
When she told her of the plan to marry the child's feelings came out.
She said, ‘You're glad Daddy died, aren't you!’
She had assumed that because mother hadn't wept or shown grief that her father hadn't been loved by anyone but herself and her father's parents, who wept copiously.
Ironically the mother had been supporting them in their grief, while hiding her own.
Her daughter's attack made her break down and weep, and after they'd cried together they talked about the misunderstandings.
The mother postponed her second marriage for six months to give time to sort out the new relationships.
The three of them were able to use some sessions of family therapy to acknowledge the need to grieve for the past as well as to prepare for the future.
For a parent to hide sorrow or even anger denies the child's right to have their own feelings.
Our grief is our own and no one has the right to take it away.
It always reclaims us.
Unresolved mourning has the capacity to erupt as an overwhelming crisis when a further bereavement is faced, not only of a death, but also of a loss to one's life-purpose, like redundancy or retirement.
GRIEVING FOR OURSELVES
One man, trying to find his own tears, turned to looking at why he never cried for his father.
His early experiences included savage beatings, carried on until his teens.
These had been given, he was told, ‘in order to teach you respect’.
He left home as early as possible, did well in his career and visited his parents as seldom as  possible.
When his father died he felt nothing and had done nothing more than take a day off for the funeral.
He couldn't bear to hear his mother mourn for her loss so continued to visit infrequently, leaving the main responsibility to his sister, who genuinely mourned her father.
It was the birth of his own son that confronted him with questions.
He wanted to do a better job than his father had done with him.
With help, he explored his feelings and to his horror found himself crying, not for his father, but for himself.
He was grieving for his own pain and sense of loss at not having a father whom he could love.
Until he worked through that he was unable to see his father as a human being.
On a visit to his mother he began to ask her what his father's life had been like.
His father had been savagely beaten himself as a child, and had gone through life feeling a failure.
He had tried to beat his son into giving him the respect he was unable to feel for himself.
The tears that came with this knowledge were now true tears of grieving for his father's death, and the knowledge that they would never communicate with each other.
He remembered not only his father's harshness, but that he had worked hard and struggled to give both children a good education, holidays abroad and a comfortable home, all things he'd never had himself.
There is a sense in which all grieving is for ourselves, so whether or not we loved the lost one can be irrelevant: all that matters is that they played an important part in our lives.
When they go they take part of us with them.
We may have shared experiences of love, anger or fear.
They may have been colleagues, school friends or bowls partners with whom we shared moments of laughter, persecution or triumph.
It is for ourselves and our lost youth we weep.
We may need to grieve when we leave places where we have been happy and even places where we have been unhappy, like prisons or boarding schools.
It can be painful to leave the house in which we were born or the house in which our children were born.
I know one woman who can't bear to throw away the bed in which her children were born!
The hardest loss for many is to move ultimately from their own home to a home for the elderly, a move which they recognize may well be the last one they will ever make, and which forces them to confront their own death.
He that conceals his grief finds no remedy for it .
Turkish proverb.
Grief over aging
A major source of distress for both men and women is the process of ageing.
Jung said that we cannot live the afternoon of life according to the programme of life's morning.
What in the morning was true will in the evening become a lie.
Our bodies begin to give us messages we would be wise to accept.
Vast industries grow up to reinforce our fear and denial, help us stay unwrinkled, maintain our hair colour, postpone sagging muscles.
We are spurred on by advertising images that fun is for the young and fit.
To be old is to be wrinkled and crabbit and heading for Parkinson's or Alzheimer's disease.
We are told that the elderly are living too long, will cost the country too much money and there will be no services enabling them to live with dignity.
But no matter what cosmetics we use, what exercises we do, the decay of our bodies moves inexorably forward.
Middle age, when most messages of what faces us begin to appear, is a gift time.
It is a time when we can take a deep breath, assess where we are and make a start on our anticipatory mourning for our fate.
We must neither deny what is going to happen to us, nor fall into a depression without hope.
Mourning and depression are not the same thing.
Mourning is a much more conscious process where we can focus on a loss, either which we have experienced or which we are going to experience.
Depression normally catches us unawares.
Mourning is something we can choose to do.
Depression is something we allow to happen if we choose not to mourn.
PREPARING FOR GRIEF
The value of anticipatory mourning has been proved in hospital work, where patients who know in advance that they are going to have an operation which entails the loss of a breast, a testicle or a limb have an opportunity to talk before the operation about their fears and anxieties.
They are encouraged to do ‘worry work’, to ask questions about what is going to happen, to weep if they feel like it, to ask for and get reassurance that the future will be all right; different but all right.
Results show that these patients recover at a much faster rate, that they are more optimistic, less ‘self-pitying’ and demand less time and attention from nursing staff than those  who did not have the opportunity for anticipatory mourning.
This applies also to those waiting for the death of someone close.
If they totally deny what is going to happen, the ultimate grieving is much, much harder.
The waiting time can be used to say goodbye to different aspects of the life we had with the person who is dying.
A friend of mine married late and had seven extraordinarily happy years before her husband fell at her feet one day, struck down by a cerebral haemorrhage.
It took him two weeks to die and for the second of those we spoke together every night by telephone, often for more than an hour.
We talked about the possibility of his death, we talked about the possibility of him being permanently brain damaged, we talked about the happiness they had enjoyed together and how important it had been to both of them to find each other.
When the time came for the machine which had been keeping her husband alive to be turned off, my friend faced the reality of his condition and let him go.
She was able to let him go as he was now because she had clarified and confirmed what he had been to her.
She grieved deeply for him but without bitterness; at one level she is still grieving years later but it is not a destructive grieving.
She has continued to grow and has chosen to develop those qualities which her husband most loved in her, her resoluteness, her courage, and her ability to stay open to the world.
UNEXPECTED DISASTER
Those who can fully grieve over an unexpected disaster, like the sudden loss of a limb or blindness, will be in a far better state to make the best use of the faculties left.
The experience of rehabilitation centres is that people who come to them having been conscientiously cheerful since the day of their loss, who have never wept or allowed themselves to enter fully into the pain of their loss, find it much more difficult to acquire new skills.
It's as if the denial of the pain inhibits their capacity to learn.
To put all their energy into learning skills which would enable them to cope with their disability would mean admitting that they are disabled.
Bringing that thought into consciousness means going through the classical stages of acknowledging the anger and the pain before finding acceptance.
Only with acceptance will they find emotional freedom and energy.
Health professionals, particularly doctors, find particular difficulty in coping with a disabling illness in adult life.
They feel they ought to be immune and, in their health, superior to lay people.
The denial can be so strong that faced, for example, with diabetes, they fail to take their diet or their insulin.
Only a dramatic confrontation with the reality of their condition will make them take their illness seriously.
There are many people who collude with their partner, or loved one, or friend's denial of loss or suffering because they cannot face the other person's pain and tears.
It is easier to go along with the false cheerfulness.
It is often left to professional counsellors like social workers and therapists to help the disabled person and their family cope with reality.
The processes of denial and anger have to be given their place before proper grieving can begin.
The birth of a damaged or handicapped child can be unbelievably painful.
It means the loss of hopes and plans which have been building up in the parents during the months of pregnancy.
The professionals involved, the doctors and nurses, can find it deeply disturbing to tell the patients what they have to face.
The most helpful sources of support are more likely to be the parents of other children who have experienced the same trauma.
They understand, because they have been there themselves.
They know the range of conflicting feelings which need to be worked through before tears of anger can become the healing tears of grief.
Those who cannot allow themselves to experience the pain and the guilt that goes with it cannot move through to acceptance and therefore some more creative response.
Unless parents fully accept the child, the burden of pain and failure will be passed on.
A very powerful account,And I Don't Want To Live This Life , was written by the mother of a girl who, from infancy, had behaved in what seemed abnormal ways.
At the age of twenty, after a life of violent and addictive behaviour, the girl, Nancy, was murdered.
What is remarkable about this story is how the mother finally found peace and came to terms with her daughter's life as well as her death.
During the twenty years of worry and despair she had not cried.
She said there was never time.
One day after her daughter's death, she was driving to see a new house to which the family planned to move.
Suddenly I felt something hot on my hands.
I looked down.
My hands were drenched with tears.
I looked  at myself in the rearview mirror.
Tears were rolling down my cheeks.
Twenty years' worth.
They were finally pouring out on their own.
I couldn't stop them.
My vision began to blur.
I was afraid I'd lose control of the car.
I pulled over to the emergency lane, barely able to see the other cars on the road.
When I'd come to a safe stop and turned off the motor, I broke down and sobbed.
I sobbed and sobbed uncontrollably.
I cried a torrent of tears.
Tears of frustration, anger, pain and grief.
I cried for my baby.
The crying continued after that, and continues, but now with other parents who face the same kinds of problems.
Deborah Spungen set up a support organization for the parents of murdered children.
In doing this she demonstrated the way in which, having once made contact with one's feelings, it becomes possible to convert pain into creative action.
Once we have made contact with pain we can use the energy it holds.
I could fill pages and pages with lists of self-help groups that have grown out of this discovered energy.
In Britain alone there are 25,000 concerned with health issues of one kind or another, not only physical but mental illness as well.
Perhaps we need to develop groups for ‘failures’, for children born with or who develop conditions which make them unable to fit labels of normality.
They are acutely conscious of having failed parental expectations.
They hide this from their parents so as not to add to their pain, but need someone with whom they can share unacceptable feelings.
We concentrate so much on parental disappointment that we forget the other face of the coin.
Children with Down's syndrome, children with learning difficulties or with a physical handicap, no matter how loved, are acutely aware of how they are seen by the world.
LOSING A COUNTRY: LOSING A JOB
One of the most poignant losses any human being faces is having to leave one's home and sometimes even one's country because of war, racism, famine or simply the drive to get decent economic opportunities.
America was built on this kind of distress and its culture was enriched by literature and songs full of nostalgia, yearning and grief.
Every immigrant family carries this sense of pain somewhere in its psyche, but often it is left to the women to  hold the sense of pain and loss while the husbands and children find their way in the new world.
To-day we can see Pakistani or Bengali women, walking in their traditional clothes, barely able to understand the language of the country in which they are living, acting as the repository for the pain and grief of the whole family.
In some way we do not fully understand, if one member of the family can do this it releases the energy of the others.
But someone has to be willing to carry the burden.
It is a heavy one, and traditionally left for women.
What we know less about is the pain of the families left behind in the ‘Old Country’ who have to watch the young people leave.
In Scotland and Ireland whole communities were bereft.
The arrival of a letter from a son or daughter was an event in which tears of relief were mixed with tears of sorrow, and the news was shared with the whole community.
In Ireland the departure of the emigrant was ritualized with a procession to the boat or the railway station.
They called it ‘a living wake’.
For many men the most important grieving they do is over the loss of their work when made redundant or on retirement.
Most men are taught to seek in their working lives the sense of purpose, of meaning and of self-respect that women seek in personal relationships.
A job gives structure and a reason for getting up in the morning: it gives human contact with colleagues, it gives ‘busyness’.
It gives them an answer to that most terrible question, ‘And what do you do?’
Men have great difficulty, because of their conditioning, to see ‘being as important.
For most, ‘doing’ is everything.
So when the job goes they feel their soul has gone with it.
Yet they are not supposed to grieve.
They are supposed to be cheerful and rejoice, when they want to weep with terror and self-pity.
They have no helpful rituals.
Their farewell party is a sham and a mockery, a pretence that a great future awaits them instead of the fear that the next great event in their lives may be their death.
And everyone joins in this charade with talk of them now having time to do all the things they have always wanted to do.
‘Drop in when you're passing’, they say, but nothing but humiliation faces those who do, and see someone else at the desk that was once their's and find everyone too busy to chat.
‘We'll lunch when you're in town’, they say — and no-one believes it.
And indeed for the first few weeks there is a manic response of getting up at the usual time and  finding things to do, but which gradually subsides into grief and depression.
There are lucky people who have jobs which can continue long past retirement age; they will live longer as a result.
Others prepare themselves through pre-retirement planning to find ways of giving continuing service to the community.
There are also people of a naturally equable temperament who intuitively understand the need for preparatory mourning and adjust their lives accordingly.
But without another job, a hobby or some activity that gives meaning to their lives there is danger.
Recent German statistics show that 30 per cent of retired people who have nothing that interests them, die within a year of retirement, regardless of the age at which they retired.
It is a very different matter for younger people made redundant without warning.
For them the whole range of feelings of shock, disbelief and anger come into play.
Unless they are given opportunities to express their grief in appropriate ways which can include weeping for loss, they will never be able to acquire the creative energy necessary to find a new job.
In close communities like mines, the workers have been able to express both grief and anger openly.
It is in the newer manufacturing industries that factories have been closed and the workers have walked away, numbed and despairing.
THE GRIEF OF DISILLUSION
These are just some of the losses we may experience in life.
Some, like our own ageing or the death of friends or loved ones, are inevitable for all of us who live long enough.
But there are other less obvious losses that happen to some people for which the grieving and mourning patterns are just as relevant.
Many people who were young in the thirties of this century had a love affair with Communism.
The Russian revolution had swept away the most cruel and backward government in Europe and become a symbol of hope for many people, a symbol that ideas of freedom and justice could overcome tyranny.
What was not understood was that when you sweep away a feudal society, you do not overnight change the institutions or the casts of thought that have been built up over centuries.
Nor in those pre-Holocaust years had  innocent belief in human progress been lost.
So with the gradual release of information about Stalinism and the terrible losses of life in the labour camps, a whole generation of political activists lost their faith, not only in Russia, but in the hope that human beings can radically alter their society in ways that make it more equal and more just.
There were some who denied their loss and held on to formulas of belief but by far the largest numbers of devotees simply withdrew from political activity into a position of depression.
They were unable to confront their pain and anger.
There were a few people who allowed themselves to feel the pain of loss, the pain of betrayal, when they began to understand what had really been happening in the Soviet Union.
I knew men and women who wept bitter tears as they confronted how they had given their love, their time, their heart's energy to a cause which they now saw as false.
These were the people who used that experience to free themselves from intellectual slavery to any party, but who did not lose the innocence of faith in the human capacity to change the world for the better.
The changes which took place in Eastern Europe during 1989 and 1990 pose some of the same problems.
There are terrible stories of what happened, how corruption spread and how power was abused.
Except for a few people in each country who tried to keep protest alive, everyone else shares responsibility.
The citizens of these countries have somehow to find forgiveness for each other and for themselves as part of the process of grieving and healing.
In many areas of our lives we have to face what T.S.
Eliot described as,
…the rending pain of re-enactment Of all that you have done ,and been ;the shame Of motives late revealed ,and the awareness Of things ill done and done to others' harm Which once you took for exercise of virtue .
Closer to home is the trauma faced by social workers over the last ten years.
This profession, which most members had come to brimming with conviction that they had found a way of linking their idealism to an honourable way of earning a living, has been devastated by continuous attack from the media.
They have felt misunderstood and scapegoated, quite unprepared for the political  and social dilemmas in which they were caught.
Many have moved from saying proudly they were social workers to saying it with embarrassment.
Grieving for the lost image of ourselves as helpful and useful people can be an important factor in avoiding depression or cynicism and recovering our self-respect.
Too often we have let ourselves be locked into a ‘graven image’ of ourselves, perhaps by parents and teachers.
Only by shedding that can we become humble.
Grief and tears are not to be seen as special experiences, only to be used at great and solemn moments.
They can be woven into the fabric of everyday life, the human experiences of trying and failing.
They give us courage to try again and to succeed.
GRIEVING AND LETTING GO
But a primary condition is that we have to let go of those aspects of our past that are no longer helpful or relevant.
The growth of every living creature or plant on the planet is dependent on the casting off of parts that have served their purpose.
If they were held on to the animal or plant would die.
The cells of our skin are constantly dying and being replaced, the old ones have to be sloughed off to make space for the new.
Similar changes are constantly taking place in other parts of our bodies.
In the plant world new growth cannot take place until the old has died and dropped away.
The seasons of the year reflect the cycle of life.
Within the human spirit the same processes are present.
The small child has to pay a price for every step she makes to independence.
To feed oneself means giving up the marvellous comfort of being fed, to walk alone means giving up the pleasant passivity of being carried.
And so it goes on through life; always a struggle between wanting to hold on to what we have at the same time as we are reaching out for new joys and satisfactions; always the dilemma of making choices, of greedily wanting everything, of resenting having to let anything go.
Every step forward requires of us the abandonment of the past.
If we try to hold on to everything we end up with nothing.
The man or woman whose marriage is a mess, who seeks a more loving relationship with a succession of lovers, but who can never bring themselves either to leave or be honest with their partner, is caught in a cycle of small deaths with no hope of life.
Others who hold on  either to resentments of the past or else to romanticised versions of past events are equally unable to grow.
What is sad is that caught in this way, they are unable to see or use the opportunities for life-fulfilling experiences spread out before them.
The ability to let go of parts of our past, of parts of ourselves, of fantasies, of dreams that are no longer relevant, of pain that has long since served its purpose, is an essential part of our capacity to grieve and to recreate ourselves.
It is for the loss of these things that we weep and it is in the weeping that we clear the path for renewal of our hope and trust in life itself, rather than in individual and fragile dreams.
Every change in our lives brings with it griefs, even changes for the better.
For that reason, conservatives who reject the idea of change, who cling to past ideas and ideologies, while we may not agree with them, are entitled to be understood and their reluctance to face the pain of change respected.
But sometimes that reluctance means that others are immured in their pain.
All social progress has caused pain to some but liberated others.
Those of us who wish to push forward must acknowledge the pain it may cause and help those affected to grieve, and then to let go of values and ideas which may no longer be relevant.
But we must also, where possible, build into plans for the future those values that are worth preserving.
Tears and Religion
Jesus wept.
John, 11:35
One autumn day, while working in the library, I found a book which described weeping rituals in ancient Canaan.
At the end of each summer, when the grass turned brown and the growing cycle had ended, groups of women came together in the fields for a ceremony of weeping.
It was thought that the god of fertility had died and only their tears could bring him back.
In this way fertility would be renewed and another season begun.
It was as if the energy of their tears revived him.
At a certain point in the ceremony the rhythm of the weeping began to change and the tears were replaced by laughter and sometimes a kind of ecstatic, even erotic frenzy.
I was moved by the account, seeing resemblances between the experience of these women, dead many thousands of years before, and women alive now who weep over men whose love they think is dead but try to revive with their tears.
Sometimes such weeping is transformed into an erotic frenzy which may or may not refertilize powerful feelings between them.
On the following day, I went to Greenham Common where women were arriving from all over Europe to take part in a demonstration against the nuclear weapons housed there.
It was a dull, grey day as if the sky was mourning with us.
At one of the gates in the fence which circled the base, a religious service was held which attracted both Christians and non-Christians.
A cloth was spread on the ground, candles placed in jam jars on the corners, a loaf in the middle.
Then to the tune of ‘By the waters of Babylon I sat down and wept’, we sang another version of the words.
The soldiers and police guarding the gate heard, ‘By the wires of Greenham, we sit down and weep, weep for this our land’.
As the women's voices soared and broke into part-singing so that the phrase ‘We sit down and weep’ rang round and round the group, the hair prickled on the back of my neck.
A ball of green  wool was passed around and we used it to bind ourselves together as the singing continued.
Next, long white streamers tied into an intricate pattern in the centre were handed to various women standing in the circle.
Then the priestess — for that is what she was — began to weave a web while talking about her reasons for being at Greenham.
She passed the streamer to another woman who did the same and each woman who received it made a statement of her sorrow, culminating with a young woman who spoke, with tears running down her face, of her fears for her children.
By the time she had finished, most of us were openly weeping with her, and the web was half finished.
Then subtly the tone began to change.
Courage and hope emerged and by the time the web was finished, the bread broken and shared, people were smiling and charged with energy.
What to do with the beautiful web we had made?
Still tied together with the strands of wool we moved towards the fence intending to drape it on the wire.
Then the movement shifted and we veered to the gate.
It was like being part of an uncertain creative organism.
Then with a sudden ecstatic rush, we all resolved at once that it should be put up across the gate and the military must accept responsibility for destroying it.
As I disentangled myself from the green wool, I had been linked not only to these women beside me, but to those in Canaan and all the other women through the centuries who have wept over the death of the gods of life, of love, and of hope, whom they tried to revive with their tears.
When the Israelite desert tribes entered Canaan, they found a land not only flowing with milk and honey, but full of weeping and laughter in its religious rituals, quite different from anything they had known.
They also entered a world of very different beliefs from their own.
All the food available to animals and man was thought to be due to the rain which fell from the heavens, the arrival of which was dependent on the will of the god Ba'al.
Each year Ba'al died at the end of the harvest, was revived, then ascended to his throne and opened a cleft in the clouds so that the rain could fall.
It was the Lord Ba'al's love for the virgin Anat that brought him back from the dead, in response to her tears.
All animal and human fertility depended on this ritual being acted out.
The whole population joined in the autumn festival.
Sacrifices were offered while the women noisily wailed and wept.
Ba'al was thought to have descended into the earth and the sacrifices and  energy invigorated him and brought about his resurrection.
But the rejoicing and the laughter which followed the tears were of equal importance, because they powered the erotic joy that was as important as the water falling from the sky.
From the resurrection of Ba'al, to the resurrection of Christ, the rituals have changed; even the meaning given to the weeping has changed; but the power of tears remains.
They became an essential part of the practices of the Israelite tribes who penetrated to the northern parts of Canaan and integrated with local people.
The Old Testament identifies holy places which were probably early cultic weeping places.
One was the grave of Rachel, where ‘Lamentation is heard in Ra-mah and bitter weeping’.
Almost certainly before Rachel an ancient goddess shed tears there bewailing her lover and, as Anat did for Ba'al, she ‘continued sating herself with weeping, To drink tears like wine’.
The other side of the weeping was the cultic ecstasy and the wild erotically-charged energy which followed it.
The goddess was recognized as a partner in fertility.
These responses began to permeate Israelite life: and the prophet Jeremiah preached against the cults and idolatry.
Women were most resistant to his strictures, claiming that when they served the goddess, they were never short of food.
The prophets won.
A transformation began which to this day influences our use of tears and lamentation.
The ancient rituals which linked them to fertility and the renewal of life were abandoned.
Yahweh, the God of Israel, eliminated Ba'al by becoming the lord of all growth and fertility.
He needed no help from men and women, and needed no partner.
In this move power was taken away from the people as participants in the ritual and invested totally in the god.
The only part left was the male role of sacrifice; the generative power of women's tears was excluded.
Weeping became a self-humiliation, an acknowledgement of one's unworthiness before the god, used only to appeal to Yahweh in the hope of influencing His decisions.
From the end of the period of the Kings, public penitential festivals were a frequent necessity.
When there were droughts, crop failure or disease, disgrace or defeat in war, the people were summoned to participate in public weeping and rituals of mourning.
A time for weeping and lamentation was fixed and announced, when ‘all the country wept with a loud voice’.
At the individual level man, because women's role in ritual was now eliminated, had to appear before God to confess his sins.
Shame, repentance and weeping served this confession.
Weeping had now become linked with penance and fasting.
Christianity continued the penitential tradition and the ‘grace of tears’ was considered one of the chief gifts offered to the penitent.
Their power was still recognized.
St Bernard tells us that ‘the tears of the humble can penetrate to heaven and conquer the unconquerable’.
The conclusion drawn in the Malleus Maleficarum , the handbook on witchcraft written in 1486 by two Dominican friars, was that this made tears displeasing to the Devil, and he made it impossible for witches to cry so that they would never find repentance.
This theory became the basis for the examination and torture of those suspected of witchcraft.
The judge is advised that:
If he wishes to find out whether she is endowed with a witch's power of preserving silence, let him take note whether she is able to shed tears when standing in his presence or when being tortured.
For we are taught both by the words of worthy men of old and by our experience that this is a most certain sign, and it has been found that even if she be urged and exhorted by solemn conjurations to shed tears, if she be a witch she will not be able to weep: although she will assume a tearful aspect and smear her cheeks and eyes with spittle to make it appear that she is weeping; wherefore she must be closely watched by the attendants.
In passing sentence the judge was advised to place his hand on the head of the accused and say,
I conjure you by the bitter tears shed on the Cross by our Saviour the Lord JESUS Christ for the salvation of the world, and by the burning tears poured in the evening hour over His wounds by the most glorious Virgin MARY, His Mother, and by all the tears which have been shed here in this world by the Saints and Elect of God from whose eyes He has now wiped away all tears, that if you be innocent you do now shed tears, but if you be guilty that you shall by no means do so.
The tears shed by Christ became an object of devotion and were considered particularly precious.
A flask containing one was a recognized and valued relic; the Shroud of Turin was thought to  show signs of tears as well as of sweat and blood.
Paintings often show the heart of Jesus weeping tears of blood; there is a Mass entitled De Lacryma Christi and a famous wine of the same name.
The tears of Mary have been even more honoured.
She is often represented as ‘Our Lady of Tears’ and shown weeping.
In this role she is the patroness of Spoleto, a town in Italy.
A picture of her painted on a wall was seen to shed tears and a chapel was built on the spot in 1485.
There are hundreds of reports of miraculous statues of Mary weeping real tears: some are reported to weep blood.
They have been seen in many countries of Europe and in America.
In a study of miraculous images of Mary which weep, the author, Father Hebert SM, after saying there is a long history of these writes, ‘There has never been such an outpouring of tears as there has been in this century…more explicitly during the ten years, 1971–1981, particularly so in Italy and in the United States’.
The tears are thought to be caused by her pain as she looks at the sins of the world, and are meant to inspire the watchers to repent and to set an example to others.
These entreaties, though modified, come in a direct line from the prophets of the Old Testament.
They too drain the vitality out of women's tears and replace them with passivity, penance and guilt.
Even the representations of Mary offered by the statues reinforces that image.
They uniformly show young, narrow-shouldered, and in so far as one can see through the draperies, narrow-hipped, flat-chested women with long pale hands which have clearly never done a stroke of work.
The faces are meek and accepting, the tears trembling gently on the cheeks; one cannot imagine these model women roaring with laughter or howling with rage.
In this way the Catholic Church has devitalized and drained of energy the power of those tears and confined women in the church to helplessness.
The joyful energy which women could generate was seen as dangerous, and the Christian church today is often equally suspicious of charismatic services.
In the same way it is suspicious of women, and the way in which they can transform tears into a source of erotic and celebratory power that can lead to resurrection.
They have been firmly removed from the rituals of power, their role frozen into passive and silent weeping at the foot of the cross where the god has been hung.
But in the Catholic Church, unlike the Protestant churches, they at least have another woman to whom they can pray.
In spite of the image of her that is presented, women coming to her know she  had a child, and that she suffered.
Go into any church in a poor area and you're likely to find candles lit before the statue of Mary and little messages on scraps of paper asking for her help.
You may even find a woman in tears.
The churches are ruled by men but kept alive by women.
They form the bulk of congregations, raise funds, dean and decorate the churches.
It is hard to understand why.
One possibility is that, with all its institutional faults, the spiritual church offers some form of communication with that part of women that maintains contact with the power of fertility.
They know that even in the often dreary services some attempt, no matter how limited, is being made to make contact with the great mystery.
It is difficult for us today to enter fully into the power that those ancient rituals must have generated, but anyone who has attended a religious revival meeting with its emphasis on repentance, tears and rebirth is in touch with the same forces.
These forces cannot be eliminated.
Various kinds of religious rituals have carried that creative power through the centuries, but now in the West they are falling into disuse in the orthodox churches.
They are being revived in the Third World and in the crusades run by evangelists, which tells us how fundamental these forces are.
Religion and tears are inextricably mixed, but often, so is erotic frenzy.
In rural areas of America, the young men learned that after a religious revival meeting, the young women attending could be led unprotesting into the fields and bushes behind the evangelical tent.
The goddess lives on.
Tears and weeping became a recognized part of spiritual discipline for many mystics.
In Catherine of Siena's Dialogue , she charts the five stages of weeping the mystic may expect.
In the last stage:
Just as green wood, when it is put into the fire, weeps tears of water in the heat because it is still green (for if it were dry it would not weep), so does the heart weep when it is made green again by the renewal of grace, after the desiccating dryness of selfishness has been drawn out of the soul.
The importance of these spiritual disciplines is also recognized in Islam, where from earliest times there has been a certain class of men known as ‘The Weepers’, who devote themselves to ascetic practices.
Until the eighteenth century, religion was the only force to speak  to the central concerns of human beings, the only explanation for human suffering which was available.
From that time on, in the West, increasing human mastery of the world in the form of science offered explanations of disease and of natural catastrophes which weakened the power of the churches and offered alternatives which excited the human imagination.
The rise of science coincided with the spread of new values which emphasized independence of individual thought in ways that were essentially a challenge to the power of the churches, their priests and ministers.
The scientists could offer better explanations when things went wrong.
Germs in the body were easier to accept than God's punishment.
More important, you could get medicine guaranteed to cure you, whereas God didn't always answer your prayers.
Perhaps most important was the idea that you didn't need to suffer, and much of the importance of religion lay in its claim to make sense of suffering.
When science found ways of easing pain, both physical and emotional, most people preferred to abandon rather than understand it.
We forget what life must have been like for people without anaesthetics and painkillers.
For more and more people God became an irrelevance except when science didn't yet offer solutions.
The great transitions of life — birth, marriage and death — retained their power over the imagination, and the rituals around these are all that have kept many churches functioning.
But that functioning is marginal to the lives of most people in affluent societies.
But though the churches are failing, religion is in some ways more powerful than ever, if by ‘religion’ we mean some way for people to make sense of their lives, and particularly suffering.
Not only has science failed to solve all our problems, it is increasingly viewed as a monster which threatens to destroy us and the planet.
Even the marvellous triumphs of medicine are losing the preventative health battle to the insidious increase of mysterious allergies, diseases of the environment and psychosomatic illnesses.
The political march of reason has halted, and the churches of eastern Europe are packed with worshippers trying to make sense of their lives.
Esoteric cults proliferate and many attempts, like astrology, to make links between human lives and the pattern of the universe are attracting new adherents.
Religion is a fundamental source of another quality compassion.
It is not enough to weep for ourselves; we have to be able to weep for others.
The Old Testament is one of the great world  sources of compassion for the poor and the hurt: the prophets thundered in their defence: ‘Oh that my head were waters and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people’ Jeremiah, 9:1).
The New Testament also constantly urges care and compassion not only for the poor, but for all injured people.
‘For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears; not that ye should be grieved, but that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly unto you’(2 Corinthians, 2:4).
Those who believe in the Christian God believe that the cause of suffering lies somewhere in our relationship with that God: part of that relationship lies in our links with other human beings.
We cannot live in isolation if we wish to be close to God.
We have to see their pain as our pain and their need as our need.
The word ‘care’ comes from the Old English carian , to suffer.
If we care, we suffer with the other.
It is the churches which have too often failed to live according to the model set for them by Christ.
It is true that they set up the great caring institutions for the poor, the handicapped and the sick — forerunners of the welfare state.
It is also true that some of these institutions have been run in brutal and insensitive ways, particularly against children given refuge.
There is a formidable list of those in religious orphanages and reform schools whose tears were not respected.
To find the benefits of religion, we have to find some way of separating it from the institutions which claim to represent it.
The central problem developed when the participatory nature of ritual was destroyed and replaced with a concept of a god who had no need for the feelings of people, who was placed above them in ways that made any behaviour other than worship and penitence irrelevant.
This made guilt central to the relationship, built on fear and sterility of feeling.
In a state of fear no other feelings can flower.
A new response is growing from women theologians and from radicals seeking liberation for many oppressed people.
They reject the role of helplessness and attempt to re-engage and integrate into religious ritual the energy of the feminine psyche.
They have a concept of God which embraces the full range of emotional characteristics, a god who is also a goddess.
They are creating new rituals of worship which reflect this unity, this wholeness, and in these rituals celebration can be offered of the capacities for  weeping, laughter, joy and for creativity.
They do not abase themselves in penitence but see themselves in a partnership which accepts responsibility for establishing peace and justice on this planet.
They are celebrating the Creation rather than the Fall.
Tears and Health
We are tears Which were never shed .
The cutting ice Which all hearts dread We could have melted ;But now its dart Is frozen into A stubborn heart .
The wound is closed ;Our power is lost .
Ibsen,Peer Gynt 
I wept not, so of stone grew I within.
Dante,Inferno , canto XXXIII, 1.49.
The human race has for thousands of years been aware of powerful links between tears and health.
Much of the knowledge was and still is intuitive.
In myths and dreams tears are seen as magical, turning into flowers, trees and jewels as they fall and bringing heroes back to life.
Greek, Roman, Indian, Eskimo, Irish and Scandinavian myths are full of such stories.
Such race memories live on.
A Scottish woman whose son was about to have an operation had a dream the night before it was due.
She was carrying him as a baby along a valley devoid of vegetation and with high hills on each side.
She realized that there were rival armies shooting across the valley from the hill tops.
A stray bullet hit and killed the baby.
She knelt down and wept and noticed that where the tears fell on the ground, flowers sprang up.
She looked at the baby, also drenched in tears, and found he had come back to life.
While we are all born with the capacity to cry, that capacity can be lost.
It can be lost for two main reasons.
The first is that the environment in which we live is so hostile to our tears that the pain  of showing them outweighs the relief we get from letting them flow.
The second is that the pain or distress which we could probably relieve by crying, is so powerful, so overwhelming, that it becomes too deep for tears.
What happens is that in order to protect ourselves we erect barriers of denial of feeling between us and the pain.
We dare not let ourselves make contact with it in case we lose control, and weep and weep without ever stopping.
When we lose the ability to cry, our body is deprived of one of the great protectors against stress.
For the major distresses of our lives, grief, fear, anger and embarrassment, the body has a built-in response, both in sounds and activity.
Weeping, sobbing, shaking, sweating, even laughing are all able to discharge emotion.
If our mind refuses to let our body respond, the feeling stays locked in and can affect all our physical processes.
Weeping and sobbing are natural and appropriate responses to grief and our body is designed to provide the capacity and to use it creatively.
The blocking of natural functions can damage our health.
There are alternatives which relieve our immediate tension.
We can vent anger by shouts and gesticulation.
We can get drunk, we can excite ourselves sexually until we achieve an orgasm.
But all these alternatives can carry a price more damaging than weeping.
As so often happens, ordinary people and poets recognized this before the scientists.
‘Have a good cry’, ‘I'll feel better once I've had a good cry’, ‘I'm worried about her, she hasn't shed a tear since she had the news’, are all sayings which have a recognized place in our language.
Lord Tennyson wrote,
Home they brought her warrior dead ;She nor swoon'd nor utter'd cry ,All her maidens ,watching ,said ‘She must weep or she will die’.
A distinguished psychosomatic physician, Dr A. Cameron Macdonald, documented his own findings on what he describes as the water-retention syndrome.
This condition normally gives rise to severe swelling, known as oedema, in various parts of the body.
Often this has a clearly organic cause, but there are many cases where no organic explanation can be found and emotional factors have to be considered.
Dr Macdonald was consulted on a series of cases which gave him clues to what was to become an accepted theory.
The first was an elderly lady with severe swelling of the eyelids and around the mouth.
The story, gently explored, was that this condition began after the death of a sister whom she had failed to visit during her final illness, in spite of having been sent for.
Her feelings of grief were complicated by feelings of guilt and she had not wept.
She said that in any case, ‘she was not given to crying’.
Within hours of her sister's death she had developed swelling of the eyelids and face.
The second, whom Dr Macdonald saw the following day, was a young pregnant woman who had developed rapidly increasing oedema, a dangerous symptom in pregnancy.
Organic causes were ruled out so, as is his wont, he sat down and talked to her.
Her mother had died and her father summoned her to come to him at once.
She was caught in a confusion of grief for her mother and guilt about her inability, because of her pregnancy, to make the long journey north which father was demanding.
Dr Macdonald cut through the guilt with his paternalistic authority, more powerful in the hospital than her father's, and insisted that she must stay where she was.
This left her free to grieve.
The third patient, encountered the following morning, was a young actor whose face had swollen to the size of a football.
Dr Macdonald, alerted by the events of the previous two days, explored the possibility of recent bereavements; all were denied.
Then the young man said, ‘It depends what you mean by bereavements’, and went on to describe his conflict about a woman with whom he was in love but not yet ready to marry.
She had just told him she was tired of waiting and would find someone else.
Each of these people, when able to confront grief directly, passed great quantities of water through their bladder and the swelling rapidly subsided.
A further fifty cases followed up showed a bereavement or separation in forty-six cases and thirty-nine of the forty-six had associated guilt, anger or resentment.
The one feature which occurred in almost every case was that patients had been discouraged from showing feeling and especially from weeping in childhood.
In another study of sixty-eight patients suffering from oedema, forty-two patients required only one ‘talking’ interview for the symptom to subside.
The other twenty-six responded to psychotherapy which ranged in length from one month to four years.
Of the sixty-eight, only six admitted that they could weep easily and without embarrassment.
Dr Macdonald clearly identifies  the link between oedema, weeping and the flow of urine from the bladder in which the body frees itself from the water retained in the tissues causing the swelling which brings the patient to the doctor.
He demonstrates how when the patient is helped to weep the kidneys can produce sometimes as much as a litre of urine.
Another of Dr Macdonald's encounters was with a woman who suffered, among other things which included slightly swollen ankles, from Sjogren's Syndrome, an extremely uncomfortable state of dry eyes.
He wondered if dry eyes might also be a symbolic message about weeping and tears so asked her if she had been allowed to cry as a child.
She replied, ‘Oh no, I was never allowed to cry and I cannot relieve myself’.
One woman, helped to ‘relieve herself, was brought up by a mother who continually told her that, ‘Big girls don't cry’.
When later attending the funeral of her ten-year-old nephew, she overheard the officiating clergyman say to the child's mother, ‘Now you mustn't cry’.
She seized the astonished man by the shoulder and said to him, ‘Never, ever say that again!’.
I would have liked to say that to the normally pleasing Duchess of Kent when shown on television visiting a home for people who are elderly.
One old lady, overcome by her situation, burst into tears.
The Duchess, obviously finding this very painful, was heard to say, ‘Don't cry, please don't cry’.
The idea has bitten deeply into our way of life.
The muscles are often the repositories of the tension that tears are not allowed to relieve.
The stiff upper lip is a barrier against the trembling which could lead to tears.
The stiff neck is a way of controlling feeling as are the rigid shoulders and the pulled-in gut.
Any experienced masseur can tell how often, as they release muscle tension, tears are shed.
There are particular muscles which seem to carry most of the burden, and it can take several sessions to help them become relaxed.
Crying seems an essential part of the process.
Often patients come with considerable back or neck pain, but unless they can use the experience of crying to look at the repression of feeling in their lives, the effects of the massage is short-lived as the tensions quickly build up again.
Teachers of the Alexander technique, concerned about total body posture, become very aware in their own training of the way we hold feelings in our bodies.
During their three-year training, which is a combination of theory and practice, it is a normal experience for students, as their bodies recover natural balance, to go through periods of deep and intense weeping after which there  is significant improvement in their postural skills.
They make no attempt to explore the cause of those tears, concentrating instead on living without muscular tension.
Some forms of psychotherapy are based on the work of Reich, an analyst who gave up ‘talking’ therapy because he saw the possibility of releasing emotional tension locked into the body, and making faster contact with the sources of conflict that cause pain and distress.
He believed that the memory of every experience in our lives is imprinted somewhere in our body tissues, mostly in our muscles, and we can recover those memories by using a series of physical movements, positions and methods of breathing which will restimulate experiences of pain and distress.
Dramatic explosions of anger and tears are inevitable consequences of this style of therapy.
Anger and tears are opposite faces of the same coin.
Anger which is denied, not allowed into consciousness, or else repressed to just below the level of consciousness, spilling over rarely, is one of the most powerful sources of stress the human body has to cope with.
It involves a constant holding-back or a holding-together of the self, and uses enormous energy, as if letting go would be desperately dangerous.
This holding-back plays havoc with bodily functions, and research is continually showing us new relationships between stress and our physiology.
Connections have been made with, among other illnesses, skin rashes, asthma, heart disease, backache and cancer.
More recently we have learnt that the functioning of the immune system, that exquisitely coordinated mechanism protecting us from disease, is intimately tied in to levels of stress.
The ability to cry is one of nature's ways of relieving stress and tension.
After a ‘good cry’, properly in touch with our feelings, there are significant changes in body tone.
The body feels and looks ‘softer’, muscles are more relaxed and skin tone improves.
This kind of crying may have to be relearnt by those whose early life experiences have distorted their natural capacity.
We are constantly being offered esoteric techniques of relaxation and meditation to counteract stress, yet choose to ignore what is naturally available or are ashamed to use it.
When Professor Cary Cooper, head of Organizational Psychology at the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, published research showing statistical links between breast cancer and stress, he also showed that the women most likely to develop breast cancer were more withdrawn and when  they cried tended to cry alone.
His advice to stressful women was: ‘If you cry, don't cry alone.
Do it when other people are around so that someone will see that you are upset and listen to you.
If that is too difficult, seek other help — counselling will do you more good than valium’.
After the 1990 Football World Cup offered us images of football heroes bursting into tears as a way of dealing with their despair, Professor Cooper was quoted as saying, ‘Crying is a psychological and physical recovery.
All the research shows that one of the best coping strategies is to let emotions out, and one of the worst is not to do that.
There is growing evidence that bottling up your emotions weakens your immune system’.
In counselling, indeed in any of the ‘talking’ therapies, tears play an important part, first of all in the release of tension, and later as a way of directing attention to areas which are ‘tender’and might repay exploration.
They may be the first sign of trust given, an attempt to show an external sign of an internal pain as a way of having it noticed.
The counsellor is given an opportunity to treat the pain with respect, and for the person seeking help this can be a supremely important experience.
The woman who died of cancer and left the poems expressing her soul's pain written over twenty years of marriage on the kitchen window sill, for her husband to find, was saying that no one in that house had respected her pain sufficiently to share it.
In her lifetime she was never known to cry, never known to complain.
Cancer, most feared of illnesses, is now seen to be intimately related to our emotional life.
The idea shocked many people who were convinced that the only cause must be genetic, or chemical, or a virus, something they could put under a microscope.
These factors may indeed be present but are more likely to act as partners with unresolved emotional issues in people's lives, rather than to initiate the disease.
An American study from the University of Oregon showed that housewives had a 54 per cent higher incidence of cancer than the female population as a whole and 157 per cent higher than that portion of the female population who work outside the home.
Research workers tried to find carcinogenic materials in kitchens, but further analysis of the data showed that people paid to work in kitchens have less cancer than housewives in spite of spending twice as much time in them.
The missing factor was how housewives feel about their lives.
Lack of opportunities to express their feelings is a common factor  in the history of cancer patients and the illness may be a response to that.
One holistic therapist I know, always asks her patients when taking their history, ‘And when did you decide to die?’
Frequently they give her the exact day they decided life was not worth living, and sometimes even the time of day the decision was made.
Death becomes the way out of deep hurts, the unexpressed griefs and resentments eating away at self over the years.
The most common experiences in the two years before a cancer is diagnosed are a significant loss or a sense of meaninglessness in the whole process of living.
This afternoon I am going to a memorial service for a woman who devoted her whole life to caring for others.
Nothing was ever too much trouble for her, her job was her life.
Two years ago she was forced into early retirement because of cuts in funding to the organization where she worked.
A woman who valued herself more could have said, ‘Well, now I'll have time to do other things’, but for this woman life without the sense of being needed and of other people valuing her had no point.
It was her breasts, those symbols of nurturance, that first showed signs of cancer, and from the moment it was diagnosed she resigned herself to her fate.
Lovely warm things will be said to-day: she might not be dead if we had said them to her while alive, and let her weep out her hurt and pain at her rejection on our shoulders.
But we were all too polite to be honest.
Nor did we reflect on the way in which work can be used by some people as a substitute for living an authentic life.
They give to others what they want for themselves.
Asthma can be an emotionally-triggered illness closely linked to the inability to cry, and a ‘good cry’ can frequently avert an attack.
Many asthma attacks end when crying begins.
In psychotherapy, with patients suffering from asthma, the relief from tension is often associated with dreams of rainfall, most common symbol of tears.
The central experience of asthma is the feeling of being stifled and one's breath being trapped.
It is as if the person is balanced on a pivot between being angry and bursting into tears, and an honest expression of either feeling relieves the tension.
But frequently the asthma sufferer learned to hold back both feelings because neither are acceptable to the family.
The drugs prescribed to relieve an attack force the respiratory passages to allow air in and out, but until the conflict about feelings is resolved or another outlet found, attacks will recur.
Tears not shed openly may be shed in other ways.
A friend of  mine who reached her fortieth birthday without having the child she hoped for, began to bleed severely from her womb.
Hormone treatment had no effect.
For quite other reasons she joined a women's therapy group, and in the course of the work stumbled into the unrealized intensity of the pain her barrenness was causing.
She had protected herself but became aware that her womb was weeping for her.
Menstruation has been described as ‘the weeping of the disappointed uterus’.
The constantly-dripping nose for which no explanation can be found is another example, the catarrh which never quite clears up, the cold that comes out of the blue when life is difficult for us.
If we're able to use it the cold may win us a few days in which to withdraw to bed and grieve gently for ourselves; if not at least we can weep openly at work, blowing our nose and wiping our eyes, and get a little consideration and sympathy from others for our sad lot.
Dr John Harrison, author of Love Your Disease —it's keeping you Healthy , claims that sinusitis, particularly in men, often indicates a reluctance to cry.
This is a view widely held among alternative and complementary practitioners.
If we cry when we are sad, the physiological response is tears from the eyes and nose.
When we've finished being sad, the mucous membranes in the nose and sinuses settle back to the normal uninflamed state.
If the sadness is there but not ever directly expressed by crying…the mucous membranes remain chronically inflamed, never really pouring out mucous and never really resting.
Low-grade inflammation results in swollen membranes which eventually block the openings to the sinuses, causing pain and further discharge.
This is chronic sinusitis.
Dr Harrison, who places stress on the importance of looking closely at his patients, watches eyes and eyelid margins to see if they are red or swollen.
If so he wonders if the patient needs to cry and has for some reason stopped himself.
There are reports of links between crying and urticaria, a rash resembling nettle rash.
Several researchers in psychosomatic medicine have reported cases where attacks of urticaria ended when the patient wept and returned when weeping was repressed.
It has been accepted that suppressed anger is a powerful force in skin rashes, and again the link between expressing anger and expressing  grief comes into play.
The symbolism of weeping eczema seems obvious.
All illnesses carry symbolic meanings as well as the purely physiological.
We may have a genetic pre-disposition to cancer, but where or when it appears in our body is determined by a combination of factors.
There is an increasing sense that each person's life-history plays a part in the illness ‘chosen’ by the body.
We speak of someone who is stiff-necked long before they may become crippled with arthritis.
The patient with back pain will say, ‘I'm scared stiff’.
The illness and the personality are linked.
Some people's rashes are entirely hidden by their clothes: they put ‘a good face’ on it.
Other people who get psoriasis only on knees and elbows may need to fend people off.
We talk casually of someone drowning in work or drinking themselves to death long before a terminal illness shows itself or their suicidal drive is detected.
We may not ask for help by weeping, but our bodies may become helpless so that we have to be helped.
We may not have the courage to scream for attention but we can ensure, by being ill, that we get it.
The awful triumvirate of fear, guilt and anger has to be faced and the tension built up in the body dealt with.
The gut, the liver, the bowel the circulatory and nervous systems are all intimately responsive to these emotions.
None of these emotions can be separated from the other; they are linked in ways not clearly understood.
It helps to bring them into consciousness and accept them.
The way we handle feelings about illnesses, we now know, will have a considerable effect on the capacity to recover from them.
Some people succumb without a struggle.
Increasingly, others are looking to understand the message their body is giving them and learn from it.
Fear may be equally distributed between both sexes, but guilt is usually nearer the surface in women, while anger is more likely to be nearer the surface in men.
These are socially conditioned responses.
Some people can struggle by themselves to understand and learn new and more creative ways of living.
Others may want someone to work with them and there is a wide range of therapies available.
Not all therapies are suited for all people.
Some can be damaging.
If, for many years, tears have been frozen in order to protect us from intense pain, the process of thawing out may require great delicacy and sensitivity.
If unleashed too suddenly, the pain can overwhelm us and we may feel it too much to endure.
So the choice of  the person with whom we share this personal journey has to be made with great care.
Profound feelings need to be experienced in an atmosphere of safety, respect and integrity.
Academic qualifications, while they can be an important guide, cannot be the only criteria.
Therapists should be interviewed and their views on issues important to you in other areas of your life examined.
Do they have sexist, ageist or racist attitudes that might emerge at a critical point in your work together?
How democratic is their style and is that important to you?
Could you work more effectively with a male or female therapist?
What happens if, in the middle of therapy, you lose your job and can't keep up the fees?
Too many people entrust their psyche to a therapist with less thought than they take when finding a garage to service their car.
Acute emotional pain is a powerful threat.
Fear is our most primitive and important response.
Tears and anger flow back and forward and round fear, fear for our survival, fear of rejection, fear of loss of dignity and of life.
Tears may start with howls of anger, then subside to sobs which seek attention for distress, and finally dry up in fear as we face our helplessness.
Now we are overtaken by guilt, and the pain of fear and helplessness is interpreted as punishment for nameless sins.
We don't know what we have done to deserve our fate, but we must have done something.
The adult response of reason is swept away to reveal the small child cowering under parental wrath.
These are some of the feelings we may have to explore if we seek not to be victims of our emotional life.
CHOICES
Some therapies replay these early experiences by using drama, art and music to make contact with deeper layers of awareness than are normally available.
Working with a dramatherapist, we can become an outraged, authoritarian father or a rebellious daughter using words written by Shakespeare 400 years ago about situations which have as much meaning to-day as they did then.
In A Midsummer Night's Dream , Hermia's father Egeus complains to the king, saying,
Full of vexation come I ,with complaint Against my child ,my daughter Hermia…
As she is mine ,I may dispose of her …
To which Hermia later replies with the well-known plea of the young for understanding, ‘I would my father looked but with my eyes’.
Having been drawn into the awareness, having re-experienced it in our bodies, we can then stand outside it and see what its meaning is for us.
Dr Sue Jennings, a pioneer in dramatherapy, described how an infertile woman may learn to identify sorrow and rage against the sterile womb which, every month, rejects the fertilized egg: how she can move from passive grief to weeping rage in which she pounds her belly with her hands, railing against its refusal to give a home to the child she desperately wants.
And somehow, having made contact with the deepest part of herself, the woman often gives permission to that womb to flower.
In this way, protected by a structure created by a skilled therapist, we can cower in fear, howl with anger, weep with panic, rend our clothes in guilt and let go any need to hold on to feelings which belong to our past rather than our present lives.
We may not have known that they lay beneath the surface of our lives.
Until we do know, we cannot give them expression in tears or anger.
This process of catharsis can bring improvements in both physical and mental health.
In a variety of forms it was known in ancient times.
Aristotle wrote about it in relation to drama and what we can gain by going to the theatre.
It is a recognized component of rituals of healing we can still see being practised by the wise men, witch doctors and shamans in ‘primitive’ societies and sometimes in the spiritual healing work of evangelical preachers.
Another well-known form of therapy, co-counselling, relies heavily on catharsis.
Using a democratic structure of rotating the roles of therapist and patient, it encourages people to express previous hurts in ways they might have done as children if that had been allowed.
Tears, weeping, sobbing, shaking and reliving the experiences which triggered off these powerful feelings, leave the person being counselled exhausted after a session but peaceful, and often with a new perception of the world.
The founder of co-counselling, Harvey Jackin, along with other therapists like Dr Janov, best known for his work on the Primal Scream, believes that only by re-experiencing the pain locked away in the psyche, repressed by not being allowed the simple physiological responses of weeping and crying, can that pain be eliminated from the system.
When the capacity to express powerful feeling is restored, changes occur not only in the person's perception of the world but  also in their physiology.
Janov details changes in tension headaches, heart rates, blood pressure, skin disorders, stomach disorders and much else.
He argues that all other forms of therapy are simply tranquillizers, helping people to adapt rather than change, or else to find an addiction like meditation or relaxation that offers temporary relief to which we will always need to return.
Other people may find more low-key but equally powerful ways of working with their thoughts and feelings, gaining insight into the causes of their distress.
At different stages of life, different forms of therapy may be helpful.
When we have left behind the turbulence of adolescence and shed some of the more harrowing demands of responsibility for making careers and caring for the next generation, we may seek opportunities to assess our lives and face its later stages with some serenity.
For this, the work of Carl Jung has offered some of the most creative wisdom.
Health, emotional and physical, and ways of achieving it, have replaced arguments about religion and spiritual salvation.
In a secular society, where death no longer holds out hope of an after-life and heaven, the quality of the life we know we have has assumed an importance previously given to the life of the soul.
Argument about rival therapies has taken on the passion previously given to theological debate.
Health has integrated the concepts of sin and guilt.
If all these books written about our power to influence our health by right action and right thinking are true, then to be sick is our own fault and we should feel guilty.
The appeal to doctrines of reincarnation is an almost essential fall-back as it shifts the burden of full responsibility from our shoulders.
It seems essential that such a burden should be shared.
Few people are capable of bearing the full and stark responsibility for their fate.
In recent years we have seen the most thorough pursuit ever carried out to find partners in responsibility for the ailments to which we are subject.
Food plays a particularly important part.
Fantasies of being poisoned, so often a feature we carry into adult life from the inevitable conflicts of infancy, are the most common, although pollution offers a reality base for our fears.
Our lethargy, our depression, our eczema, our lumps, our arthritis, our coronaries, our aches and pains, our allergies, are entirely due to polluted food…say some.
Others with equal cogency argue that damage to our health lies in our failure to take exercise, or in some form of faulty body co-ordination that constricts important pathways for our nerves, veins and arteries.
Much of this is undoubtedly true but perhaps not true enough to justify the industries springing up all over the country offering simplistic solutions like food supplements and gymnasia.
The more responsible therapists, like acupuncturists, reflexologists, yoga teachers and herbalists, offer interesting and usually sensible explanations for symptoms.
The backaches, the headaches, the abdominal pressure, the fatigue and skin troubles as well as the life threatening illnesses for which no cure is on tap from conventional medicine often respond to these alternative or complementary therapies…for a time.
Then, to the disappointment of both therapist and patient, the improvement halts and fades away and the patient moves on to try something else, blaming either themselves or the therapist.
There are some remarkable examples of genuine healing, but increasingly these are seen to be linked with some inner process involving a drive to self-healing.
It is this new emphasis that causes such anxiety and guilt to those for whom self-healing does not work.
Do I really not want to be well? the cancer sufferer asks herself.
Do I really hate my life or myself so much that I want to die?
The answers involve asking ourselves every time we are ill, what benefits that illness brings us.
It is not an easy question and sometimes there is more than one answer.
One is, however, fairly constant: the pain and discomfort of illness is frequently easier than the other kind of pain and hurt in our unconscious memories.
The demons of early agony of being abandoned when left alone for longer than we could bear it, the terror of being annihilated by a raging adult, the suffocating experience of being trapped in the tunnel of our mother's body with a cord tightening round our neck…it is hard to face those feelings again.
It is easier to keep them buried, push the feelings back down with stiffened muscles, joints and tension headaches.
We can withdraw into fatigue.
One fascinating interaction between mind and body is seen in an illness known as psychosomatic glycaemia fatigue.
The symptoms are excessive fatigue, either in the form of chronic or acute attacks.
What identified sufferers was a collapse of motivation.
They forced themselves to keep going but they had no enthusiasm.
Some had lost faith in their marriage, some in hope for promotion, some on discovering that they would never have a child.
The physical result of this apathy and lack of zest was an inability to raise the sugar  concentration in the blood.
The conclusion is that we need enthusiasm for living to be healthy and energetic.
To retain enthusiasm in the face of difficulties, we must receive respect for our tears and complaints in childhood and be helped to renew hope when facing difficulties.
We are swamped to-day with books and articles about the power of positive thought to heal our physical or our emotional ills.
Dr Coué, who, in the nineteenth century proclaimed the virtue of saying first thing every morning and regularly thereafter that, ‘Every day, in every way I'm getting better and better’, is enjoying a great revival.
The phrases used are different but the message is the same, ‘I approve of myself, ‘I am a child of the Universe’, ‘I relax and trust in life’.
It's quite hard work for some of us to take this seriously, but that may be because we are not very good at loving ourselves or trusting life.
What is important is the discovery that saying these things can actually make us feel better, but only if we say them with sincerity.
Saying positive things about ourselves or having positive things said to us actually produces a chemical response in our brains.
Holding the idea that we are good, that we are lovable, that we are cared for, seems to act in much the same way as a tranquillizer.
The idea enters the brain and by being given meaning triggers off a biochemical process which soothes and makes us feel happy.
Being stroked physically has the same soothing effect and the phrase, ‘being stroked’ when we are complimented grows from the similarity of these experiences.
By having someone in our adult lives who constantly feeds us verbal tranquillizers, or by feeding them to ourselves we can ease emotional pains and keep them at bay for a while.
But if the pain is rooted in our past and is never brought into consciousness, we will need stronger and stronger doses of the tranquillizer.
It is when these fail that sex, drugs or alcohol are invoked to more effectively push down the pain.
Actors and politicians use applause, fanatical followers of cults, religions or political parties use a different set of ideas, which can range from love for one's fellow human beings to projections of bitter hate upon one's enemies.
The leaders become very skilled at giving their followers a range of ‘fixes’ to meet their need to be valued, but also their need to have someone to hate.
Most of us will try anything to ease ourselves of the pain of having been unsatisfactory children.
We will seek reassurance that we are loved in all kinds of bizarre ways rather than acknowledge there were times when we were not loved, or we may never have  been loved, or even that we may have been hated.
We may seek out partners incapable of loving us in the way we need so as to experience again the brief hope that this time it will be all right or as Lisa Minelli sang in the film Cabaret , ‘This time I'll be lucky’, before the pain sweeps in again to overwhelm us.
Most of us will try anything rather than face the pain, yet that is the only way out of it, and tears and weeping are an essential factor in the cure.
Every therapist of emotional pain, no matter their particular style, sees the discharge of feeling through tears as a positive and healing experience.
Most see it as essential, preferably happening in the company of the therapist but sometimes taking place in between therapeutic sessions.
Weeping in therapy sessions, say some, can be used as a defence against having to talk about the pain.
It can go on and on, soaking through boxes of tissues, seemingly having no end and making it quite impossible for the patient to speak or to say why he is crying.
This can last for some weeks.
Other therapists would say that this weeping is an expression of pain experienced in the life of the person before words were available.
Weeping serves two purposes.
One cleanses the brain of the chemicals associated with depression which in turn gives rise to feelings of sorrow.
The second is to release emotional tension.
This effect is temporary unless the feeling which is linked with the tears can be experienced: therapists would say re-experienced, since the deep pain triggering the tears is seldom about experiences happening in our day-to-day lives.
It is more likely to be about sore things from childhood, which we were not allowed properly to experience or mourn: or we may have been too young in emotional or physical development to cope.
Children who have had happy, loving and stable early experiences will when hurt simply weep for a while to relieve the hurt, then get on with life.
They will not need to overreact with despair or anger.
For some it may be that the act of crying was left free for them to use in a healthy way.
Freud and Breur described one case which illustrates this capacity for self-healing.
The woman they described had nursed three or four people whom she loved, through a final illness.
Each time she exhausted herself but managed never to become ill.
What happened was that after each death she would go through a process of remembering the scenes of illness and death.
Every day she would go through each impression once more, would weep over it and console herself — at her leisure one might say.
This process of dealing with her impressions was dovetailed into her everyday tasks without the two activities interfering with each other.
In addition to these outbursts of weeping with which she made up arrears and which followed close upon the fatal termination of the illness, the lady celebrated annual festivals of remembrance at the period of the various catastrophes.
This contrasts sadly with the experience of an elderly woman I met who suffered three bereavements in quick succession.
All were people whom she loved deeply, one was her husband, the other her son, the third her sister.
She told me that after the second, her son's death, she was so angry with God that she refused to cry and found after her sister's death, she was unable to.
She now had a permanent pain in her chest which she knew quite clearly was related to her inability to cry.
She knew also that it would not clear until she could recover her tears.
For most people their tears are distorted in some way or another, often confused and strangled, not flowing freely.
It is very unusual in ‘advanced’ societies for us to cry without at the same time apologizing.
An important aspect of these therapies is that people are given permission to cry and are guided through the experience.
For the rest of us crying is a hit or miss experience, sometimes satisfying but sometimes leaving us drained, exhausted or more hopeless than when we started.
This probably relates to our reason for crying and the early history of how our tears were responded to.
One man, told by his doctor that he had cancer, retreated to his bedroom and wept for a week, refusing to eat and waiting to die.
He fell back into the pattern of helplessness in the face of distress that he had been taught in the cradle.
There was no fairy godmother to rescue him.
Another person could weep and out of the weeping find memories of strengths which could lead to formulating a treatment plan and a cure.
The most healing tears are those which neither overwhelm us with pain, nor are so detached from our feelings that we do not really own them.
Ideally we should both feel the pain and also retain awareness of what is happening.
The most successful  weepers are those who have integrated a loving carer into their experience, so that even when they are weeping alone they do not feel abandoned or frightened.
Not all of us have had those good experiences, but we can recapture in later life what we did not find in childhood.
We need not be ashamed of borrowing such a carer, either in formal therapy or informal friendship.
In experiences of communal disaster or of shared pain we can gain support from those who suffer with us.
Tears are magical because they can transform us.
They can calm, restore, comfort and relieve us.
The lesson is to value our own and other people's tears as a source of health, strength and courage.
