chapter four
CONFLICT AND THE EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIP
Objectives
We have seen how, from the workers' point of view, rationalised labour and practices can mean a very constraining and potentially unstable working environment.
However, the emphasis on structural constraints and formal controls provides only a partial view.
Relationships between workers and managements are much more complex, involving struggle on the part of workers, as well as degrees of cooperation and consent.
Workers have certain resources even in the most restrictive circumstances: the power to disrupt production, to withhold cooperation, and the practical abilities and skills upon which employers depend.
If production is to go ahead at all there has to be some minimum level of cooperation between management and workers, and workers require some autonomy if their initiative is to be counted upon.
This chapter will seek to examine various theories on the nature and management of conflict in employment relationships.
There can be a sharp discrepancy between the degree of freedom and dignity that workers believe they deserve and the control that employers think is necessary for their authority to be maintained.
Therefore, resistance to control on the part of workers, and the conflict which follows from this, remain a constant feature of the labour process.
WORKPLACE RESISTANCE
Dimensions of industrial conflict
Workers' opposition to the constraints of the workplace can vary in a number of different ways.
To begin with, the level on which conflict occurs can be based on actions taken by individuals, action taken by work groups, and action at the level of workers' organisation, namely the trade union.
Secondly, conflict may be formal in the sense of being openly recognised by the parties involved, and perhaps institutionalised as part of an established bargaining procedure; or it can be informal, and confined to a sphere of covert activity outside the organisation's authority structure.
And thirdly, conflict may be spontaneous or it may be organised.
To an extent, these dimensions occur as patterned forms of conflict.
Thus the resistance of individuals would normally be classified as being both informal and spontaneous.
Similarly, resistance based on work groups is also usually informal, although it shows a degree of organisation in the sense of providing a collective response even if not a pre-planned one.
Trade union organisation provides a very important basis of opposition, preventing any single group of workers from being isolated.
Essentially the formal recognition of a union legitimises workers' resistance, and this can immeasurably strengthen their bargaining position.
Having made these distinctions, however, it is important not to oversimplify them.
The different dimensions of conflict overlap and interact in a sometimes bewildering variety of ways.
For example, types of worker resistance which derive from spontaneous, unofficial initiatives on the part of groups of workers often benefit from a degree of tacit legitimacy, in the sense that those in authority may ‘turn a blind eye’ to various workshop practices.
Conversely, while a trade union provides the basis for claiming legitimacy of action, official industrial disputes may still not actually enjoy widespread legitimacy.
The extent to which workers are able openly to contest issues can vary a great deal, depending on factors like prevailing public opinion and the attitude of the particular employer.
Range of industrial conflict
While it is possible to take the view that collective trade union action is of a different kind from initiatives taken by individuals or small groups of workers, most social scientists nowadays would probably accept that these forms of conflict stem from the same root causes in the commodity-status of labour and the constraints of managerial authority.
And, indeed, on close inspection there does prove to be an overlap between different levels of conflict.
The great complexity in patterns and forms of industrial conflict that these diverse dimensions point to has often been noted (Eldridge, 1968, Hyman, 1984, p55).
As an individual response conflict may occur where workers, finding themselves at odds with their work for whatever reasons, may respond by taking time off or by leaving the job after a relatively short period.
Thus, high rates of absenteeism, lateness or labour turnover usually indicate a ‘withdrawal’ from the work situation.
Industrial sabotage is also seen as a similar reaction to a work situation experienced as disagreeable.
As well as conflict individually expressed, there is collective conflict involving the solidarity of the workforce.
The great diversity of industrial conflict means that it often takes the form of a tactical response.
Interests will be mobilised in pursuit of explicit objectives, and the parties involved will use forms of resistance which seem most appropriate.
For instance, if workers and their leaders regard an all-out strike as a measure of last resort, they may wish first to test management's resolve with less drastic action such as an overtime ban, or with subtle forms of non-cooperation which affect output and quality.
Similarly, in the case of a plant under threat of closure, a strike would make little sense if the company intended moving the stock and machinery elsewhere.
The occupation of the site would be more likely to add to workers' bargaining strength.
Conflict initiated by management can also be a tactical response in changing circumstances.
Thus, for example, if the market for a firm's products is buoyant and it can sell all it makes, management would normally be reluctant to provoke action that would disrupt output.
Supervisors and personnel officers will be instructed to tread carefully when dealing with workers.
However, if demand falls collective action poses less of a threat, and may even be beneficial.
A strike of limited duration can improve a firm's financial position by saving on wages.
Thus, in times of slack demand it is not uncommon to find managements tightening up on industrial discipline.
In this chapter these various aspects of industrial conflict will be explored, essentially by examining the three principle levels of conflict: individual and group conflict (which are here classed under workplace conflict) and broader industrial conflict based on trade union action.
The point-of-production resistance of workers has often been interpreted as being a problem of poor communications, of managers and workers unable to understand each other 's points of view, or as some other type of human relations difficulty.
However, Salaman (1979) has recently drawn attention to the dialectic between managerial control and workers' resistance as a vital, if often neglected, aspect of class conflict.
This suggests that individual and group resistance has a structural aspect and stems from a clash of real material interests.
Nonetheless, it is a structure which is dynamic and changing.
In this sense, for example, the employment relationship was visualised by Goodrich (1975) in his classic study of the British mining industry in terms of a ‘frontier of control’, the boundaries of which continually shift as one side or the other gains ascendancy.
Workers or management may control some aspect of operations, but the struggle may simply shift to another area.
As Thompson (1983, p.124) points out, control reflects ‘the degree of power management has to direct work’, and this is always relative to the countervailing power possessed by workers.
In reality, a perpetual struggle for control in work is not always obvious or observable.
The tactics workers adopt are often versatile and frequently covert, so that an intimate knowledge of a particular place of work might be needed in order to be aware of resistance going on.
Nor does resistance have to be manifest to be effective.
The threat of resistance being offered if some change were to be initiated may be enough to maintain the status quo.
For example, skilled workers may enjoy considerable autonomy by virtue of their employer's reliance on their skills — so much so that the employer gives little thought to attempts to rationalise work or de-skill jobs.
Spontaneous resistance and sabotage
A form of activity which clearly comes under the heading of subtle and covert resistance is industrial sabotage.
This is a response from workers who are perhaps seeking a respite from a tedious job, or who wish to defy what they regard as an oppressive management.
Sabotage can break the rhythm of work and it can give workers the feeling of having some control over their work situation, however slight.
Highly constraining technologies, like assembly lines, can produce in workers a desire to ‘beat the system’, while other acts of  sabotage may simply be a byproduct of pressures for output.
The removal of safety devices to speed up production, for instance, is often done with the tacit connivance of supervisors.
Industrial sabotage has been a neglected area of research, despite its being one of the commonest forms of worker resistance.
However, Taylor and Walton (1971) have provided a sociological framework of analysis.
They argued that although sabotage is usually regarded as irrational or even pathological behaviour, careful investigation shows that ‘in many cases the meanings which inform sabotage are explicitly intentional’.
A knowledge of the context in which acts of sabotage occur — the lack of alternatives available to workers, the frustrations that build up over time — often shows sabotage to have been an understandable response.
Taylor and Walton note that sabotage can be difficult to define: at one end it merges with informal practices which become almost part of normal procedure, ‘neither openly demanded nor openly questioned’, while in extreme cases sabotage may be identified with explicitly political violence.
Indeed, it is possible to argue with Taylor and Walton's own definition: ‘rule- breaking which takes the form of conscious action or inaction directed towards mutilation or destruction of the work environment’.
Here, they use the common-sense idea of sabotage as a ‘spanner in the works’, yet several of their own examples do not fit readily into such a definition.
Not all acts of sabotage ‘mutilate or destroy’ the work environment; some merely cause delays and confusion.
Nor does sabotage necessarily break rules in any simple sense.
Rules themselves may conflict with one another, and sabotage may break one (usually formal) rule whilst fulfilling some other informal expectation.
WORK GROUPS AND WORK CULTURES
The collective resistance of workers is also a feature of much informal action in the workplace.
Given the power of the managerial hierarchy to dispense or withhold rewards, open acts of defiance expose individuals to reprisal.
But resistance which is both group-based and informal can be very difficult for management to pin down.
The example of sabotage, discussed above, was a case in point.
Although covert, sabotage is not necessarily just an individual response.
Taylor and Walton noted that ‘often the active or passive cooperation of hundreds is observable’.
Work groups may generate distinctive ‘cultures of resistance’ based on informal relations of friendship, or on some shared occupational identity such as a craft ethic (Salaman, 1979, pp.16–36).
In any case, work groups often develop common values and a sense of their own history.
They may also share distinctive ways of communicating, such as a repertoire of sayings and in-jokes.
This culture — frequently the expression of past struggles with management — can form an effective basis of unity and continuing resistance to formal control.
A classic study of work group resistance, is found in the famous Hawthorne research (Roethlisberger and Dickson, 1943).
The management at  the Hawthorne plant had been frustrated in their efforts to raise production in a section where electrical assemblies were wired up — the so-called Bank Wiring Room — and the researchers were called in to try to resolve this problem.
The researchers discovered the existence of a strong group culture which enforced an output norm.
Workers in the section perceived management's standards — arrived at by Taylorist methods — to be outside their control and liable to be raised arbitrarily.
Consequently they restricted their output to a level they regarded as reasonable, one that did not undermine their own pay and job security, and that the slower members could keep up with.
The Hawthorne researchers stressed the pressure that groups can bring to bear on members to conform to common norms.
In this case positive sanctions involved acceptance in the friendship cliques, while negative sanctions meant ridicule and ostracism for anyone who broke ranks and tried to ‘bust’ the agreed work rate.
The prevailing view of such work group resistance has often been that it stems from workers' misunderstanding of management's intentions.
Indeed, such disapproval is implicit in the very notion of workers ‘restricting’ output.
Lupton's noted study On the Shop Floor (1963) traced the widespread acceptance of this biased view to the Hawthorne research and the human relations movement which followed it.
These interpreted output restriction in terms of the social requirements of sustaining a group structure.
Workers' desire for group membership, and their supposedly effectual motives, were contrasted with management's rational criteria based on technical efficiency.
(The focus of the human relations school has always centred on the possibility of reconciling these social and technical rationales.)
However, as Lupton points out, the conflict of interest may well be genuine, not merely an irrational response by workers.
Workers' behaviour, he argues, is really a response to managerial control , and is best understood as a counter-attempt to assert workers' own control (1963, p.6).
The point has been made more generally by Eldridge in his historical survey of workers' resistance (1971, pp.45–64).
He suggested that in the early stages of the industrial system, tactics like machine-breaking by agricultural labourers may indeed have reflected a clash between workers ‘traditionalistic outlook’ and the new methods of technical efficiency.
But as industrial capitalism developed, the basis of conflict shifted to one of ‘competing rationalities’.
The struggle to exert control increasingly brought managements and workers into conflict over issues related to the work itself: bargaining over piecework rates, the rules of shop practice, the pace and intensity of work, and so on.
Thus, conflict reflects workers' coming to terms with the rational procedures of employment, and learning to fight back using employers' own categories of time and money.
Some celebrated empirical studies of work groups have argued that so-called restrictive practices usually reflect the attempt by workers to impose their own definition of a fair day's work.
Lupton's own research, in an electrical components firm showed how an equitable balance between wages and effort can develop on the shopfloor.
Not only workers but supervisors too colluded to ‘fiddle’ earnings and work allocation in a complex piecework system.
The ‘fiddle’ was ‘a quite stable adjustment of the discrepant goals of management and workers’(1963, p. 197).
Similarly, Donald Roy's well-known  studies also showed the conscious manipulation of payment systems.
In one case, Roy (1952) observed that output restriction stopped short of the point where management would have re-timed jobs and cut the piece rates; in another (1954) study operators, inspectors and supervisors cooperated in informal practices to ‘fix’ a fair job rate.
Manual workers are not the only occupational group to have to cope with imposed controls.
Professionals and white-collar employees nowadays increasingly find their status and conditions under attack.
As a result, it is possible to see in such groups the collective responses normally associated with shopfloor workers.
Pettigrew's (1973) study of the implementation of a computer network in a large retailing firm provides a good example of group solidarity amongst employed professionals.
The programmers in the company initially had a good deal of control over the computer installation, which provoked management to cut down their influence.
The programmers responded in a variety of ways — by attacking the competence of the ‘dilutees’ whom management brought in to fragment their work, and by habitually withholding their most important resource: information.
They kept details of programs in their heads, and always explained procedures in highly technical jargon.
Their varied and imaginative tactics grew out of a strong collective identity developed in the face of the hostility they encountered from management.
Finally, the ways in which employees can adapt systems of managerial control depend to a large extent upon the work context, particularly the room for manoeuvre allowed by factors like market pressures, technology and work organisation.
Patterns like the ‘fix’ and the ‘fiddle’were developed by skilled workers, in piecework systems where considerable discretion was retained on the shopfloor.
Similarly, professional groups possessing key skills can often rely on employers' dependence upon them.
Where this kind of space exists, informal relationships need not always subvert formal goals.
Indeed, workers can adapt in ways which support the organisation (Fox, 1971, p.33).
Instances in which workers take the initiative to get a job done reflect cooperative elements in the employment relationship.
However, in work situations under much tighter constraint, or based on work-pacing technology like the assembly line, there is far less scope to manipulate managerial control.
In such cases workers' resistance may be defensive and more obviously oppositional.
INDUSTRIAL CONFLICT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
The forms of industrial conflict whereby workers' interests are mobilised on a broader front include strikes and other kinds of industrial action, and here the role of trade unions as workers' official representatives comes into play.
Of course, in reality there is a continuum between these and more informal types of conflict.
A great deal of strike activity turn out, on closer inspection, to be spontaneous and based on resistance by specific groups of workers.
Likewise, the strength of any union in the final analysis rests on the resolve of workers to oppose managerial control at the point of production.
This was well demonstrated, for example, in Huw Beynon's famous study of a Ford car assembly plant, which gave a detailed account of the two-way relationship between official trade union activity and the shopfloor resistance of workers (Beynon, 1984).
Still, in focusing on the collective character of disputes, we are moving to a level of analysis that includes the wider framework of economic and political changes.
Outside the confines of the work organisation, factors like public opinion, the state of the economy, and government policy on industrial relations cannot be ignored.
Conflict in the employment relationship has had an important influence on theories of industrial relations.
The orthodox approach to the subject of the 1950s and 1960s essentially involved a pluralist perspective.
It viewed management, on the one hand, and workers organised and represented by trade unions, on the other, as both possessing roughly comparable resources of power.
Their interests were seen as being conflictual in some degree, but the pluralist model implied that the terms of the relationship were negotiable.
As Alan Fox, a major proponent and later critic of pluralism, has put it, ‘The pluralist does not claim anything approaching perfection for this system…[but the imbalances of strength between employers and unions…are not seen as so numerous or severe as generally to discredit the system either from the union's point of view or the management's’(1977, p.136).
More recently, however, the weaknesses of this approach have been recognised.
To view workers and employers as equal partners in an agreement lacks any sense of the sharp inequalities of power dividing them.
But more importantly, since the late 1960s, the ‘return’ of industrial conflict as a major issue in workplace relations has created serious difficulties for this analysis.
A pluralist perspective sees conflict essentially as a temporary breakdown in job regulation, which means that the emphasis is very much on the resolution of disputes in collective bargaining.
So while the model could certainly account for conflict, high rates of strikes and evidence of a powerful opposition of interests between employers and workers could not be accommodated.
The scale of many more recent industrial disputes, together with the manner in which they have been regarded by workers, employers and the state, have made explanations based on pluralism seem less and less plausible.
The failure of conventional pluralist ideas prompted the emergence of what Hill (1976) has called the ‘new industrelations’ based on a ‘sociological and radical perspective’.
The main exponents of this approach — writers like Hyman, Beynon and Fox — all take conflict to be a major structural component of employment; although we should also note that sociology in fact has a longer tradition of exploring the distinctive problems of explanation and understanding associated with industrial conflict (eg. Eldridge, 1968).
Interpreting industrial conflict
At least two main aspects of the sociological approach can be singled out.
Firstly, it sees industrial relations as part of a totality of social relations.
It is necessary to consider the social context of industrial relations as well as the labour process; and here the new sociology of work, discussed in the previous chapter, is of central relevance.
Above all, a sociological view of power and control is essential.
Thus a unifying theme of the ‘new’ industrial relations, to  quote Hill (1976), is ‘the conviction that order and coherence in industry and society rest on relations of dominance and power, and that in modern industrial societies, particularly capitalist ones, power disparities are long-term, structured and not susceptible of much modification’.
A second important feature of sociological explanations of industrial conflict is that they assume conflict to be a reasoned response of one form or another.
Even where it at first appears to be a rather pointless reaction there is invariably found to be some rational element, which means that conflict must be classed alongside other forms of purposive social action.
This approach, pioneered by Weber (1964, pp.88–115), has been widely applied in studies of industrial conflict.
Viewing behaviour as social action means that explanations of events must be ‘adequate at the level of meaning’.
Or, as Eldridge has put it, ‘adequate description for sociological purposes involves the attempt to delineate the meaning people attribute to their behaviour, and to the situations in which they find themselves’(1968, p.17).
The basic focus of interest here is the different versions of events that industrial conflict, by its very nature, is likely to produce.
What the workers might think is a lively practical joke, management may regard as disruption or sabotage; what workers might see as an intensification of their labour, management may regard as an improvement in flexibility, and so forth.
Therefore, as impartial observers, it is important that we take account of all definitions of the situation, and are prepared to understand events as the participants themselves experience them.
Implied in this approach is a definite change of emphasis from pluralist-type accounts.
The latter involved a narrow focus on the formal institutions of industrial relations.
But the sociological approach argues that this is inherently abstract and artificial, as if decisions taken within the negotiating arena somehow independently shape the course of events.
Instead, it is recommended that the motives and actions of the groups involved in workplace relations should be the main focus of attention.
It is how they perceive and define events, and how their consciousness forms and changes, that is ultimately decisive.
A sociological model of industrial conflict
In the accounts of industrial action one reads about in newspapers or sees on television, the cause of a dispute will usually be attributed to the issue over which work relations broke down.
Most of us therefore tend to think that strikes are brought about by specific disagreements, over pay for example, or over alleged misconduct by workers or managers.
However, a sociological explanation needs to be more holistic than this, and it is not normally sufficient merely to regard the events leading up to a strike as its cause.
Following Eldridge (1968, pp.19–23), we can distinguish different ‘causal levels’ on which behaviour is structured.
The events that immediately precede a strike are more accurately defined as the factors which serve to precipitate the ensuing conflict.
But in addition there are issues which form the local background to any given dispute, and other factors which constitute the broader societal context of conflict.
Thus it is possible to discern three main levels of causality in this model of industrial conflict.
Firstly, there is the immediate cause, which is necessary to bring about the specific instance of conflict but which does not provide the sufficient conditions for conflict in general to occur.
Secondly, there is the background to the dispute, or the rules of ‘custom and practice’ which constitute a sort of local social structure within a place of work.
Superimposed on them, at the third level, is the wider social structure (Table 4.1).
A classic study which serves as a model analysis of how these levels of explanation may be linked up is provided by Gouldner's Whitecat Strike (1955).
This traced the course of an unofficial stoppage in a small gypsum mine and a factory in which the mineral was processed into plasterboard.
The plant, a major source of employment in a small community, for years had been operated under what Gouldner termed an ‘indulgency pattern’ of management.
Here, the relationships between managers and workers were tolerant and friendly, and involved loyalties and commitments over and above the mere exchange of wages for work.
However, the corporation that owned the plant regarded it as being inefficiently run and took steps to introduce a regime of tighter discipline.
New machinery was brought in which meant an unpredictable pace of work.
All in all, the ‘indulgency pattern was subjected to a crippling attack, and workers’ hostility rapidly mounted' (p.28).
As events came to a head, there were changes in the supervisory structure, with popular supervisors demoted and unpopular men promoted.
Finally, a quarrel broke out between the union steward and a production engineer, who was himself closely associated with the efficiency drive and the focus of much of the tension.
It was this which sparked off the strike.
By dwelling on this complex chain of cause and effect, Gouldner indicated that the strike could only be understood against the background of  changes in the employment relationship.
The employer's intention to retake certain areas of discretion was seen by the workers as the contravention of a rule, the indulgency pattern, which was regarded as fair and legitimate by most people in the plant, including many in supervision and management.
Thus the strike came as no surprise to those involved.
The researchers, the workers, management and union officials all ‘saw it coming’ and regarded the strike as a wholly understandable outcome.
While Gouldner described an ‘everyday’ strike, Lane and Roberts's Strike at Pilkingtons (1971) gives an account of a dispute that attained national fame a seven-week stoppage at the glass-making company in 1970.
Their approach was similar to Gouldner's in attempting ‘to see the strike through the eyes of its different groups of participants’(p.18).
But the Pilkington dispute could not have been anticipated (although there were issues that precipitated it — pay levels were perceived to be low and the initial walkout occurred over a wages error).
The main point Lane and Roberts stressed was the dynamism of the strike itself.
Once under way, sections of the workforce were ‘drawn in’ and the strike became a liberating experience for many of those involved in organising it.
Crucially, a rift developed between a local strike leadership and the trade union's national officials.
The union, notoriously moderate and bureaucratic, repudiated the strike and made several attempts to engineer a return to work (including alleged collaboration with the employer).
This produced a deep sense of betrayal amongst workers; and the ‘civil war, between rank-and-file workers and the official union was essentially what turned the strike into a protracted struggle.
Lane and Roberts argued that strikes are not difficult to explain.
They are ‘normal events’, arising almost naturally out of the circumstances of the employment relationship itself: ‘A wildcat can break out in perfectly normal conditions, and the structure of the relations between employers, trade unions, governments and workers guarantees that some strikes will grow from small beginnings into mighty struggles’(p.241).
This brings us to consider the broader context of industrial conflict.
Factors operating at this level are remote from the event itself, predispose different groups of people towards certain kinds of action and hence define the limits of other causes.
The key factor put forward as the underlying cause of conflict is the distribution of wealth and power, reflecting the deep class divisions of our society.
Within the workplace inequality and conflict are inextricably bound up, irrespective of the relationship between particular managements and workforces.
Because wages are part of the employers' costs, which they must seek to minimise if they are to survive, workers experience a ceaseless downward pressure on their standards of living.
It is only by exerting upward pressure themselves, using whatever means are at their disposal, that workers are able to sustain wage levels and general conditions.
Thus the returns going to labour and capital are not simply allocated by the hidden hand of the market; they stabilise only as the outcome of conflict.
Work organisations are power hierarchies in which ‘lower participants’— manual and white- collar employees who make up the bulk of the employed population — find  themselves continuously under the control of others.
Sociologists have argued that this sharply divided authority itself provokes conflict (Dahrendorf, 1959).
In order to sustain authority structures, managers are obliged continually to assert the power of their position, which inevitably calls forth resistance on the part of workers.
The social response to strikes
Although industrial conflict occurs across a wide range of behaviour, there can be little doubt of the massive amount of attention focused on one of its forms: strikes.
This partly reflects the fact that strikes are a dramatic form of conflict (or at least they can be portrayed as dramatic events), and partly it reflects the fact that public opinion in Britain is firmly fixed upon strikes.
Repeated surveys have shown that a large majority of people remain convinced that Britain is much more strike-prone than other industrial countries, that strikes cause severe economic disruption and that they are a major contributor to the country's industrial decline (Taylor, 1980, p.13).
This is important because public opinion has a crucial influence on the climate in which industrial relations is conducted.
Yet the manner in which strikes are perceived needs some explaining.
Indeed, as industrial relations experts have frequently pointed out, albeit with almost no effect, the popular view bears little relation to the known facts (Turner, 1969).
Table 4.2 compares stoppages in fourteen major industrial nations.
(The differences in definitions adopted by different countries would not affect the broad pattern of international comparison, although we should be sceptical about small variations between countries.)
These data do lend some support to the prevailing public opinion.
The figure for Britain falls within a band of figures for countries (Australia, Canada, Ireland, Italy and Spain) which can be regarded as relatively strike-prone, albeit the number of days lost in Britain is the lowest in the group.
Moreover, Britain's recorded striker-days are high compared with some other European countries, particularly France and Germany.
Nevertheless, we can see straightaway that these figures give the lie to any simple notion of Britain being excessively strike-ridden.
We fall roughly in the middle of this overall ranking.
In addition, the impact that strikes have on production tends for numerous reasons to be exaggerated.
We have already mentioned that strikes need not be damaging to individual firms; and while it is true that the economy as a whole can be damaged by certain groups of workers (eg. power workers, miners and transport workers), relatively few groups actually have this kind of muscle.
Also, strikes are responsible for an almost negligible amount of lost time compared with total hours worked by the employed population.
Causes of lost production other than strikes, such as sickness, industrial accidents, and more recently of course unemployment, affect output much more seriously.
Why, then, the outcry about strikes?
In his thorough sociological analysis of industrial conflict, Richard Hyman (1984) has put forward two main reasons.
Firstly, the role of the news media in forming public opinion is very important.
Certainly recent research has detected an element of straightforward bias in the reporting of strikes.
Managers are often subtly portrayed as the more reasonable and responsible party, and greater authority is attributed to their views, while strikes are seen as ‘problems’ created by workers.
This type of imbalance, it is suggested, reflects deeply rooted divisions of power and wealth in our society.
The news media, themselves privately owned and controlled, convey an image of society which support dominant class interests.
From this viewpoint, Philo, Beharrell and Hewitt (1977) have argued that the television news's ‘one-dimensional’ treatment of industrial relations helps to create a consensual image of society, which ‘at its most damaging amounts to laying the blame for the problems of an economy based on private interest at the door of the workforce’.
However, simple bias is not a complete answer; we need to take into account the way in which news is produced.
News cannot just be soon as information about events that is transmitted to the public in some unproblematic way; in a very real sense the news is manufactured .
The raw material of events is processed (selected, edited, dramatised, presented) by the professionals who run the media; ultimately it is their values which influence the version of events the public receives (Edwards, 1979).
In seeking to present strikes as ‘newsworthy’, media professionals often convey a quite artificial image of industrial relations.
News coverage tends to  reduce the complex process of strikes down to a single issue.
(In terms of the model developed earlier, only the precipitating causes tend to be brought out.)
It is only if a strike remains in the news for a long period that anything of its history or underlying causes will emerge and then only in the ‘quality’ press, rarely on television or in the tabloid newspapers where most people obtain their information.
Hence the demand of workers for jobs with reasonable pay and security may command public sympathy, but it does not find widespread legitimacy, and those on strike may simply appear as troublemakers causing dissent unnecessarily.
Employers, by contrast, can call upon powerful ideological forces in our culture to legitimise their interests.
They need only announce a general aim of improving efficiency or international competitiveness and their case is virtually made for them.
However, this line of argument still leaves unanswered the question why strikes are presented as they are, which brings us to the second of the points Hyman raised.
He suggested the basic reason for the public clamour over strikes reflects their political repercussions rather than any direct economic impact.
Strikes, in other words, represent a challenge to managerial authority .
Even though very few strikes create a real crisis of control in firms, any strike, no matter how short- lived, contains the seeds of a deeper threat to management.
As Hyman (1984, p.156) puts it, it is hardly surprising ‘that those who exercise managerial authority typically resent this limitation on their autonomy, and are sometimes haunted by the fear that strikes may escalate into an explicit challenge to the minority control of industry,.
Managerial authority, and indeed the whole edifice of organisational power, represent the rights of ownership delegated to management.
Thus, when the managerial control of labour is thwarted by industrial action, ultimately the employment relationship itself is being undermined.
As we have stressed, this is the basis of a capitalist industrial economy, hence we can see why in the final analysis the disruption of authority in industry should be regarded as being so critical.
Conclusion: Patterns of industrial action
Finally, on the issue of strike statistics, the data in Table 4.3 reveal several important aspects of industrial relations.
The changing pattern of strikes in the period since 1961 falls roughly into three stages.
Stoppages in the early 1960s were numerous but tended to be limited in the numbers of workers involved and in duration.
This reflected the high level of local organisation of the early post-war years: industrial action sprang from the shopfloor, and the preponderance of unofficial or ‘wildcat’ strikes was a major industrial relations issue.
However, during the 1970s this pattern was transformed.
The changes were complex, as ever, but there were two important aspects: a shift of union power from plant to national level, and with industry entering the early stages of recession some major struggles occurred.
Thus, we can see strikes still frequent, but becoming larger in size and longer in duration.
The pattern changed again in the early 1980s.
Strikes remained relatively large, but the numbers have fallen sharply and represent the lowest level of industrial conflict in the post-war years.
There can be little doubt that this  reflects the very high unemployment experienced so far and the resultant weakened state of the union movement and of labour generally.
In the current period industrial relations is conducted in a very different climate from that of much of the post-war era.
The impact of the recession in Britain has compelled employers drastically to reduce labour costs at the same time as it has effectively shifted the balance of market strength in their favour.
As a result, a whole range of measures including stricter disciplinary codes, work reorganisation and redundancies have been carried through in large numbers of firms (Hyman and Elger, 1981).
In this period of ‘realism’ the immediate concerns of many workers have moved towards job security.
Nonetheless, it would be misleading to ‘read off’ from the unemployment situation a decline in workers' resolve to take independent action.
As the table shows, the level of conflict in the early 1980s fell far below that of the 1970s, but the pattern was certainly not one of uniform decline.
In 1979 and again in 1984 enormous numbers of working days were lost to disputes resulting, firstly, from the major strikes mounted by engineering and public sector workers, and secondly, the mineworkers' strike which lasted a bitter fourteen months.
In the aftermath of both these outbursts of militancy stoppages of work declined dramatically.
But after 1979 levels of industrial action steadily climbed.
Following the miners' strike in 1984, industrial action has sunk again, to what seems its lowest point in the period under consideration, though it is still too soon to tell if this will be sustained.
At any rate, it would be an exaggeration to speak of a collapse of militancy, or to infer  that over the long term workers' resistance cannot be maintained.
Much depends on the determination of workers to defend jobs and conditions, and factors like this may alter considerably over time.
Above all, the changes and uncertainty of the present period mean that the full extent of the current developments in employment patterns remains very much an open issue.
CONFLICT AND COOPERATION AT WORK
‘Conflict’ is not as clear a concept as one might think.
We have already considered it in the context of stress and frustration (ie. conflict between the individual and his environment) and role theory (ie. inter-personal conflict within the individual).
In this chapter we will look at conflict as a social process ie. between individuals and groups, departments, levels in the hierarchy, or perceived groups in the organisation — ie. ‘us and them’.
You should be clear in your mind, however, that there is no clear-cut definition of, or approach to, ‘conflict’: there is much controversy in conflict research, as to what should be studied, and how, and how meaningful the results are.
Various ‘interest groups’ in a conflict situation are likely to have different perspectives on the nature of the situation itself, as well as on the particular issues that create it.
For some parties, eg. management, conflict will be a ‘problem’ to be ‘solved’.
From the point of view of the behavioural scientist, however, conflict may seem to be part of the steady state of organisations, so that cooperation, order and stability are more interesting phenomena to study.
Since the 1960s, there has been a shift in the management perspective on conflict, from theories which stated:
conflict is avoidable, caused by disruptive elements (ie. troublemakers) and detrimental to organisational effectiveness; to
conflict is inevitable, part of change, caused by structural factors, eg. the class system, and is useful (in small doses) if constructively handled.
In other words, existing social/organisational arrangements are still considered to be legitimate, or natural, and the main question which remains is how to control or utilise inevitable conflicts.
The goals of the organisation are on the whole shared or accepted by its members: only the means of achieving them are in dispute.
That is not the only possible view, however: radical Marxist perspectives do not regard organisational goals as legitimate, and the goals themselves, as well as the means of achieving them, need to be overthrown in the interests of humanity.
We will look at three main approaches.
Theories of conflict in organisations
The ‘happy family’ view
This view presents organisations as:
co-operative structures, designed to achieve agreed common objectives, ie. with no systematic conflict of interest; and
harmonious environments, where conflicts are exceptional and arise from:
misunderstandings;
personality factors;
the expectations of inflexible employees; or
factors outside the organisation and its control.
Drucker (The Practice of Management ) writes,
‘Any business must mould a true team and weld individual efforts into a common effort.
Each member of the enterprise contributes something different, but they must all contribute towards a common goal.
Their efforts must all pull in the same direction, without friction, without unnecessary duplication of effort’.
This kind of view is reasonably common in managerial literature, which attempts to come up with training and motivational techniques for dealing with conflicts which arise in what are seen as potentially ‘conflict-free, organisations.
Conflict is thus blamed on bad management, lack of leadership, poor communication, or ‘bloody-mindedness’ on the part of individuals or interest groups that impinge on the organisation.
The theory is that a strong culture, good two-way communication, cooperation and motivational leadership will ‘eliminate’ conflict.
The ‘happy family’ view starts from a belief in ‘social order’or ‘industrial peace’: conflict is a threat to stability, and must be avoided or eradicated.
The conflict view
In contrast, there is the view of organisations as arenas for conflict on individual and group levels.
Members battle for limited resources, status, rewards, professional values etc.
Organisational politics involve constant struggles for control, and choices of structure, technology and organisational goals are part of this process.
Individual and organisational interacts will not always coincide.
The extreme form of this perspective is the Marxist view, which is that:
organisations are one of the ‘theatres of war’ in which the class struggle is fought.
Within an organisation, this war may have different ‘fronts’— eg. industrial democracy, wages, equal opportunities, health and safety;
the organisation is the home of the bourgeoisie — opponents of the working class;
organisational conflict is part of an inevitable struggle, as long as some own and control the means of production, and others do not.
This view still colours many people's perspective on trade unionism, big business, the worker/management divide etc.
It starts from a belief that ‘social order’ or ‘industrial peace’are themselves the problem: conflict is a way of instituting necessary revolutionary change.
‘The history of all hitherto society is the history of class struggles.
Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guildmaster and journeymen, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant opposition to one another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight…’
Marx and Engels:The Communist Manifesto (1888)
The ‘evolutionary’ view
This view regards conflict as a means of maintaining the status quo, as a useful basis for evolutionary — rather than revolutionary — change.
Conflict keeps the organisation sensitive to the need to change, while reinforcing its essential framework of control.
The legitimate pursuit of competing interests can balance and preserve social and organisational arrangements.
A flexible society benefits from conflict because such behaviour, by helping to create and modify norms, assumes its continuance under changed conditions.
This ‘constructive conflict’ view may perhaps be the most useful for managers and administrators of organisations, as it neither:
attempts to dodge the issues of conflict, which is an observable fact of life in most organisations; nor
seeks to pull down existing organisational structures altogether.
Ideology apart, managers have to get on with the job of managing, maintaining society as a going concern, and upholding organisational goals with the cooperation of other members.
We will therefore look more closely at the idea of ‘managing’ conflict.
Constructive and destructive conflict
Given that conflict is inevitable, and assuming that organizational goals are broad! y desirable, there are two aspects of conflict which are relevant in practice to the manager or administrator.
Conflict can be highly desirable.
It can energise relationships and clarify issues.
Hunt suggests that conflict is constructive, when its effect is to:
introduce different solutions to problems;
define power relationships more clearly;
encourage creativity, the testing of ideas;
focus attention on individual contributions;
bring emotions out into the open;
provide opportunity for catharsis ie. the release of hostile feelings etc that have been, or may be, repressed otherwise.
Conflict can also be destructive, or negative ie. injurious to social systems,(although the radical perspective regards this as positive and desirable).
Hunt suggests that conflict of this kind may act in a group of individuals to:
distract attention from the task;
polarise views and ‘dislocate’ the group;
subvert objectives in favour of secondary goals;
encourage defensive or ‘spoiling’ behaviour;
result in disintegration of the group;
stimulate emotional, win/lose conflicts, ie. hostility.
Tjosvold and Deerner researched conflict in different contexts.
They allocated to 66 student volunteers the roles of foremen and workers at an assembly plant, with a scenario of conflict over job rotation schemes.
Foremen were against, workers for.
One group was told that the organisational norm was to ‘avoid controversy’; another was told that the norm was ‘cooperative controversy’, ie. trying to agree; a third was told that groups were out to win any arguments that arose, ie. ‘competitive controversy’.
The students were offered rewards for complying with their given norms.
Their decisions, and attitudes to the discussions, were then monitored.
Where controversy was avoided, the foremen's views dominated.
Competitive controversy brought no agreement — but brought out feelings of hostility and suspicion.
Co-operative controversy brought out differences in an atmosphere of curiosity, trust and openness: the decisions reached seemed to integrate the views of both parties.
But can real managers and workers be motivated to comply with useful organisational ‘norms, in this way?
Charles Handy redefined the term ‘conflict’ to offer a useful way of thinking about destructive and constructive conflict and how it might be managed.
Organisations are political systems within which there is competition for scarce resources and unequal influence.
Differences between people are natural and inevitable.
Differences emerge in three ways:
argument;
competition; and
conflict — which alone is considered wholly harmful.
Argument and competition are potentially beneficial and fruitful; both may degenerate into conflict if badly managed.
Argument means resolving differences by discussion; this can encourage integration of a number of viewpoints into a better solution.
Handy suggests that in order for argument to be effective:
the arguing group must have shared leadership, mutual trust, and a challenging task; and
the logic of the argument must be preserved — ie. the issues under discussion must be classified, the discussion must concentrate on available information, and the values of the individuals must be expressed openly and taken into account.
Otherwise, argument will be frustrated.
If this is so, or if the argument itself is merely the symptom of an underlying, unexpressed conflict, then conflict will be the result.
Competition can:
set standards, by establishing best performance through comparison;
motivate individuals to better efforts; and
sort out the ‘men from the boys’.
In order to be fruitful, competition must be open , rather than closed ; or, rather, must be perceived by the participants to be open, rather than closed.
‘Closed’ competition is a win/lose (or ‘zero-sum’) situation, where one party's gain will be another party's loss.
One party can only do well at the expense of another, in competition for resources, recognition etc.
‘Open’ competition exists where all participants can increase their gains, eg. productivity bargaining.
If competition is perceived to be open, the ‘rules’ are seen to be fair, and the determinants of success are within the competitors' control, competition can be extremely fruitful.
The observations of Peters and Waterman on the motivational effect of comparative performance information supports this view.
If these preconditions are not met, competition may again degenerate into conflict.
Causes, symptoms and tactics of conflict
Conflict may be caused by differences in the objectives of different groups or individuals.
It is a function of management:
to create a system of planning whereby individual or group objectives are formulated within the framework of a strategic plan.
A poor planning structure leaves the door open for conflict to enter where formal objectives, roles, authority relationships etc overlap or are unclear; and also
to provide leadership, and to encourage individuals to accept the goals of the organisation as being compatible with their personal goals.
Poor leadership might also lead to conflict, with the goals of individuals or groups diverging and at odds with each other.
Conflict may also be caused by disputes about the boundaries of authority For example:
staff managers may attempt to encroach on the roles or ‘territory’ of line managers and usurp some of their authority; or
one department might start ‘empire building’ and try to take over the work previously done by another department.
Personal differences, as regards goals, attitudes and feelings, are also bound to crop up.
Ideologies — which we discuss below — may also effect the objectives of individuals and interest groups, and may render ‘cooperative controversy’ impossible.
According to Handy, the observable symptoms of conflict in an organisation will be:
poor communications, in all ‘directions’;
interpersonal friction;
inter-group rivalry and jealousy;
low morale and frustration;
proliferation of rules, norms and myths; especially widespread use of arbitration, appeals to higher authority, and inflexible attitudes towards change.
The tactics of conflict may be as follows:
One manager will withhold information from another.
A manager who lacks some important information will be in a weak position for making decisions or urging his own views.
Keeping information away from a ‘rival’ manager is a very effective tactic for increasing influence and extending the boundaries of one's own authority and influence.
Information might be presented in a distorted manner.
This will enable the group or manager presenting the information to get their own way more easily.
For example, if the engineering department wants to introduce a new item of equipment into Service, they might give biased information about likely ‘teething  troubles’ with the equipment's technology or the expected costs of maintenance, or breakdown times.
A group (especially a specialist group such as accounting) which considers its influence to be neglected might seek to impose rules, procedures, restrictions or official requirements on other groups, in order to bolster up their own importance.
A manager might seek to bypass formal channels of communication and decision-making by establishing informal contacts and friendships with people in a position of importance.
A departmental manager might establish informal contacts with the managing director's personal assistant, and so get ‘one up’ on other departmental managers, by having a friend close to the managing director's ear.
Line managers might refuse to accept the member of a staff department to fill a vacancy in their department.
Similarly, line managers might refuse to accept the recommendations of staff department experts.
This attitude of conflict by line towards staff management is more likely to occur where staff departments use tactics of their own to obtain more influence over line department operations.
Conflict might also take the form of faultfinding in the work of other departments: eg. Department X might duplicate the work of department Y — hoping to prove department Y ‘wrong’— and then report the fact to senior management.
Managerial response to conflict
Hunt identifies five different management responses to the handling of conflict — not all of which are effective.
Denial/withdrawal
‘Sweeping it under the carpet’.
If the conflict is very trivial, it may indeed ‘blow over’ without an issue being made of it, but if the causes are not identified, the conflict may grow to unmanageable proportions.
Suppression
‘Smoothing over’, to preserve working relationships despite minor conflicts.
As Hunt remarks, however: ‘Some cracks cannot be papered over’.
Dominance
The application of power or influence to settle the conflict.
The disadvantage of this is that it creates all the lingering resentment and hostility of ‘win/lose’ situation.
Compromise
Bargaining, negotiating, conciliating.
To some extent, this will be inevitable in any organisation made up of different individuals.
However, individuals tend to exaggerate their positions to allow for compromise, and  compromise itself is seen to weaken the value of the decision, perhaps reducing commitment.
Integration/collaboration
Emphasis must be put on the task, individuals must accept the need to modify their views for its sake, and group effort must be seen to be superior to individual effort.
Not easy.
Hardy suggests two types of strategy which may be used to turn conflict into competition or argument, or to manage it in some other acceptable way.
Environmental (‘ecological’) strategies .
These involve creating conditions in which individuals may be better able to interact cooperatively with each other: they are wide- ranging, time-consuming, and unpredictable, because of the sheer range of human differences.
Such strategies involve:
agreement of common objectives;
reinforcing the group or ‘team’ nature of organisational life, via culture;
providing feedback information on progress;
providing adequate coordination and communication mechanisms;
sorting out territorial/role conflicts in the organisational structure.
Regulation strategies .
These are directed to control conflict — though in fact they make it so much a part of the formal structure of the organisation that they tend to legitimise and even perpetuate it.
Possible methods include:
the provision of arbitration to settle disputes;
the establishment of detailed rules and procedures for conduct by employees;
appointing a person to ‘manage’ the area of conflict ie. a liaison/coordination officer;
using confrontation, or intergroup meetings, to hammer out differences, especially where territorial conflicts occur;
separating the conflicting individuals; and
ignoring the problem, if it is genuinely likely to ‘go away’, and there is no point in opening fresh wounds.
INTEREST GROUPS
‘Conflicts of interest’ may exist throughout the organisation — or even within a single individual.
There may be conflicts of interest between local management of a branch or subsidiary and the organisation as a whole; or between sales and production departments in a manufacturing firm (over scheduling, product variation etc); or between trade unions and management.
These are three common examples: you can no doubt identify many others.
There are also formal ‘interest groups ’, ie. groups which are perceived to represent the interests of their members.
Such groups tend to wield greater  power in conflict situations than their members, and indeed the very existence of the groups may be seen to anticipate and perpetuate conflict, to harden and formalise a set of attitudes and values that their individual members may not themselves have recognised or expressed.
Trade Unions are organisations whose purpose it is to promote their members' interests, and, in the view of many trade unionists, to bring about social change for the betterment of society as a whole.
Situations occur where trade union negotiators set targets for achievement of these goals which appear to be at odds with the targets set by management for the organisation (and its employees).
Disputes between management and unions may therefore be seen in the context of inter-organisational conflict, and individual members of both organisations may then feel a tug of loyalties in opposing directions.
However, the officials of both organisations might succeed in reconciling their apparently conflicting goals.
Trade unions have a vested interest in the success of the commercial or government organisation to which their members belong because unless this organisation prospers, the security and rewards of their members will be restricted.
For this reason, trade unions might be active in cooperative efforts with management to achieve growth through greater efficiency.
They also share with management responsibility for good industrial relations.
It is important to be aware that trade unions are organisations in their own right, and we must not assume too hastily or too readily that the goals of a trade union organisation are the same as those of its members or full-time officials.
The potential divergence between individual goals and organisational goals exists for a union as well as for a company.
This view was given a political edge by the present Conservative government's Industrial Relations Code of Practice , which states that it should be the responsibility of a union to ensure that:
its members understand the organisation, policy and rules of the union;
its members understand the powers and duties of the members themselves and those of their union representatives;
its officials are adequately trained to look after their members' interests in an efficient and responsible way.
Like trade unions, occupations and professions are ‘interest groups’, in that they represent the interests of their members and of their clients.
Professional bodies and other occupational associations are concerned:
to preserve standards of skill and knowledge by requiring training, experience or some qualification for membership, and by fostering the exchange of knowledge between members both for the ‘honour’ or social respect of the members, and in the public interest;
to preserve appropriate financial rewards, theoretically commensurate with their skills and knowledge; and
(particularly in the case of the professions) to create a measure of independence — eg. in the regulation of conduct and ethics, the right to control their own concerns.
This may be considered a kind of ‘deal’ made with society and other organisations, in which self-determination is allowed in return for high standards of service.
Labour and financial resources being scarce, and social status being desirable, there is bound to be competition between different occupational groups.
One of the principle ways of promoting the interests of one, as opposed to another, is to gain influence over public policy decisions.
Popular strategies for occupations which desire to do this include:
trade union organisations; and
professionalisation.
Professional workers may best be able to serve the interests of their clients if they are part of a strong, independent and highly qualified group which, of course, may also serve the personal ends of the members.
Other interest groups include other organisations (eg. suppliers or customers), shareholders, consumer associations, government, regulatory bodies etc all of whom are in positions to bring a certain amount of pressure to bear on organisations to have their interests preserved.
Ideologies of conflict
Ideologies, or ‘philosophies’, are ‘clusters’ of specific beliefs that individuals or groups hold.
Clashes of ideology will be a primary cause of conflict in organisations, whether related to work and the organisation itself (eg. ideologies of the relationship between manager and worker, about the value of work etc) or to non-work factors (eg. political, religious or cultural ideologies which may bring an individual into conflict with others).
Political ideologies, in particular, are carried into the workplace: we will discuss class and class-consciousness later.
Alan Fox (in ‘Industrial Relations and a Wider Society: Aspects of Interaction ’ 1975) identifies three broad ideologies which are involved in industrial relations:
Unitary ideology
All members of the organisation, despite their different roles, have common objectives and values which unite their efforts.
Workers are loyal, and the prerogative of management is accepted as paternal, and in everyone's best interests.
Unions are a useful channel of communication, but are no longer necessary, and can offer unhelpful encouragement to disruptive elements.
‘The occurrence of strikes is a persistent practical contradiction of the ideology of harmony of interests which assigns legitimacy to managerial power .’
Hyman: Strikes
Pluralist ideology
(This is the perspective we have discussed in relation to Handy and others).
Organisations are political coalitions of individuals and groups which have their own interests.
Management has to create a workable structure for collaboration, taking into account the objectives of all the various interest groups or ‘stakeholders’ in the organisation.
A mutual survival strategy, involving the control of conflict through compromise, can be made acceptable in varying degrees to all concerned.
Radical ideology
This primarily Marxist ideology argues that there is an inequality of power between the controllers of economic resources (ie. shareholders, managers etc) and those who depend on access to those resources (ie. wage earners).
Those in power exploit the others by indoctrinating them to accept the legitimacy of their rights to power, and thus perpetuate the system.
Conflict between these strata of society, ie. the proletariat and bourgeoisie, does not aim for mutual survival, but revolutionary change.
MANAGERIAL MODELS OF THE WORKER
As we discussed earlier, a managers approach to motivation, direction and control of workers will depend on the assumptions he makes about them.
We have already discussed scientific management and the human relatioNs school of management theory, and the ‘picture’ of the worker that they put forward.
We will here describe two other important descriptioNs:
the work of Edgar Schein (Organisational Psychology);
Douglas McGregor's Theory X and Theory Y.
Edgar Schein developed four models of individuals in general, which have implications for their roles in employing organisations.
The rational-economic individual is primarily motivated by economic incentives.
He is mainly passive and can be manipulated by the organisation; he is emotional and unpredictable, and organisations will have to control him.
In the context of an employing organisation, such a man would be influenced in his behaviour mainly by salary and fringe benefits.
Fortunately, not all men are like this, and the self-motivated, self-controlling individuals must assume responsibility for those that are.
The social individual looks for self-fulfilment in social relationships.
In the context of an employing organisation, this would imply that an individual's  major motivation would be not so much the job itself as the opportunity to mix with other people.
The self-actualising individual is influenced by a wider range of motivations.
At the simplest level, these may include the need for food and security; but they range beyond this to the need felt by self-actualisation man to realise his own full potential.
He is capable of maturity and autonomy and will (given the chance) voluntarily integrate his goals with the organisation.
The complex individual represents Schein's own view of people.
According to his model, individuals are variable and driven by many different motives.
The motives influencing a particular individual may change from time to time, and their relative importance may also vary, depending on the situation.
The complex man will respond to no single managerial strategy, but will consider its appropriateness to circumstances and his own needs.
Douglas McGregor, in his book The Human Side of Enterprise , discussed the way in which managers see themselves in relation to others.
He identifies two extreme sets of assumptions (Theory X and Theory Y) and explores how management style differs according to which set of assumptions is adopted.
Theory X and Y
Theory X is the theory that the average human being has an inherent dislike of work and will avoid it if he can.
The human being prefers to be directed, wishing to avoid responsibility.
He has relatively little ambition and wants security above all.
He is self-centred, with little interest in the organisation's needs.
He is resistant to change, gullible and easily led.
He must be coerced, controlled, directed, offered reward or threatened with punishment to get him to put forth adequate effort towards the achievement of organisation objectives.
According to Theory Y, however, the expenditure of physical and mental effort in work is as natural as play or rest.
The ordinary person does not inherently dislike work: according to the conditions it may be a source of satisfaction or punishment.
Extensive control is not the only means of obtaining effort.
Man will exercise self-direction and self-control in the service of objectives to which he is committed: he is not naturally passive, or resistant, to organisational objectives, but has been made so by experience.
The most significant reward that can be offered in order to obtain commitment is the satisfaction of the individual's self-actualisation needs.
The average human being learns, under proper conditions, not only to accept but to seek responsibility.
Many more people are able to contribute creatively to the solution of organisational problems than do so.
At present the potentialities of the average person are not being fully used: management's responsibility is to create conditions and methods that will enable individuals to integrate their own and the organisation's goals, by personal development.
Theory Y implies the optimum integration of organisational requirements with individual goals.
‘Authority is an inappropriate means for obtaining commitment to objectives.
Other forms of influence help in achieving integration for example are required for this purpose’.
Management should adopt policies that promote satisfaction of needs in the job, and individual development and self- expression.
You will have your own viewpoints on the validity of Theory X with Theory Y. In fact McGregor intentionally polarised his theories, and recognises that people are in reality too complex to be categorised in this way.
McGregor also recognised that the assumptions were self-perpetuating, even where the ‘types’ did not exist.
If people are treated as though they are ‘Theory X’ people, because of management assumptions, ‘Theory X’behaviour will in fact be induced thus confirming management in its beliefs and practices (eg. ‘clocking on’, time-keeping systems, close supervision and management controls etc), ie: ‘Theory X explains the consequences of a particular managerial strategy’.
McGregor supported the ideas of Maslow about man's hierarchy of needs, and suggested that a Theory X approach will work well where man is concerned with his physiological and safety needs.
‘But the ‘carrot and stick’ theory does not work at all once man has reached an adequate subsistence level and is motivated by higher needs…‘
Theory X is often misunderstood, and confused with a ‘hard’ or ‘soft’style of direction.
‘Theory X is not a straw man for purposes of demolition, but is in fact a theory which materially influences managerial strategy in a wide sector of American industry today.’
What was true in 1960 remains true even now.
‘What sometimes appear to be new strategies decentralisation, management by objectives, consultative supervision, ‘democratic’ leadership are usually but old wine in new bottles, because the procedures derived to implement them are derived from the same inadequate assumptions about human nature…
These new approaches are no more than different tactics programmes, procedures, gadgets within an unchanged strategy based on Theory X '.
In more general terms, lip service is paid to Theory Y but Theory X is practised.
Theory X stresses domination and dependence in work relationships;, Theory Y emphasises independence.
But the seeming ‘either/or’ conflict suggested by these opposing views does not exist; leadership styles can vary in degrees, ranging from extreme Theory X to extreme Theory Y. McGregor was unable to prove that one extreme was objectively better than another (ie. more productive) nor could he disprove that a middle of the road leadership style might not be better.
Theory X supervision, when the ‘rules’ are properly applied, should be successful in achieving stated objectives.
It is unlikely, however, that the stated objectives will be surpassed, ie. the minimum objectives become the maximum objectives as well.
Much potential might be unrealised.
Theory Y supervision has been implemented on occasions.
For example, the Lincoln Electric Company in the USA made each employee responsible for his own supplies (both purchasing and control) and for setting the quality and quantity of his own output.
Theory Y, however, depends on mature individuals; maturity, given the influence of group psychology etc, does not exist sufficiently on the shop floor to be practicable in its extreme form.
Progress along the road to Theory Y is all that is realistically possible.
McGregor concluded that ‘Theory Y is an invitation to innovation’.
Theory Z
Theory Z was put forward by W G Ouchi as an ‘advance’ on Theory Y. It attempts to draw on the successful management techniques of large Japanese companies, and suggests how the key elements of successful Japanese management methods can be applied to Western management and organisation.
To understand Theory Z, it will be helpful to know something about the characteristics of large Japanese firms.
In Japan, there are a number of very large firms, such as Sony, Hitachi and Mitsubishi.
Each of these has a large number of small firms as ‘satellites’ around it.
The small firms provide goods and services to a large firm, which is in effect a monopoly buyer.
The small supplier firm will often be located near to the big firm, and will be expected to provide supplies on demand.
The big firm thus minimises its holding of stock, and the small firm must bear the brunt of stockholding costs by holding sufficient stocks of its own finished goods to meet any order which comes from the big firm.
The big firms therefore benefit from ‘domination, of their small suppliers.
Large firms are able to provide lifetime employment for their employees who are expected in return to be dedicated ‘company men’.
Lifetime employment gives employees greater career stability, and tends to contribute to better industrial relations.
For a large part of their career, employees retain the same job status and pay, and are not promoted.
Only employees with sufficient seniority (typically, half-way through their career) become eligible for promotion.
Since young managers cannot expect to be rewarded for good short-term performances, there is less incentive to work for short-term results at the expense of longer-term benefits.
Inter-departmental disputes are less likely to  arise and cooperation between managers is more easily achievable in the absence of ‘political’ in-fighting.
Large firms spend large amounts of money on the welfare of their employees — housing, sports and social facilities, and medical care as well as training.
Broadly speaking, large Japanese firms are characterised by cooperation between management and employees and between managers and departments.
Decisions are usually reached by consensus, rather than by a senior manager taking a decision and selling it or imposing it on his subordinates.
Theory Z is based on the belief that it is the spirit of co-operation, and the consensus approach to decision-making, that gives Japanese firms the advantages of higher employee motivation, better productivity and higher output quality.
Theory Z therefore argues that:
Although individual managers might have to accept responsibility for decisions, there should be a consensus in decision-making , reached by agreement with the manager's subordinates and colleagues.
In Japan, the concept of collective responsibility is sometimes used.
Although there is a formal organisation and management hierarchy,decisions are nevertheless democratic and based on trust between managers and subordinates.
This participative approach to decision-making encourages the free flow of information between departments as well as between managers and subordinates.
Work activities should be ‘humanised’.
Individual employees are not simply regarded as a functional cog in the wheel.
For consensus decision-making to work and for an atmosphere of trust to develop between managers and subordinates, there must be an erosion of status-consciousness.
Separate canteens for managers and workers cannot be permitted and managers should really dress in the same way as workers, in standard-type overalls.
Employees must also be rewarded for their commitment to the firm, but not in such a way that the desire for rewards affects what they think and do eg. secure lifetime employment is a more effective reward than early promotion.
Theory Z is thus an extension of Theory Y, with the participative approach to decision-making emphasised as a need for consensus, and with an emphasis on personal commitment and the humanisation of work activities.
CLASS AND CLASS-CONSCIOUSNESS IN BRITAIN
‘Working class’, ‘middle class’ and ‘upper class’are common terms, but they do not adequately express the complexities of social class in Britain.
We all have stereotypes about the typical attributes of a particular class, and the whole topic tends to be very emotive, on the basis of these perceptions.
In assessing realistically the nature and influence of social class, then, we must consider not only class itself, but class- consciousness.
‘Subjective’ definitions of class relate to the way in which people consider themselves.
A white-collar job, owning a home or indulging in particular leisure pursuits may cause a person to identify himself as ‘middle class’; others may consider anyone who ‘works, to be ‘working class’; others may preserve a sense of being ‘working class’ because of their family background, though their own social circumstances have changed.
Sociologists have more objective criteria for defining social class, based on categories such as occupation, income and wealth (most importantly), and broadly speaking, following on from these education, lifestyle (housing, leisure pursuits, dress, schooling for children etc), and behavioural characteristics.
In general, seven categories are used to distinguish groups in the class structure:
upper class aristocracy and large property owners
upper middle class professionals, eg. lawyers
middle class managerial and technical, eg. retail managers, computer operators
lower middle class non-manual, white-collar and clerical, eg. office workers, supervisors
upper working class skilled manual, eg. mechanics, electricians
working class semi-skilled manual, eg. machine operators
lower working class unskilled manual, eg. cleaners, waitresses.
Another method of classification takes only five occupational categories, which are used for census and other statistical purposes: the social classes 1–5 on the Registrar General's Scale.
Social class 1 consists of occupations requiring a university degree or high professional equivalent.
Social class 2 consists of occupations which also frequently demand a professional qualification, eg, teachers, higher civil servants, and managers (even if‘unqualified’).
Social class 3 the largest group, is usually sub-Divided into:
non-manual, consisting of most of the remaining non-manual jobs, eg. foremen, shop assistants, clerical workers; and
manual regarded as skilled manual.
Social class 4 consists of semi-skilled manual occupations.
Social class 5 consists of unskilled manual occupations.
The trouble with such five-category classifications in practice is that they describe a two-class society: the working class — producers of goods and services — and middle class — the managers and organisers — are identified, but the ‘upper class’ seems to have disappeared altogether.
The aristocracy — ie. titled landowners — do still exist and have been joined by the very wealthy (through ownership or investment): it has been reckoned that this 1% of adult population owns one-quarter of all the wealth in Britain.
You may have noticed that social class is defined:
economically , relying on analysis of the distribution of economic resources in society, in terms of income (money earned from paid employment and dividends on investment) and wealth (other financial assets eg. land, property, shares); and
culturally , when the general behaviour, lifestyle and attitudes of people are emphasised.
It has been argued that you can identify a person's class according to his dress, manner of speech, address, attitude to education, leisure habits etc.
But…
‘It is certainly the case that people in the same social class have many things in common— the same monopoly or lack of access a scarce resources, for example ; the same good or bad standards of housing; the same access to, or restrictions on, educational opportunity; the same shared experiences of comfort, travel, hardship or enjoyment.
But all of these cultural characteristics are the consequences of social class rather than the causes of it.
People's lifestyles are a reflection of their economic condition in society, not the reason for their position.’
Jane Thompson:Sociology Made Simple 
Cultural definitions of class also run into the problem of stereotyping, and over-generalisation about ‘working class attitudes’, ‘middle class values’ etc. — often accompanied by value judgements (depending on one's viewpoint).
In the 1950s, attention was directed to the fact that manual workers had increasingly been earning wages directly comparable to those of white-collar and supervisory staff.
In other words, the working class characteristics of low economic resources and consumer power no longer applied.
It was suggested that cultural differences would gradually be eroded also and that working class people would take on bourgeois, or middle class, lifestyles.
This was called ‘embourgeoisement’.
It was assumed that the spread of middle class attitudes would radically alter allegiances at work, in particular.
Instead of‘us and them’ perceptions of their relationships with their employers, the manual workers would forgo hitherto strong class loyalties, and increasingly associate themselves with middle- class conformity.
John Goldthorpe and his associates followed up these arguments in 1962 with a study of affluent workers in the car industry: how far had they become middle class in their behaviours and attitudes, with increased spending power?
Their conclusion was that although surface characteristics had changed, and even values and aspirations were ‘converging’ to some extent, there was no evidence of radical reshaping of the class structure; the relationship between status groups within it remained significantly unaltered.
The notion of ‘embourgeoisement’ was replaced by that of ‘class convergence ’.
In the Marxist view, ‘classes’ are groups of people who share the same relationship to the means and organisation of production.
Two products of the class situation were:
class conflict : the bourgeoisie and proletariat have interests which are irreconcilably different; and
class consciousness : the proletariat represented ‘a class in itself’ while they shared the conditions of labour.
They did not act as ‘a class for itself’ until they became aware of their common interests and acted collectively, ie developed ‘class consciousness’.
As long as members of the proletariat saw their struggles as ‘personal problems’, or were coerced or conditioned into behaving against their class interests, they were in a state of ‘false consciousness’.
Max Weber criticised the Marxist view for being over- generalised.
He distinguished between different aspects of social stratification, including dimensions which could overlap class boundaries, eg.:
Status .
Weber argued that people's social standing, as well as economic position, was significant in their position in society, and that the link between job/income and status is not always direct, e.g. respect for the sense of vocation attributed to nursing, social work etc. which is not reflected in economic reward or social power; and
Party .
Parties for Weber were groups organised to attract and wield power — not just political parties, but trade unions, professional associations and other interest and pressure groups.
Weber argued that such groups could overlap class distinctions eg. the present day Labour Party.
that such groups could overlap class distinctions eg. the present day Labour Party.
Class and work
There are two main class responses to work, ie cultural responses derived from class differences.
So far as society is concerned, the middle class culture of work is part of the mainstream social culture; the working class culture of work is subordinate in terms of social power.
The working class culture of work (based on the ideal values and assumptions of the class, rather than the actual experiences of work) is:
‘dead straight’— work and non-work selves are in harmony:.
concepts of career, ‘job satisfaction’, ‘vocation’ etc. are central to this.
rational — based on expectations of having choice in and control over career prospects and progress.
monopolistic over definitions — the way things are, the only sensible way of doing things etc.
You can't beat the system and shouldn't want to, because it represents a co-operative progress towards shared goals.
The working class culture of work is not socially dominant — but relates to the numerical majority of people.
The essential characteristics of those who work to create profit in return for wages have remained the same despite surface changes since Marx.
Boring, repetitive or even hazardous employment may still be acceptable to capitalist morality: the job is done not out of interest but as a way of earning money, not out of loyalty, but a fear of redundancy.
Two great strengths of shopfloor culture have been identified as:
the strength of sheer mental and physical power to survive in a hostile environment.
This provides the focus for pride, self-esteem and a certain mystique attached to strength (and particularly masculinity, which, on the debit side, helps to perpetuate sexist attitudes at work and at home); ie ‘the lads’ culture.
confidence expressed in the culture, based on common sense, ability and cheek.
Informal resistance against formal organisation gives the illusion of regaining control.
A sense of solidarity and comradeship enables workers to enforce their ‘own terms’ to a certain extent, eg. practical jokes, subversive humour etc.
It is arguable that differences in attitude between worker and management —‘us and them’— are inevitable while there are groups of people who carry those labels; the great divide is too much a fact of organisational life, part of the fabric of ‘norms, that each new recruit is taught.
Social class becomes significant when we realise that patterns of recruitment are not distributed randomly from all social strata: managerial and  education, motivation, and personality variables, but this is not so significant that social background can be altogether dismissed as a relevant factor in work behaviour.
Alienation
We have already referred to ‘alienation’ in connection with Blauner's studies of various technologies.
When an individual or group feels separated from some aspect of their lives (psychologically, but usually in connection with the work situation in particular), they suffer ‘alienation’— the symptoms include feelings of powerlessness, meaninglessness, isolation and self-estrangement.
Marx argued that the division of labour in capitalist society causes the worker to lose control over the conditions and fruits of his labour, with the result that he becomes estranged both from himself and from his fellow men.
Marx argues that the capitalist worker is inevitably alienated — whether he knows it or not.
One of the main themes repeatedly emerging in personal accounts of manual work is the experience of alienation suffered by workers in mindless, routine, satisfaction-less jobs.
However, sociological accounts of the meaninglessness of boring work, and the experience of alienated working class labour, commonly fail to recognise that people respond surprisingly well to bad conditions, lack of control and a sense of exploitation; they do seek meaning, enjoyment and structure.
This may, as we mentioned in connection with shopfloor culture, occur in spite of work conditions, and often as a form of resistance or opposition to the dominant culture of the workplace.
Alienation is in any case a difficult concept.
Seeman tried to render it useful by identifying five meanings for it:
powerlessness — the worker is dominated and controlled by others;
meaninglessness — he feels isolated from organisational goals;
normlessness — inability to use socially acceptable means to reach prescribed goals;
self-estrangement — adherence to the instrumental work orientation; and
self-evaluative involvement — concerning the self-concept.
Dahrendorf, however, has argued that alienation is irrelevant to empirical social science, ‘since no amount of empirical research can either confirm or refute it’.
Counter-organisations and sub-cultures
It is worth reiterating the point that the dominant, mainstream cultures of organisations are broadly acceptable within the framework of the formal organisation structure.
The dominant culture may well be one that has been fostered or actively imposed by the Organisation in the person of its managers.
However:
cultures exist in all organisation, including sub-units of the whole employing organisation; and
not all cultures will ‘buy in’ to the attitudes and values the organisation wishes to promote.
If managers wish to integrate divisionalised structures or geographically dispersed branches, for example, by promoting a strong ‘central’ culture, they may encounter resistance among the sub-units.
‘Sub-cultures’ are cultures which exist in a context dominated by the decisions, values and attitudes of others.
The shopfloor culture referred to earlier is a subculture of this kind.
A K Cohen, among other sociologists, defines sub-cultures as ‘cultures which exist within cultures’, with three major characteristics.
The group shares a distinctive way of life, knowledge, beliefs, codes, tastes and prejudices.
These are learned from others in the group who already exhibit these characteristics.
Their way of life has ‘somehow become traditional’ among those who inherit and share the social conditions to which the subcultural characteristics are a response.
‘Counter cultures’ are groups of people within society whose values and norms are different from and go against those held in the wider society.
‘The power to create and manipulate culture as a means or controlling others is well entrenched in the social, Economic and political institutions of a society but it is also continually resisted by opposing cultural forms ’.
Bryn Jones:The Politics of Popular Culture 
Some sociologists have researched ‘counter school’ youth cultures, and how they are naturally carried over onto the shopfloor.
In collective opposition to the dominant culture of the school, ‘the lads’(as Willis calls them) are conventionally regarded as violent, undisciplined ‘trouble makers’.
In fact, school is an institution which has little meaning for ‘the lads’: it has merely to be ‘got through’ as enjoyably as possible — by ‘having a laff’and rehearsing the loyalties and possibilities for defiance and resistance which will be carried over into work.
Wage labour, like school, is essentially meaningless — as is the ‘work ethic’ designed to perpetuate it.
According to Willis, ‘when the lads arrive on the shopfloor, they need no telling (from those already there) to ‘take it easy’, ‘take no notice’ or that ‘they’(the management) always want more; you've had it if you let them get their way.’
They have no illusions about social mobility and success: they  refuse to acknowledge or accommodate the values on which the ultimate security of the mainstream culture depends.
Those that are ‘seduced’ by middle-class culture are despised as traitors.
Cooperation
We have discussed ‘cooperation’ by implication in our study of conflict, but we will summarise its nature briefly here.
Cooperation is a common cultural belief, and one that is basic to any economic system.
In work organisations it is universally believed that cooperation is a Good Thing, and achieve greater productivity than lack of cooperation.
For most tasks, this is proven by experience.
Cooperation is a set of shared values, to the extent of submission of individual needs and differences to the needs of the ‘team’.
Cooperation has a rational appeal.
It is demonstrable that a suitable number of people cooperating on a task will achieve a better result than one person doing the same task.
Synergy may enable 2 = 2 to equal 5.
Co-operation has an emotional appeal.
It incorporates values about unity, teamwork, comradeship, insiders (versus outsiders).
Some cultures encourage this value-cluster more than others.
In the UK, individualism is a major aspect of the national culture — despite stated views on the virtues of co- operation.
Hofstede's studies of West German, Japanese and Swedish cultures, however, demonstrate an emphasis on co- operation and interdependence, rather than individuality.
Methods of encouraging co-operation have already been discussed in connection with reinforcing cultures, communication, team cohesiveness and the control of conflict.
(Remember that cooperation itself may even involve a certain amount of argument or competition.)
chapter five
A MANAGEMENT ORIENTATION TO ORGANISATIONS
Objectives
To examine the concept of leadership at work, largely through evaluating the work and ideas of prominent management theorists.
The second part of this chapter will consider decision-making as a function of leadership, and the associated concepts of authority, delegation, responsibility and accountability.
INTRODUCTION
The process of management and the functions of management have been analysed many times in various ways by different writers, who have taken the view that:
management is an operational process, which can be understood by a close study of management functions; and
the study of management should then lead to the development of certain principles of good management, which will be of value when put into practice.
Henri Fayol
Henri Fayol, a French management theorist working in the early decades of this century, listed the functions of management as follows:
Planning This involves selecting objectives, and the strategies, policies, programmes and procedures for achieving the objectives either for the organisation as a whole or for a part of it.
Planning might be done exclusively by managers who will later be responsible for performance: however,advice on planning decisions might also be provided by ‘staff management’ who do not have ‘line’authority for putting the plans into practice.
Expert advice is nevertheless a part of the management planning function.
Organising This involves the establishment of a structure of tasks which need to be performed to achieve the goals of the organisation, grouping these tasks into jobs for an individual, creating groups of jobs within sections and departments, delegating authority to carry out the jobs, and providing systems of information and communication, and for the coordination of activities within the organisation.
Commanding This involves giving instructions to subordinates to carry out tasks over which the manager has authority for decisions and responsibility for performance.
Coordinating This is the task of harmonising the activities of individuals and groups within the organisation, which will inevitably have different ideas about what their own goals should be.
Management must reconcile differences in approach, effort, interest and timing of these separate individuals and groups.
This is best achieved by making the individuals and groups aware of how their work is contributing to the goals of the overall organisation.
Controlling This is the task of measuring and correcting the activities of individuals and groups, to ensure that their performance is in accordance with plans.
Plans must be made, but they will not be achieved unless activities are monitored, and deviations from plan identified and corrected as soon as they become apparent.
Fayol's analysis of management functions is only one of several similar types of analysis.
Other functions which might bc identified, for example, are staffing (ie. filling positions in the organisation with people), leading (unlike commanding, ‘leading’ is concerned with the interpersonal nature of management) and acting as the organisation's representative in dealing with other organisations (ie. an ambassadorial or public relations role).
Drucker on the management process
Peter Drucker worked in the 1940s and 1950s as a business adviser to a number of US corporations.
He was also a prolific writer on management.
Drucker grouped the operations of management into five categories.
Setting objectives for the organisation .
Managers decide what the objectives of the organisation should be and quantify the targets of achievement for each objective.
They must then communicate these targets to other people in the organisation.
Organising the work .
The work to be done in the organisation must be divided into manageable activities and manageable jobs.
The jobs must be integrated into a formal organisation structure, and people must be selected to do the jobs.
Motivating employees and communicating information to them to enable them to do their work.
The job of measurement .
Management must:
establish objectives or yardsticks of performance for every person in the organisation;
analyse actual performance, appraise it against the objectives or yardsticks which have been set, and analyse the comparison;
communicate the findings and explain their significance both to subordinate employees and also to superiors.
Developing people .
The manager ‘brings out what is in them or he stifles them.
He strengthens their integrity or he corrupts them’.
Drucker has also argued that there is a further basic function of management in business: economic performance.
In this respect, the business manager is different from the manager of any other type of organisation.
Management of a business can only justify its existence and its authority by the economic results it produces, even though as a consequence of their actions, significant non-economic results occur as well.
He then described the jobs of management within this basic function of economic performance as:
Managing a business .
The purposes of the business are:
to create a customer; and
innovation.
Managing managers .
The requirements here are:
management by objectives;
proper structure of managers' jobs;
creating the right spirit in the organisation;
making a provision for the managers of tomorrow; and
arriving at sound principles of organisation structure.
Managing worker and work.
These three jobs are carried out within a time dimension.
a.
Management must always consider both the short- term and longer-term consequences of their actions.
A business must be kept profitable into the long-term future, but at the same time short-term profitability must be maintained to avoid the danger that the long term will never be reached, and the business liquidated or taken over.
b.
Decisions taken by management are for the future, and some have a very long ‘planning horizon’— the time between making the decision and seeing the consequences of that decision can be very long.
For example, if a decision is made to build a factory, it might be years before the building is erected, equipped and in operation, and years more before it earns sufficient profits to pay back the investment.
THE MANAGER'S ROLE
Being a manager: the views of Handy
Charles Handy suggested that a definition of a manager or a manager's role is likely to be so broad as to be fairly meaningless.
His own analysis of being a manager was divided into three aspects:
the manager as a general practitioner;
the managerial dilemmas; and
the manager as a person.
The manager as a general practitioner.
A manager id the first recipient of an organisation's problems and he must:
identify the symptoms in the situation (eg low productivity, high labour turnover, severe industrial relations problems etc);
diagnose the disease or cause of the trouble;
decide how it might be dealt with — ie. develop a strategy for better health;
start the treatment.
Typical strategies for health were listed as:
people : ie. changing people, either literally or figuratively,
hiring and tiring
reassignment
training and education
selective pay increases
counselling or admonition;
the work and the structure:
re-organisation of reporting relationships
re-definition of the work task
job enrichment
re-definition of roles;
the system and procedures : ie to amend or introduce:
communication systems;
rewards systems (payment methods, salary guides);
information and reporting systems; budgets or other decision-making systems (eg. stock control, debtor control).
The managerial dilemmas
Managers are paid more than workers because they face constant dilemmas which they have to resolve.
These dilemmas are:
The dilemmas of cultures .
The cultures of organisations were described earlier in this text.
It is management's task to decide which culture of organisation and management is required for his particular task.
As a manager rises in seniority, he will find it necessary to behave in a culturally  diverse manner to satisfy the requirements of his job and the expectations of his employees.
In other words, managers must be prepared to show flexibility and good judgement in their choice of organisation culture.
‘The manager must be flexible but consistent, culturally diverse but recognisably an individual with his own identity.
Therein lies the dilemma.
Those…who relapse into a culturally predominant style will find themselves rightly restricted to that part of the organisation where their culture prevails.
Middle layers of organisations are often overcrowded with culturally rigid managers who have failed to deal with this cultural dilemma’
The dilemma of time horizons .
This is the problem of responsibility for both the present and the future at the same time, described above in paragraph (a) at the bottom of page 133;
The trust-control dilemma .
This is the problem of balance between management's wish to control the work for which they are responsible, and the necessity to delegate work to subordinates, trusting them to do the work properly.
The greater trust a manager places in subordinates, the less control he retains himself.
Retaining control implies a lack of trust in subordinates.
‘The managerial dilemma is always how to balance trust and control’;,
The commando leader's dilemma .
In many organisations, junior managers show a strong preference for working in project teams, with a clear task or objective, and working outside the normal bureaucratic structure of a large formal organisation.
Unfortunately, there can be too many project groups (or ‘commando groups’) for the good of the total organisation, and a manager's dilemma is to decide how many project groups he should create to satisfy the needs of his subordinates, and how much bureaucratic organisation structure should be retained for the benefit of the total organisation despite the wishes of his subordinates.
The manager as a person
Management is developing into a ‘semi-profession’ and managers expect to be rewarded for their professional skills.
The implications for individual managers are that ‘increasingly it will come to be seen as the individual's responsibility to maintain, alter or boost his skills, to find the right market for his skills and to sell them to the appropriate buyer’.
In other words, management must continue to develop their own professional skills and sell them to the best bidder.
The ‘traditional’ view that an organisation should employ ‘raw recruits’and nurture them into its management structure might in future no longer be accepted.
‘There will then be no obligation to continue to employ the individual when the benefit of his skills begins to be less than their costs’.
THE MANAGER AS LEADER
Leadership is the process of influencing others to work willingly towards an organisation's goals, and to the best of their capabilities.
‘The essence of leadership is followership .
In other words it is the willingness of people to follow that makes a person a leader’(Koontz, O'Donnell, Weihrich).
Leadership would also be listed as one of the functions of management.
Leadership comes about in a number of different ways.
A manager is appointed to a position of authority organisation.
He relies mainly on the (legitimate) authority of that position.
Leadership of his subordinates is a function of the position he holds (although a manager will not necessarily be a ‘leader’, if he lacks leadership qualities).
Some leaders (eg in politics or in trade unions) might be elected.
Other leaders might emerge by popular choice and through their personal drive and qualities.
Unofficial spokesmen for groups of people are leaders of this style.
Leaders are given their roles by their putative followers; their ‘authority’ may technically be removed if their followers cease to acknowledge them.
The personal, physical or expert power of leaders is therefore more important than position power alone.
Leaders are the creators and ‘sellers’ of culture in the organisation.
‘The [leader]not only creates the rational and tangible aspects of organisations, such as structure and technology, but is also the creator of symbols, ideologies, language, beliefs, rituals and myths .’
(Pettigrew).
If a manager had indifferent or poor leadership qualities his subordinates would still do their job, but they would do it ineffectually or perhaps in a confused manner.
By providing leadership, a manager should be able to use the capabilities of subordinates to better effect, ie leadership is the ‘influential increment over and above mechanical compliance with the routine directives of the organisation’(Katz and Kahn:The Social Psychology of Organisations ).
Managers therefore need — and should seek — to become leaders in situations where they require cooperation ie. not merely compliance by their immediate subordinates.
‘Leadership over human beings is exercised when persons with certain motives and purposes mobilize, in competition or conflict with others, institutional, political, psychological and other resources so as to arouse, engage and satisfy the motives of followers .’
Gregor Burns
Since leadership is concerned with influencing others, it is necessary to have some understanding about what motivates people to work.
Motivation is the subject of an earlier chapter of this text, but it may be summarised briefly as the process which determines how much effort, energy and excitement a person is prepared to expend in his work.
Koontz, O'Donnell and Weihrich formulate the principle that ‘since people tend to follow those whom they see as a means of satisfying their own personal goals, the more managers understand what motivates their subordinates and how these motivations operate, and the more they reflect this understanding in carrying out their managerial actions, the more effective leaders they are likely to be.’
Trait theories of leadership
Early theories suggested that there are certain qualities, personality characteristics or ‘traits’ which make a good leader.
These might be aggression, self-assurance, intelligence, initiative, a drive for achievement or power, interpersonal skills, administrative ability, imagination, a certain upbringing and education, the ‘helicopter factor’(ie. the ability to rise above a situation and analyse it objectively) etc.
This list is not exhaustive, and various writers attempted to show that their selected list of traits were the ones that provided the key to leadership.
The full list of traits is so long that it appears to call for a man or woman of extraordinary, even superhuman, gifts to be a leader.
Jennings (1961) wrote that ‘Research has produced such a variegated list of traits presumed to describe leadership, that for all practical purposes it describes nothing.
Fifty years of study have failed to produce one personality trait or set of qualities that can be used to distinguish between leaders and non-leaders.’
The ‘great men’ theory (ie. that people are born with leadership qualities or traits, and either do or do not ‘have what it takes’to be leaders) has been challenged by writers of the human relations school.
Stodgill wrote (1948)‘A person does not become a leader by virtue of the possession of some combination of traits, but the pattern of personal characteristics of the leader must bear some relevant relationship to the characteristics, activities and goals of the followers’.
As early as 1928, Mary Parker Follett had suggested that different work situations called for different types of leadership.
The conclusion was that if leadership is not an innate gift, a style of leadership appropriate to a given work situation could be learned and adopted.
Other theories of leadership
Alternative approaches to leadership theory have been developed over tie years, and some of these will be described under the headings of:
style theories, mainly of the ‘behaviouralist’ school of thought;
systems theory and leadership;
contingency theories of leadership.
LEADERSHIP AND LEADERSHIP STYLES
Four different types or styles of leadership were identified by Huneryager and Heckman (1967):
Dictatorial style The manager forces subordinates to work by threatening punishment and penalties.
The psychological contract between the subordinates and their organisation would be coercive.
Dictatorial leadership might be rare in commerce and industry, but it is not uncommon in the style of government in some countries of the world, nor in the style of parenthood in many families;
Autocratic style Decision-making is centralised in the hands of the leader himself, who does not encourage participation by subordinates; indeed, subordinates' ideas might be actively discouraged and obedience to orders would be expected from them.
The autocratic style is common in many organisations, and you will perhaps be able to identify examples from your own experience.
Doctors, matrons and sisters in hospitals tend to practise an autocratic style; managers/directors who own their company also tend to expect things to be done their way;
Democratic style Decision-making is decentralised, and shared by subordinates in participative group action.
To be truly democratic, the subordinate must be willing to participate.
The democratic style is described more fully later;
Laissez-faire style Subordinates are given little or no direction at all, and are allowed to establish their own objectives and make all their own decisions.
The leader of a research establishment might adopt a laissez- faire style, giving individual research workers freedom of choice to organise and conduct their research as they themselves want (within certain limits, such as budget spending limits).
These four divisions or ‘compartments’ of management style are really a simplification of a ‘continuum’or range of styles, from the most dictatorial to the most laissez-faire.
The Ashridge studies
A slightly different analysis of leadership styles, based on this continuum, was made by the Research Unit at Ashridge Management College, based on research in several industries in the UK (reported 1966).
This research distinguished four different management styles.
The autocratic or ‘tells’ style
This is characterised by one-way communication between the manager and the subordinate, with the manager telling the subordinate what to do.
The leader makes all the decisions and issues instructions, expecting them to be obeyed without question.
The persuasive or ‘sells’ style
The manager still makes all the decisions, but believes that subordinates need to be motivated to accept them before they will do what he wants them to.
He therefore tries to explain his decisions in order to persuade them round to his point of view.
The consultative style
This involves discussion between the manager and the subordinates involved in carrying out a decision, but the manager retains the right to make the decision himself.
By conferring with his subordinates before making any decision, the manager will take account of their advice and feelings.
Consultation is a form of limited participation in decision-making for subordinates, but there might be a tendency for a manager to appear to consult his subordinates when really he has made up his mind beforehand.
Consultation will then be false and a facade for a ‘sells’ style of leadership whereby the manager hopes to win acceptance of his decisions by subordinates by pretending to listen to their advice.
The democratic or ‘joins’ style
This is an approach whereby the leader joins his group of subordinates to make a decision on the basis of consensus or agreement.
It is the most democratic style of leadership identified  by the research study.
Subordinates with the greatest knowledge of a problem will have greater influence over the decision.
The joins style is therefore most effective where all subordinates in the group have equal knowledge and can therefore contribute in equal measure to decisions.
The Ashridge studies made one or two very interesting findings with regard to leadership style and employee motivation.
(You should compare these with the views of other writers described in the rest of this chapter.)
There was a clear preference amongst the subordinates for the consultative style of leadership but managers were most commonly thought to be exercising the ‘tells’ or ‘sells, style.
The attitudes of subordinates towards their work varied according to the style of leadership they thought their boss exercised.
The most favourable attitudes were found amongst those subordinates who perceived their boss to be exercising the consultative style.
The least favourable attitudes were found amongst subordinates who were unable to perceive a consistent style of leadership in their boss.
In other words, subordinates are unsettled by a boss who chops and changes between autocracy, persuasion, consultation and democracy.
The conclusion from this finding is  
It is important to get the consultative and ‘join' styles in perspective.
A leader cannot try to forget that he is the ‘boss’ by being friendly and informal with subordinates, or by consulting them before making any decision.
Douglas McGregor (Leadership and Motivation) wrote about his own experiences as a college president that: ‘It took a couple of years, but I finally began to realise that a leader cannot avoid the exercise of authority any more than he can avoid responsibility for what happens in the organisation .’
A leader can try to avoid acting dictatorially, and he can try to act like ‘one of the boys’, but he must accept all the consequences of being a leader.
McGregor wrote that ‘since no important decision ever pleases everyone in the organisation, he must also absorb the displeasures, and sometimes severe hostility, of those who would have taken a different course’.
Lewin, Lippitt and White (1939)
Although Elton Mayo is considered to be the pioneer of the human relations movement, Lewin was another important theorist who did much research on group dynamics and leadership styles.
With his colleagues Lippitt and White he reported the results of well-known experiments which were carried out in boys' clubs established for the purposes of their studies.
Club leaders were trained to act as autocratic, democratic or laissez-faire leaders, and the purpose of the experiments was to learn how the children reacted to different styles of leadership.
The leaders were moved from one club to another every six weeks and by means of rotation each club (consisting of 10- year old boys) experienced three different styles of leadership, under three different leaders.
The autocratic leader tended to give orders, and to interrupt the activities of the boys by giving commands to do something.
Criticism and praise were given out non-objectively, ie at the whim of the leader.
The democratic leader suggested what the boys should do, showed concern for each boy's individual welfare, participated in the activities of the group, but left the decisions about what to do to the boys themselves.
The laissez-faire leader also made suggestions, but was more ‘standoffish’ and did not involve himself with the boy's welfare, nor did he join in the group activities, so that the boys were effectively left to do what they wanted by themselves.
Lewin, Lippitt and White were particularly interested in aggressive social behaviour, either within the group or shown to outsiders.
Their findings may be summarised as follows.
In one experiment, aggressive behaviour was very much more common among the autocratic group than the democratic group, but none of the aggression or hostility was directed at the leader himself.
In a subsequent experiment, boys in four out of five autocratic groups showed ‘apathetic’ behaviour and lack of aggression.
This apathy was attributed by the experimenters to the repressive style of the club leader.
95 per cent of boys preferred a democratic to an autocratic leader, and 70 per cent preferred a laissez-faire leader to an autocratic one.
Aggression is only partly caused by leadership style.
Other factors arousing hostile behaviour are tension, restriction of physical space and the cultural background of the boys in the group.
Nevertheless, leadership style contributes towards such behaviour.
In a subsequent publication many years later (1960) Lippitt and White investigated the effect of leadership on productivity in different groups.
They concluded that:
work-orientated conversation was greatest in a democratic group, less in an autocratic group and, interestingly, least in a laissez-faire group;
the amount of work actually done was greatest in an autocratic group and least in a laissez-faire group.
Motivation was strongest in a democratic group where boys often carried on working even when a leader left the room.
Interestingly, however, motivation was not sufficient to increase output above the level of the autocratic group;
as mentioned above, hostility and discontent were greatest in an autocratic group.
Four boys dropped out of the experiment, and all belonged to an autocratic group at the time.
Boys in an autocratic group were more dependent on their leader, and submissive; their hostility was towards each other.
In contrast, originality, group-mindedness and friendly playfulness were greatest in a democratic group.
Rensis Likert
Rensis Likert distinguished four systems of management:
1.
Exploitive authoritative
2.
Benevolent authoritative
3.
Consultative authoritative
4.
Participative group management.
Likert attempted to show that the effective manager is one who uses the participative style of management, although the ideal manager must be able to use the right leadership style for any given situation.
Everyone in an organisation is interdependent: authority alone is insufficient to obtain good performance, and can only be effective in certain situations and with certain people.
The complete manager is one who uses (normally) a supportive, participative approach but who can use any style effectively in a particular situation.
In his books New Patterns of Management and The Human Organisation , Likert attempted through research to answer the question, ‘What do effective managers have in common?’
His research showed that four main elements are normally present in any effective manager.
They expect high levels of performance .
Their standards and targets are high and apply overall, not only to their subordinates' performance, but also to other departments and their own personal performance.
They are employee-centred .
They spend time getting to know their workers and develop a situation of trust so that their employees feel able to bring problems to them.
When necessary, their action scan be hard (though fair), akin to the actions of a responsible  parent.
Such managers are typified by their ability to face unpleasant facts in a constructive manner and help their staff to grow and develop a similar constructive attitude.
They do not practise case supervision .
The truly effective manager is aware of the performance levels that can be expected from each individual and he has helped them to define their own targets.
Once this has been achieved, the manager judges results and does not closely supervise the actions of his staff.
In this way he not only develops his people, he also frees himself to spend more time on other aspects of his work (for example, planning decisions, communications with other areas and personnel problems).
They operate the participative style of management as a natural style .
This means that if a job problem arises they do not simply impose a favoured solution.
Instead, they put the problem to the staff member involved.
Having agreed a solution, the participative manager would assist in implementing it.
Likert emphasises that all four features must be present for a manager to be truly effective.
For example, if a manager is employee-centred, if he delegates and is participative, then he will have a happy working environment but he will not produce a high performance unless he also establishes standards of performance.
A manager's concern for people must be matched by his concern for achieving results.
This linking of the human relations approach with scientific management targets will provide the recipe for effective performance.
It is important to remember that management techniques such as time and motion study, financial controls etc are used by high producing managers ‘at least as completely as by the low producing managers, but in quite different ways.’
The different application is caused by a better understanding of the motivations of human behaviour.
In New Pattern of Management Likert examined the results achieved by managers and supervisors who were practising the participative style of management.
He analysed these results in terms of output, wastage rates, labour turnover and absenteeism.
In summary, his research showed that on the whole, supervisors with the best performance were those who concentrated their main efforts on the human aspects of their staff's problems and attempted to build work groups with high performance standards.
On the other hand, supervisors with poor performance are described as spending more time in ensuring that their staff were busily employed in fulfilling specified stages of work.
His research further showed that the participative, supportive supervisor who was transferred to a low-production unit was able to raise the performance at a fast rate.
It is necessary to understand how the principle of supportive relationships would affect an organisation structure.
The integration of organisational goals and objectives with those of every individual in the organisation is essential.
Each individual  must believe that the organisation has desirable, significant objectives, and that he makes an indispensable contribution to the objectives of the organisation.
Jobs which do not fulfil this purpose must be reorganised so that they do.
‘Experiences, relationships etc are considered to be supportive when the individual involved sees the experience tin terms of his values, goals, expectations, and aspirations) as contributing to or maintaining his sense of personal worth and importance.’
An organisation must recognise the importance of the well- motivated work group in setting high-performance goals.
‘Management should deliberately endeavour to build these effective groups, linking them into an overall organisation by means of people who hold overlapping group membership .'
‘Linking pins’ perform a key function in the ‘overlapping group form of organisation’.
A leader of one group is also a subordinate member of a group higher in the hierarchical structure, so that he acts as a link between his subordinates and a higher authority.
Diagrammatically this would be shown as follows:
In the example, G is a linking pin between the group led by B and his own group of N, O and P. similarly, B is a linking pin to decisions at the top level — ie. A's group of A, B, C, and D.
The group leader retains responsibility for what occurs, even though the group practises collective decision-making.
Likert's conclusion was that the style of supervision is more important in achieving better results than any more general factors such as job interest, loyalty towards the company etc. (however, it remains true that employees  must receive rewards (pay etc) which give them compensation for their efforts.
Intrinsic satisfactions cannot replace equitable reward systems.)
There are clearly difficulties involved in the practical application of Likert's ideas.
For the overlapping group structure to be applied, the entire organisation must adopt the new management style.
This ‘new style, however, tends to be ‘localised’ in individual managers and their own work groups.
In a large organisation, a worker at the bottom of the hierarchy will have difficulty in relating his own contributions to the setting of the organisation objectives at the top of the hierarchy.
The ever-present problems of conflict between the self-interest of rival sub-units (eg production, sales, marketing and accountancy departments) will tend to blur a proper appreciation of what company objectives really are.
Task management: a return to traditional views — Blake's grid
The writings of the human relations school (McGregor etc) tended to obscure the ‘task’ element of a manager's responsibilities.
By emphasising style of leadership and the importance of human relations, it is all too easy to forget that a manager is primarily responsible for ensuring that tasks are done efficiently and effectively.
Robert R Blake and Jane S Mouton designed the management grid (1964) based on two aspects of managerial behaviour, namely:
concern for production, ie. the ‘task’; and
concern for people.
The results of their work were published under the heading of ‘Ohio State Leadership Studies’, but are now commonly referred to as Blake's grid.
The extreme cases shown on the grid are defined by Blake as being:
1.1
impoverished : manager is lazy, showing little effort or concern for staff or work targets.
1.9
country club : manager is attentive to staff needs and has developed satisfying relationships.
However, there is little attention paid to achieving results.
9.1
task management : almost total concentration on achieving results.
People's needs are virtually ignored and conditions of work are so arranged that people cannot interfere to any significant extent.
5.5
middle of the road or the dampened pendulum : adequate performance through balancing the necessity to get out work while maintaining morale of people at a satisfactory level.
9.9
team : high performance manager who achieves high work accomplishment through ‘leading’ committed people who identify themselves with the organisational aims.
The conclusion is that the most efficient managers combine concern for the task with concern for people.
It is worth being clear in your own mind about the possible usefulness of Blake's grid.
Its primary value is obtained from the appraisal of a manager's performance, either by the manager himself or by his superiors.
The ideal manager is a 9.9 individual with high concern for both production and people.
An individual manager can be placed on the grid, and his position on the grid should help him to see how his performance as a leader and a manager can be improved.
For example, a manager rated 3.8 has further to go in showing concern for the task itself than for developing the work of his subordinates.
You should also be aware that Blake's grid is based on the assumption that concern for production and concern for people are not incompatible with each other— which may or may not be true within the systems and personnel profile of a given organisation.
Reddin's 3-D views on leadership style
W J Reddin (1970) argued that a leader's concern for task and concern for people might be high or low (and in this respect he follows Blake and Mouton's ideas); however, a leader might be effective or ineffective in any style of leadership, depending on the circumstances.
The following table  
John Adair: action-centred leadership
Adair (Effective Leadership , 1983) identified three aspects of a leadership situation which overlap, but are distinct, ie:
the requirements of the task;
the needs of the individual;
the needs of the group (for self maintenance) etc.
Adair recognised that there will seldom be complete harmony between the three sets of needs, and the resulting tensions must be diagnosed and managed by the leader of the group.
Around this framework, Adair developed a scheme of leadership training based on precept and practice in each of eight leadership activities:
defining the task
planning
briefing
controlling
evaluating
motivating
organising
setting an example.
Adair identified leadership style in this essentially functional approach: the common perception of leadership as ‘decision-making’ was, he argued, inadequate to describe the range of action required by the complex situation in which the manager finds himself.
A SYSTEMS APPROACH TO LEADERSHIP
Systems theory is concerned with the complex inter- relationships between the many different parts of a system (eg. the organisation), and the effect of the environment on the system (and vice versa).
Katz and Kahn have developed ideas on how leadership can contribute to the functioning of a system.
Early research by Katz and Kahn (reported in 1951) into the effect of leadership style on productivity suggested that there were three aspects of leader behaviour which affected productivity:
assumption of the leadership role;
closeness of supervision;
degree of employee-orientation.
Comparisons were made between high-production and low- production groups and it was found that:
in the most efficient groups the supervisor assumed the leadership role and used his supervisory talents to get the best out of his group.
The leader has special functions and cannot therefore behave as an ordinary group member (ie be ‘one of the boys’).
In large organisations the assumption of the supervisory role is often made easier by transferring staff on promotion so that they make a fresh start among strangers;
supervision was closer in low-production than in high-production groups.
Workers expect to have some control over the means by which they perform a set task, and they resent having means specified in too much detail.
Supervisory behaviour was found to reflect management leadership styles, ie the organisational context affects leadership;
studies of the attitudes held by supervisors towards their subordinates revealed that the men in charge of high-production groups were more employee-oriented (ie intent on promoting their welfare).
In the research experiment, the attitudes of a manager were gauged by asking subordinates to rate bosses; results showed that the efficient bosses were seen by their subordinates to be more considerate .
Katz and Kahn have since developed their ideas and have suggested that the reason why the most effective managers show consideration and understanding towards their subordinates is because they supple formal position in the organisation and appreciate that their employees:
have interests and roles outside their job;
are subject to pressures and influences from their external environment;
need information to do their job with greater understanding; and
need to be guided in the dynamic, changing organisation, and to understand the significance of change.
Good leaders show a true awareness that organisations are ‘open’ systems, reacting to and changing with their environment, of which their subordinates are also a part.
Leaders influence those aspects of their subordinates' interests, energies and drive which cannot be harnessed by simple organisation structure, job definitions, or more formal management techniques.
A CONTINGENCY APPROACH TO LEADERSHIP
A contingency approach to leadership is one which argues that the ability of a manager to be a leader, and to influence his subordinate work group, depends on the particular situation, and will vary from case to case.
Factors which vary in different situations are the personality of the leader, his leadership style, the nature of the group's tasks, the nature and personality of the work group and its individual members, conditions of work and ‘external environmental’ factors.
F E Fiedler's contingency theory
Perhaps the leading advocate of contingency theory is F E Fiedler.
In an earlier work (1960) he studied the relationship between style of leadership and the effectiveness of the work group.
Two styles of leader were identified:Psychologically distant managers (PDMs), who maintain distance from their subordinates by:
formalising the roles and relationships between themselves and their superiors and subordinates
being withdrawn and reserved in their interpersonal relationships within the organisation X
preferring formal consultation methods rather than seeking opinions of their staff informally;
Psychologically case managers (PCMs), who:
do not seek to formalise roles and relationships with superiors and subordinates
are more concerned to maintain good human relationships at work than to ensure that tasks are carried out efficiently
prefer informal contacts to regular formal staff meetings.
Fiedler further developed his account of the significant qualities of the psychologically distant manager.
He judges subordinates on the basis of their performance, expects them to make mistakes and plans accordingly.
He prefers ambitious subordinates.
He attempts to obtain considerable freedom of action from his superiors.
Though reserved in his interpersonal relationships he nevertheless displays good interpersonal skills.
He is primarily task-orientated, and gains satisfaction from seeing a task performed.
Given these qualities of the PDMs, it is perhaps not surprising that in his 1960 study Fiedler concluded that the most effective work groups were led by psychologically distant managers and not by psychologically close managers.
The explanation for this appeared to be that a manager cannot properly control and discipline subordinates if he is too close to them emotionally.
Fiedler went on to develop his contingency theory in A Theory of Leadership Effectiveness .
He suggested that the effectiveness of a work group depended basically on two factors:
the relationship between the leader and his group; and
the nature of the work or tasks done by the group.
He concluded that:
a.
a structured (or psychologically distant) style works best when the situation is either very favourable, or very unfavourable to the leader; and
b.
a supportive (or psychologically close) style works best when the situation is moderately favourable to the leader.
A situation is ‘favourable’ to the leader when:
the leader is liked and trusted by the group;
the tasks of the group are clearly defined; and
the power of the leader to reward and punish with organisation backing is high.
‘Group performance will be contingent upon the appropriate matching of leadership styles and the degree of favourableness of the group situation for the leader, that is, the degree to which the situation provides the leader with influence over his group members .’
(Fiedler)
Fiedler's analysis can be described by a 3-dimensional cube in which one dimension represents the level of respect and trust for the leader amongst subordinates, a second dimension is the degree to which the tasks of the group are clearly defined, and a third dimension is the degree to which the leader has power and authority to reward or punish subordinates.
a.
When the situation is very favourable for the leader, he can afford to concentrate on the task, and be a task- orientated, psychologically distant manager.
The leader of a research group might be in this position.
b.
When the situation is only moderately favourable for the leader, he will need to show more concern for people — ie be a psychologically close manager.
c.
When the situation is unfavourable for the leader, he will need to be task-orientated, and a psychologically distant autocrat.
d.
Concern for task and concern for people should be balanced according to the needs of the situation, and the degree to which it favours a leader.
The situation is the key to deciding how effective a leadership style can be.
‘If we wish to increase organisational and group effectiveness we must learn not only how to train leaders more effectively, but also how to build an organisational environment in which the leader can perform well.’
Handy's ‘best fit’ approach
Handy has also suggested a contingency approach to leadership.
The factors in any situation which contribute to a leader's effectiveness are:
the leader himself — ie. his personality, character and preferred style of operating;
the subordinates — ie. their individual and collective personalities, and their preference for a style of leadership;
the task — ie. the objectives of the job, the technology of the job, methods of working etc;
the environment which is discussed separately.
Essentially, Handy argues that the most effective style of leadership in any particular situation is one which brings the first three factors — a leader, subordinates and task into a ‘best fit’.
For each of the three factors, a spectrum can be drawn ranging from ‘tight’ to ‘flexible’.
A best fit occurs when all three factors are on the same level in the spectrum, though this is rare in practice.
Confronted with a lack of fit, the leader must decide which factor(s) should be changed to bring all three into style; hence, Handy argues, the great emphasis on ‘leaderships’ in management literature.
‘However, although the leader's style is theoretically the easiest to alter in the short term, there are often long-term benefits to be achieved from re-defining the task (eg. job enlargement) or from developing the work group.’
The fourth factor identified by Handy in the situational jig- saw is the environment:
a.
The position of ‘power’ held by the leader in the organisation and the relationship of the leader and his group .
Power might be a position of authority but it might also be the  expertise or the charisma of the leader.
A person with great power has a bigger capacity to set his own style of leadership, select his own subordinates and redefine the task of his work group;
b.
Organisational ‘norms’ and the structure and technology of the organisation .
No manager can flout convention and act in a manner which is contrary to the customs and standards of the organisation.
If the organisation has a history of autocratic leadership, it will be difficult to introduce a new style.
If the formal organisation is highly centralised, there will be limits to how far a task can be restructured by an individual manager.
In mass-production industries, where routine, repetitive work is in-built in the production technology, challenging tasks will be difficult to create, and leadership will tend to be autocratic;
c.
The variety of tasks and the variety of subordinates .
If the tasks of a work group are simple, few in number and repetitive, the best style of leadership will be different from a situation in which tasks are varied and difficult.
In many groups, however, tasks vary from routine and simple, to complex ‘one-off’ problem-solving.
Managing such work is complicated by this variety.
Similarly, the individuals in a work group might be widely different.
One member of the group might seek participation and greater responsibility, whereas another might want to be told what to do.
Furthermore, where labour turnover is frequent, the individuals who act as leaders or subordinates are constantly changing; such change is unsettling because the leadership style will have to be altered to suit the new situation, each time a personnel change occurs.
The ‘environment’ can be improved for leaders within an organisation if top management act to ensure that:
leaders are given a clear role and ‘power,;,
organisational ‘norms’ can be broken — ie. the culture is responsive and adaptive;
the organisational structure is not rigid and inflexible;
subordinates in a work group are all of the same quality or type; and
labour turnover is reduced, especially by keeping managers in their job for a reasonably lengthy period of time.
Leadership style: Summary
The relevance of leadership style to the practice of management may be summarised as follows.
Leadership involves a concern for the task itself and also a concern for people.
Concern for people requires an understanding of what will motivate individuals to work harder and more effectively, and also an understanding of what can make a work group as a whole improve its motivation and norms of working.
Leadership style is a factor influencing the motivation of individual subordinates and the attitudes of work groups.
Leadership style is susceptible to improvement through training and management development programmes.
The most appropriate style of management for raising the level employee efficiency and effectiveness will vary with circumstances.
This means that either:
a manager might have to change his leadership style as the circumstances of his job change (eg. when he is moved to a new job).
However, since it is difficult to turn an autocrat into a democrat, or vice versa— ie. since a leopard cannot change its spots…
…it might be necessary instead to appoint managers who have a particular style of leadership to jobs where that style will be the most productive in the circumstances.
DECISION-MAKING
Managers are employed to make decisions.
There are different ways of categorising decisions.
One useful analysis of decisions is into five categories.
1.
Routine planning decisions — Typically, budgeting and scheduling.
2.
Short-run problem decisions — Typically, decisions of a non-recurring nature.
For example, a manager might have to deal with a staff problem, or give instructions to a subordinate about what to do next.
3.
Investment or dis-investment decisions — For example, should an item of equipment be purchased?
Should a department be shut down?
Decisions of this nature often have long-term consequences.
4.
Longer-range decisions — Decisions made once and reviewed infrequently, but which are intended to provide a continuing solution to a continuing or recurring problem.
Shillinglaw (1963) calls these ‘quantitative policy decisions’, and they include decisions about selling and distribution policies (eg. Should goods be sold through middlemen or direct to customers?
What type of customer should the sales force attempt to attract?
What should the company's discount policies be?
Should a company employ its  own delivery fleet, or should it hire contractors for distribution?
Should a new product or service be launched?
Should an additional shift be established in order to raise production levels to meet growing sales demand?).
5.
Control decisions ie. decisions about what to do when performance is disappointing and below expectation.
Decisions are needed to resolve problems, when there is a choice about what to do.
Problems vary, not just according to what they are about, but also according to:
how easy or complex they are to resolve;
how frequently they arise;
whether the problem can be quantified, or whether there are qualitative matters of judgement involved;
how much information is available to help the manager to make the decision;
how serious the consequences would be if a bad decision were made; and
whose job it is to make the decision about how to deal with it.
The complexity of decisions
Some problems are difficult to resolve, and call for:
careful judgement; or
a lot of thought; or
technical skill or experience on the part of the manager.
The manager who has the job of making any decision should have the technical skills to make a sensible decision and avoid unnecessary mistakes.
Due to the technical complexity of some decisions, management jobs are often specialised by function , with managers being trained and developed to acquire the technical skills — in engineering knowledge, accountancy, personnel administration, marketing, and so on to run a functional department and make good management decisions for that department.
The frequency of decisions
Some problems are recurring, and have to be resolved fairly regularly.
Other problems are occasional, perhaps unique, and difficult to foresee.
a.
Problems which recur regularly can be dealt with in a routine or standardised way, with the help of rules and procedures.
For example:
if a member of staff is continually late for work, a disciplinary code of practice should be available to give guidance to the employee's supervisor about what steps to take; or
if a supplier is late with a delivery, there should be procedures in the purchasing department for chasing up the delivery.
b.
Problems of a non-recurring and non-foreseeable nature cannot be provided for in a book of rules and procedures.
A higher decision-making ability is usually needed from managers to deal with problems in (b) compared with problems in (a).
Quantifiable and non-quantifiable problems
Quantifiable problems are problems where the likely outcome of each decision option can be measured, ie. quantified, and the option which offers the ‘best numbers’ will be selected.
The outcome of a decision might be measured in:
a.
money terms, eg. revenue, costs, profits;
b.
units of output or work, eg. number of items produced or sold, quantities of stock, hours of work, number of employees or items of equipment;
c.
productivity or efficiency, ie. units of work produced per unit of input resource employed, such as units produced per manhour or units processed per machine per week.
Quantifiable problems can be resolved by mathematical techniques, to produce a quantifiable decision.
However, not all problems can be dealt with mathematically.
Even with quantifiable problems, there will often be matters of doubt and uncertainty, where ‘qualitative, factors will affect the outcome too.
Qualitative factors include:
risk
man behaviour and attitudes.
Some simple examples might help to illustrate qualitative influences:
A sales manager estimates that to launch a new product on to the market will cost £200,000 in development and marketing costs.
Each product that is sold will earn a gross profit margin of £20, and so the company would need to sell 10,000 units to break even.
He thinks that the company will be able to sell 12,000 units.
A decision has to be made whether or not to launch the new product.
In quantitative terms the product is expected to make a net profit of (12,000 x £20)— £200,000 = £40,000, but only if the forecast of sales is correct.
It could be wrong, and the product might make a loss, if sales fail to reach 10,000 units.
Some judgement is needed about the risk element, in deciding whether or not to launch the product.
An office manager has to decide whether to change the procedures in his office for handling routine transactions.
His ideas for change would involve some regrouping of staff, and some need for training with new computer software.
He thinks the changes would improve the productivity of the office and enable it to handle more work each week.
However, he suspects that his work force will resist the change, and will insist on alterations to his proposals, and create a hostile atmosphere in the office.
Quantifiably, the decision should be in favour of change, but a qualitative factor that could change the decision is what the reaction of staff might be.
Again,judgement is needed by the manager in his or her decision.
The key point being made with these examples is that decisions involving qualitative factors call for the use of judgement by the manager.
The information available
Decision-makers need information to help them to reach a decision.
The greater the preponderance of qualitative issues over quantitative issues, the more judgement will be needed in making decisions.
Programmed decisions
The writer on management theory, Herbert Simon, made a distinction between:
programmed decisions; and
non-programmed decisions.
Programmed decisions , as the name implies, are decisions of a routine nature or quantitative nature for which decision rules can be predetermined.
Many operational decisions can be programmed and a computer used to make them, instead of a manager.
Alternatively, programmed decisions can be entrusted to a fairly junior level of management.
Non-programmed decisions are required when a manager must use his judgement, and these exist:
where decisions could be computerised, but are currently taken by managers or staff; and
where qualitative factors affect the decision.
The consequence of a decision
Sometimes, the difference between making a good decision, an ‘ordinary’ middle-of-the road decision and a bad decision might not be important, in terms of its outcome or consequences.
At other times, the beneficial consequences of a good decision, or the harmful consequences of a bad decision, can be enormous.
As you will imagine, decisions where the consequences could be significant should call for greater management skills
Who makes the decisions?
Decisions can be made either:
by one person — ie. one manager; or
by two or more people jointly, eg in committee.
Just who makes the decisions depends on organisation structure, and the extent to which authority is delegated within the organisation.
We shall look at these issues more fully later on.
Discretion
Discretion is the ‘liberty of deciding as one thinks fit, absolutely or within limits.’
(Oxford English Dictionary).
1.
There is little or no room for discretion with programmed decisions.
2.
The exercise of discretion in decision making can be associated with the use of judgement.
3.
Discretion means freedom to make decisions as one thinks fit.
Such freedom can only be exercised if the manager has the full authority to make decisions, without the need to ask a boss for approval, and without the chance that a boss might step in and alter or reverse the subordinate's decisions.
4.
A significant motivating factor for managers is the right to exercise discretion — ie. to have authority — over a particular area of work.
AUTHORITY, RESPONSIBILITY AND DELEGATION
Organisational authority refers to the scope and amount of discretion given to a person to make decisions, by virtue of the position he or she holds in the organisation.
The authority and power structure of an organisation defines:
the part which each member of the organisation is expected to perform; and
the relationship between the members;
so that their concerted efforts should be effective in achieving the purpose of the organisation.
Authority can be delegated.
Delegation of authority occurs in an organisation where a superior gives to a subordinate the discretion to make decisions within a certain sphere of influence.
This can only occur if the superior initially possesses the authority to delegate, ie a subordinate cannot be given organisational authority to make decisions unless it would otherwise be the superior's right to make those decisions.
Delegation of authority thus refers to the process by which a superior gives a subordinate the authority to carry out an aspect of the superior's job.
Without delegation, a formal organisation could not exist.
Responsibility refers to the liability of a person to be called to account for his/her actions and results.
A subordinate may have a responsibility for which he will be called to account by his superior; a board of directors may have a responsibility to its shareholders; and a government in a democracy will have a responsibility to the electorate.
Responsibility is therefore the obligation to do something; in an organisation, it is the duty of an official to carry out his assigned tasks.
Unlike authority, responsibility cannot be delegated .
Where a supervisor delegates authority to his subordinate, he remains responsible for ensuring that the work gets done, albeit by the subordinate rather than by himself personally.
The superior will exact responsibility from the subordinate for the authority delegated but he will remain responsible himself too.
With responsibility, we must associate accountability .
A manager is accountable to his superiors in the organisation for his actions and he is obliged to report to his superior how well he has exercised his responsibility and the use of the authority delegated to him.
The command structure of authority may be shown by an organisation chart, or may be documented in schedules or manuals.
It m appreciated that authority, responsibility and delegation are critical aspects of an organisation structure, and are significant factors in determining the efficiency with which an organisation operates.
It has been suggested that the main causes of dissension and stress in day-to-day operations of an organisation are weaknesses in the organisation structure.
L.F. Urwick's principles of good organisation
L F Urwick developed a number of the principles of good organisation.
These included:
the principle of specialisation: as far as possible, each individual should perform one function only, in which he can be a specialist;
the principle of authority : there should be clear lines of authority (or chains or command) from the top of an organisation down to every individual working in it;
the principle of definition : the duties, authority and responsibility of each position and its relationships with other positions, should be defined in writing and made known to everyone concerned;
the principle of correspondence : authority should match responsibility; and
the principle of span of control : managers should not control more than 5 or 6 subordinates if they have interlocking responsibilities.
Authority of power
If an organisation is to function as a cooperative system of individuals, some people must have authority or power over others.
Authority and power flow downward through the formal organisation.
Authority is the right to do something, ie in an organisation it is the right of a manager to require a subordinate to do something in order to achieve the goals of the organisation.
Managerial authority thus consists of:
making decisions within the scope of one's own managerial authority;
assigning tasks to subordinates; and
expecting and requiring satisfactory performance of these tasks from subordinates.
Power is distinct from authority, but is often associated with it.
Whereas authority is the right to do something, power is the ability to do it.
Three aspects of authority developed by Hicks and Gullet (‘Management’) are as follows.
1.
Responsibility and accountability are coupled with managerial authority.
When a manager is given the authority to do something, it is automatically presupposed that he has the ability to do it, the facilities that he needs and that the desired results will be achieved.
The manager is responsible for the actual results achieved, and he is held accountable because information about his achievements will be fed back to his superiors, and they can then call him to account to explain his performance.
2.
Authority is subjective .
Amitai Etzioni made a study of authority and motivation in differing environments.
He found that the way in which authority and power are exercised will differ according to the environment, relationships and type of subordinates.
Thus the way a prison warder, or even a shopfloor supervisor, exercises authority to get subordinates to do what he wants will be different from the way in which the director of a public company or the managing director of an audit firm will exercise theirs.
It will differ again in the case of the captain of the rugby team, or a parish priest.
In general, at the bottom end of the management hierarchy, authority must be exercised with more coercion whilst at the top end of the hierarchy, authority is more discreet and immediate subordinates more self-motivated.
3.
Sources of authority .
The authority of a manager might come from one or more sources.
Top down authority
This refers to the authority conferred on a manager because of the position he holds in the organisation's hierarchy and the extent to which authority has been delegated.
It is the official authority ‘traditionally’ associated with management, which goes down the scalar chain.
In most organisations, top down authority goes hand-in-hand with departmentalisation and the division of work, so that a senior manager in department A cannot tell a junior manager in department B  what to do, because his authority does not cross department or sectional boundaries.
Bottom up authority
This refers to the authority conferred on a leader from the people at lower levels in the organisation.
Elected leaders, such as politicians and many trade union officials, have such authority, which they will be expected to exercise in the interests of the electors/union members.
Rank
In some organisations such as the armed forces, rank is a clear expression of authority, and orders gain credibility because they come from someone of higher rank.
Personal authority or charisma
Some managers acquire authority through their personal charisma, and as a consequence are capable of influencing the behaviour of others.
Tradition
Some individuals acquire authority by tradition.
In old established family firms, the elder members of the family might continue to be obeyed and held in respect, even after they have officially retired.
Delegation of authority
It is generally recognised that in any large complex organisation, management must delegate some authority because:
there are physical and mental limitations to the work load of any individual or group in authority;
routine or less important decisions are therefore passed ‘down the line, to subordinates, and the superior is free to concentrate on the more important aspects of the work (eg. planning); and
the increasing size and complexity of organisations calls for specialisation , both managerial and technical.
This is the principle of division of work .
However, by delegating authority to subordinates, the superior takes on the extra tasks of calling the subordinates to account for their decisions and performance, and also of coordinating the efforts of different subordinates.
To be truly effective, the process of delegation should consist of four stages:
the expected performance levels (the expected results) of the subordinate should be clearly specified (ie determine the  required results).
These should be fully understood and accepted by the subordinate; tasks should be assigned to the subordinate who should agree to do them;
resources should be allocated to the subordinate to enable him to carry out his tasks at the expected level of performance, and authority should be delegated to enable the subordinate to do this job; and
responsibility should be exacted from the subordinate by the superior for results obtained (because ultimate responsibility remains with the superior).
In addition:
the subordinate's ability and experience must be borne in mind when allocating tasks and responsibilities, since it is highly damaging to allocate tasks beyond a subordinate's capabilities; and
frequent contact must be maintained between the boss and subordinate to review the progress made and to discuss constructive criticism.
A subordinate may have written or unwritten authority to do his job.
Written authority is preferable because it removes the room for doubt and argument.
Authority may also be general or specific.
It is general if the subordinate is given authority to make any decisions with regard to a certain (specified) area of the operations — ie. he is put in charge.
It is specific if the subordinate has authority to make certain limited and identified decisions within that area of operations.
General authority gives the subordinate greater discretion and flexibility.
Principles of delegation
There are certain principles of delegation, recommended by classical theorists, and many of them are still relevant in the context of formal organisation structure.
These are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Authority (and power) and responsibility (and accountability) must be properly balanced within an organisation; ie there must be parity between authority and responsibility:
A manager who is not held accountable for any of his authority or power may well exercise his authority in a capricious way.
It is a common human trait to wish to maximise power and minimise accountability.
A manager who is held accountable for aspects of performance which he has no power or authority to control is in an impossible position.
As stated previously, responsibility cannot be delegated.
A subordinate should be responsible to his superior for achievements with delegated authority, but the superior in his turn remains responsible to his own boss for the achievements of his subordinates.
There should be delegation of authority according to the results required, ie. a subordinate must be given sufficient authority to do all that is expected of him.
Once authority has been delegated, a superior should not expect his subordinate to refer decisions up the chain of command to him for confirmation (or ratification) provided that the decision is within the subordinate's scope of delegated authority.
There must be no doubts about the boundaries of authority because where doubts exist, decision-making will be weak, confused and possibly contradictory (if boundaries of authority overlap).
Classical theorists such as Fayol therefore argued that the scalar chain of command must be clearly specified in terms of who holds what authority and who is accountable to whom and for what.
Information flow does not have to be restricted to passing up and down the scalar chain, but authority should.
‘The line of authority is the route followed — via every link in the chain — by all communications which start from or go to the ultimate authority.
This path is dictated both by the need for some transmission and by the principle of unity of command, but it is not always the swiftest.
It is even at times disastrously lengthy in large concerns, notably in governmental ones.’
(Fayol:General and Industrial Administration ).
When authority is delegated, the relationship between subordinate and superior is critically important.
Drucker has argued that although authority is passed down to subordinates, the relationship between subordinates and superiors, and their responsibilities, have three dimensions:
Every manager has the task of contributing towards what his superior's section must do to achieve its objectives.
Every manager has a responsibility towards the organisation as a whole, and must define the activities of his own unit so as to contribute towards achieving the organisation's objectives.
Every manager has a responsibility towards his subordinates (ie to make sure they know what is expected of them, to help them set their own objectives, to help them attain their objectives, to offer counsel and advice etc).
‘The vision of a manager should always be upward-towards the enterprise as a whole.
But his responsibility runs downwards a well to the mangers on his team ’.
(Drucker)
It is an interesting question to ask why, in a formal organisation built up in the ‘classical, hierarchical manner, there should be so many levels of management.
After all, the purpose of management is to see that the work of the organisation gets done, and the only managers who supervise ‘actual work’ directly are the ‘front-line’or ‘first-line’supervisors (eg. ‘foreman’in manufacturing industries).
If a first-line supervisor has a superior, the work of the superior must derive from the supervisor.
Drucker noted that ‘the managers on the firing line have the basic management jobs — the ones on whose performance everything else ultimately rests.
Seen this way, the jobs of higher management are derivative, are, in the last analysis, aimed at helping the firing line manager do his job.
Viewed structurally and organically, it is the firing line manager in whom all authority and responsibility centre; only what he cannot do himself passes up to higher management’.
Yet authority is passed down or delegated through the formal organisation; it is not passed up from supervisors to senior managers.
Although the front-line supervisor manages the real work, the authority to do so comes from higher up.
A front-line supervisor only has authority over his part of the work of the organisation and cannot issue instructions to another part.
For example, the manager of the Oldham branch of a clearing bank cannot issue instructions to employees in the Huddersfield branch.
Senior managers are required to coordinate the work of subordinates by having authority over a wider area of work, right up to the chief executive and board of directors.
Front-line supervisors make short-term day-to-day decisions and have no time for longer-term plans and decisions.
Longer-term decisions are kept within the authority of more senior managers.
‘Authority and responsibility should always be task-focused .
This applies all the way up the management hierarchy to the chief executive job itself ’.
(Drucker)
The relationship between organisation structure and delegation
To decide how authority and responsibility should be delegated, it is necessary:
first of all, to decide what kind of structure of jobs (and departments) the organisation needs; and
only then to decide how authority should be delegated within this structure.
In other words, the way in which authority should be delegated depends very much on how the organisation's tasks are analysed.
To decide what structure of jobs is needed, Drucker has suggested the need for three analyses to be made.
Activities analysis
This is an analysis of what the major activities carried out by the organisation should be.
A typical manufacturing company will have functional activities such as‘manufacturing’, ‘engineering’ and ‘sales’, but not every manufacturing company may need these functional divisions, and some may need to emphasise other  functions as well .
As an example, Drucker quoted the case of Crown-Zellerbach, a big West-Coast pulp and paper manufacturer, which found that long-range forest management was such an important activity that it had to be established as a separate department, because otherwise it would not be given the attention its importance warranted.
A decision analysis
This analyses the kind of decisions to be made in an organisation, and the activities they affect.
The analysis will help the management organiser to determine which managers should make the decisions, and who else should be informed.
Drucker itemised four characteristics of the nature of decisions.
(i)
The degree of futurity in the decision .
For how long in the future does the decision affect the business, and how quickly can the decision be reversed if it is later found to be a bad one?
Decisions which can be reversed quickly should be taken by relatively junior management.
(ii)
the impact of the decision on other departments or functions , or on the business as a whole.
If a decision affects only one function (eg one section in manufacturing) it can be taken by fairly junior management.
If it affects more than one function, the decision must be taken by a manager senior enough to provide consultation with and cooperation with the other functions affected by the business.
For example, if the warehousing department is considering a reduction in finished goods stocks, this will affect production (less output needed) and sales (there may be inadequate stock levels to meet customer demand without a waiting list).
The decision would need to be made at a very senior level of management (possibly Chief Executive level).
(iii)
The number of qualitative factors in a decision .
Qualitative factors call for the exercise of managerial judgement, and decisions involving value considerations should be taken, or at least reviewed, at a higher management level.
(iv)
Whether the decision is regular and periodic, or rare.
For recurrent decisions, a general rule is required.
This might be decided by higher management.
Then, when the rule is subsequently applied in specific cases, more junior management should be given the authority for its application.
Drucker concluded about decision analysis that: ‘A decision should always be made at lowest level and as close to the scene of action as possible…
Analysing the foreseeable decisions…shows both what structure of top management the enterprise needs and what authority and responsibility different levels of operating management should have ’.
A relations analysis
This considers the relationships between a manager in charge of an activity and other managers with whom he will have to work.
These relationships are not only downwards (with subordinates) but also upwards (with superiors) and sideways (with managers of different activities).
‘Analysing relations is not only indispensable to the decision of what kind of a structure is needed.
It is also necessary to make the vital decision how the structure should be manned.
Indeed, only an analysis of the relations in a job makes possible intelligent and successful staffing’.
Problems of delegation
In practice many managers are reluctant to delegate and attempt to do many routine matters themselves in addition to their more important duties.
Some common reasons for this are listed below.
A manager may feel that his subordinate will carry out the work badly, and that he himself will ultimately be held responsible for his subordinate's errors.
Some managers believe that they would lose touch with their department (both workload and staff) unless they retain some routine tasks.
Seniors are often unwilling to admit that subordinates have developed to the extent that they could perform some of the manager's duties.
Handy writes of a ‘trust-control dilemma’ in a superior/subordinate relationship, in which the sum of trust + control is a constant amount; ie  where,
T = the trust the superior has in the subordinate, and the trust which the subordinate feels the superior has in him;
C = the degree of control exercised by the superior over the subordinate;
Y = a constant, unchanging value.
Any increase in C leads to an equal decrease in T, ie. if the superior retains more ‘control’ or authority, the subordinate will immediately recognise that he is being trusted less.
If the superior wishes to show more trust in the subordinate, he can only do so by reducing C, ie by delegating more authority.
To overcome the reluctance of managers to delegate, it is necessary to:
provide a system of selecting subordinates who will be capable of handling delegated authority in a responsible way.
If subordinates are of the right ‘quality’, superiors will be prepared to trust them more;
have a system of open communications, in which the superior and subordinates freely interchange ideas and information.
If the subordinate is given all the information he needs to do his job, and if the superior is aware of what the subordinate is doing:
the subordinate will make better- informed decisions,
the superior will not ‘panic, because he does not know what is going on.
Although open lines of communication are important, they should not be used by the superior to command the subordinate in a matter where authority has been delegated to the subordinate.
In other words, communication links must not be used by superiors as a means of reclaiming authority.
They should:
ensure that a system of control is established.
Superiors are reluctant to delegate authority because they retain absolute responsibility for the performance of their subordinates.
If an efficient control system is in operation, responsibility and accountability will be monitored at all levels of the management hierarchy, and the ‘dangers’ of relinquishing authority and control to subordinates are significantly lessened; and
reward effective delegation by superiors and the efficient assumption of authority by subordinates.
Rewards may be given in terms of pay, promotion, status, official approval etc.
System of appeals and pooled authority
Further problems with delegation occur when:
subordinates who must coordinate their activities cannot agree about how things should be done; or
the collective authority of subordinates may be required to make a decision.
Disagreements will inevitably occur within any formal organisation.
The general rule is that problems which cannot be solved at lower levels are referred upward through the organisation structure until the problem reaches an official with enough authority and power to solve the problem.
The channel for appeals would be described by an organisation chart:
A disagreement between D and E could be referred to B; whereas a disagreement between D and F would need to be settled either by B and C together (using their pooled authority) or by appealing up the scalar chain to A. 
Some organisations may have a special appeals procedure, with problems or grievances referred to an independent arbitrator.
Pooled authority (or ‘splintered’ authority) refers to a situation in which two subordinates join together and use their collective authority to make a decision, instead of referring the matter up the chain of command to a superior.
In the preceding ‘organisation chain' B and C might pool their authority to make a decision affecting their common area of work, or affecting subordinates D, E and F, instead of referring their problem to A. Management conferences are an example of attempts to exchange ideas and reach collective decisions on the basis of pooled authority.
COMMITTEES
Committees might be used within an organisation as a means of either delegating authority or pooling authority.
The disadvantages and advantages of committees extend beyond considerations of authority and responsibility and they are described here in full.
Within an organisation, committees can consist entirely of executives (eg. board meetings, budget approvals, project teams, feasibility studies).
Alternatively, committees can be an instrument of joint consultation between employers and employees (eg. works councils, joint productivity groups, staff advisory councils).
Classification of committees
Committees may be classified according to the power they exercise, distinguishing between those having the power to bind the parent body and those without such power.
It is also important to consider the function and duration of committees so that the following categories may be defined:
executive committees which have the power to govern or administer.
It can be argued that the board of directors of a limited company is itself a ‘committee’ appointed by the shareholders, to the extent that it governs or administers;
standing committees which are formed for a particular purpose on a permanent basis.
Their role is to deal with routine business delegated to them at weekly or monthly meetings;
ad hoc committees are formed to complete a particular task.
It can be described as a fact-finding or special committee which is short lived and having achieved its purpose, reports back to the parent body and then ceases to exist;
subcommittees may be appointed by committees to relieve the parent committee of some of its routine work; or
joint committees may be formed to coordinate the activities of two or more committees, eg. representatives from employers and employees may meet in a Joint Consultative committee.
This kind of committee can either be permanent or appointed for a special purpose.
A psychologist, Janis, has recognised that a group develops a strong feeling of ‘we-ness’ and it becomes vulnerable to a pattern of behaviour known as ‘group think’.
This happens as the outcome of group pressure and impedes the official exertion of one's mental processes.
In order to overcome these difficulties, it has been suggested that members of committees should be encouraged to evaluate decisions critically.
The leader should always conduct the meeting impartially and avoid stating his preferences and objections.
When the time comes to take a decision, one member should take the part of ‘devil's advocate’ challenging the majority viewpoint.
Reasons for committees
The potential advantages of committees are as follows:
a.
consolidation of power and authority: whereas an individual may not have sufficient authority to make a decision himself, the pooled authority of a committee may be sufficient to enable the decision to be made.
A committee may be referred to in this type of instance as a plural executive.
Examples of a plural executive include a board of directors or the Cabinet of the government, which are policy-making and policy-execution committees;
b.
blurring responsibility: when a committee makes a decision, no individual will be held responsible for the consequences of the decision.
This is both an advantage and a disadvantage of committee decisions;
c.
creating new ideas: group creativity may be achieved by a ‘brainstorming committee’ or ‘think tank’;,
d.
they are an excellent means of communication: for example:
to exchange ideas of a wide number of interests before a decision affecting the organisation is taken;
to inform managers about policies, plans, actual results etc;
e.
they are democratic, because they allow for greater participation in the decision-making process;
f.
combining abilities: committees enable the differing skills of its various members to be brought together to deal with a problem.
In theory, the quality of committee decisions should be of a high standard;
g.
coordination: they should enable the maximum coordination of all parties involved in a decision to be achieved;
h.
advisory capacity: a committee is frequently used to offer advice to a decision-maker,;
i.
representative: they enable all relevant interests to be involved in the decision-making process and they bring together the specialised knowledge of working people into a working combination;
j.
through participation, they may improve the motivation of committee members (and even of their subordinates), and provide managers with wider experience to help with their development;
k.
a committee may be set up by a board of directors to do ‘spade work’ and avoid detailed discussions at board meetings.
The disadvantages of committees may be summarised as follows:
a.
they are apt to be too large for constructive action, since the time taken by a committee to resolve a problem tends to be in direct proportion to its size;
b.
committees are time consuming and expensive;
c.
delays may occur in the work cycle if matters of a routine nature are entrusted to committees; committees must not be given responsibilities which they would carry out inefficiently;
d.
operations of the enterprise may be jeopardised by the frequent attendance of executives at meetings, and by distracting them from their real duties;
e.
incorrect or ineffective decisions may be made, due to the fact that members of a committee are unfamiliar with the deeper aspects of issues under discussion.
Occasionally, there may be a total failure to reach any decision at all;
f.
certain members may be apathetic, due to pressure of work or disinterest, resulting in superficial action;
g.
since there is no individual responsibility for decisions, this might invite compromise instead of clear-cut decisions, besides weakening individual responsibility throughout the organisation.
Moreover, members may thereby be enabled to avoid direct responsibility for poor results arising from decisions taken in committee.
Weak management an hide behind committee decisions;
h.
committees lack conscience; and
i.
proceedings may be dominated by outspoken or aggressive members, thus unduly influencing decisions and subsequent action, perhaps adversely, ie. there may be; ‘tyranny’ by a minority.
Centralisation or decentralisation
Committees are not used as the main method of delegating authority, and authority is more typically delegated down a formal management hierarchy or chain of command.
Centralisation and decentralisation refer to the degree to which authority is delegated in an organisation.
The terms are thereby used to describe the level at which decisions are taken in the management hierarchy.
Complete centralisation would mean that no authority at all was exercised by subordinates; complete decentralisation would mean that all authority was exercised by subordinates (ie there would be no coordination of subordinates).
It is doubtful whether any organisation approaches to either of these extremes.
In the following paragraphs, the term ‘centralisation’ will be used to mean a greater degree of central control, and ‘decentralisation’to mean a greater degree of delegated authority.
the advantages of centralisation
The advantages of centralisation are as follows.
Senior management can exercise greater control over the activities of the organisation and coordinate their subordinates or sub-units more easily.
With central control, procedures can be standardised throughout the organisation.
Senior managers can make decisions from the point of view of the organisation as a whole, whereas subordinates would tend to make decisions from the point of view of their own department or section.
Sub-optimality occurs when one department makes a decision which appears to be a good one, from the departmental point of view, but which is actually damaging to the organisation as a whole.
With centralisation, sub-optimality should not occur, but with decentralisation it would be a serious threat to the efficiency of the organisation.
Centralised control enables an organisation to maintain a balance between different functions or departments.
For example, if a company has only a limited amount of funds available to spend over the next few years, centralised management would be able to take a balanced view of how the funds should be shared out between production, marketing, research and development, motor vehicles, other fixed asset purchases in different departments etc.
Senior managers ought to be more experienced and skilful in making decisions.
In theory at least, centralised decisions by senior men should be better in ‘quality’ than decentralised decisions by less experienced subordinates.
(Note: this raises the issues of trust and the capabilities of subordinates, which have already been discussed in this chapter.)
Centralised management will often be cheaper, in terms of managerial overheads.
When authority is delegated, there is often a duplication of management effort (and a corresponding increase in staff numbers) at lower levels of hierarchy.
To avoid such costs of duplication some specialised departments (eg data processing, the legal department) may remain centralised.
In times of crisis, the organisation may need strong leadership by a central group of senior managers.
The advantages of delegation (decentralisation)
Some delegation is necessary in all large organisations because of the limitations to the physical and mental capacity of senior managers.
A greater degree of decentralisation, ie over and above the ‘minimum’ which is essential, has the following advantages.
It reduces the stress and burdens of senior management.
It provides subordinates with greater job satisfaction by giving them more say in decision-making which affects their work.
Such participation in decisions, leading to job satisfaction, might  motivate the subordinates to work harder and more efficiently and effectively, to achieve the goals of the organisation.
Subordinates may have a better knowledge of ‘local’ conditions affecting their area of work.
With the benefits of such knowledge, they should be capable of more informed, well- judged management.
Unfortunately, local managers often think in the short term, whereas senior managers think in the longer term.
A subordinate might therefore make a well-informed decision to win a short-term advantage when a different decision would have been preferable in the longer-term view.
Delegation should allow greater flexibility, a quicker response to changing conditions, and speedier decision-making.
If problems do not have to be referred up a scalar chain of command to senior managers for a decision, decision-making will be quicker.
Since decisions are quicker, they are also more adaptable, and easier to change in the light of unforeseen circumstances which may arise.
By allowing delegated authority to subordinates, management at middle and junior levels are ‘groomed’ for eventual senior management positions, because they are given the necessary experience of decision-making.
Delegation is therefore important for management development.
By establishing appropriate sub-units or profit centres to which authority is delegated, the system of control within the organisation might actually be improved.
Targets for performance by each profit centre can be established, actual results monitored against targets and control action taken by appropriate subordinates with the necessary authority; the subordinates would then be held accountable and responsible for their results, and areas of efficiency or inefficiency within the organisation would be more easily identified and remedied.
Centralisation and decentralisation: Summary
Arguments in favour of centralisation and decentralisation
Pro centralisation
1.
Decisions are made at one point, and so easier to coordinate.
2.
Senior managers in an organisation can take a wider view of problems and consequences.
3.
Senior management can keep a proper balance between different departments or functions eg. by deciding on the resources to allocate to each.
4.
Possibly cheaper, by reducing number of managers needed and so lower cost of overheads.
5.
Crisis decisions are best taken at the centre.
Pro decentralisation
1.
Avoids overburdening top managers.
2.
Improvers motivation of more junior managers.
3.
Helps junior managers to develop and the process of transition from functional to general' management.
4.
Greater speed of decision making, and response to changing events.
5.
Greater awareness of local problems by decision makers Geographically dispersed organisations should often be decentralised on a regional/area basis.
6.
Separate spheres of responsibility can be identified, and control systems set up for junior management, and so controls, performance measurement and accountability are better.
How much delegation should there be?
Since there are advantages and disadvantages of delegation, it is natural to ask how much delegation there should be so that an organisation can operate in the most efficient way.
Several different views have been put forward; we shall consider them in the next chapter under three headings:
span of control;
functional or divisional organisation structures;
contingency theory of delegation.
chapter six
THE NATURE OF WORK ORGANISATION
Objectives
To consider how we define organisations, both formal and informal in nature and the objectives of organisations.
To explore the concepts of bureaucracy, authority, power and influence within large and small organisations.
DEFINING ORGANISATION
As we have said, writings on ‘organisations’ over the years have taken very many different perspectives and ‘angles’on the subject.
Organisational metaphors have varied from the primitive tribe with its constituent hunting bands, to the ship with its crew, to the biological organism, according to the emphasis which the writer wished to put on particular aspects of organisational life.
Buchanan and Huczymski put forward the following definition of organisation:
‘social arrangements for the controlled performance of collective goals’.
They point out that the difference between organisations (and particularly work organisations) and other social groupings with collective goals (eg. the family, the bus stop queue) is:
the preoccupation with performance; and
the need for controls.
a.
Organisations are collections of interacting individuals, occupying different roles but experiencing common membership.
However, this embraces a wide variety of behaviours; the relationship between them may be cooperative or coercive; their roles may be ill-defined or clearly-defined, overlapping, conflicting etc.
b.
Organisations are created because individuals need each other in order to fulfil goals which they consider worthwhile.
As we have seen, however, one individual's goals may be very different from another's and from those of the organisation as a whole.
c.
Performance must be controlled in order to make best use of human, financial and material resources, for which individuals, groups and organisations compete.
The need for controlled performance leads to a deliberate, ordered environment, allocation of tasks (ie. division of labour), specialisation, the setting of standards and measurement of results against them etc.
This implies a whole structure of ‘power’ or ‘responsibility’relationships, whereby some individuals control others.
REASONS FOR ORGANISATIONS
In general terms, organisations exist because they can achieve results which individuals cannot achieve alone.
By grouping together, individuals overcome limitations imposed by both the physical environment and also their own biological limitations.
Chester Barnard (1956) described the situation of a man trying to move a stone which was too large for him:
the stone was too big for the man (environmental limitation ) and
the man was too small for the stone (biological limitation ).
By forming an organisation with another man, it was possible to move the stone with the combined efforts of the two men together.
Barnard further suggested that the limitations on man's accomplishments are determined by the effectiveness of his organisation.
In greater detail, the reasons for organisations may be described as follows:
social reasons : to meet an individual's need for companionship;
to enlarge abilities : organisations increase productive ability because they make possible both:
specialisation; and
exchange.
The potential benefits of specialisation were recognised by Adam Smith in his famous book The Wealth of Nations (1776).
Specialisation permeates our modern industrial and commercial society;
to accumulate knowledge (for subsequent re-use and further learning); and
to save time: organisations make it possible for objectives to be reached in a shorter time.
Synergy
Organisation can have a synergistic effect.
Synergy is explained, briefly, as the principle that 2 + 2 = 5.
In other words, by bringing together two separate and individual ‘units of resource’ the output of the units combined will exceed the joint output of the separate units so that:
before their combination, 2 + 2 = 4and
after their combination, 2 + 2 = 5.
Thus if A can grow 1,000 units of a product on his land, and B can grow 800 units on his land, by combining their resources (perhaps to buy some modern farming equipment and to organise their work more efficiently) they might succeed in growing, say, 2,100 units of the product.
Formal and informal organisation
A formal organisation may be defined (Etzioni) as a social unit deliberately constructed to seek specific goals.
It is characterised by:
planned divisions of responsibility;
power centres which control its efforts;
substitution of personnel; and
the ability to combine its personnel in different ways.
Formal organisations have an explicit hierarchy in a well- defined structure; job specifications and communication channels are also well-defined.
An informal organisation, in contrast, is loosely structured, flexible and spontaneous.
Membership is gained consciously or unconsciously and it is often difficult to determine the time when a person becomes a member.
Examples of an informal organisation are managers who regularly go together for lunch in a local cafeteria, a clique of workmates etc.
With every formal organisation there exists, to a greater or lesser extent, a complex informal organisation.
The formal organisation is a structure of relationships and ideas; informal organisation, in practice, modifies this formal structure (Blau and Scott 1962).
Personal objectives and organisations
Barnard described an organisation as a ‘system of cooperative human activities’ and it is important to be aware that:
an organisation consists of people who interact with each other;
the way in which people interact is designed and ordered by the organisation structure so as to achieve joint (organisational) objectives.
Each individual has his own view of what these organisational objectives are;
each person in the organisation has his own personal objectives; and
the organisational objectives as gauged by an individual need to be compatible with personal objectives of the individual if he is to be a well-integrated member of the organisation.
The task of management is:
to recognise the personal objectives of individuals and to integrate these with organisational objectives;
to reconcile and integrate the differing views of organisational objectives that are held by different individuals so that a total company objective may be recognised (Argyris); and
to make the optimal use of resources (materials, human abilities and efforts etc.) in achieving these integrated personal and organisational objectives.
An organisation will be effective only so far as it helps individual members to achieve their own personal objectives, and a large part of the task of management is therefore concerned with this problem.
It is important that an individual should consider that the objectives of the organisation (and consequently his own efforts and actions within the organisation) are compatible with his various needs.
Some personal needs will be more important than others and an individual will be prepared to sacrifice some of his objectives for his own greater benefit (eg. an individual may be prepared to sacrifice some of his time in order to do a job which earns extra money).
The objects and objectives of an enterprise
Every business organisation has its objectives — ie. its main purpose for being in existence.
These may be to make as large a profit as possible for the organisation's owners, in the case of private enterprise, or to provide a service in the case of non-profit-making organisations or government departments and institutions.
Every business organisation also has its objects — ie. every business exists to carry out certain activities such as manufacturing and selling motor cars, providing retail services, providing telecommunications services, etc.
In the case of companies, their objects are described in the objects clause of the memorandum of association.
Non-profit making organisations, public corporations and other government institutions might also have formally-stated objects in their constitution, whereas other organisations such as sole traderships do not have any formally-stated objects (even though they will still have objects of some description).
As an example, a partnership of solicitors might be formed with the objective of making profits but with the object of providing legal services.
Business organisations differ from each other partly because they have different objects, despite similar objectives.
A hairdressing business and a manufacturer of armoured tanks have the same profit objective, but radically different objects.
The objects of a business also help to dictate what sort of organisation structure the business requires.
To integrate individual and organisational objectives it is necessary to formulate organisational objectives which are understood by all members as well as compatible with their personal goals.
‘Organisational objectives should give the organisation meaning to man…and man meaning a the organisation .’
(Davis)
BUREAUCRACY
A bureaucracy exists when the officials of an organisation are physically separated from the ‘real work’ of the organisation.
To a layman, the word ‘bureaucracy’ has unpleasant associations; however, the German writer, Max Weber (1864–1920) who is the organisational theorist most closely associated with the analysis of bureaucracy, was inclined to regard bureaucracy as the ideal form of organisation, which is ‘from a purely technical point of view, capable of attaining the highest degree of efficiency and is in this sense formally the most rational means of carrying out imperative control over human beings .’
Weber regarded an organisation as an authority structure.
He was interested in why individuals obeyed commands, and he identified three grounds on which legitimate authority could exist.
1.
Charismatic leadership : in such an organisation, a leader is regarded as having some special power or attribute; decision-making is centralised in him and delegation strictly limited.
The leader expects personal, sycophantic devotion from his staff and followers.
Decisions are frequently irrational.
2.
Traditional or patriarchal leadership : in such organisations, authority is bestowed by virtue of hereditary entitlement, eg the family firm, the lord of the manor.
Tradition is glorified.
Decisions and actions are bound by precedent.
3.
Bureaucracy : authority is bestowed by dividing an organisation into jurisdictional areas (production, marketing, sales etc) each with specified duties.
Authority to carry them out is given to the officials in charge, and rules and regulations are established in order to ensure their achievement.
Leadership is therefore of a ‘rational-legal’ nature.
Weber specified several general characteristics of bureaucracy, which he described as ‘a continuous organisation of official functions bound by rules’:
hierarchy : each lower office is under the control and supervision of a higher one;
specialisation and training : there is a high degree of specialisation of labour.
Employment is based on ability, not personal loyalty;
impersonal nature : employees work full time within the impersonal rules and regulations and act according to formal, impersonal procedures;
professional nature of employment : an organisation exists before it is filled with people.
Officials are full-time employees, promotion is according to seniority and achievement; pay scales are prescribed according to the position or office held in the organisation structure;
rationality : the ‘jurisdictional areas’ of the organisation are determined rationally.
The hierarchy of authority and office structure is clearly defined.
Duties are established and measures of performance set;
uniformity in the performance of tasks is expected, regardless of  whoever is engaged in carrying them out;
technical competence in officials, which is rarely questioned within the area of their expertise; and
stability : the reward for employees who do their jobs well is stability, regular pay, a retirement pension, the chance of promotion, etc.
Compared with other types of organisation the potential advantages of bureaucracy may seem apparent.
Weber was impressed with the development and accomplishments of bureaucracy, and especially with the role of technical knowledge in bureaucratic administration which he regarded as the primary source of the superiority of bureaucracy as an organisation.
He was also ready to acknowledge the failures of bureaucracy and deplored an organisation of ‘little cogs, little men, clinging to little jobs and striving towards bigger ones.’
Koontz, O'Donnell and Weihrich suggest that the principles of formal organisations are:
the conscious attainment of a common goal by organised, collective effort;
unity of objective: the formal organisation should ensure that individuals in the organisation find it easy to work towards the common organisation goal.
‘If the objective is to make profit over a period of time, then the organisation pattern that helps to accomplish this conforms to the principle of unity of objective,;, and
efficiency: an organisation structure is efficient if it facilitates the achievement of organisational and personal goals by individuals with the ‘minimum unsought consequences or costs.’
However, efficiency may be difficult to measure or gauge.
Criticisms of bureaucracies
Many criticisms of bureaucracies may already be familiar.
Weber acknowledged their existence but did not discuss them.
However ideal bureaucracy may appear in theory, there are many inefficiencies in practice which need to be overcome.
The very strength of some of the characteristics of bureaucracy may in some cases be turned into a cause of weakness.
Responsibility may be avoided by using the rulebook, although the rules are established to enable efficient decisions and actions.
By sticking to the letter of the law, the spirit of the law may be lost.
Bureaucratic red tape may prevail, and risk- averse officials become ‘sticklers’ for the rules.
There is frequently a tendency to ‘pass the buck’.
In giving orders to subordinates, an official will go by the rule book and will blame someone else for the existence of the rules where his decision appears inappropriate.
He may also act on the principle that ‘things have always been done this way’ and justify his actions accordingly.
A manager who wishes to resist change will pass the buck by saying that customary habits and methods have always worked in the past.
A formal bureaucratic structure, by creating a well-defined awareness of areas of authority and responsibility, may lead to ‘empire building’— ie. hoarding authority to prove competence and ability.
Other influences commonly found in bureaucracies are:
a.
The complexity of decision-making (eg. to obtain the go-ahead for new projects etc) slows down the decision-making process, causing unwanted delays.
b.
Conformity creates ritualism, formalism and ‘organisation man,.
c.
Personal growth of individuals is inhibited.
d.
Innovation is discouraged; there is a school of management thinking which believes that too much bureaucracy represses creativity and initiative in moulding organisation man.
e.
Control systems are frequently out of date.
Weber suggested that certain general social consequences of the development of bureaucracy would arise.
These are:
a tendency to ‘levelling’(eg. recruitment based on competence);
a tendency to plutocracy, ie rule by the wealthy (based on the interest in long-term training before qualification); and
a spirit of ‘formalistic impersonality, without hatred or passion, and hence without affection or enthusiasm’.
Various writers have written about the inefficiencies or ‘dysfunctions’ of bureaucracy.
Merton suggested that there is a rigidity of behaviour in a bureaucracy, due to:
a.
the reduction in the amount of personalised relationships (officials work with officials, not people with people);
b.
the internationalisation of the rules of the organisation.
Rules originally designed for efficiency take on a significance which is totally unrelated to any organisational goal;
c.
the increase in the use of categorisation of situations in order to reach decisions; decision-making is simplified (based on precedents); and
d.
the development of an ‘esprit de corps’.
In spite of impersonalised relationships, there is a propensity amongst members of an organisation to defend each other against outside pressures.
Rigidity of behaviour, Merton argued, has three consequences.
It creates reliability, thus meeting an important maintenance need of the system.
It creates defensibility of individual action (due to categorisation for decision-making purposes).
It increases difficulties with clients.
Client pressure (eg. complaints from members of the public) creates a felt need for defensibility of individual actions, which in turn encourages further rigidity of behaviour.
Selznick suggested a further dysfunction in bureaucracy.
As a result of increasing specialisations and technical competence, delegation of authority has increased.
With delegation, however, comes the ‘bifurcation of interests’.
What one expert sees as the organisational goals are different from the views of another expert.
This in turn raises conflict between sub-units of the organisation and there is a tendency for individuals to identify with the sub-goals of their sub-unit to the detriment of the organisation as a whole.
Selznick concluded that delegation achieves a necessary purpose, as specialisation increases, but that it carries problems with it, ie. it is both functional and dysfunctional at the same time.
Gouldner argued that rules are both functional and dysfunctional in a bureaucracy.
Rules are functional
they take away from a subordinate the feeling that his superior, in issuing orders, holds power over him.
This in turn reduces the interpersonal tensions which otherwise exist between superiors and subordinates, and for this reason the ‘survival of the work group as an operating unit’ is made possible by the creation of rules.
Rules are dysfunctional
employees use rules to learn what is the minimum level of behaviour expected from them, and there is a tendency for employees to work at this minimum level of behaviour.
This, in turn, suggested Gouldner, creates a requirement for close supervision.
Greater pressure from supervisors will make subordinates more aware of the power the supervisor holds over him, thereby increasing tension within the work group.
Overcoming the disadvantages
The financial and technical advantages of bureaucratic organisations usually outweigh the disadvantages, which need to be reduced to acceptable proportions.
Arguably therefore:
a.
bureaucratic managers need to believe that all employees are individuals and that the individuals matter;
b.
the content of subordinates' jobs should be increased as far as possible (by decentralisation);
c.
the organisation should be arranged:
into small working groups (to promote group loyalty and purpose),
into small working establishments (for the same reasons),
with as little centralisation as possible (to give junior management more scope),
with good communications; and
d.
culture may be used to increase the flexibility and humanity of the organisation: eg. the ‘loose/tight’ properties of Peters and Waterman's excellent companies.
A bureaucracy, on balance, promotes efficiency in larger organisations, but it must achieve a balance whereby rules are impersonal but not inhuman, the structure is organised but not rigid, and employees are loyal without being unthinking conformists.
Many large organisations are structured in the main as bureaucracies, although other formal organisation structures may be designed, at least for a part of the organisation.
LARGE AND SMALL ORGANISATIONS
It is wrong to confuse ‘bureaucracy’ with ‘large’organisations, because the features of bureaucracy can be found in many small and most medium-sized organisations.
It might be useful, however, to consider the advantages and disadvantages of large size in this chapter.
The advantages of a large organisation are as follows:
a.
A large-scale organisation should have access to sufficient resources to command a significant market share.
This in turn will enable it to influence prices in the market so as to ensure continuing profitability.
b.
A large organisation can provide for greater division of work and specialisation.
Specialisation, and the development of a wide range of products or customer services, should enable the organisation to attract continuing customer support and market shares.
In contrast, a small or medium-sized business will require greater competence and versatility from its top management, because they will not have the benefits of support from functional specialists which are available to the top managers of large organisations.
c.
A large organisation with a wide variety of products or customer services should be able to offer an attractive career to prospective  employees, and it is therefore likely to receive job application requests from very talented people.
This in turn should enable the large organisation to recruit and develop high-quality personnel for future top management positions.
d.
Specialisation brings with it the ability to provide expert services at a relatively low cost to the customer.
A large organisation is also able to make use of the advantages of efficient ‘large-scale’ equipment (eg. manufacturing equipment or advanced computer systems).
For these (and other) reasons, large organisations are able to achieve economies of scale in the use of resources.
Cheaper costs in turn mean either lower prices for customers or higher profits for the organisation.
e.
A large organisation is more likely to provide continuity of goods or services, management philosophy, customer relations etc than a smaller organisation.
A smaller organisation might be prone to sudden policy changes or changes of product when a new management team takes over.
The disadvantages of a large organisation are as follows:
a.
There is a tendency for the management hierarchy to develop too many levels.
The more management levels there are, the greater the problem of communication between top and bottom, and the greater the problems of control and direction by management at the top.
b.
An organisation might become so widely diversified in the range of products or services it offers that it becomes difficult, if not impossible, for management to integrate all of the organisation under a common objective and within a single ‘management philosophy’ and culture.
c.
Top management might spend too much time in maintenance of the organisation (ie with problems of administration) and lose sight of their primary tasks of setting objectives and planning for the future.
d.
There is a tendency of top management in large organisations to become ‘ingrown and inbred, smug and self- satisfied’.
The tendency towards ‘group-think’— an acceptance by all managers of a common attitude towards problems — might introduce an unconscious resistance to necessary changes and developments.
e.
The sheer size of an organisation may provide management with problems of coordination, planning policy and effective control.
For example, a junior manager might find the organisation so large that he has relatively little influence.
Decisions which he regards as important must be continually referred up the line to his superiors, for inter-departmental consultations etc.
At the same time, the top management might find the organisation so  large and complex, and changes in policy and procedures so difficult and time-consuming to implement, that they also feel unable to give direction to the organisation.
The organisation is therefore a ‘monster’ which operates of its own accord, with neither senior nor junior managers able to manage it effectively.
f.
In a large organisation, many of the tasks of junior management are routine and boring.
Even middle management might be frustrated by the restrictions on their authority, the impersonal nature of their organisation, the inability to earn a just reward for their special efforts (owing to the standardisation of pay and promotion procedures) and the lack of information about aspects of the organisation which should influence their work.
These difficulties of large organisations can, to some extent, be overcome by:
decentralisation and delegation of authority : The aim of decentralisation should be to encourage decision-making at lower levels of management ‘closer to the action’.
Management motivation, but also management efficiency in target-setting, planning and control should improve;
pay policies which provide for just rewards (individual or team bonuses) for outstanding effort, achievements and innovation;
the introduction of comprehensive management and employee information systems which enable all managers and employees:
to understand their planned contribution towards achieving organisational objectives
to compare their actual achievements against their targets
a task structure within the organisation which stimulates employee commitment.
Peters and Waterman advocate what they call ‘chunking’— breaking organisational structures down into small, task-centred units.
Problems of large organisations
1.
Organisation structure
1.1
Sharing out tasks and responsibilities.
Who does what?
1.2
How much specialisation/functionalisation should there be?
1.3
What span of control is suitable?
And so how tall/flat will the organisation be?
There is a tendency for the management hierarchy to develop too many levels.
The more management levels there are, the greater the problem of communication between top and bottom, and the greater the problems of control and direction by management at the top.
1.4
To what extent should authority be delegated?
How much centralisation/ decentralisation should there be?
Can junior/middle managers be trusted to exercise discretion and make decisions?
How should managers be trained and developed?
2.
Planning and control
2.1
How should the organisation identify its objectives and set targets for achievement?
In the case of large diversified ‘conglomerate’ corporations, can the organisation have a major objective other than a financial one (eg. profit maximisation)?
2.2
Developing formal management information systems to enable managers to plan and control properly.
Communication problems.
2.3
The problem of making managers accountable, monitoring performance and setting up effective control systems.
2.4
The difficulties of coordinating the efforts of managers: problems of conflict (line versus staff; interdepartmental rivalries etc).
2.5
Difficulties of setting up a system of rewards that is directly linked to performance appraisal and the achievement of objectives.
3.
Adapting to change
3.1
Large organisations might be slow to adapt to change because of a bureaucratic system of operating and decision-making that stifles ideas for innovation.
4.
Motivation
4.1
It is difficult for individuals to identify themselves with the objectives of a large organisation.
The organisation's objectives and their personal objectives will differ.
4.2
Difficulties for individuals to see how their efforts contribute to achieving the organisation's objectives (due to narrow specialisation of jobs etc).
4.3
Possible problems in getting employees to enjoy working in a large organisation, where a bureaucratic ‘role culture’ predominates.
4.4
Decision-making might be slow, with managers not allowed the authority and discretion they would like.
Small organisations
1.
Organisation structure, planning and control
1.1
Less rigid definition of jobs than in large organisations, and less specialisation.
1.2
Authority often centralised, although the management hierarchy will be small and all managers should feel quite close to the decision-making process.
1.3
Planning, control and communication (management information systems) will be less formal than in larger organisations.
1.4
Fewer people than in large organisations, and so lesser problems of coordination.
Greater sense of teamwork but greater risk of disaster through personality clash.
1.5
Not so much bound by formal rules and procedures as large organisations.
1.6
Decision- making procedures are relatively fast.
Decisions can be taken quickly.
2.
Adapting to change
2.1
Small organisations are usually staffed by individuals who are more innovative in their ideas, and more responsive to change.
Ideas for innovation and adapting to change are more accepted by the small organisation culture.
2.2
However, resources are likely to be limited for R &D, personnel, marketing etc.
3.
Motivation
3.1
Individuals have a wider range of duties, and are often able to contribute more to the achievements of the organisation, compared with the achievements of individuals in large organisations.
3.2
Individuals might develop a closer sense of identity with the organisation — eg. through personal association with the owner-managers.
3.3
Pay and reward systems are usually more personalised than in large organisations.
3.4
Management training and development are not encouraged as much as in large organisations.
3.5
The ‘culture’ in small organisations is unlikely to be bureaucratic.
4.
Resources
4.1
Small businesses are considered risky investments and a small organisation's borrowing capability might be limited.
4.2
Limited resources may restrict capacity for developing new product ideas on which the organisation may have been founded.
Informal organisation
The structure of an organisation is affected by the people working within it, and an informal organisation exists side by side with the formal one.
The informal organisation of a company is so important that a newcomer has to ‘learn the ropes’ before he can settle effectively into his job, and he must also become ‘accepted’by his fellow workers.
When people work together, they establish social relationships and customary ways of doing things, ie. they:
form social groups, or cliques (sometimes acting against one another); and
develop informal ways of getting things done — ie. norms and rules which are different in character from the ‘organisational manual’ rules which are imposed organisation.
Social groups, or cliques, may act collectively for or against the interests of their company; the like-mindedness which arises in all members of the group strengthens their collective attitudes or actions.
Whether these groups work for or against the interests of the company depends to some extent on the type of supervision they get.
If superiors involve them in decision-making, they are more likely to be management-minded.
The informal organisation of a company, given an acceptable social atmosphere:
improves communications by means of a ‘bush telegraph’ system; and
facilitates the coordination of various individuals or departments and establishes ‘unwritten’ methods for getting a job done.
Certain individuals can have an important informal influence in an organisation.
To take an illustrative example, the managing director of XY Company is a very remote individual and the production and sales directors have difficulty in communicating and working with him effectively.
The financial director, however, has a remarkably good personal understanding with the managing director and can approach him readily in all matters at work.
The sales and production directors therefore often ask the financial director to put their views informally to the managing director and to sound out his opinion before they approach him formally.
The formal organisation structure is therefore supplemented by an informal structure which improves the way in which top management sets about its job.
The informal structure of a company may ‘take over’ from the formal organisation when the formal structure is slow to adapt to change.
When employees are dissatisfied with aspects of formal organisation (eg. they dislike the work they do or the person they work for) they are likely to rely more and more heavily on an informal organisation at work to satisfy their personal needs in their work situation.
When this happens, it has been argued (by Argyris and others) that the informal organisation of the individual will act against the efficiency of the formal organisation.
Informal organisations always exist within a formal organisation, and if employees are properly motivated, these informal organisations should operate to the advantage of the formal organisation's efficiency and effectiveness.
A conclusion might therefore be that management should seek to harness the informal organisation to operate to the benefit of the formal organisation.
In practice, however, this will be difficult because unlike formal organisation, which does not change even when individual employees move into and out of jobs (by promotion, transfer, appointment, resignation or retirement etc) most informal organisations depend on individual personalities.
If one member leaves, the informal organisation is no longer the same, and new informal organisations will emerge to take its place.
POWER AND INFLUENCE
Influence is the process by which one person in an organisation, A, directs or modifies the behaviour or attitudes of another person, B. Influence can only be exerted by A on B if A has some kind of power from which the influence emanates.
Power is therefore the ability to influence, whereas influence is an active process.
Power and influence are clearly important factors in the structure and operations of an organisation.
They help to explain how work gets done.
In addition, it has also been suggested that:
most individuals in an organisation would like to have more influence over their work;
an individual who believes he exerts some influence is likely to show greater interest in his work.
The research of writers, such as Likert, who support the principle of management by participation suggests that employees may be more productive when they consider that they have some influence over planning decisions which affect their work; and
some individuals are motivated by the need for power (McClelland) and show great concern for exercising influence and control, and for being leaders.
Charles Handy (understanding Organisations ) identified six types of power:
Physical Power
The power of superior force.
Physical power is absent from most organisations (except the prison service and the armed forces), but it is often evident as an undercurrent in industrial relations (eg violence on the picket line or bullying on the shop floor).
Resource power
The control over resources which are valued by the individual or group to be influenced.
Senior managers may have the resource power to grant promotion or pay increases to subordinates; trade unions possess the resource power to take their members out on strike.
Position power
The power which is associated with a particular job in an organisation.
Handy noted that position power has certain ‘hidden’ benefits:
access to information;
the right of access: eg entitlement to membership of committees and contact with other ‘powerful’ individuals in the organisation; and
the right to organise conditions of working and methods of decision-making.
Expert power
The power which belongs to an individual because of his acknowledged expertise.
This power can only belong to a person if others acknowledge him to be an expert.
Many staff jobs in an organisation (eg. computer systems analysts, organisation and methods analysts, accountants, lawyers or personnel department managers) rely on expert power to influence line management.
If the expert is seen to be incompetent (eg. if an accountant does not seem to provide sensible information) or if his area of expertise is not widely acknowledged (which is often the case with personnel department staff) he will have little or no expert power.
Personal power, or charisma
The popularity of the individual.
Personal power is capable of influencing the behaviour of others, and helps to explain the strength of informal organisations.
Negative power
The use of disruptive attitudes and behaviour to stop things from happening.
It is associated with low morale, latent conflict or frustration at work.
A subordinate might refuse to communicate openly with his superior, and might provide false information; a colleague might refuse to cooperate; a typist might refuse to type an urgent letter because she is too busy; a worker might deliberately cause his machine to break down.
Negative power is destructive and potentially very damaging to organisational efficiency.
Influence, the act of directing or modifying the behaviour of others, may then be achieved through:
the application of force, eg. physical or economic power;
the establishment of rules and procedures — enforced through position and/or resource power;,
bargaining and negotiation — depending on the relative strengths of each party's position,(expert, resource or personal power etc); or
persuasion, again associated with various sources of power.
Handy identified two further, ‘unseen’ methods of influence.
Ecology the environment in which behaviour takes place.
The physical environment can be altered by a manager, who may be able to regulate noise levels at work, comfort and security of working conditions, seating arrangements, the use of open-plan offices or segregation into many small offices, the physical proximity of departments as well as individuals.
‘The design of work, the work, the structure of reward and control systems, the structure of the organisation, the management of groups and the control of conflict are always of managing the environment in order to influence behaviour.
Let us never forget that although the environment is all around us, it is not unalterable, that to change it is to influence people, that ecology is potent, the more so because it is often unnoticed .’
(Handy)
Magnetism ie. the unseen application of personal power.
‘Trust, respect, charm, infectious enthusiasm, these attributes all allow us to influence people without apparently imposing on them.’
The authority of trade union officials
One of the great organisational problems concerning trade unions is that of ‘dual authority’.
An employee works for an organisation, but may also be a member of a trade union.
The employee therefore see his involvement in a union, or support for his union, to be the best means of securing his personal objectives (eg. through extra pay or shorter working hours) or the employee may consider that his own goals would be furthered better by loyalty to senior managers in the organisation and acceptance of the organisation's goals.
Another feature of a trade union is the nature of authority of its leaders.
Union officials are elected by the members (although some fulltime officials, such as economic advisors, will be appointed from outside) and therefore derive their authority ‘bottom up’.
In some unions, officials may then exert position power and give instructions to members or junior officials.
Shop stewards very occasionally may rely on power to ‘bully’ members on the shop floor; most shop stewards hope that members will accept their guidance as industrial relations ‘experts’and therefore exert influence through expert power.
In negotiations with management, union officials may feel compelled to resort to the threat of industrial action (a strike, ‘blacking’ certain work practices, a work-to-rule or go-slow etc — to use resource power in the form of their control over the labour force, ie. the support of their members).
It might also be called a form of ‘negative power’— the power to disrupt.
Delegation
When authority is delegated, the relationship between subordinate and superior is critically important.
Drucker has argued that although authority is passed down to subordinates, the relationship between subordinates and superiors, and their responsibilities, have three dimensions.
Every manager has the task of contributing towards what his superior's section must do to achieve its objectives.
Every manager has a responsibility towards the organisation as a whole, and must define the activities of his own unit so as to contribute towards achieving the organisation's objectives.
Every manager has a responsibility towards his subordinates (ie to make sure they know what is expected of them, to help them set their own objectives, to help them attain their objectives, to offer counsel and advice etc).
‘The vision of a manager should always be upward-towards the enterprise as a whole.
but his responsibility runs downwards as well to the managers of his team .’
(Drucker)
Jaques (the ‘Glacier investigations ’) found that even a well-defined role in the organisation posed problems for the person expected to fill it with regard to the exercise of authority.
In particular, he found that in an organisation committed to consultative management, a superior may become more and more reluctant to exercise his authority.
Mechanisms for avoiding responsibility and authority included:
the exercise of a purely consultative relationship with others while ignoring roles involving line authority;
misuse of formal joint consultation processes — ie. using contact between higher management and workers' representatives as an excuse to ignore responsibility for immediate subordinates.
Consultation must not by-pass intervening roles in the chain of command; and
pseudo-democracy — eg. a superior, senior member on a committee asserting ‘I'm just an ordinary member’.
One of the most important conclusions of the Glacier studies was that there is a distinctive leadership role in groups, and that members (in their roles as participants)expect it to be filled properly.
chapter seven
THE STRUCTURE AND CULTURE OF ORGANISATIONS
To consider how the structure of an organisation comprises all its arrangements for dividing up its activities and co- ordinating them.
There are a great number of ways of structuring and the relevance of each depends on particular sets of circumstances as well as to particular kinds of organisation.
It is likely that a structure which was appropriate to an organisation at a particular stage in its development will become less so as it matures.
It is common for the informal structure to disguise the inadequacies of the formal structure.
STRUCTURING ORGANISATIONS FOR PERFORMANCE
Companies tend to choose to reorganise when existing structure ceases to serve its purpose rather than when a new opportunity or developmental stage is being planned.
It is more commonly problems which flag the need for organisational change.
Such problems can arise either from structures becoming inappropriate or from poor and insensitive implementation of appropriate ones.
Common among such problems are those of poor communication leading to distrust or of personality clashes.
Typically, morale weakens, conflict arises, decisions are taken too late, response to changed circumstances becomes inadequate and costs rise.
Some of these features will be seen in the case study.
In seeking the most appropriate structure for the organisation in the given circumstance and with the given aims there will be inevitable compromises to be made between conflicting organisational forms which seem to offer elements of a solution.
The choice between bureaucracy and adhocracy represents a common dilemma.
The first is built on formal procedures and standardisation to ensure a proper response to every set of circumstances while the second, a more recent form in large organisations involves temporary structures set up to solve specific detachment of individuals from the aims of the organisation as a whole and their consequent apathy.
This in turn leads to their ‘going by the book’, their sense of power stemming from their ability to hold things up rather than get things done.
The problems of adhocracy on the other hand centre around power struggles, confusion and anxiety.
The aim of this chapter is to help the reader to recognise the problems in an organisation which might be due to the inappropriateness of its structure, to compare the relative merits of known structures to his/her own organisation and to suggest changes and predict consequences.
In this chapter we shall briefly look at formal organisation structure and consider a variety of views of how this structure might be established so as to optimise the efficiency of the organisation.
An efficient organisation may be defined as:
a ‘high-performing’ organisation; or
an organisation whose structure lends itself most readily to ensuring that employees work effectively for the achievement of their own and the organisation's goals.
CENTRALISATION AND DECENTRALISATION
Centralisation and decentralisation refer to the degree to which authority is delegated in an organisation — and therefore the level at which decisions are taken in the management hierarchy.
Complete centralisation would mean that no authority at all was exercised by subordinates; complete decentralisation would mean that all authority was exercised by subordinates.
It is doubtful whether any organisation approaches to either of these extremes.
In the following paragraphs, we shall use the term ‘centralisation’ to mean a greater degree of central control, and ‘decentralisation’to mean a greater degree of delegated authority.
Alfred Sloan
Sloan's ideas were first developed in General Motors and Du Pont in the United States.
He recognised the interaction of technical, financial and personal factors in the management of large enterprises and the value of having an organisational structure that took account of this interaction.
He also recognised that the major problem which faces any large multi- operational enterprise is the appropriate degree of centralisation or decentralisation of decision-making authority.
Sloan recognised that centralisation and decentralisation are not mutually exclusive, but that an organisation should find the right combination between freedom for its divisions and control over them.
He considered his executives needed motivation and opportunity, and chose decentralisation wherever possible, provided co-ordination remained intact.
‘From decentralisation we get initiative, responsibility, development of personnel, decisions close to the facts, flexibility in short, all the qualities necessary for an organisation to adapt to new conditions.
From coordination we get efficiencies and economies.
it must be apparent that coordinated decentralisation is not an easy concept to apply’.
Sloan's solution to the problem in General Motors was related to committee work and good communications.
A continuous series of meetings took place in the organisation with the objectives of:
agreeing long-term plans;
agreeing short-term plans;
comparing achievement with plans;
setting objectives and goals.
Information was designed to flow up and down the organisation to ensure that all decentralised objectives were compatible with, and a part of, the total corporate objective.
This communication system removed one of the principal organisational dilemmas.
Group directors and national directors were committed to the same goals.
Decentralisation did not create confused objectives.
Divisional managers made all decisions affecting the operations of their own divisions, but:
their decisions had to be in conformity with the organisation's general policies;
they had to report their results to central managers; and
they had to ‘sell’ changes in operating policy to central management, and had to be prepared to accept advice from the ‘general officers’at headquarters about desirable changes.
Whatever system is set up, it is of paramount importance that all managers at all levels should clearly know where they fit into the organisation.
They should know the mature and extent of their authority and responsibility and that of fellow managers at all levels.
Managers can then exercise as much authority and carry as much responsibility as possible within the constraints of the policies set by the organisation and the commitments they have made to their own superior executive.
The contingency theory of delegation
The contingency theory states that the degree of centralisation or decentralisation which would be most appropriate for an organisation will depend on the particular situation of that organisation.
The market environment of the organisation is an important variable.
If the organisation is faced with rapid change, and therefore uncertainty in decision-making, there will be a greater reliance on local knowledge of events and ‘on-the- spot’ decisions, so there should be greater decentralisation than in a relatively static organisation in a stable environment.
The culture and personal of the organisation — ie. the skill, knowledge and attitudes of subordinates, and the philosophy and psychological security of superiors, will help to determine how much delegation will be desired by the subordinates, and how far superiors will feel that they can trust the people below them.
It has been suggested that the technology of an organisation will help to determine its structure, and also the degree of centralisation of authority.
(The work of Eric Trist and Joan Woodward on this subject will be discussed later.)
For example, it is possible to exercise better and cheaper central control by means of a centralised computer information system for management.
However, developments in computer technology (eg microcomputers linked to a larger central computer or networked micros) may also have made decentralised management control easier and cheaper.
Where a high level of uniformity is required throughout the organisation, and where effective coordination of different parts of the organisation is essential, there is likely to be more centralisation of authority.
Examples of organisations requiring such uniformity might be the armed services, or some government departments (eg. those dealing with the payment of social security, supplementary benefits, pensions etc).
Environmental factors (eg. geography, socio-cultural conditions, the legal and political environment etc) may pull towards delegation or centralisation, for example:
geographical dispersion of an organisation increases the pressure for decentralisation of authority to regional or area managers; or
on the other hand, the growth in the exercise of power by trade unions has resulted in a tendency to by-pass lower and middle management, and union representatives may insist on dealing with top officials.
This creates greater centralisation of decision-making.
LINE AND STAFF MANAGEMENT
There are two ways of looking at the distinction between line and staff management.
The terms can be used to denote functions in the organisation.
Line management consists of those managers directly involved in achieving the objectives of an organisation (ie. all production and sales managers in a manufacturing company).
Every other manager is staff (eg. accounting, marketing, research and development).
‘Line functions are those which have direct responsibility for achieving the objectives of the company.
Staff activities are those which primarily exist to provide a advice and service.'
(Rosemary Stewart)
The terms can also be used to denote relationships of authority.
A line manager is one who has direct authority over a subordinate: by this definition, any manager, whether he works in an operations department or an advisory department, will have line authority over his subordinates.
Thus, in the (staff) person  department the manager in charge of recruitment and training will be subordinate in a line relationship to the personnel director.
Another popular distinction between line and staff is that:
staff managers are thinkers and advisors;
line managers are doers.
Staff departments exist in many organisations where there is a need for specialisation of management.
Accountants, personnel administrators, economists, data processing experts and statisticians are all experts in a specialised field of work.
Where this expertise is ‘syphoned off’ into a separate department, the problem naturally arises as to whether:
the experts exist to advise line managers, who may accept or reject the advice given; or
the experts can step in to direct the line managers in what to do — ie. to assume line authority themselves.
No organisation of substantial size can avoid operating problems unless there is a clear understanding as to the structure of the tasks and relationships of an organisation, ie. where authority and responsibility rest.
This means that managers must know whether they are ‘line’ or ‘staff’.
Unfortunately, this is an aspect of organisation which causes enormous friction.
Line managers are thought of as ‘first class citizens’ and staff are relegated in status to the second rank as expensive ‘overheads’, who are not contributing anything of worth to the organisation.
Staff managers are therefore constantly trying to acquire line functions.
Functional staff
A development in more recent years has been the recognition that some ‘staff’ management has become highly specialised in areas of work which form a fundamental part of line management, eg. in the fields of industrial relations and capital expenditure.
In these areas the line manager would allow the staff manager to assume some of his responsibilities, while still retaining final authority and responsibility.
A typical example would be where the personnel manager specified the rules for disciplining and dismissal of employees.
The line manager recognises that the staff manager has greater knowledge and expertise on this subject and acquiesces in the carrying out of the prescribed steps of the procedure.
(This obviously requires a degree of communication and cooperation, an acceptance of ‘expert’ as opposed to‘position’power, which is not so essential in the purely ‘legal’relationships of line structures.)
This is clearly different to the role of the traditional staff manager (eg. work study, organisation and methods, ‘personal assistant to’ positions etc).
Urwick and Dale have defined it as ‘functional staff’ as opposed to‘general staff’.
General staff positions, as in the Army context, are seen as purely advisory positions.
Implications of line and staff for organisational design
2 There are drawbacks to using staff, awareness of which should enable management to use staff functions more effectively.
The problems are as follows.
a.
There is a danger that staff experts may, intentionally or not, undermine the authority of line managers.
Subordinates might respect the ‘expert power’ of the staff man, and show less willingness to accept the judgement of their line boss.
b.
Friction may also occur when staff managers report to a higher authority in the scalar chain of command.
For example, a management accountant may submit reports about a line manager's performance to the production director or the managing director.
The line manager might resent the perceived interference.
c.
Staff managers have no line authority and therefore no responsibility for what actually happens.
If they give advice, which is acted on but fails to achieve desired results, staff men can blame the line managers for not carrying out their plan properly.
d.
Staff managers may attempt to usurp line authority.
Any change in the boundaries of authority should be the result of conscious planning, and not surreptitious empire-building.
The solutions to these problems are easily stated, but not easy to implement in practice.
a.
Authority must be clearly defined, and distinctions between line authority and staff advice clearly set out (eg. in job descriptions).
b.
Senior management must encourage line managers to make positive efforts to discuss work problems with staff advisors, and to be prepared to accept their advice.
The use of experts should become part of the organisational culture — with emphasis on the building of expert teams if possible,(ie. ‘two heads are better than one’).
c.
Staff managers must be fully informed about the operational aspects of the business on which they are theoretical experts.
By providing them with detailed information they should be less likely to offer impractical advice.
d.
When staff advisors are used to plan changes the business, they must be kept involved during the implementation, monitoring and review of the project, so that they share responsibility for outcomes.
Drucker argues that the traditional view of staff specialists as ‘advisors with some authority’ is a poor approach to organisation design.
He suggests that ‘as far as I have been able to grasp the concept, to be ‘staff’ means to have authority without having responsibility.
And that is destructive'.
It is much better that (support) functional departments, which are necessary in any large organisation,
should have their own clear objectives;
should have clearly stated areas of authority; and
should be responsible and accountable for their exercise of that authority.
SPAN CONTROL
Span of control or ‘span of management’, refers to the number of subordinates responsible to a superior.
In other words, if a manager has five subordinates, the span of control is five.
Various writers of the classical school, such as Fayol, Graicunas and Urwick, argued that the managerial span of control should be limited to between three and six.
Their arguments were based on the twin beliefs that:
there should be tight managerial control from the top of the organisation; and
there are physical and mental limitations to any single manager's ability to control people and activities.
To ensure effective control, the number of subordinates and tasks over which a manager has supervisory responsibilities should therefore be restricted to what is physically and mentally possible.
The French writer V A Graicunas devised a formula to show how the number of possible relationships between members of an organisation increases geometrically in proportion to the number of members: where N is the total number of possible relationships and n is the number of members.
In any given organisational unit, therefore, as the number of subordinates increases, the supervisor finds himself managing a mushrooming number of organisational relationships (where n = 1,N = I, and where n = 7,N = 490).
This exploding complexity of larger and larger units must impose some limitations on the capabilities of management, ie the span of control is limited by the number of inter-relationships that one person can manage.
A narrow span of control offers:
tight control and close supervision; better coordination of subordinates' activities;
time to think and plan; managers are not burdened with too many day-to-day problems;
better communication with subordinates, who are sufficiently few in number to allow effective ‘networking’.
James Worthy reported in 1950 that the policy of the American Sears Roebuck company was to have as wide a span of control as possible between stores managers and their subordinates, the merchandising managers.
A wide span of control forced stores managers to delegate authority: the consequences, Worthy claimed, were improved morale and greater efficiency of merchandising management.
Lynall Urwick put forward a counter-argument that a wide span of control had been possible in this example because the work of the merchandising managers did not interlock, and so the need for coordination and integration was not present: this reduced the burdens of supervision and made a wider span of control feasible.
Urwick concluded that the maximum management span of control should be six, when the work of subordinates interlocks.
On the other hand, a wide span of control offers:
a greater decision-making authority for subordinates;
fewer supervisory costs;
less control, but perhaps greater motivation through job satisfaction.
It is reasonable to accept the view that there is a limit to a supervisor's capabilities and that the span of control should therefore be limited.
However, the span of control is now thought to be dependent on:
a.
the amount of time a supervisor has to spend with his subordinates, taking into account the demands of his own superiors, other departments and operational/non-managerial work;
b.
the geographical distribution of subordinates;
c.
the responsibilities and diversity of work done by superiors and subordinates.
This will determine the amount of delegation that is possible, the amount of control required, the suitability of team working etc;
d.
the ability of superiors to deal with interruptions to the work they may be doing and the number of problems which arise and need to be dealt with;
e.
the degree to which staff management relieves line management of aspects of their work, leaving them free to exercise supervision;
f.
the quality of lateral communications, which may enable subordinates to get jobs done without constant reference back to their superior;
g.
the technology of the organisation.
(This view emerged from the work of Joan Woodward, described later in the chapter); and
h.
the extent to which subordinates need to be controlled and supervised, and in particular the strength of the ‘central faith’ or culture of the organisation, which provides an alternative means of control over employees.
Tall and flat organisations
The span of control concept has implications for the ‘shape’ of an organisation.
A tall organisation is one which, in relation to its size, has a large number of management hierarchies, whereas a flat organisation is one which, in relation to its size, has a smaller number of hierarchical levels.
A tall organisation implies a narrow span of control, and a flat organisation implies a wide span of control  
Some classical theorists accepted that a tall organisation structure is inefficient, because:
it increases overhead costs;
it creates extra communication problems, since top management is more remote from the work done at the bottom end of the organisation, and information tends to get distorted or blocked on its way up or down through the organisation hierarchy;
management responsibilities tend to overlap and become confused as the size of the management structure gets larger.
Different sections or departments may seek authority over the same territory of operations, and superiors find it difficult to delegate sufficient authority to satisfy subordinates;
the same work passes through too many hands; and
planning is more difficult because it must be organised at more levels in the organisation.
Behavioural theorists add that tall structures impose rigid supervision and control and therefore block initiative and ruin the motivation of subordinates.
Nevertheless, not all researchers favour flat organisation structures.
Carzo and Yanouzas suggested that if work is organised on the basis of small groups or project teams (therefore narrow spans of control and a tall organisation structure) group members would be able to plan their work in an orderly manner, encourage participation by all group members in decision-making and monitor the consequences of their decisions better, so that their performance will be more efficient than the work of groups in a flat structure with a wide span of control.
Peters and Waterman also observe the success of ‘chunking’— breaking the organisation into small, task-centred units.
DEPARTMENTATION
As an organisation grows in size:
it is able to take advantage of economies of scale, which in turn may call for the establishment of departments of specialists or experts (eg. research and development, management scientists etc);
the number of levels in the organisation hierarchy increases, so that problems of delegation of authority and control arise;
specialist support teams (eg. service and maintenance, quality control, corporate planning, organisation and methods, data processing etc) are created to ease the burdens and complexities of line management.
Such support teams need to be slotted into the hierarchical structure; and
separate groups and departments continue to be formed as specialisation extends; new problems of communication and coordination (or integration) now arise.
When an organisation diversifies its activities into different products and markets, it is common for the structure to be ‘divisionalised’.
Large divisions of a company may in turn be sub-divided into smaller units.
The creation of departments and divisions is known as departmentation .
Different patterns of departmentation are possible, and the pattern selected will depend on the individual circumstances of the organisation.
Various methods of departmentation are by:
Numbers
When menial tasks are carried out by large numbers of workers, supervision can be divided by organising the labourers into gangs of equal size.
Departmentation by numbers alone is rare; an example might be the organisation of a conscript army of infantrymen into divisions, and battalions etc.
Shifts
Shiftworking employees are organised on the basis of ‘time of day’.
Function
This is a widely-used method of organisation.
Primary functions in a manufacturing company might be production, sales, finance, and general administration.
Sub-departments of the production function might be manufacturing (machining, finishing, assembly etc), production control, quality control, servicing and purchasing.
Sub-departments of sales might be selling, marketing, distribution and warehousing.
Government departments include the Treasury, Home Office, Foreign Office, Department of Trade, Department of Industry, Ministry of Defence, etc.
Functional organisation is logical and traditional and accommodates the division of work into specialist areas.
Apart from the problems which may arise when ‘line’ management resents interference by ‘staff’advisors in their functional area, the drawback to functional organisation is simply that more efficient structures might exist which would be more appropriate in a particular situation.
Territory
This method of organisation occurs when similar activities are carried out in widely different locations.
The telecommunications service, for example, is divided into regions which in turn are subdivided into Telephone Areas.
Some authority is retained at Head Office (organised, perhaps, on a functional basis) but day-to-day service problems are handled on a territorial basis.
Within many sales departments, the sales staff are organised territorially.
The advantage of territorial departmentation is better local decision-making at the point of contact between the organisation (eg a salesman) and its customers.
Localised knowledge is put to better use and in the right circumstances it may be less costly to establish area  factories/offices than to control everything through Head Office (eg. costs of transportation and travelling may be less).
The disadvantage of territorial departmentation might be the duplication of management effort.
For example, a national organisation divided into ten regions might have a customer liaison department at Head Office.
If the organisation did all customer liaison work from head office it might need fewer managerial staff.
In a similar way, there would be a tendency for regions to duplicate planning management, personnel and training management, accountancy management etc, thus increasing overhead costs and problems of coordination and integration.
Product
some organisations group activities on the basis of products or product lines.
Some functional departmentation remains (eg manufacturing, distribution, marketing and sales) but a divisional manager is given responsibility for the product, product line or brand, with authority over the personnel of different functions involved in its production marketing etc.
The advantages of product departmentation are that:
individual managers can be held accountable for the profitability of individual products;
specialisation can be developed.
For example, salesmen and/or engineers will be trained to sell and/or service a specific product in which they may develop technical expertise and thereby offer a better sales and after-sales service to customers;
the different functional activities and efforts required to make and sell each product can be coordinated and integrated by the divisional/product manager.
The disadvantage of product departmentation is that it creates a new form of management and therefore increases the overhead costs and managerial complexity of the organisation.
customer or market segment
a manufacturing organisation may sell goods through wholesalers export agents and by direct mail.
It may therefore organise its functions (particularly marketing) on the basis of types of customer, market segment or distribution channels.
The advantages of market-oriented organisations are that:
they encourage efficient marketing techniques and PR, which in turn should improve sales and  relationships between the organisation and its environment (customers, the government, the general public etc);
they promote a culture whose values are heavily customer-oriented, which may be a strong motivating force (Peters and Waterman).
The disadvantages of market-orientation may be that it requires special leadership (a ‘bureaucratic’ management would fail to achieve the required inter-relationships between the organisation and its customers) and is likely to be costly in terms of staffing and other overheads.
Equipment specialisation
The most obvious example of departmentation based on equipment specialisation is provided by the data processing departments of large organisations.
Batch processing operations are conducted for other departments at a computer centre (where it is controlled by DP staff) because it would be uneconomical to provide each functional department with its own large mainframe computer.
CONTINGENCY APPROACH TO ORGANISATION STRUCTURE
The contingency approach states that while a particular structure may create optimum efficiency in an organisation, this ideal structure will vary according to the internal and external conditions of each organisation.
The structure which is selected is likely to be a compromise between environmental pressures which pull in opposite directions.
For example:
a.
there are pressures for uniformity .
Standardisation of methods, rules and procedures might result in economies of scale.
Where uniform procedures exist, it is easier to impose centralised control.
The movement of personnel from one part of an organisation to another is made easier.
Specialised skills can be developed and applied throughout the organisation;
b.
there are also strong pressures for diversity .
Differences in regional characteristics, markets, customers or products, differences in the technology used in various aspects of the organisation's work, the greater readiness of individuals to identify with smaller work groups than with an entire organisation, and the desire of subordinates to have more authority are all factors which tend towards decentralisation and diversification in different parts of an organisation.
The contingency approach suggests that the factors which help to determine the optimal structure in any particular situation include:
a.
The environment .
The organisational structure most conducive to high performance depends on whether the environment is stable and simple, or changing and complex.
In a stable environment, the pressures for uniformity are strong; any unforeseen events will be rare and can be dealt with by top management.
Lawrence and Lorsch compared the structural characteristics of a ‘high-performing’ container firm, which existed in a relatively stable environment, and a ‘high-performing’plastics firm which existed in a rapidly changing environment.
They concluded that:
in a stable environment (ie. the container finn) the most efficient structure was one in which the influence and authority of senior managers were relatively high and of middle managers low;
in a dynamic environment (ie the plastics firm) the most efficient structure was one in which the influence and authority of senior managers were somewhat less, and of middle managers correspondingly greater.
b.
Size .
Contingency theory suggests that although an informal structure is more efficient for smaller firms, in large organisations formalisation and bureaucracy is often the most efficient type of structure available.
c.
Type of personnel .
Some employees like to be told what to do and prefer a standardised, uniform structure of organisation with authoritarian leadership; other employees (often those with a broader and greater education) prefer to be given responsibilities and to work in teams, and to make decisions in their own ways.
d.
The ‘culture’ of the organisation .
This is described later in this chapter.
e.
Technology of the organisation .
The socio- technical systems approach to organisation structure is also described later in this chapter.
Contingency theory does have its critics, such as John Child:
‘One major limitation of the contemporary contingency approach lies in the lack of conclusive evidence to demonstrate that matching organisational designs to prevailing contingencies contributes importantly to performance .'
Lawrence and Lorsch suggested in their research that poor- performing companies have an inappropriate organisation structure for their particular circumstances.
However, it could be argued that an organisation is badly structured because it is poorly managed, and even if it were restructured, poor management would continue to depress the organisation's performance — ie. performance may not be attributable only to structure.
Other factors might contribute more importantly to organisational performance, such as planning and control methods, information systems, leadership and employee motivation.
Well-established organisations in non-competitive environments might be able to perform successfully with any type of organisation structure, because they are secure within their environment and can ignore contingency factors (eg. the Civil Service, perhaps).
MATRIX ORGANISATION
Matrix organisation is a structure which emerged in the USA during the 1950s and 1960s and which is now widely practised in a variety of forms.
Basically, a matrix organisation provides for the formalisation of management control across functional boundaries, whilst at the same time maintaining functional departmentation.
It may be thought of as a reaction against the ‘classical’ form of bureaucracy (and unity of command — ie. one man, one boss) by establishing a structure of dual command.
Matrix management first developed in the 1950s in the USA in the aerospace industry.
Lockheed-California, the aircraft manufacturers, were organised in a functional hierarchy.
Customers were unable to find a manager in Lockheed to whom they could take their problems and queries about their particular orders, and Lockheed found it necessary to employ ‘project expediters’ as customer liaison officials.
From this developed ‘project coordinators’, responsible for co-ordinating line managers in solving a customer's problems.
Up to this point, these new officials had no functional responsibilities.
Owing to increasingly heavy customer demands, Lockheed eventually created ‘programme managers’, with authority for project budgets and programme design and scheduling.
These managers therefore had functional authority and responsibilities, and a matrix management organisation was created.
It may be shown diagrammatically as a management grid; for example:
Authority would be shared between the project coordinators and the heads of the functional departments.
Functional department heads are responsible for the organisation of the department, but project coordinators are responsible for all aspects of the project itself.
An employee in a functional department might expect to receive directions/commands from a project coordinator as well as from the departmental head — ie. there may be dual command.
A product management structure may be superimposed on a functional structure in a matrix; product or brand managers may be responsible for the sales budget, production budget, pricing, marketing, distribution, quality and costs of their product or product line, but may have to coordinate with the R &D, production, finance, distribution, and sales departments in order to bring the product on to the market and achieve sales targets, ie:
The authority of product managers may vary from organisation to organisation.
J K Galbraith drew up a range of alternative situations as shown on the next page:
Once again, the division of authority between product managers and functional managers must be carefully defined.
Project teams are another example of a simple matrix structure.
A project may be interdisciplinary, and require the contributions of an engineer, a scientist, a statistician and a production expert, who would each be appointed to the team from their functional department, whilst still retaining membership and status within their ‘home’ department, ie:
Members of the project team (circled) would provide formal lateral lines of communication and authority, superimposed on the functional departmental structure.
Leadership of the project team would probably go to one of the more senior members in the hierarchy, but this is not a requirement of the matrix structure.
The team member from department A may be team leader (eg. if A was the Production Department, and its member was able to gain an operational overview of the team's activities): he would then be in a subordinate position in the organisation chart to the Head of Department B but his superior within the project team.
Matrix management thus challenges classical ideas about organisation in two ways:
it rejects the idea of one man, one boss
its subverts the bureaucratic ethic of authority based on status in the formal hierarchy.
The advantages of matrix structures are said to be that:
they foster greater flexibility:
in people, by creating a culture of adaptability and readiness to accept change,
of tasks and structure.
The matrix structure may be short-term (as with project teams) or readily amended (eg. a new product manager can be introduced by superimposing his tasks on those of the existing functional managers);
dual authority gives the organisation multiple orientation.
For example, a functional department may be production-oriented, but the superimposition of product managers will provide market orientation;
they provide a structure for allocating responsibility for end-results.
A product manager is responsible for product profitability; a project leader is responsible for ensuring that the task is completed;
they provide for inter-disciplinary cooperation and a mixing of skills and expertise;
the offer employees greater participation in planning and control decisions, which may provide job satisfaction, and perhaps motivation; and
they break down departmental monopolies and foster participative management styles based on teamwork, rather than on traditional subordinates/superior relationships (Argyris).
The disadvantages of matrix organisation are said to be as follows:
dual authority threatens a conflict between functional managers and product/project managers.
Where matrix structure exists it is important that the authority of superiors should not overlap and areas of authority must be clearly defined.
A subordinate must know to which superior he is responsible for a particular aspect of his duties;
an individual with two or more bosses is more likely to suffer stress due to the ambiguity (and potential political problems) of his situation;
matrix structures are sometimes more costly eg. if product management positions are additional jobs, where a simple structure of functional departmentation would suffice; and
it may be difficult for the management of an organisation to accept a matrix structure.
A manager may feel threatened by the seeming erosion of his authority, or by the uncertainties created by a culture of change and flexibility.
CULTURE
At this point, it is worth discussing in more detail the concept of ‘culture’ in organisations.
It may be defined as the complex body of shared values and beliefs of an organisation.
Peters and Waterman, in their study (In Search of Excellence ) found that the ‘dominance and coherence of culture’ was an essential feature of the ‘excellent’companies they observed.
A ‘handful of guiding values’ was more powerful than manuals, rule books, norms and controls formally imposed (and resisted).
They commented: ‘If companies do not have strong notions of themselves, as reflected in their values, stories, myths and legends, people's only security comes from where they live on the organisation chart.’
Handy sums up ‘culture’ as ‘that's the way we do things round here’.
For Schein, it is ‘the pattern of basic assumptions that a given group has invented, discovered, or developed, in learning to cope with its problems of external adaptation and internal integration, and that have worked well enough to be considered valid and, therefore, to be taught to new members as the correct way to perceive, think and feel in relation to these problems.’
‘I believe that the real difference between success and failure in a corporation can very often be traced to the question of how well the organisation brings out the great energies and talents of its people.
What does it do to help these people find common cause with each other?
And how can it sustain this common cause and sense of direction through the many changes which take place from one generation to anther?…
I think you will find that it owes it resiliency not to its form of organisation or administrative skills, but to the power of what we call beliefs and the appeal these beliefs have for its people .’
Watson (IBM) quoted by Peters and Waterman
All organisations will generate their own cultures, whether spontaneously, or under the guidance of positive managerial strategy.
The culture will consist of:
a.
the basic, underlying assumptions which guide the behaviour of the individuals and groups in the organisation, eg. customer orientation, or belief in quality, trust in the organisation to provide rewards, freedom to make decisions, freedom to make mistakes, the value of innovation and initiative at all levels team-working etc;
b.
overt beliefs expressed by the organisation and its members, which can be used to condition (a) above.
These beliefs and values may emerge as sayings, slogans, mottos etc. such as‘we're getting there’, ‘the customer is always right’, or ‘the winning team’.
They may emerge in a richer mythology — in jokes and stories about past successes, heroic failures or breakthroughs, legends about the ‘early days’, or about ‘the time the boss…
‘. Organisations with strong cultures often centre themselves around almost legendary figures in their history.
Management can encourage this by ‘selling’ a sense of the corporate ‘mission’, or by promoting the company's ‘image’; it can reward the ‘right’attitudes and punish (or simply not employ) those who aren't prepared to commit themselves to the culture;
c.
visible artifacts — the style of the offices or other premises, dress ‘rules’, display of ‘trophies’, the degree of informality between superiors and subordinates etc.
The culture/structures approach to organisation
The cultures/structures approach states that the structure of an organisation reflects different varieties of organisation culture.
The ideal organisation structure in any particular situation is dependent on the culture which exists.
The approach is thus a ‘contingency theory’ of structure.
Handy, following a 1972 article by Roger Harrison, discusses four cultures.
An organisation might have a structure which reflects a sin  culture; on the other hand, different structures reflecting different cultures might exist in separate parts (or departments) of the organisation.
(For example, the organisation structure of the marketing division and the computer systems design department might differ, because the culture in the two departments are not the same.)
The four cultures discussed by Handy are:
1.
The power culture
Power and influence stem from a central source, perhaps the owner-directors.
The degree of formalisation is limited, and there are not many rules and procedures.
Important decisions are made by key people, and other employees tend to rely on precedent in the absence of other guidelines as to what to do.
Other characteristics of the power culture are:
the organisation, since it is not rigidly structured, is capable of adapting quickly to meet change; however, the success in adapting will depend on the luck or judgement of the key individuals who make the rapid decisions; and
personal influence decreases as the size of an organisation gets bigger.
The power culture is therefore best suited to smaller organisations, where the leaders have direct communication with all employees.
2.
The role culture or bureaucracy
These organisations have a formal structure, and operate by well-established rules and procedures.
Job descriptions establish a definite task for each person's job, and procedures are established for many work routines, communication between individuals and departments, and the settlement of disputes and appeals.
The organisation structure defines authority and responsibility to individual managers, who enact the role expected of their position.
Individuals are required to perform their job to the full, but not to overstep the boundaries of their authority.
Line management will accept advice from specialist staff experts only when such advice seems necessary or appropriate.
Since a wide variety of people of different personalities are capable of doing the same job, the efficiency of this organisation depends on the structuring of jobs and the design of communications and formal relationships, rather than on individual personalities.
Individuals who work for such organisations tend to learn an expertise without experiencing risk; many do their job adequately, but are not over-ambitious.
The bureaucratic style can be very efficient in a stable environment and when the organisation is of a large size.
Thus the Civil Service, insurance companies and many large well- established companies with long-term products are associated with bureaucratic organisations and the role culture.
Unfortunately, bureaucracies are very slow to adapt to change and when severe  change occurs (eg. an economic depression) many run into financial difficulties or even bankruptcy (eg. BL cars, the British Steel Corporation).
3. the task culture
As reflected in a matrix organisation, in project teams and task forces — in such organisations, there is no dominant or clear leader.
The principal concern is to get the job done; therefore the individuals who are important are the experts with the ability to accomplish a particular aspect of the task.
Each individual in the team considers he has more influence than he would have if the work were organised on a formal ‘role culture’ basis.
Such organisations are flexible and constantly changing: they adapt to the environment in order to create or maintain the conditions necessary for success in the task, and do not become a mere part of the machinery as, for example, project teams are disbanded as soon as their task has been completed.
Since job satisfaction tends to be high, owing to the degree of individual participation and group identity, ‘behavioural’ management theorists might recommend this type of organisation structure as being the most efficient available.
Handy would argue that this type of structure might only be successful if the nature of the work is suited to matrix organisation or project work, and if the employees of the organisation belong to the task culture and therefore want the work organised in this way.
4.
The person culture
The person culture is formed in an organisation whose purpose is to serve the interests of a person or the individuals within it.
These organisations are rare, although an example might be a partnership of a few individuals who do all the work of the organisation themselves (with perhaps a little administrative assistance).
It is quite common, however, for individuals to use an organisation to suit their own purposes; for example:
studio artists look on their job as a means of expressing themselves artistically;
university lecturers might use their official position as a springboard from which to launch a wider career.
The factors which help to determine, in any situation, what the predominant culture and therefore organisation structure will/should include:
a.
Size: Large organisations are more likely to favour a bureaucracy (role culture) as a means of organising the complexity of work.
b.
People: Some people like to be told what to do, and would favour an organisation structure based on power culture or role culture.
Others enjoy the challenge of a complex job and ‘ambiguity’ and would therefore prefer (task-culture) project work.
People with strong need for security, and people of low intelligence or with  poor interpersonal skills, tend to prefer bureaucracies.
Personal ambition might be served by a bureaucracy, but is perhaps more associated with power culture and person culture.
c.
The age of the organisation : many businesses and other organisations begin to grow through the efforts of a few individuals (eg. owner-directors, or the founder of a political pressure group) and tend to be highly centralised (power culture).
As the organisations get older, and the former leaders are replaced by a new ‘generation’ of managers, systems tend to formalise and bureaucracy develops.
d.
The predominant goals or objectives of the organisation : if the main purpose of an organisation is service to the community (eg. hospitals, local government, railways, public utilities), a bureaucratic organisation will probably be most suitable for providing, monitoring and controlling the required level of service.
If the predominant goal is growth or survival, an organisation based on power culture or task culture would be more efficient and successful.
e.
The technology of the organisation : an important school of thought best known through the works of Eric Trist and Joan Woodward suggests that the most efficient structure of an organisation will be one which is suited to the technological conditions of the work (ie the equipment, methods of working, the nature of automation etc).
This important theory is described more filly below.
f.
The environment (economic, competitive, socio-cultural, legal, geographical etc : examples of environmental influences are:
economic and market changes.
Organisations which adapt best are those structured according to a task culture or power culture;
an organisation which is spread over a wide geographical area is likely to decentralise authority on a regional basis, so that different cultures might predominate in different regions; and
the appointment of worker-directors to the board of a company might betoken a change of attitudes towards decision-making within an organisation, from bureaucracy towards teamwork and group decisions (ie. from a role culture to a task culture).
The adaptive organisation
Most organisations exist in a changing environment and must adapt in order to survive.
Although formalisation and bureaucratic organisation helps a small company to develop into a large one, it may be insufficient to enable the organisation to survive continuing environmental changes.
Handy suggests that an organisation adapts to change in one of three ways:
by deliberation : the organisation ‘seeks to reinforce the formal structure by more formal structures’.
Companies or governments might establish committees with powers to investigate, recommend or even to make decisions.
Special project teams might be created, or new departments established (eg. corporate planning department or economic advisory section);
by reproduction : large national organisations might delegate authority (‘decentralise’) to regional headquarters.
Unfortunately, decentralisation of this sort usually results in regional structures which duplicate the former national structure: bureaucracy in the same form, but on a smaller scale.
Unless the environment is fairly stable, such adaptation is likely to be inefficient;
by differentiation : the organisation employs different structures with different cultures, in separate parts of the organisation, using a contingency approach — ie. choosing the most suitable structure for each particular situation:
stable, routine work will be performed in a formalised bureaucratic manner (role culture );
adaptation to change (development of new products and new markets, or meeting environmental ‘threats’) should be organised on a task basis;
any sudden crisis might have to be dealt with by key individuals with emergency powers (power culture );
overall policy decisions of the organisation should be set by a ruling body of key individuals (board of directors, the Cabinet of government ministers, or the supreme policy-making councils of other organisations)(power culture ).
‘One culture should not be allowed a swamp the organisation’(Handy).
However, where differentiation, on a contingency basis, is applied in an organisation structure, there is a potential for conflict.
Project teams might resent policy decisions of senior managers because they believe them to be inappropriate to the problems of the organisation; line managers might resent ‘free- wheeling’‘undisciplined’ members of project teams.
The management of an organisation must be capable of reconciling differences and integrating the work of all employees towards a common aim.
ORGANIC AND MECHANISTIC ORGANISATIONS
Burns and Stalker contributed significant ideas about managing organisation growth and change.
They identified the need for a different organisation structure when the technology of the market is changing; innovation is crucial to the continuing success of any organisation operating in the market.
They recommended an organic structure (also called an ‘organismic structure’) which has the following characteristics.
There is a ‘contributive nature’ where specialised knowledge and experience are contributed to the common task of the organisation.
Each individual has a realistic task which can be understood in terms of the common task of the organisation.
There is a continual redefinition of an individual's task, through interaction between the individual and others.
There is a spread of commitment to the concern and its tasks.
There is a network structure of authority and communication.
Communication tends to be lateral rather than vertical.
Communication takes the form of information and advice rather than instructions and decisions.
Burns and Stalker contrasted the organic structure of management, which is more suitable to conditions of change, with a mechanistic system of management, which is more suited to stable conditions.
A mechanistic structure has the following characteristics.
Authority is delegated through a hierarchical, formal scalar chain.
Communication is vertical rather than lateral.
Individual tasks are not clearly related to whole projects, or the overall goals of the organisation, owing to specialisation of work.
Individuals regard their own tasks as something distinct and divorced from the organisation as a whole.
There is a precise definition of duties in each individual job (eg. rules, procedures, job definitions).
Mechanistic systems are unsuitable in conditions of change because they tend to deal with change by cumbersome methods.
For example:
the ambiguous figure system : in dealing with unfamiliar problems authority lines are not clear, matters are referred ‘higher-up’ and the top of the organisation becomes overburdened by decisions;
mechanistic jungle : jobs and departments are created to deal with the new problems, creating further and greater problems; and
committee system : committees are set up to cope with the problems.
The committees can only be a temporary problem-solving device, bet the situations which create the problems are not temporary.
ORGANISATION DEVELOPMENT
It is important to have a good understanding of the term ‘organisation development’.
‘Growth is defined as change in an organisation's size, when size is measured by the organisation's membership or employment; development is defined as change in an organisation's age .’
(Starbuck 1965)
‘Development involves policy decisions that change organisational objectives.
Growth, on the other hand, involves technical or administrative improvement by which it is possible more effectively to accomplish old objectives .’
(Hicks 1967)
Organisation development ‘is a complex educational strategy intended to change the beliefs, attitudes, values and structure of organisations so that they can better adapt to new technologies, markets and challenges and to the dizzying rate of change itself.’
(Bennis 1969)
From the definition of Bennis, two important points must be emphasised.
Organisation development is an educative process.
It is based on the prescription that there is no ideal form of organisation design, but that organisations must be adaptive in order to survive.
It is generally accepted that the ‘master and slave’ ideology of classical management theory is not properly tenable,(although these beliefs still exist widely today and, to varying degrees, classical management theories are used in practice: bureaucracy and the formal structure of organisations offer security, familiarity and safety which continue to have strong appeal).
Organisation theorists have begun to emphasise:
the importance of individuals in organisations: the problems of conflict between individuals or work groups, the psychological importance of the work group, the effect of different styles of leadership, and the problems of motivation; and
the influence of the environment on an organisation; and of the organisation on its environment (open systems theory).
Proponents of organisational development programmes would argue that although there are many cases where a bureaucratic organisation might be the appropriate organisational structure to have (eg. possibly with routine or repetitive work) it is clearly inappropriate in other cases.
To adapt to the increasing complexities of modern business life, an organisation cannot afford to be a sluggish bureaucracy.
Individuals should be motivated to welcome change, and to cooperate with other members of an organisation in achieving change and adapting to it.
The problems of employee resistance to change were discussed in the earlier chapter on conflict, stress and change.
Management styles and organisational culture must be such as to make change and adaptation (development) possible: encouraging  innovation, tolerating small errors in the process of experimentation, rewarding new ideas etc.
An organisation must react to its environment.
Management involvement in internal operations and problems must be oriented to the environment, its opportunities and demands.
THE SOCIO-TECHNICAL SYSTEMS APPROACH TO ORGANISATION
Eric Trist
This approach takes the view that organisation structure (along with the work done by an individual, and the way in which he can relate to fellow-workers) tends to be influenced by the technology of the operations.
Organisations are complex social systems, but must be seen in the context of their technology — ie. they are socio-technical systems .
The originators of socio-technical systems theory are reputedly Eric Trist and his colleagues at the Tavistock Institute who (in the early 1950s) studied the effects of technological change on the morale of workers.
They based their studies on the coal mines where, owing to increased mechanisation, the miners were merged into larger and larger groups, found it difficult to identify their share of the work within the enlarged groups and suffered low morale: productivity was falling.
Trist realised that productivity was linked to job satisfaction and the ability of the miner to associate his own extra effort with extra reward.
When he introduced a method of organisation where the large shifts were subdivided into small, identifiable units, morale improved and productivity increased.
Trist also believed that the primary task of management was to relate the organisation to its environment.
Management must realise that an organisation is a conversion process that converts units of input from the environment into units of output desired by the consumer in that environment.
The market is constantly changing and management should monitor these changes and react to them.
Trist has consistently developed a systems approach to organisations, in which task requirements and individuals' needs are interrelated as an interdependent ‘socio-technical’ system.
‘it is difficult to see how these (organisation) problems can be solved efficiently without restoring responsible autonomy to primary groups throughout the system and ensuring that each of these groups has a satisfying sub-whole as its work task, and some scope for flexibility in work-pace.
Only if this is done will the stress of the deputy's role be reduced and his task of maintaining the cycle receive spontaneous support from the primary work groups .’
(Trist and Bamforth)
The research work of Trist
The Coal Board had been trying to introduce new mechanical processes into coal mining in order to increase productivity, but the innovation provoked severe industrial unrest.
Trist and his colleagues were invited to study the problem and to come up with a solution.
Prior to the technical innovations by the Coal Board, miners had been used to working in small autonomous groups or teams.
Each team had its own place at the coal seam and was responsible for hewing coal with a pick or drill, loading it into tubs for transportation out of the mine and propping up the roof as they advanced.
Each miner in the team was an all-rounder and did not have to specialise in any single activity within the overall task of the group.
Each team was paid as a group and the pay was shared out equally between its members.
The Coal Board decided to change the work organisation in order to introduce new coal-cutting equipment capable of cutting a long stretch of wall at a time.
Their new organisation (known as the conventional long-wall system ) divided the mining work into three separate tasks or shifts.
a.
One group of miners did the cutting.
b.
A second group of miners loaded the loose coal onto a moving conveyor which took it away from the coal face.
c.
A third group moved the coal cutting equipment and conveyor forward, and propped up the roof.
The new arrangements proved unsuccessful.
Within each specialised task there were some miners more willing and more able than others to carry out the specialised work.
There were also problems in coordinating the work of the three different groups or shifts.
As a result, it was found that closer supervision was required by management to ensure that the work was done properly and that every individual did his fair share.
Trist and his colleagues suggested that close managerial supervision was unsuitable to mining work, which was carried out in dangerous conditions.
They agreed that the technical equipment used in operations must influence the type of work organisation for employees: in the case of coal mining, the new cutting equipment and conveyor belts made working in small groups no longer practicable.
However, a work group has social and psychological properties and the work organisation should not be arranged in such a way that the advantages of technological improvements are offset by employee resistance and unrest.
Trist et al argued that an organisation is a socio-technological system which must attempt to balance,
economic advantages,
technological advantages, and
social and psychological advantages within the work organisation.
It is not sufficient to introduce the most up-to-date technology if a cheaper older technology is available or if the new work organisation will create serious employee unrest.
Nor is it sufficient to create worker satisfaction if this entails inefficiency and uneconomic working which could be improved by better technological equipment.
Their solution to the coal mining problem was to recommend a composite long-wall method of working.
Under this method the new technology was retained, but the workforce was no longer divided for three separate tasks.
The team as a whole was given the responsibility for the whole task and for assigning individuals to particular jobs.
By this means, the work group was given autonomy, self-regulation, multi-skilled roles and a complete task to perform.
As far as possible, the social conditions of the traditional system of mining were restored, while the ‘three-task’ group was defined as the new primary work group for coal mining operations.
Joan Woodward (1916–1971
Joan Woodward developed the socio-technical systems approach with extensive research into differing types of organisations.
She discovered that the structure of organisations varied very widely and that technology was a major factor contributing to the variances.
Woodward categorised the levels of technology into:
unit production, or small batch production;
mass production, or large batch production;
process production, or continuous flow production.
This categorisation also describes a rising scale of technical complexity , ie. process production is more complex than mass production, which is more complex than unit production.
By ‘technical complexity’ she meant the extent to which the production process is controllable and its results predictable.
Woodward described the findings of a survey of firms in Essex.
‘When the firms were grouped according to similarity of objectives and techniques of production, and classified in order of the technical complexity of the production systems, each production system was found to be associated with a characteristic pattern of organisation.
It appeared that technical methods were the most important factor in determining organisational structure and in setting the tone of human relationship inside the firm.’
Elaborating further on the survey, Woodward noted the following.
Different objectives of different finns controlled and limited the techniques of production they could use (eg. a firm developing prototypes of electronic equipment cannot go in for mass-production).
Analysing the firms into a continuum of ten levels of technical complexity (sub-divisions, slightly overlapping, of the three main levels described above) firms using similar technical methods also had similar organisational structures.
‘It appears that different technologies imposed different kinds of demands on individuals and organisations and that these demands have to be met through an appropriate form of organisation.’
Specific findings were that:
a.
the number of levels in the management hierarchy increase with technical complexity, ie complex technologies lead to ‘tall’ organisation structures, while simpler technologies can operate with a ‘flat’structure;
b.
the span of control of first-line supervisors was at its highest in mass production, and then decreased in process production, ie. 
c.
labour costs decreased, and the ratio of indirect labour increased as technology advanced;
d.
the span of control of the chief executive widened with technical advance;
e.
the proportion of graduates in supervisory positions increased with technical advance;
f.
the organisation was more flexible at both ends of the scale of complexity, ie. duties and responsibilities were less clearly defined.
In mass production, duties and responsibilities are clearly set out, largely owing to the nature of the technology, and this favours a formal, authoritarian structure.
As a consequence,
the amount of written, as opposed to verbal, communication peaked with mass production, being a feature of bureaucracy and formal structures;
specialisation between the functions of management was most frequent in large batch and mass-production companies.
The clear-cut demarcation (and resulting conflicts) between line and staff management was also most frequent here;
the administration of production (ie. the ‘brain-work’) and the actual supervision of production work are the most widely separated in large-batch and mass production companies;
g.
industrial and human relations were better at both extremes of the scale than in large-batch and mass production companies, possibly owing to heavier pressure on all individuals in this type of organisation; and
h.
the size of the firm was not related to its technical complexity, ie it is not possible to attribute the ‘faults’ of mass production to the size of the finn rather than to the nature of its technology.
STRUCTURE AND PERFORMANCE IN ORGANISATIONS
Although there are different perspectives on organisations, and a proliferation of research and writing on the subject, it is possible to single out two predominant schools of thought.
One is concerned with the sociology of organisations, and focuses on what Mouzelis has called ‘the organisational problems of society's power structure’(1975, p.79).
This corresponds broadly with the approach of the previous chapter, and owes much to the Weberian analysis of bureaucracy.
The second is a managerial tradition deriving from F W Taylor's theory of scientific management and his studies of work administration.
The concerns here are with the internal efficiency of organisations: the design of structure and the motivation of groups and individuals to perform in line with stated goals.
To a large extent these two approaches have been mutually exclusive, not to say antagonistic.
Writers interested in the ‘problem’ of organisation tend not to regard organisational efficiency as an issue of first importance, and writers preoccupied with efficiency usually disregard awkward questions about the social and political impact of organisations.
(Though there are notable exceptions in those who have tackled the problem of integrating the two approaches, eg. Mouzelis, 1975; Perrow, I 980; and Albrow, 1980.)
However, we will now turn our attention to the managerial approach.
Although in some ways it seems hardly necessary to have to justify this, the concerns of management merit our interest for a number of reasons.
Modern large-scale organisations produce the goods and services of our material life, and the problems of providing these benefits efficiently affect all of society.
Furthermore, since management has the power to direct activities in  organisations, a knowledge of managerial priorities and objectives is necessary for a wider understanding of organisational behaviour.
Organisations have many different objectives and engage in a variety of activities, so there is a problem in defining an initial perspective on organisation theory and what we expect the theory to cover.
Organisations as systems
A similarity with living organisms suggests itself, and while there are dangers in taking this analogy too far, it has proved a useful model and one which keeps cropping up in organisational analysis.
The parts of an organisation — departments, divisions — must integrate their efforts, just as the parts of any living organism are interdependent.
Moreover, organisations may be viewed as existing in a competitive environment, as do plants and animals, and they have to adapt to environmental conditions or perhaps find their existence threatened.
Organisations have system boundaries in the sense that they may occupy a definite geographical area, although this isn't always the case.
Government departments and multinational companies, for example, are dispersed over wide areas.
Nonetheless, great care is taken in organisations to ensure that the membership is identified and kept under review.
The writers who have developed the systems approach, however, have been at pains to emphasise that organisations should not be viewed merely as closed systems; to do this is to adopt a very static picture of how they operate (Elliott, 1980).
Organisations have suppliers and clients; and there are wider social and economic forces that affect them, such as the labour market, the community, government legislation, and of course other organisations.
Thus, organisations are open systems, and transactions across the organisational boundary take place continuously, so much so that it can be difficult in practice to define exactly where an organisation stops and its environment begins.
Structure and performance
It follows from the systems approach that organisations have a structure — an established set of relationships, with the emphasis on ordered and regularly occurring activities.
Because tasks in organisations are almost always interdependent, it is essential that personnel act in a calculable and predictable manner.
Hence performance and structure are inextricably linked.
And, of course, the desire to improve performance is the underlying reason for studying the management process in organisations.
This aim does not refer to the effectiveness of actual decisions taken in given circumstances (which is the central problem of business policy), but rather to the attempt to identify those structures of behaviour which contribute to the achievement of organisational goals.
Reference here is mainly to the formal structure of organisations — that is, the official hierarchy of positions, the division of labour and specified operating procedures.
This is not to ignore the informal side of organisational activity.
We focused on this in the previous chapter, and indeed as we shall  see organisational analysis has increasingly taken serious notice of factors which lie outside the structure of formal authority.
However, as Child (1984) has pointed out, only the formal structure is subject to control and planning by management, thus it remains the fundamental concern of organisation theory.
In practical terms, the design of an effective structure must reflect the objectives of the particular organisation and the context in which it operates.
Good management also means anticipating the changed circumstances which make structural development and adaptation necessary.
Goals and the problem of rectification
The formal mature of organisation structure reflects the fact of goals having been identified and the criteria of achievement specified.
Indeed, organisations are set up and designed explicitly as means of achieving certain goals.
While some goals refer to broad aims, such as efficiency or the pursuit of profit, these afford little insight into the operations of a specific enterprise, and so more detailed goals are normally of interest.
For example, the management of a retail chain specialising in inexpensive furniture might well decide that the goal of quality is not its first priority.
They may be content to put up with a certain proportion of customer complaints for a given volume of business.
On the other hand, a high-class interior designer would be far more likely to regard quality as a goal that could not be compromised, and might regard a single dissatisfied customer as a threat to future business.
Thus, while both firms have the same overall goal of selling furniture for profit, the more detailed breakdown of goals tells us much more about the different ways in which the two businesses will be run.
An important problem relating to the use of goal analysis is that of reification .
This refers to the tendency of attributing human motives to social institutions, in this case of thinking about organisations as if they were pursuing the goals in question.
Of course, only the personnel of organisations can pursue goals.
Still, it is all too easy to refer to organisations as the active party — to speak of organisations controlling their personnel, adapting to their environments, and so on.
The danger in viewing the organisation as a purposeful entity is that one ends up with a highly abstract and artificial analysis.
The people making decisions and the motives behind their actions tend to be overlooked.
There is also the danger of unwittingly shielding the actions and motives of senior management from criticism by implying that it was ‘the organisation’ that was responsible for particular decisions.
Thus when analysing organisational goals, one must be clear that one is referring to the objectives officially sanctioned in the organisation, and not to the goals that organisations pursue.
Having discussed these introductory points, we can proceed to examine some of the ways in which the structure of organisations contributes to the achievement of the goals set by management.
There are several distinct but related aspects of organisation structure.
At its most basic level, formal structure refers to the physical shape of the organisation the distribution of jobs and lines of command often set out in  an organisation chart, if the firm in question has one.
At a more analytic level we can distinguish two main components of the management structure:
1.
the division of task or function — the division between groups, departments, specialisms and organisational divisions; and
2.
the division of power and authority — the division between superordinate and subordinate which forms the organisational hierarchy.
This gives the familiar picture of organisations as pyramidal structures of laterally connected departments and hierarchical levels.
Thus, for example, Salaman (1979, p.61) has defined structure as ‘the way in which work is organised and control exercised’, a definition in which we can see the twofold emphasis on relationships of communication and authority.
As well as these basic relationships, formal structure is identified with the major areas of managerial responsibility.
John Child (1984, Chapter 1) has set out in some detail the requirements for the formulation and successful implementation of managerial plans.
They include an established procedure for decision-making, with arrangements for the collection of information, the notification of decisions to groups and individuals, and a schedule for meetings.
Another important managerial task is the control and coordination of activities.
Here, operational procedures have to be set down in advance in order to specify areas of accountability and standards of performance; there must be a monitoring system to feed back information on performance to the right authority centres, and arrangements to correct operational activity in the light of any shortcomings.
Thus the success and viability of an enterprise depend upon creating the most effective structure of administration, given the circumstances in which the organisation is operating — one which distributes the necessary tasks, delegates required authority and controls the outcomes of actions.
SUMMARY
The nature of many organisations is basically unstable (or evolving).
In resolving the many dilemmas of structure, solutions may only be temporary.
They satisfy some objectives but not others.
In time, the neglected objectives become important, or those who espouse them become increasingly vociferous, and a new form of structure evolves.
However we divide up the work of an organisation, we cannot satisfy all of its members for all time to come.
Circumstances and people change, and so must structures.
All organisations need a rationale for dividing up their work.
The main considerations to be decided upon are:
to what extent shall we require staff to be specialists?
how specific shall we be in defining each person's duties?
is the organisational structure to be tall or flat?
shall we strive to ensure unity of command?
how far shall important decision-making be decentralised?
to what extent shall common services (eg. printing or accountancy) be centralised?
on what basis shall the organisation's members be grouped into teams, departments, divisions, etc?
All of these decisions involve dilemmas in which equally important values are in conflict and however one resolves the dilemma, potential problems will arise.
There is no way of dividing up the organisation's work that will simultaneously satisfy all the organisation's objectives and all its members.
Once the activities of an organisation have been divided up, they need to be coordinated and this becomes more difficult with the complexity of the organisation's activities.
The complexity of an organisation's activities in turn increases with differentiation, interdependence, uncertainty and as the uncertainty in an organisation increases, the greater is the amount of information that needs to be processed by decision- makers to ensure coordination.
Galbraith identifies seven basic strategies for dealing with the need to process increasing amounts of information in complex coordination.
Of these, the first three (rules, programmes and procedures; hierarchical referral; goal-setting) are very basic and can be found in practically any organisation but they are likely to be insufficient for non-routine activities, so organisations must also choose some combination of the remaining four options.
These all offer particular costs and benefits and will be more or less suitable to particular patterns of complexity.
Two of them (slack resources and the creation of self-contained tasks) work by reducing the need for information- processing while the remaining two (investment in vertical systems; creation of lateral relations) aim to increase the organisation's capacity for handling information.
If an organisation does not, either by accident or design, choose one of these approaches, them its performance will suffer.
