National Congress on Languages in Education
LANGUAGE IN TEACHER EDUCATION
Papers &Reports Edited by Christopher Brumfit
1988
WORKING PARTY REPORT
1.
SUMMARY OF QUESTIONNAIRE RESULTS
INTRODUCTION
The questionnaire was piloted in a number of institutions in Scotland in May 1985, and was sent out in final form in July 1985 to every state higher education institution in the UK offering teacher education courses.
Subsequently questionnaires were sent to 20 local authorities (with a request for any relevant information on their own practice relating to matters raised in the questionnaire) and 10 EFL institutions (from both private and public sector) that were known to offer teacher training courses.
Altogether 141 institutions were approached, of which 52 were Colleges, 26 Polytechnics, 33 Universities, 20 Local Authorities and 10 EFL Colleges.
Institutions were asked to return the questionnaire if possible by 30th September, 1985, with data relating to the academic year 1984–85.
In November, 1985 a further letter was sent to every institution that had not replied, requesting information about difficulties in responding.
The returns from this postal exercise, together with the breakdowns of institutions, are as follows:
Eight institutions replied that they were no longer engaged in teacher education, others that there was no time, or no member of staff available to complete the questionnaire.
If we bear in mind that the institutions that did not reply may also have included some for whom the questionnaire was inappropriate, we can assume that the responses we obtained would represent somewhere approaching half those working in teacher education at the time.
It is tempting to assume that those particularly committed to Language in Education would have replied, but there is no way of being sure about this.
The analysis which follows will concentrate on the Education Departments of Polytechnics, Colleges and Universities running DES approved teacher education courses.
Returns from other institutions proved difficult to fit in to a coherent pattern.
Responses to individual questionnaire items are discussed in turn: paragraph numbering reflects that of the relevant questionnaire items.
Text of letter.
THE UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHAMPTON
Department of Education
25th June, 1985
Dear Principal/Head of Department,
Language in Teacher Education
I am writing to ask for the co-operation of your Institution in a survey of Language in Teacher Education which is being carried out by the NCLE.
I realise that this is a bad time to ask for help in any professional and academic matter, but in the light of cutbacks and recommendations from reports like the Swann Report it is important that we are clear about the provision of language education for future teachers.
It is intended that the results of this survey should be communicated to the DES and local authorities, as part of a detailed report, in 1986.
The NCLE is a standing body established in 1976 of all major associations concerned with language or languages in education.
It only receives support for very basic administrative costs, and projects like this one are voluntary activities by members of working parties.
The Working Party on Language in Teacher Education has the following three aims:
1.
To establish, by examination of existing research and information, and by conducting a survey to fill the gaps, what provision there currently is for
a)
training teachers of language in all its forms (mother tongue English, community languages, classical, second or foreign languages); and
b)
educating all teachers about the role of language in education, and the implications of this for their work.
This is to be both in pre-service and in-service provision.
2.
To identify particular experiences of work in this area, both successful and unsuccessful, for more detailed discussion by participants and observers, as valuable case- studies of organisational, curriculum development or methodological issues.
3.
To provide a detailed commentary on the material obtained in relation to an overall philosophy of the role of language in education and its implications for teacher education policy and practice.
The enclosed questionnaire is part of the work for the first aim.
It has been piloted and commented on in a number of institutions already.
There are four sections.
The first is about general provision in any one institution.
The second is about provision for language in education for teachers in general.
The third is about the training of teachers of language and specific languages (including Welsh, Gaelic, Classics, English as a mother tongue and languages of ethnic minorities, as well as foreign languages and ESL).
The fourth section is about policies and trends in course developments within the areas described in the second and third parts.
Only one copy of Section 1 needs to be filled in, but ideally separate copies of Sections 2, 3 and 4 should be filled in for each course taught in the appropriate field.
I realise that this is asking a great deal, but it would help our strained finances if copies of these sections can be made within each institution.
If, however, you feel unable to do this, it would still help us if the questionnaire could be filled in for the largest course, and some indication be given of provision in other courses.
Clearly it will be most helpful to us if the responsible people for the teaching of a course themselves fill in the details.
Our piloting suggests that there is very little information here which could not be filled in out of the heads of appropriate teachers on these courses, so filling in the questionnaire should not cost a great deal of time for each person.
If there is any separate documentation or further material useful to our Working Party, we should be most grateful to receive it.
We shall of course send a report of the questionnaire results to every institution which completes the questionnaire for us.
I hope it will be possible for all questionnaires to be returned by 30th September 1985 at the latest, but if in practice this is likely to cause problems, I shall of course be happy to receive them a little later.
I do hope that it will be possible for you to participate in this exercise, even though I realise that many demands are made on people's time.
We have been liaising with those bodies who are surveying associated areas in this field, but the additional information we gather here should be of great use in future policy-making.
It may even contribute to an improvement of the prospects for satisfactory teacher training in the future.
If you have any comments you would like to make to me on this exercise I shall be most grateful to receive them.
I would also be very happy to receive any in-depth descriptions of experiences of teachers in your institution who have worked in this general area.
Any material received of this kind will be listed in our final papers, and the most interesting will be reprinted as papers accompanying the final report.
I look forward to your co-operation.
With many thanks.
Yours sincerely,
NATIONAL CONGRESS ON LANGUAGES IN EDUCATION 1984–1986 CYCLE: WORKING PARTY OF LANGUAGE IN TEACHER EDUCATION QUESTIONNAIRE
Introductory note: This questionnaire forms part of a survey which is being carried out by the NCLE to establish the extent of current provision for language education in the training, both pre- and in-service, of all teachers.
We are thus concerned both with language education for all teachers, and with the specific language education of teachers of particular languages, including classics, English as a mother tongue, modern foreign languages, community languages of minority groups, ESL and EFL.
In this questionnaire, ‘language education’ refers to learning about language as a social or psychological phenomenon and its structure, not to work on methods of teaching languages.
Unless otherwise indicated, therefore, this questionnaire is asking for information about courses which aim to improve teachers' or trainee teachers' understanding and awareness of the nature of human ability-orientated courses, either in teaching methods for language teaching or in communication for all teachers — but information given should not refer to work in these areas unless it has been specifically asked for.
It is recognised that some courses, particularly those in primary education, aim to permeate the whole course with language understanding.
You will appreciate that it is very difficult to apply to your institution, please attempt an approximate quantification of notional time spent on language work, and indicate the problem in a footnote.
Please note that courses aimed specifically at overseas students should be included, but it should be indicated what group they are intended for.
Throughout the questionnaire, please either ring the appropriate answer, or add information, as required by the question.
SECTION ONE: BASIC INFORMATION
1.3. a Although only 58 institutions provided the full questionnaire, they taught between them a large number of courses.
For initial training: B.Eds (4 at Universities, 18 at Colleges, and 10 at Polytechnics), PGCEs (15 at Universities, 15 at Colleges, and 6 at Polytechnics), as well as 8 courses under other names.
1.3. b (i) At in-service level: 23 MA(Ed)s (17 at Universities, 4 at Colleges, 2 at Polytechnics), 3 BPhils (3,—,—,), 22 BEds (4, 10, 8), 25 Advanced Diplomas (7, 10, 8), 11 Advanced Certificates (1, 3, 7) were listed.
However, of all these 84 advanced award-bearing courses, only 14 were specifically on language teaching or language in education.
These were one MA(Ed) full time and one part time, and a part time Advanced Diploma at University: one full time MA(Ed), one part time BEd, one full time and two part time Advanced Diplomas, and two part time Advanced Certificates at Colleges: and one full time MA(Ed), one full time Advanced Diploma, and two part time at Polytechnics.
Twenty institutions said they had no in-service courses of a year or more.
1.3. b (ii) Courses of ten weeks but less than a full academic year totalled 22 general courses and 12 language-related ones, across all institutions.
The language-related courses consisted of one full-time each in Universities and Polytechnics, and three in Colleges: four part-time in Universities, two in Colleges and one in a Polytechnic.
1.3. b (iii) Twenty-two non-award-bearing courses of 1–10 weeks were listed, across all institutions, but none were specifically language-related.
1.3. b (iv) Of the 22 courses listed of less than a week, across all institutions, only one (at a University) was language related.
1.3. b (v) Institutions that listed their numbers of school- based inset days ranged from one College and two Polytechnics doing 40+ to 11 institutions doing no school-based work, and 12 who made no response to this question.
However, there was no significant work in language in this area.
1.4 Figures for units in all types of pre-service education specifically on language are shown in Table 2.
(Note: Totals reported in this and following tables may vary somewhat from those shown in Table 1.
as some institutions reported more than one course/unit in response to some questions).
Such units were most commonly called ‘Language in Education’(7 Universities, 9 Colleges, 7 Polytechnics).
13 other titles were used, but only one (‘Language and Learning’ by three) was used by more than two institutions.
Only one (a University) used Applied Linguistics, and none, it was interesting to note, used the term ‘Educational Linguistics’.
1.4. b BEds customarily had quite extended language courses (13 Colleges and 8 Polytechnics had courses of 20+ hours, while only three had less).
PGCEs, which are the main route for training specialist secondary teachers, had substantially less, however (see Table 3).
Numbers of tutors with a commitment to language courses varied considerably.
In Universities it was never more than one or two.
12 of the 13 Colleges who responded to this question had 6 or more staff for this purpose, and most of the Polytechnics made similar returns.
However, this almost certainly reflects the general commitment to language (particularly the teaching of reading) by all tutors on Primary training courses.
This view is supported by the strong commitment of College staff (9 out of 13 institutions had 6+ staff with a prime commitment to language), whereas only 4 universities listed themselves as having even 1–2 people primarily committed to Language in Education.
5 Universities, 8 Colleges and 7 Polytechnics listed themselves as having staff with graduate qualifications in linguistics or applied linguistics.
6 Colleges had at least three graduates in this area, but only 2 each of Universities and Polytechnics listed this number.
Thirteen more institutions had staff with non-graduate qualifications in these subjects.
1.5 It proved very difficult to assess in how many other initial training courses there was explicit language work.
5 universities seemed to have something on language in most methods classes.
In other institutions (probably because of the greater quantity of compulsory core work) this was not so frequently referred to.
1.6 6 Universities, 6 Colleges and 2 Polytechnics did not report any Inset courses generally concerned with Language in Education.
The remainder listed a scatter of courses concerned with English, Modern Languages, Literacy, Literature and ESL and one course on Community Languages.
Only five courses could be described as general ones on Language in Education: the rest could be grouped with the specialist courses primarily geared towards the teaching of a language or towards literacy reported in response to Question 1.7. b
1.7. a Institutions varied enormously in the extent to which they were able to provide exact figures for the initial training of specialist language teachers.
Thus no meaningful figures can be reported here for the major language groupings (English, French, German).
However, minority interests were represented by 19 teachers of Welsh (11 University, 8 College), 34 of Classics (all University), 2 of Gaelic (both Colleges), and unstated numbers of Italian, Spanish, Russian and Community Languages.
1.7. b (i) 12 Universities, 10 Colleges and 7 Polytechnics did not report offering award-bearing Inset courses for language teachers.
Of those who did, 4 courses on English teaching, 10 on Modern Languages, 3 on Language teaching and 6 on Community Languages were listed.
It seemed clear, though, that some courses which should have been entered in this section (referred to in responses to earlier questions, e.g. 1.6) were not listed here, so these are almost certainly under-estimates.
1.7. b (ii) 8 Universities, 12 Colleges, and 8 Polytechnics did not offer non-award-bearing Inset for language teachers.
Of the courses listed, 5 were for English teachers, 15 were for Modern Language teachers, 1 for Primary teachers, 4 for a mixed group, 1 on ‘Language Awareness’, 1 on ‘Examining’, 1 on ‘English Language’ and 6 uninterpretable.
1.8 Only 1 University reported offering language improvement courses, and that for writing only, and only 2 offered study skills courses.
In contrast, 4 Colleges and 1 Polytechnic offered language improvement, and 9 Colleges and 6 Polytechnics study skills.
The study skills courses were nearly always compulsory.
(Please make as many copies as you need of Section Two)
SECTION TWO: LANGUAGE IN EDUCATION FOR THE TEACHING OF ALL SUBJECTS
N.B. Please complete Subsection IIA for each award-bearing course aimed at ALL students/teachers.
Please complete Subsection IIB for each award-bearing course aimed at SPECIFIC GROUPS of students/teachers, OTHER THAN language specialists.
Please complete Subsection IIC for ALL COURSES
IIA Courses aimed at all students/teachers
(Please complete this section PLUS section IIC individually for each course of this type)
IIC.7 Please add below (or attach) any further information about these courses/units not covered by the above.
(We would also be very grateful to receive copies of any handouts or other material which you use with students).
SECTION 2: LANGUAGE IN EDUCATION FOR THE TEACHING OF ALL SUBJECTS
NB In spite of our attempt to seek information relating only to time spent on specific work on the nature of language and its role in the world, it was clear that many respondents considered that any course on (e.g.) language teaching methods or reading methods was entirely ‘about’ language.
Consequently, much of the information reported in Section 2 simply tells us the hours timetabled for courses concerned with language teaching.
With this caveat, some trends can be seen.
IIA.
COURSES FOR ALL TEACHERS
IIA1.
Contact hours:
B.Ed Primary courses overwhelmingly have compulsory courses on language (19 out of 23), and most of these (17) have 30+ hours.
The only Junior Secondary B.Ed similarly had 30+ compulsory hours.
Secondary B.Eds had the same tendency: only two out of 10 had optional courses, and all courses were of at least 20 hours.
The only B.Ed for children with severe learning difficulties had 20–29 hours of compulsory language work.
A similar tendency was observed in compulsory language work.
A similar tendency was observed in in-service B.Eds, which were almost entirely for Primary teachers.
The only B.Tech listed, for CDT teachers, had a compulsory course of 20–29 hours.
The same proportions were apparent in Primary PGCE courses, 12 out of 15 with 30+ hours, and all 15 with compulsory courses (though one only had between 10 and 20 hours).
Secondary PGCEs presented a much more mixed picture.
Two universities offered no work on language for all teachers, and four courses were optional.
Seven PGCEs had fewer than 10 hours, seven had 10–19, three had 20–29, and two had 30+.
Four gave no times.
The main methods subjects from which students were drawn crossed the spectrum, except that no Physical Education teachers were mentioned (this reflects one return from a College, which wrote back politely refusing to answer the questionnaire on the grounds that as they only trained PE teachers the language issue did not arise).
A PGCE for children with severe learning difficulties had 20–29 hours of compulsory language work, as did, at In-service level, a Diploma in Primary Management.
Five other diplomas and certificates aimed at primary teachers had compulsory work on language of 30+ hours, but the only general MA(Ed) course with language work (excluding courses for specialist language teachers) had a compulsory course of less than 10 hours.
II.2.A
No informants provided any information about proportions of students taking up optional courses: the only student numbers provided were for compulsory courses, and not all of these gave their numbers.
IIA.3
Apart from PE, mentioned above under IIA.1, the distribution of students crossed all subject areas: however, in the absence of figures on optional courses, it is impossible to determine whether teachers of sciences, for example, have any language work provided outside their methods classes.
(We shall discuss section IIC here for all respondents to Section IIA.
This deals with details of the courses aimed at all students preparing for a general professional qualification (PGCE, B.Ed, etc.) regardless of specialism.
Analysis of courses for specific groups of teachers will follow analysis of Section IIB, which deals with those groups).
IIC.1
Most B.Ed primary courses claimed to cover all the areas of content listed in the questionnaire.
(The least popular were The Language of Specialist Subject, Language Interaction between Pupils, Bilingualism and Multilingualism, and Classroom Research on Language).
However, since fourteen topics were listed, even fairly full courses must have paid quite limited attention to any one topic, in order to cover all of them in the time available.
‘Testing and Assessment’ was the only additional topic mentioned by more than one institution, and that was by two only.
Secondary B.Eds showed an identical pattern.
Of the other large groups of courses, PGCE Primary students on between a quarter and a third of the courses received little on The Language of Specialist Subjects, Standard Language, Accent and Dialect, Bilingualism and Multilingualism, and Classroom Research.
Curiously, the least popular topics of PGCE courses were Language Acquisition (only four), Language and Cognition (six) and Classroom Research in Language (five).
Sociolinguists may be somewhat surprised to note that Language and Disadvantage remains one of the most popular topics, with almost all courses at all levels giving it special emphasis.
Taking all courses together, there was a noticeable tendency to consider additional topics in the areas of ‘Language and…
Ideology, Gender, Race, etc.’.
Some responses listed most topics in courses of a total length of nine hours.
IIC.2
The minimum number of hours a student could work on language varied wildly, probably because of the variable interpretations of ‘language work’ referred to above.
B.Ed courses listed ranges from 12 hours to 200+, and PGCE courses varied from 0 to 60 hours, though only seven PGCE Secondary courses suggested more than 10 hours as a minimum.
IIC.3
Apart from the fact that some percentage estimates totalled well over 100, there was little of interest in the analysis of modes of teaching.
Lectures, seminar discussions, guided reading, essays/projects and workshops all attracted a range of support within most courses, with no clearly discernible trends.
IIC.4
An enormous number of booklists was supplied.
On the whole, respondents did not favour the single coursebook in the way that courses in the United States do.
The variety was so wide that no generalisations can be made, except to note a lack of books explicitly on the description of language.
Students are clearly not expected to be able to question the linguistic judgments of commentators from a position of substantial technical expertise.
IIC.5
An interesting difference between B.Eds and PGCEs emerged from this question on modes of assessment.
B.Eds were about equally divided between continuous assessment and examinations, with some project work.
However, no PGCE listed assessment by formal examination: all used continuous assessment or essays/projects.
IIC.6
Staff qualifications for those engaged in Language work:
Unfortunately, it was impossible to ascertain the relationship between these figures and qualifications in language or linguistics.
Many respondents maintained (some quite hotly) that teaching experience and/or qualifications in literature, French, or other degree subjects were adequate for teaching about language.
‘Experience in language work’ was frequently responded to by statements about the number of years spent as a teacher.
Clearly, the question was inadequately worded.
IIB
COURSES FOR SPECIFIC GROUPS OF TEACHERS (OTHER THAN LANGUAGE TEACHERS)
This section of the questionnaire had a disappointingly low return.
For all courses, both pre- and in-service, only eight examples were offered, and only four more could be gleaned from examination of information elsewhere in the questionnaire returns.
The only explicit courses in initial training for subject specialists other than language teachers mentioned were a PGCE unit for drama students at a Polytechnic (for nine students: no. of hours not listed), and a 20 hour course for 10 PGCE students of economics at a College.
IIC
There were no significant variations for this group from what has been reported under IIC for Language courses for all students.
The same topics are relatively unpopular, and the same difficulties of interpretation emerge in responses to the other questions.
CONCLUSION TO SECTION 2
In general, the area which gave the greatest cause for concern for its relative lack of attention to language issues was secondary PGCE courses at university level.
The major statistics related to this group are summarised below.
Please add below any further information about these courses/units not covered by the above.
(We would also be very grateful to receive copies of any handouts or other material which you use with students)
SECTION 3: TRAINING FOR THE TEACHING OF LANGUAGE AND LANGUAGES
The purpose of this section was to shed some light on the explicit training of specialist language teachers.
Consequently, it makes sense to consider each specialism separately.
SECONDARY PGCE: ENGLISH /DRAMA
Four University, four College, and three Polytechnic courses in this category were described, involving 26 staff, only three of whom were not doing this as their main concern, and all of whom had appropriate degree qualifications.
It was interesting to note, in view of CATE pressures to involve teacher-tutors, that there were only six bought-in staff, five of whom were in one institution.
Hours of language teaching methods varied from 20 to 150, and most respondents considered that all of their course was already concerned with ‘language in education/basic linguistics’.
Thus there was a clear mismatch between what was meant by the questionnaire, and conscious or unconscious tutor perceptions.
The courses involved 140 main methods students (four of whom were listed as non-native speakers), and a further 74 subsidiary methods students were reported (but it should be noted that some courses failed to provide numbers).
Teaching practice hours varied from 150 to 750.
Several returns claimed that all TP hours were supervised: one claiming 630 hours of supervised practice.
Most respondents gave the number of supervised hours per student as between ten and twenty.
Major topics covered in the methods course excluded (predictably but not necessarily desirably) second language acquisition (only two courses included this), and — much more worryingly — anything on the history of English teaching (only three inclusions).
Other topics listed were all covered by a majority of courses.
Only one course had an examination for methods work: continuous assessment (eight) and essays/projects (nine) were widely favoured.
Staff qualifications: First degree 18, Masters nine, PhD four, Teaching qualification 18.
(NB this does not tally exactly with the information about 26 staff given earlier).
SECONDARY PGCE: MODERN LANGUAGES
Thirteen Universities, seven Colleges and one Polytechnic described courses of this kind.
Fifty-six staff were involved, all with appropriate degrees, and all except two with this as their main concern.
There were 20 bought-in staff.
Hours on methods varied between 50 and 405, but most were between 100 and 200.
None gave more than 13 hours to Language in Education (except one which listed the whole 120), and several gave none (but unlike with the English tutors, this was generally recognised as a separate area).
Several courses gave some time to language improvement, but in only two cases was it more than 20 hours.
Three hundred and nine students were covered by these courses, of whom 34 were native speakers of the target language — more than 10% of the total.
A further 120 were engaged in subsidiary Modern Languages courses, of whom seven were native speakers.
Hours of teaching practice varied between 90 and 630, and supervision (ignoring those who listed upwards of 100 hours!) was often for less than 10 hours in total — noticeably less than for English on average.
Topics which were scarcely covered in methods courses included History of Language Teaching (only seven courses), Description of Language (only four).
Language Variation (only five), Language and Disadvantage (only four).
The pattern of assessment followed precedent, with only two courses requiring examinations.
SECONDARY PGCE IN OTHER SUBJECTS
Two University Classics courses, two University Welsh courses, and one College Gaelic course were also listed.
Classics had one tutor in each institution, but one institution bought in two others also.
They taught four and two hours respectively on Language in Education out of 130 and 37 hours respectively of methods work.
Only one of these courses provided further statistics: 15 main methods students, four subsidiary, 100 hours of teaching practice of which 12 were supervised.
All topics were covered between the two courses, except for(understandably but regrettably) Language Acquisition, and Teaching Spoken Language.
Both staff had first degrees plus teaching qualifications.
In Welsh, neither of the two courses explicitly taught Language in Education work as part of the methods (200 and 100 hours respectively).
Between them, 10 non-native speakers and four native speakers were in training, with a further four non-native speakers doing subsidiary methods.
They had 100 hours and 120 hours of teaching practice respectively.
Both courses claimed to cover all topics, except Syllabus Design which was only covered by one.
Only one tutor's qualifications were listed: first degree plus Masters plus a teaching qualification.
The Gaelic course had one tutor and one student.
Fifteen out of 90 methods hours were spent on Language in Education.
There were 60 hours of teaching practice, of which six were supervised.
The tutor had a Masters degree.
On none of these courses was there any examination: continuous assessment was preferred.
B Ed IN ENGLISH
One College and one Polytechnic offered this with five staff, of whom four had this as their main concern.
Language teaching methods had 50 and 125 hours respectively, with 20 and 90 respectively offered to Language in Education.
Student numbers were four and 19.
Neither of the courses dealt with the Social Context of Language, Computer Assisted Language Learning, Description of Language, Syllabus Design or Language Policy.
One course had an examination.
Both staff had PhDs.
B Ed IN WELSH
One College provided information on this with five staff, for four of whom it was their major concern.
They all had appropriate degrees.
60 hours of language improvement, and 91 on Language in Education were offered, out of an unspecified methods total.
Seven native-speakers and one non-native speaker were students.
There were 90 hours of teaching practice, of which 20 were supervised.
The topics ignored included the Social Context of Language, the History of Language Teaching, and (perhaps surprisingly) Language Policy.
Assessment was both continuous and by examination.
Staff qualifications included two PhDs, one Masters and one first degree, with four having teaching qualifications.
OTHER COURSES FOR SPECIALIST TEACHERS
Two courses dealing with English at an unspecified level, ESL at an unspecified level, Bengali at In-service level, and a Diploma in TEFL gave insufficient information for codification to be practical.
CONCLUSION TO SECTION 3
The results in this section were not comprehensive enough to enable firm conclusions to be drawn.
However, it does appear that the notion of language teachers joining a profession with its own history does not figure largely in tutors' conceptions of their work, that English tutors do not see ‘language’ as something requiring separate attention, and that all tutors tend to play down aspects of language policy or language in society.
All of these have implications for policy.
IV.2.e Please give the title of any comparable course(s) which is planned to begin within the next two years:
Please note that we would be most grateful for any handouts or further information you would like to send us.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR ALL YOUR HELP, WHICH IS GREATLY APPRECIATED.
We shall, of course, send a copy of our final report to all institutions that return us a completed questionnaire.
Please return this questionnaire to Professor C.J. Brumfit, Department of Education, University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton.
SO9 5NH, by 30th September, 1985.
SECTION 4: POLICY AND TRENDS
The purpose of this section was to discover as much as possible about trends in staffing and recruitment, the internal policies of institutions on Language in Education, and a little about the attitudes of tutors in this area towards their field.
As in some earlier parts of the questionnaire, information provided was too patchy to allow strong generalisations.
However, some general tendencies could be observed.
Most questions under IV.1 were concerned with trends in units described in Section 2 of the questionnaire.
IV.1.a
In 1984–5, most of the courses in all institutions had been running for less than five years, though about a third of courses in Colleges, including nearly half the B Ed Primary courses had been operating in the way described for more than five years.
(Recent demands by the Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (CATE) will have ensured that these courses have been substantially revised since 1984–5).
IV.1.b
Data on staff teaching on units in 1975, 1980 and 1985 was insufficient to make any generalisations about increases or decreases in numbers of staff.
IV.1.c &d
Similarly, it was impossible to gather from details of courses discontinued or planned whether there were any general patterns of expansion or reduction.
Several institutions commented that the whole system was in such flux, because of the impact of CATE, that long-term tendencies could not be reliably described.
IV.1.e
This question investigated management models for ‘Language in Education’.
The four possibilities were:
a)
organised by an individual or group with separate responsibility for this area:
b)
organised by an individual or group with responsibility for this area among a number of others, but not for the whole course programme:
c)
organised by an individual responsible for the whole course programme:
d)
organised by a group responsible for the whole course programme.
Nothing was entered by anyone under the fifth, ‘Other’ choice.
This was a brief attitude questionnaire in which respondents were invited to react to six statements.
Results were as follows:
Information in this section, on trends in staffing and student numbers for courses described in Section 3 of the questionnaire, was too sparse to enable any general comments to be made.
It was apparent from elsewhere in the responses that four Polytechnics and five Colleges had had cuts in the area of Language in Education, and that one College and one Polytechnic had had increases in provisions within the previous five years.
However, quantitative information about general trends simply was not forthcoming.
CONCLUSION TO SECTION 4
Clearly Section IV has to be interpreted with even more caution than other sections of this questionnaire.
Nonetheless, it is slightly surprising that staff responding seemed to be generally not dissatisfied with their situation.
The limited amount of discussion that members of the Working Party were able to hold with colleagues suggested a certain defensiveness.
Rather than maintain that the situation was unsatisfactory and needed diversion of energy into this area, there was a tendency to see any admission of failure as indicating that the whole area should disappear.
The findings of this questionnaire do not unfortunately enable us to assess such subjective impressions.
GENERAL CONCLUSION
We have tried to emphasise in this report the inevitable tentative nature of conclusions to be drawn from the data presented.
At the very least, though, this questionnaire gives us a little more information than would otherwise be available.
People who responded to the considerable demands of the questionnaire were presumably those who felt committed enough to do so.
It is unlikely that there are an enormous number of institutions doing major work in this area whose views are not recorded here, and the proportion of institutions represented is reasonably high for a postal survey.
We hope that the responses will be found at least suggestive for future policy-making.
We cannot conclude this report of the questionnaire findings without thanking all those who completed parts of the questionnaire in their own institutions and the administrators who facilitated the process.
Any information is better than none: the fact that the results are inevitably partial and suggestive rather than comprehensive and definitive should if anything increase our appreciation of those who spent so much time and effort to help us to obtain a clearer picture.
II.
LANGUAGE IN TEACHER EDUCATION: IMPLICATIONS FOR GENERAL POLICY
INTRODUCTION
Thirty years ago teacher education in Britain was set for a major expansion.
Simultaneously but quite independently, the impact of linguistics, particularly through Chomsky's effectiveness as an academic publicist, was giving a major boost to language studies.
Psychology, sociology, anthropology, philosophy and educational studies all responded either in agreement or in reaction to Chomsky by taking language more seriously.
But concern as widespread as this cannot be attributed solely to the work of one man, however challenging his ideas: the times were propitious too.
Bernstein's writings of the 1960's appeared to suggest language as a possible cause of failure in state education.
The growth of demand for English teaching throughout the world led to an expansion of serious work in EFL at all levels, accompanied by great enthusiasm among publishers for new ideas, and international markets that were willing to pay for teaching, textbooks and high-level advice.
The political pressures of comprehensive reorganisation of secondary education in Britain, combined with increasing recognition of multilingualism in British schools in response to migration into the UK, led to greater sensitivity to the facts of multi- dialectalism and language variety.
International bodies such as the Council of Europe invested money in large-scale projects to improve second and foreign language teaching.
Throughout the world, formal linguistics rode high as an academically respectable subject, and many other disciplines, pure and applied rode high with it.
Perhaps it is fortunate that such success came too late to affect the newly developing teacher education programmes very fundamentally.
The disciplines for Educational Studies and that area of it concerned with teacher education (Tibble, 1966).
History, Sociology, Philosophy and Psychology were enshrined for a time.
Initial training courses for secondary school teachers frequently consisted of methods or subject studies, for part of the time, and formal work in each of the four ‘foundation disciplines’ for the rest.
Language work was scarcely mentioned at all; as ‘language’ permeated everywhere, it was therefore explicit nowhere.
However, it was not long before disenchantment with this general model of teacher education set in (Hirst, 1983).
Increasingly, methodological work in subject areas was becoming more sophisticated, and demanding more rigorous integration of ‘foundation’ procedures into the needs of particular subjects.
The study of education became less formalised, but more integrated.
Yet, as Hirst (1983) indicates, the debate was still generally conceived of in terms of the old, well-established disciplines versus (or integrated with) the school subject areas.
In ‘language’ there was a vacuum within educational studies.
The importance of language to education was undeniable; yet it did not prove possible for development to take place within conventional faculties or schools of education (in 1975, for example, departments within the University of London Institute of Education were unable to agree about establishing a language centre because of concern over who should be seen as central).
Major educational work took place outside Education Departments in recently formed Applied Linguistics groups associated with Linguistics (Edinburgh and Reading), Language and Linguistics (Essex), English and Linguistics (Lancaster) or English (Birmingham) to name only some of the more prominent sources of applied linguistic expertise within Arts or Social Science faculties rather than Education.
Of course work in these area interacted with and monitored work in Education proper, but the degree of activity outside Education departments is very striking in this period.
At the same time, increasing interest in language led to a succession of BEd courses with strong language components in Colleges of Education (work in the Birmingham area, led by Professor John Sinclair, part of which is described in Mary Willes' paper on pp. xx-xx, was particularly notable, but similar innovations were developed elsewhere).
The Nuffield Programme in Linguistics and English Teaching, directed by Professor Michael Halliday from 1964, was publishing its findings and proposals through the Schools Council, including the influential ‘Language in Use’ materials (Doughty, Pearce and Thornton, 1971), and publishers like Edward Arnold and Penguin Books were offering serious general analyses of language issues for teachers.
The DES ran a number of conferences on Language in Colleges of Education, starting at Lady Spencer Churchill College in September 1971, and at Coloma College in July 1973.
Up to the time of the publication of the Bullock Report (DES, 1975), it looked as if the movement towards a serious consideration of language was irreversible.
The Bullock Report offered clear support for language in teacher education: ‘Among the modules that go to make up the professional training element there should be a compulsory one on language in education’(DES, 1975: 337–8).
But in spite of this, the recession and the planning policies adopted for teacher education prevented any significant major development.
Curiously, perhaps, as linguistics has become increasingly ‘applied’ and concerned with social setting, its impact on teacher education has failed to make corresponding advances, Education Departments, as the questionnaire results show, do employ people with linguistic training, and applied linguistics backgrounds are shared by the holders of at least three current Chairs in Education (two at London, one at Southampton).
But applied linguistics has made very little direct impact on either English mother tongue teaching (though scholars such as Harold Rosen have clearly been well read in this field) or on general Education.
In spite of two books calling for ‘Educational Linguistics’(Spolsky, 1978: Stubbs, 1986) the case that will convince the profession at large has still to be made.
Individual initiatives by groups of teachers — the graded objectives movement in foreign language teaching (Harding, Page &Rowell, 1980; Clark, 1987), language awareness (Hawkins, 1984; Donmall, 1985), stylistic approaches to teaching literature (Brumfit &Carter, 1986)— have drawn on applied linguistic work, but the overall impact appears to be slight.
Yet we cannot see this relative lack of effect as indicating that there is no desire for change.
The concerns of the Department of Education and Science, Her Majesty's Inspectorate and politicians alike indicate dissatisfaction with the status quo.
The terms of reference of the Committee of Inquiry into the Teaching of English Language, set up by the Secretary of State for Education in January 1987 clearly reflect worries about defining the need for language understanding, both in schools and in teacher education.
The recent HMI survey on the initial training of teachers in the public sector remarks, with reference to primary BEd degrees:
The majority of courses provided students with insufficient help to understand clearly the place of English, or language, within the whole primary curriculum, that is to say how language ability should be developed in the context of the various elements of the curriculum and how in turn these can be more effectively learned by appropriate language activities.
There was little evidence anywhere of the study of the structure of language.
(DES, 1987: 66)
All in all, there seems little doubt that the time is ripe for an assessment of the role of language in teacher education.
The purpose of the NCLE Working Party was to start investigations which could lead to such an assessment.
GENERAL PROBLEMS IN CURRENT PRACTICE
The last few years have been stressful for teacher education, for it has not only experienced the constant need for self- defence of higher education generally, but also special pressures from the Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (CATE), set up in 1984, and the new funding arrangements for in-service education started in 1986 (which effectively wiped out the source of student funding for most full-time award-bearing courses).
These pressures both reflect and contribute to an uncertainty about the role of teacher education within higher education.
Thus it is not surprising that responses to the questionnaire were varied in quality and range of answers.
(Indeed, the reactions to the fact of the questionnaire varied from, on the one hand, the view that only HMI should authorise such an enquiry, to the view that asking anything at all was an unwarranted interference with personal liberty.
Fortunately, these views were entirely exceptional, and courteous co-operation was the norm.).
1.
The desire for integration, referred to above, has produced a widespread model which is very difficult to assess from outside.
‘Language’, we were frequently told, ‘permeates the teaching process, and does not need explicit independent treatment’.
The logic of constructing courses so that students recognise the importance of language all the time is very compelling.
At the same time, though, an organisation of teaching which is extremely difficult to monitor may result in desirable procedures and content disappearing by default.
One of our informants cynically suggested (though in fact with reference to the concept for Multicultural Education) that ‘permeation is a word used to indicate that the institution believes the issue should be seen to be addressed without wishing to provide administrative support for such addressing’.
While this is clearly an unfair characterisation of much of the serious effort to achieve genuine permeation in many institutions, it is certainly true that permeated work need not have anyone in charge of it, need not demand any specialist expertise, and need not actually be visible to students at all.
As the Swann Report says (again with reference to Multicultural Education), ‘It is important to recognise however that permeation alone cannot be regarded as providing adequate provision for the kind of teaching which we have advocated…. without additional specialist course work, both compulsory and optional’(DES, 1985: 559).
This is a position we would also endorse for language work.
Certainly scarcely any of the responses that referred to permeation discussed the difficulties of the concept with any sophistication.
We received no checklists of basic topics to be covered by all tutors, and no indication that anything other than general exhortation might be insisted on by course organisers.
There does seem to be a case, therefore, for some work in initial training to be based on a general language section or sub- department which is committed to presentation of language issues, and considering their relevance in schools and other institutions.
2.
In spite of the uncertainty expressed in the HMI survey quoted above, the impression from the questionnaires was that substantially more activity took place on primary than secondary courses (though we should point out that HMI considered in their survey that secondary teachers had better ‘assimilated the importance of language in children's learning’ in their training than primary teachers — DES, 1987: 119).
What is difficult to monitor is the extent to which ‘language work’ for primary teachers is provision of literacy teaching skills that are required for all primary teachers, analogous to the methods work of specialist language teachers.
Nonetheless, all teachers will need to be able to understand how language operates, if we are to avoid the widespread condemnation of ‘improper’ speech, beliefs that Indians speak ‘Indian’(Linguistic Minorities Project, 1985: 322), and misunderstandings of the structure of English (Bloor, 1986), etc.
LANGUAGE IN THE CURRICULUM
1.
NCLE has argued for some time that schools should have coordinated policies on language as a medium for learning and languages as subjects.
There is certainly no clear evidence from our survey that teacher education reflects such ambitions.
‘Language awareness’ courses, where they exist, are taught either in isolation, or in association with foreign language methods courses.
‘Language across the Curriculum’ sometimes appears as a general title, but there is no evidence that any languages other than English contribute strongly to a serious policy for other subjects in school.
(A simple example of a missed chance would be a recent lesson in which the pupils were asked to write to Paris to buy a painting for a local authority: there was no consultation with the French Department, and no opportunity to write in French at all!)
In our responses there was no evidence that the notion of a school language policy was seriously addressed at either initial or (more surprisingly) at in-service level.
Nor was there direct evidence of co-operation between language departments to any great extent, though close links between English, Foreign Language, Classics and Community Language Methods tutors at secondary level training should not be hard to develop.
All in all, this is an area where some schools are thinking ahead of teacher education (see, e.g. Marland, 1986).
A mismatch between the most imaginative practice and the best teacher education can never be good for the latter.
Perhaps a first realistic step is to encourage greater co-operation between English, Foreign and Community Language method tutors at secondary level and between all these and ‘Language’ tutors at primary level in training institutions.
RECOMMENDATION:
(1)
Teacher education should explicitly address, through its content and organisational practice, and need for schools to bring languages together in a coordinated policy.
2.
But the need for close liaison goes further.
There is, it is heartening to note, quite widespread acceptance that language is significant in all subject areas.
Evidence of clear timetabled discussion of this in non-language subjects is rarer.
What is not explicitly introduced, though, is the notion of language as a worthwhile area of content in — for example— physics and zoology within science programmes, social studies, history, or geography.
If we consider understanding of language to be essential for a well-grounded education, such developments should be encouraged, especially when schools do no explicit teaching of basic ideas about language.
Yet this could happen in addition to, rather than instead of, explicit language awareness activity in schools.
Understanding language development for all prospective parents, second language learning for all prospective language learners, language structure and the history of languages for some students at least, have been encouraged in some schools (Donmall, 1985).
Such initiatives need to be built on and extended.
Further, the role of ‘Language in Use’(Doughty, Pearce &Thornton, 1971) should be considered seriously, as the NATE submission to the Kingman Inquiry (NATE, 1987) does.
And if we want language teachers to be able to teach creatively and relevantly about language, they will need special training in this addition to their normal language methods work.
(2)
Teacher education methods tutors in all subject should explicitly address the issue of language as a medium of learning.
(3)
All language teachers should be encouraged to teach about the nature of language and should be explicitly trained in methods of doing this and co-operating with other teachers in so doing.
RECOMMENDATIONS:
3.
A depressing feature of the questionnaire results was the lack of general appreciation of the needs identified by the Swann Report (DES, 1985: 561–2 and 611) for satisfactory teacher education for a multilingual society.
Among the few topics consistently under-represented was Bilingualism and Multilingualism, and no evidence suggested that the languages and varieties of language of all ethnic groups were being built upon.
Mainstream work did not refer at all to the potential role of minority languages in the curriculum, nor to the major debates that have taken place in this area.
This is partly, no doubt, because teacher education in language is mostly tied to the teaching of particular languages, or to other disciplines like psychology or sociology where language is not the central focus.
(4)
That the social dimensions of language in Britain, and particularly of the languages and dialects of minority communities, should be specifically studied as part of the training of all teachers, and be seen as an essential major element for any teacher of language.
(5)
That primary teacher education should include components on the role of community languages, means of maintaining and developing pupils' mother tongues and the possibilities of bilingual education.
RECOMMENDATIONS:
4.
Nor was there evidence of language for work or life after school being taken very seriously as an issue, except insofar as it fitted in to conventional English and EFL work.
On the other hand, foreign languages were clearly expected to be taught for communication in the first place.
RECOMMENDATION:
(6)
That there should be more research on the language needs of employment and that the relationship between such needs and the teaching of English, community and foreign language should be explored in teacher education.
5.
It was striking that the historical, social and policy implications of language teaching were the areas most neglected in methods work.
This perhaps links with the lack of awareness of Britain as a multilingual society referred to above — on the whole teaching methods seem to be conceived of a primarily technical, with little regard for the links between techniques and methods used and more general educational and social questions.
It is clearly undesirable to ask methods tutors to be less practical, but there is a case for asking for practicality to be embedded in social awareness.
Students are being prepared to join a profession with its own history and its own view of its role in society.
RECOMMENDATION:
(7)
Methods work in all language teaching should be sensitive to the historical, social and policy implications of joining the language teaching profession, as well as similar implications for the teaching profession in general.
SELF-AWARENESS BY TEACHERS
There was evidence that some BEd courses introduced students to classroom research and self-awareness activities.
Depressingly, there was no evidence that this happened much in language work at University level, even in in-service and BEd work (though this could be accounted for by the pressure of time on PGCEs, and the tendency to teach general research methods at Masters and Diploma levels).
There seemed little if any concern for research into the description of linguistic interaction in the classroom — a particularly sad observation, as this is an area where teachers are well-equipped to find a base for research, and need to be able to monitor their own and others' performance effectively.
Whatever the pressure on pre-service training, some willingness to address these issues at in-service level had been expected, and was not apparent.
In this, Britain is in marked contrast to practice in the United States and Canada (see, e.g. Alatis, Stern &Strevens, 1983).
(8)
That all teachers, particularly those working at secondary level, require work to make them aware of the nature of language, in addition to work on language in particular subject areas.
Current work on language for primary teachers should be supported and strengthened.
(9)
That teacher education should recognise the need for all teachers to be familiar with research on classroom interaction and language use in educational settings.
Trainee teachers should have the option of being prepared for research activity in this area.
A particular priority is research on classroom interaction in multiethnic and multilingual classrooms.
RECOMMENDATIONS:
STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS
It is possible that a substantial increase in demand for teacher education on language could develop in the next few years.
Movements such as the development of Oracy testing in GCSE, the concerns of the Kingman Inquiry into the teaching of English language, the need for sophisticated Graded Objectives work in modern languages, and the pressures for multilingual education, all point in this direction.
However, such a development would need nurturing, and there are few people with adequate expertise to nurture it.
The nature of language is more complex than amateurs think, and there is a long tradition of scholarship and study to draw upon.
A graduate or post-graduate level understanding of applied linguistic and educational issues is essential for those who lead teacher education in this area, as well as close contact with and experience of teaching in British schools.
Because of the development of applied linguistics and its close connection with EFL teaching particularly (discussed at the beginning of this chapter), such a combination of expertise is rare.
Unless means can be found for experienced teachers to have at least the equivalent of a whole year studying for a Master's level retraining, the partially sighted will be leading the blind.
There is a very substantial and relevant literature of research, practical discussion and theory to be mastered before language work can be developed with the sophistication that English graduates are able to bring to the work in literature.
Further, the amount of time available in practice for part time Masters level courses makes it unlikely that occasional work will give awareness of language as strong a base as was provided for first degree work in other areas.
Yet language is too important to be left either to amateurs who know British education but know only a little about language, or to professionals who know much about language but have little close contact with British education.
RECOMMENDATION:
(10)
There must be support for full-time courses in the area of Language in Education at Masters level, for advisers, teacher educators and school-based in-service and curriculum coordinators.
III IMPLICATIONS: LANGUAGE IN EDUCATION FOR ALL TEACHERS
INTRODUCTION
Linguists have a tendency to regard it as axiomatic that all teachers — including teachers of subjects other than languages — need to be informed about language.
Certainly, support for this belief can be found in the general consensus in educational circles that linguistic factors play an important role in determining a child's success or failure at school.
However, if linguists are to convince practising teachers and the providers of pre- and in-service courses, they must explicitly examine and justify this belief.
In the process, they must be able to demonstrate precisely what teachers need to know about language and why they need to know it.
It is not enough for this justification to be expressed in terms of a linguist's model of language or language use: it must be expressed with reference to the professional needs of teachers and the learning needs of children.
We cannot expect teachers of science, history of geography to accept that they need to know about, say, the nature of language or the multiplicity of its functions, unless we can show how the need for this knowledge derives — by a chain of relevance sufficiently direct to be convincing — from their own search for greater pedagogic effectiveness.
Our main argument in this paper is that linguists have not often recognised the need for this sort of justification; that their views about what is educationally relevant in the field of language study does not always coincide with the concerns expressed by educationalists; and that linguists and educationalists need to begin a common search for relevance in which the linguists' knowledge is related to a frame of reference based on the needs of learners and teachers.
LANGUAGE AND EDUCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
This search must necessarily take place against a broader background of views about the relationship between linguistic factors and educational development.
It is therefore useful to bear in mind how these views have evolved over recent years.
We are now at a point in this evolution where, I believe, the climate is more favourable than hitherto to cooperation between linguists and educationalists.
If we look back over the past twenty-five years or so, we can distinguish three main phases:
1.
In the first phase, from the early 1960's to the early 1970's, attitudes towards the role of linguistic factors in a child's development were deeply influenced by the ideas of Basil Bernstein and his circle.
However, complex these ideas may have been in their original conception, they were taken over by many educationalists in a simplified, stereotypic form, typified by the supposed dichotomy between ‘elaborated’ and ‘restricted’codes.
Within this simplified conception, the role of linguistic factors in education is easy to define: some children come to school equipped with an elaborated code which enables them to be successful in class because they can use it to analyse, describe, speculate, and so on; other children fail, because they do not possess this code.
This ‘language deficit’ was often assumed, explicitly or otherwise, to reflect a corresponding ‘cognitive deficit’: because language and thought are related, a person with a restricted language capacity is also likely to have a restricted thinking capacity.
In this phase, the most active generators of ideas were sociologists and psychologists.
When linguists became involved, with a few notable exceptions, it was mainly to distance themselves from this current of ideas and to introduce the second phase.
2.
It was in the second phase, then, that linguists stepped to the fore and tried to replace the simple notions of language code and language deficit.
(4) Within this newer, linguistically-based account, Bernstein's two codes are just two varieties of language, each equally valid as vehicles for group interaction and identity, which happen to be favoured by different social groups.
They can be classified together with other kinds of language variation, such as styles or dialects, and any suggestion that one might be superior to the other is due to social prejudices.
Thus, if it is true that children who speak the more prestigious variety are the more successful than others, this is caused by other factors such as higher teacher- expectations or the middle-class values of the school.
If the first phase aroused the resistance of linguists, the second phase, with its uncompromising insistence on linguistic equality, could not satisfy educationalists.
The latter may have shared in that general relaxation of social attitudes to nonstandard varieties that had also occurred, for example, in public institutions such as the BBC.
However, equality in language cannot be measured purely in social terms.
It also has to be measured in relation to particular purposes and tasks.
When one does this, it is clear that not every child is equally equipped to cope with the particular purposes and tasks that occur in classrooms.
In this context, the linguist's proclamation of the functional equality of all varieties can be of little help.
In addition, it is an assumption that precludes them, to a large extent, from beginning to get to grips with the language- based problems that learners might experience and providing teachers with useful insights into how linguistic factors might help or hinder a child's progress at school.
3.
This brings us to the third phase, in which linguists have become more generally prepared to question the notion of linguistic equality and to accept that language differences might give rise to difficulties which are not due solely to the social and linguistic misconceptions of teachers.
An important indicator of this development was the debate on the notion of linguistic equality which took place in 1983 at the conference of the Linguistics Association of Great Britain.
The main conclusions of the debate are summarised in Hudson (1985), where three conceptions of linguistic equality are distinguished:
(a)
‘Structural equality’: does every language variety possess an equal repertoire of structural and lexical items?
(b)
‘Communicative equality’: can every language variety satisfy an equal range of communicative needs?
(c)
‘Cognitive equality’: does every language variety exert a similar influence on the cognitive make-up of its speakers?
With respect to each type of linguistic equality, two other important questions are:
(a)
Are we considering the potential equality of a variety (which its speakers could develop if they wished) or the actual equality of a variety, as it is used now?
(b)
Are we considering the language of a particular group or the language of an individual speaker?
In educational contexts, it is important to concentrate particularly on the actual equality of the language spoken by individuals in school.
On the basis of this analysis, most of the fifty linguists who participated in the debate could not subscribe to a straightforward conception of linguistic equality.
They found this conception too optimistic and accepted that not all schoolchildren possess the linguistic means to cope with their present communicative needs.
Hudson notes that ‘this shift will no doubt be welcomed by those in the teaching profession whose job is to try to remedy mismatches between resources and demands in this area, and they will be pleased to find that linguists accept that such mismatches arise’(1985: 5)
This last quotation indicates an important characteristic of the phase of development that we are now in.
Linguists and educationalists no longer start from conflicting assumptions about the all-important question of language differences at school.
On the one hand, educationalists have moderated their earlier notions about language deficit and become more tolerant towards, say, variation in style and dialect.
On the other hand, linguists no longer cling as a matter of faith to the notion of linguistic equality.
They accept that language differences might indicate differences in language capacity, when this capacity is measured in relation to particular situations and communicative demands.
They are also prepared to contemplate discussing possible relationships that might exist between an individual's language and his or her cognitive functioning.
This rapprochement of basic attitudes of educationalists and linguists is an important foundation for constructive dialogue and cooperation.
WHAT SHOULD TEACHERS KNOW ABOUT LANGUAGE?
We return now to the question raised in the first part of the paper.
What does the practising teacher of, say, science or history need to know about language, in order to bring about improvements in the classroom and cope with problems that arise there?
The Bullock Report (1975: 339–40) attempted to define the ‘minimum specifications’ of knowledge about language that every teacher should possess.
This minimum includes seven main areas:
1.
Some knowledge of the nature of language.
2.
The functions of language.
3.
The relationship of language to thought.
4.
The relationship of language to learning.
5.
The acquisition of language.
6.
The development of language.
7.
Reading.
We can compare this with a similar attempt made eight years later by Stubbs (1983), who distinguishes four main areas of language which teachers should know about if they are to be able to make informed decisions about language problems at school:
1.
Language diversity within Britain.
2.
Language diversity within English.
3.
Practical language planning.
4.
A model of language itself.
There are areas in which the suggestions of Bullock and Stubbs overlap and areas in which they diverge.
How is a teacher or course-organiser to decide between one version and the other or, indeed, between these two versions and any other that a linguist might draw up?
Although each version is intended to serve pedagogical needs, neither one provides a pedagogically-based rationale for the selection of themes that it proposes.
Thus, for example, Stubbs mentions some of the language problems that arise at school but does not attempt to provide, on the basis of these problems and the aims of the educational process, a rationale for the help which he, as a linguist, would like to offer to teachers.
The frame of reference within which the authors write is that of the linguist.
The pedagogical frame of reference — which ought to describe and define the functions that the knowledge will serve — is not taken into account.
It is interesting to compare the aspects of language which are highlighted by Bullock and Stubbs with those which are highlighted in a document drawn up by a group of educationalists whose expertise is not primarily in the field of language study.
In 1980 a working party of the Association for Science Education published a collection of papers (Language in Science) which deal with the role of language in science education and make proposals relating to teachers' needs.
It is therefore an important indicator of the linguistic concerns of educationalists who are convinced of the importance of language in education but whose own frame of reference is pedagogically rather than linguistically oriented.
Here are the three main areas with which the papers deal:
1.
The role of language in the learning process, particularly how children can learn through discussion.
2.
How children sometimes experience learning difficulties because they cannot cope with the specialist language of science, as it is often used in books or by teachers.
3.
How science teachers can further the general language development of children.
Other working groups have produced similar documents which reflect the nature of their concerns in the field of language.
The Geographical Association focuses on:
1.
Pupils talking and writing in geography.
2.
Teachers talking to pupils and writing for pupils.
3.
Textbooks and other published materials.
The units of Language in Chemistry (Scottish Curriculum Development Service, 1980) deal with:
1.
Talking to learn.
2.
Listening and understanding.
3.
Teacher and pupil talk.
4.
Reading and learning.
5.
Writing and learning.
6.
Language and assessment.
It is clear from these various documents that amongst non- language teachers who are aware of the importance of linguistic factors, the main focus of interest is not on linguistically- based concepts like language variation, language functions or models of language.
It is with understanding linguistic factors in relation to the concrete problems and activities which make up the daily reality of the school: what children need to learn, how they learn and what difficulties they experience.
It is these pedagogical concerns that linguists must appeal to if they want teachers to listen to them, by demonstrating how linguistic concepts and knowledge can help to explain or solve them.
They must be able to demonstrate, for example, how a science teacher would be better equipped to understand children's difficulties, if s/he knew more about dialects, registers or the nature of language.
As their point of departure, linguists need to adopt a frame of reference which is not that of the linguist but that of the educationalist.
‘PEDAGOGICAL LINGUISTICS’
As our own point of departure in this section, we would like to take three areas of pedagogical concern which correspond closely to those highlighted in Language in Science:
Aims of learning: What knowledge and skills should children acquire?
We must consider here not only subject-specific knowledge and skills but also the child's general personal and social development, for which every teacher is responsible.
Learning processes: How can children learn most successfully?
How should teachers behave in order to stimulate the desired learning processes?
Learning difficulties: Why do the desired learning processes not always take place?
What prevents children from learning?
These three domains can provide a framework for a consideration of the role of language in education.
This can help us towards defining a field of ‘pedagogical linguistics’, that is, a field of pedagogically-relevant themes and concepts, from which to derive appropriate content for pre- and in-service courses, as well as for programmes of relevant linguistic investigation.
A. AIMS OF LEARNING
In the domain of educational aims, it is possible to pick out three main areas to which linguistics can make important contributions:
1.
It can help to give teachers an adequate conception of the communicative competence which children need in order to cope with the demands of modern life.
2.
It can help to provide a picture of the typical development of language skills during childhood and adolescence, so that teachers can recognise more reliably disturbances that occur.
3.
It can help to illuminate ways in which communication skills can be extended through teaching methods within the specialist subject e.g. through different kinds of interaction or stimuli for written work.
In all of these areas, there are concepts and insights from linguistics which can contribute to pedagogical understanding.
There is also, of course, considerable need for research in order to refine these concepts and provide more adequate insights and solutions.
B. LEARNING PROCESSES.
Here, too, we can distinguish three especially important areas for the contribution of linguistics:
1.
Linguistics can seek to clarify teachers' thinking about the complex relationship between words and concepts, which is central to formulating an approach to specialist language in the classroom.
2.
It can seek to clarify thinking about other aspects of the relationship between language and thought.
This issue is currently at the centre of pedagogical discussions about language, since many teaching methods rest on the assumption that when children talk or write, they are also developing their ability to think.
3.
Linguistics can help to illuminate ways in which teachers can initiate different kinds of interpersonal interaction or other language use, by varying the kinds of stimuli or contexts which they provide.
Through the information and insights which it can provide in these areas, linguistics can give important help to teachers in formulating appropriate teaching methods.
C. LEARNING DIFFICULTIES
Once again we can distinguish three main domains:
1.
Linguistics can help teachers to analyse those kinds of speech situations which might exclude some children from the learning process e.g. because the children are not familiar with the variety of language which is used.
2.
It can give teachers more insights into the kinds of communication skills that school demands from children but which many children may not possess e.g. the ability to process context-independent speech, to use language for certain intellectual functions or to process certain kinds of written language (see Perera, 1982).
3.
It can make teachers more aware of the importance of attitudes towards language and how their own attitudes may result in reactions which discriminate against children with less ‘prestigious’ forms of speech.
To conclude, then, these represent just some of the domains of pedagogical activity to which the knowledge and concepts of linguistics can contribute greater understanding.
As I said earlier, we now seem to be at a stage of development where the attitudes of linguists and educationalists to important language issues have become more compatible than hitherto.
We therefore have some justification in hoping for more constructive cooperation between specialists in language study and pedagogy, which should lead in turn to a clearer conception of the role that linguistics can perform in helping teachers to increase their understanding and effectiveness in the classroom.
IV IMPLICATIONS: LANGUAGE FOR PRIMARY PHASE TEACHERS
This section will deal specifically with Language in Primary Teacher Education.
It will argue that because of the nature of primary school teachers' role they have quite specific training requirements and that the current climate of change may well be catalytic.
It will further be argued that initial teacher training cannot be treated as separate from other areas of teacher education and that changes in any one sector will inevitably influence all teacher education provision, initial, probation support and in-service and that in the light of this interdependence, strategies should be established for a coordinated response across the spectrum of teacher education provision.
It is not the intention here to detail a course blueprint, partly because such prescriptiveness would stand in contradiction to the learner-centred tenet of primary practice, and partly because stimulating and informed models have been presented elsewhere for discussion (Bullock, 1975; Hawkins, 1984; Sinclair, 1982).
Instead what follows is based on insights gained through personal involvement in writing the one hundred hour language courses for the primary phase B.A. and P.G.C.E. courses in response to D.E.S.
Circular 3/84, and through analysis of the questionnaires.
It seems therefore appropriate to make recommendations with reference to three particular aspects of Language in Primary Teacher Education:
(i)
The content of the 100 hour language component in B.Ed.
and P.G.C.E. initial training courses;
(ii)
the organisation of those components;
(iii)
the implications of these recommendations for post experience and in-service provision.
RECOMMENDATION 1.
The major message of the Bullock Report which inter alia advocated the development of policies for Language Across the Curriculum needs reiterating.
The view that teachers should take their responsibilities in respect of the linguistic development of their pupils more seriously is not of course new.
However, to translate this vision into effective classroom practice resulting in the amelioration of standards and the quality of learning experiences, teachers do need appropriate training to equip them personally and professionally for the task.
Students in initial training do therefore need to be given the opportunity to examine and analyse written school language policies in practice during their periods of school experience.
RECOMMENDATION 2.
Since primary school teachers have responsibility for all areas of the school curriculum, special consideration be given to the language curricular genres and to writing for a variety of purposes.
RECOMMENDATION 3.
In addition to subject-specific language needs, teachers need to be aware of the situation-specific linguistic demands made upon young learners in primary classrooms.
In order to fully inform such study there is a need for more research in this field.
Research to complement the existing work relating to pupil-teacher interaction (Sinclair &Coulthard, 1975; Sinclair and Brazil, 1982 and Willes, 1983), and also in the relatively less well explored areas of pupil-pupil interaction, a specific feature of infant classroom activity.
RECOMMENDATION 4.
Since ‘talk’ forms a substantial part of a primary schoolchild's life the teachers' classrooms need to reflect an understanding of the role of language in learning situations and also the role of language in social situations.
RECOMMENDATION 5.
There is an increasing demand for teachers to become classroom researchers engaging in action-research.
To enable teachers to perform this function with regard to language, they will need in their training the research tools that will enable them to do this.
Students will therefore need courses that will equip them for observing, collecting and analysing linguistic data.
RECOMMENDATION 6.
Recent surveys including that carried out by the Linguistic Minorities Project 1985 have revealed the extent to which Britain is multilingual.
Yet too few of the teachers in training are themselves bilingual (or even multilingual).
There is therefore an increased possibility that monolingual teachers will find themselves in linguistically diverse classrooms.
In order to prepare students in training adequately for this eventuality, there is the need for teaching practice placements with community language speakers.
In preparation for this students will need to be aware of cross-cultural discourse patterns.
In addition, Swann's (D.E.S.
1985) expectation of seeing appropriate training and support being available to all teachers to enable them to cater for the linguistic needs of pupils in a linguistically diverse Britain (para. 2.17) still needs serious consideration.
The survey undertaken on behalf of Swann and reported in para. 5.11 on the extent to which teacher training courses were aiming to inform their students about the linguistic diversity of Britain today, revealed what was considered by Swann, to be an inadequate response to the widespread presence of ethnic minority language speakers in our nation's schools.
It therefore seems appropriate to restate the need for students in initial teacher education to have some knowledge of the current issues and debate that relate specifically to the linguistic needs of ethnic minority pupils, in particular, Mother Tongue Teaching, Bilingual Education and English as a Second Language.
In addition, the linguistic needs of monolingual pupils should be given separate consideration.
Teacher training institutions therefore still need to address themselves to the issues outlined in the survey:
(a)
conveying an awareness of dialect and language differences, and of a ‘repertoire’ approach to language learning in schools;
(b)
conveying an awareness of the existence and main characteristics of minority community languages in Britain;
(c)
conveying an awareness of current professional (and academic) discussion of mother-tongue teaching, bilingualism, etc.;
(d)
developing competencies and strategies for working in multilingual classrooms.
(Swann, para. 5.11)
RECOMMENDATION 7
Infant classrooms are social places and this is becoming increasingly true across the primary age range and even beyond.
There is also an increasing awareness of the importance of the human relationship aspects of learning and teaching — as distinct from the pedagogy.
Professional preparation needs therefore to include an understanding of the role of language in human relationships and this should include non-verbal interaction.
RECOMMENDATION 8
Primary school teaching is still a predominantly matriarchal profession.
Aspiring entrants to the profession need therefore to be aware of sociolinguistic variations that are related to a speaker's sex, the role of gender in language and the possible social implications of both, particularly in classrooms.
RECOMMENDATION 9
Young children are beginning their formal education sometimes as early as four years old.
It is therefore increasingly important for their teachers to have a knowledge of theories of language acquisition.
Since these theories draw on a variety of disciplines including psychology, sociology, linguistics, etc., the language component of initial training courses seems the ideal arena in which to bring together these perspectives.
While it is true there is no consensus among linguists (much less across disciplines) of a comprehensive description of the English language, theories are currently being developed which place language in its social context and the disciplines of sociologic and psycholinguistics are seeking to describe the human and social aspects of language as communication and the concomitant relationship between language and learning.
Consideration of these areas and how they can inform classroom practice should begin in initial training.
RECOMMENDATION 10
This tenth recommendation relates to context rather than content.
All of the preceding discussion and recommendations have implications not only for the content of Primary Language courses but also for their organisation.
A real understanding of the issued raised will come about by the approaches to teaching that are adopted for this aspect of the initial training courses, which should be in keeping with the best of primary school practice.
This will mean a person-centred, experiential approach to learning.
This will of course have resource and organisational implications particularly in those institutions where major expansion has been centred.
These should not however prove insuperable.
It will become an increasing necessity as institutions move towards the 1990's and attempt to broaden the base of their student intake; initial teacher education courses will hopefully have a much wider range of students on their courses.
In addition to the eighteen year-olds with ‘A’ level qualifications gained via Access courses or O.U.
study.
H.E.
institutions and perhaps particularly U.D.E.'s will need to consider the most appropriate teaching strategies for these students, particularly during their first year of study.
2.1
Since language courses constitute a very considerable time allocation there are inevitable human and material resource implications.
However, these courses, however well planned and commendable in content, can only really be effective if they are adequately resource.
The staff teaching these courses should be qualified by appropriate experience and specialist academic study.
In institutions where this is not the case at present it should be given priority in plans for staff development and forward planning.
3.0
Analysis of the survey reveals a remarkably wide variation across institutions in the organisation of their language courses.
All however, share the aim of developing professional competence.
In this conclusion therefore we would like to present the case for greater integration, coherence and concomitance across teacher education courses in three specific areas:
(i)
the theoretical and applied courses within initial training courses (B.Ed., B.A. &P.G.C.E.)
(ii)
initial and in-service teacher education provision
(iii)
research and teaching
3.1 THEORETICAL AND APPLIED EDUCATION STUDIES COURSES WITHIN INITIAL TEACHER TRAINING COURSES (B.ED., B.A. &P.G.C.E.)
There has sometimes been a division between these two aspects of initial teacher education courses.
It seems however, that adequate professional preparation can only emerge as the result of developing the relationship between theory and practice.
There is here a clear necessity for developing a course where these aspects are integrated.
For the language needs of learners can only be effectively solved by a linguistic analysis of their source problems (Carter, 1982:2).
The development of professional competence however paramountly desirable cannot substitute for the academic element in language courses.
Adequate professional preparation is the result of the developing relationship between theory and practice.
The success of any teacher training course, whether initial or in-service, will therefore depend upon the successful integration of theory and practice.
There are still courses which appear to offer ‘separate fields of study with only desultory, largely unsystematic forays being made to see how diverse theoretical considerations may be judiciously combined in tackling the full range of practical problems that teachers need to cope with (Merritt, 1986:187).
In order to overcome this, the interrelationships within the course components and areas of the school curriculum need to be explored.
3.2 COHERENCE WITHIN TEACHER EDUCATION ACROSS INITIAL AND IN-SERVICE PROVISION
The two functions of initial and in-service education are clearly interrelated and cannot be carried out in isolation from each other.
Changes in initial training, like the introduction of the 100 hour language component, will inevitably affect the in-service training needs of teachers.
INSET providers will need therefore to acknowledge and extend the expertise of teachers, gained during initial training.
In order to do this, the providers themselves may need updated qualifications in language.
The changes taking place in INSET funding arrangements may allow scope for local initiatives to flourish.
However, the most satisfactory response could only mean a major thrust coordinated at national level.
This could best be achieved by including Language as one of the D.E.S.
national priority areas.
3.3 RESEARCH AND TEACHING
Plowden's observation (D.E.S., 1966) that education is an applied discipline and the subsequent recommendation that the relation between research and practice should be reciprocal should not be forgotten.
At a time when the newly formed U.F.C. will seek to concentrate research funding, consideration needs to be given to the research needs of the teaching profession.
Plowden's claim that research and practice are parts of a whole with neither being able to flourish without the other, is still pertinent.
To recommend further financial investment in the area of research at a time of serious retrenchment in H.E.
is not naïve.
It is essential, and research funding should be regarded both as a priority and as a necessary complement to the current expansion in primary teacher training.
V IMPLICATIONS: LANGUAGE FOR LANGUAGE(S) TEACHERS
It seems obvious enough that ‘language teachers’— the phrase used by foreign language teachers to describe themselves — need to know about ‘language’ but if we rephrase the formulation what we in fact have are French teachers who speak French, German teachers who speak German and so on.
By ‘speaking’ French/German/etc., is meant: ability to speak the language with some degree of fluency, ability to describe its grammar according to some recognised handbook — e.g. Grevisse, Duden,— and critical knowledge of an established canon of literary works written in the language.
Sometimes this knowledge is supplemented by some familiarity with theoretical linguistics illustrated by examples from the language in question, or more rarely the knowledge of literature is wholly or partly replaced and supplemented by knowledge of the contemporary history, sociology and economics of a country where the language is spoken.
All these qualities provided by the academic course are valued by the gate-keepers of the foreign language-teaching profession — PGCE tutors, advisers to L.E.A.s headteachers — but especially in recent times the degree of spoken language fluency is stressed.
It is then the purpose of the initial training course — i.e. the PGCE and the Probationary Year — to provide ‘professional’ knowledge and skill in language teaching.
Our argument in the following pages will be that there is a knowledge about language appropriate to foreign language teaching and that this knowledge is at present provided neither in the academic nor in the professional course.
In our two-phase system this knowledge falls through the gap between the phases.
The academic course is extremely difficult to characterise because of the multiplicity of higher education courses taken by future language teachers; and it is becoming more so, as the predominance of the ‘traditional’ literature course is weakened.
It is nonetheless still possible to quote Hawkins' questions,(1981: 277):
Why (is) it extremely rare to find a student who (has) made even a superficial study of phonetics in the course of the degree…
How suitable, as a preparation for teaching in secondary school, is a degree course in which the student's reading is almost entirely confined to imaginative literature and which entails no systematic study of any other register in the foreign language…
On the other hand there are those who would argue that even if the academic course has to have a vocational purpose — and most students themselves would agree with this — the variety of vocational destinations requires a degree of generality to achieve commonality of interests and this cannot provide for the specific needs of future language teachers.
The common features of a course for future accountants, managers, bankers and teachers are to be found in the educational purposes of the academic study of literatures and languages — and where these include study of language it must still be in terms of common interests and not the sectional approach of linguistics for language teachers.
In our view this argument is valid: there is value in that generalised approach but it must include the study of language as well as languages.
For the combination of studying alongside those with other career intentions and of blending literary and scientific studies can only be beneficial to the future teacher.
In particular the opportunity to provide students with the humane education of literary study and the scientific education of linguistics is a unique combination whose advantages have yet to be fully recognised.
An account of professional courses — at least with respect to PGCE — is in principle just as complex because even the advent of accreditation has not enforced uniformity.
In practice however it would appear that PGCE courses do resemble each other in many significant ways, no doubt because they have the same ultimate purposes and because the limited time available enforces a focus on fundamental issues leaving little opportunity for additional, idiosyncratic areas of study.
There is no official ‘core curriculum’, but the evidence available suggests that PGCE courses spend most of the time covering common ground.
This is not be say that courses are all similar, for the methods of covering the ground are probably very varied, giving as much variety as in any other course of study.
The evidence for the existence of this common ground is limited.
In 1983, CILT provided three anonymous descriptions of modern languages PGCE courses, one in a Polytechnic and two in university departments of education.
In 1985 a conference of PGCE tutors drafted a description of a core curriculum whose status remains indefinite.
Also in 1985, one former PGCE tutor (Nott, 1985) gave a detailed description of what he thought should be included in a PGCE course for foreign languages.
The Nuffield modern languages survey has not yet reported and the only available account is an interim report from 1985.
The very detailed survey carried out by Spicer and Riddy in 1977 has now to be treated as a historical document, even though many requirements placed PGCE courses by the nature of contemporary schools have not changed and therefore there are still many relevant details in their report.
Today, then, the common topics of PGCE courses are briefly as follows: aims of foreign language teaching, methodologies and approaches, techniques used within different approaches for different groups of learners, analysis and use of course books, lesson preparation and evaluation, teacher and pupil spoken language in the process of teaching, teaching aids, examinations and assessment, methods and techniques of teaching literature, preparation for professional responsibilities, e.g. record-keeping, the relationship of language teaching to other parts of the curriculum and to vocational applications.
Neither the three CILT-provided course outlines nor Nott's article refer explicitly to linguistic or applied linguistic knowledge.
The PGCE tutors' document suggests that course content should include ‘the nature of language’ and ‘language as a meaningful social activity’.
Spicer and Riddy's survey stated that 8 of 24 university departments of education included in their aims ‘to make students familiar with the application of linguistics, the nature of language and how it works’(1977: 50).
The Nuffield inquiry was reported in the following terms concerning selection:
Averaged out, the trainers clearly gave much greater weight in selecting future teachers to oral proficiency and experience of the country whose language would be taught, and much less to written proficiency, knowledge of literature or linguistics, the referee's report, or experience with children’(Gold, 1985: 11)
The knowledge of linguistics referred to here would of course be that acquired during the academic course, but may be an indication of priorities in the PGCE course itself.
The NCLE survey discussed earlier in this volume suggests that little prominence is given to linguistics topics such as‘Description of Language’, ‘Language Variation’ and ‘Language and Disadvantage’, with only four or five of the 21 institutions reporting these in their courses.
In dealing with language learning theory and philosophy PGCE tutors no doubt refer to knowledge about language in general, the knowledge provided by linguistics, but it is our experience and belief that such an approach founders because the references have little meaning — students have insufficient knowledge to comprehend the reference.
Yet, the importance of this kind of knowledge is in principle self-evident and requires no lengthy argument.
As an illustrative point, consider the all-important distinction between spoken and written language, including the grammatical differences, the different constraints in the production of text, the differences in communication between writer and reader and speaker and listener and, in foreign language teaching, the different expectations of learners' standards of production and reception.
Until very recently this distinction was scarcely recognised by foreign language teachers and, in essence, they taught and examined as if spoken language were identical with written language.
The difficulties this causes are now clear to all, as the introduction of GCSE imposes the recognition of the spoken-written distinction on the profession.
However, that imposition simultaneously reveals how, without linguistic knowledge to explain the distinction, the enforced recognition is for many teachers a traumatic experience.
In the final analysis, students and teachers do not have a grasp of linguistic knowledge which is adequate enough for them to evaluate and make judgments about the methods/approaches/techniques which they are encouraged to adopt.
They are not in a position to make professional judgments but rather they are more like the craftsman who inherits techniques and modifies them with experience.
This is not to say that PGCE (and in-service) tutors do not attempt to develop ‘professional’ rather than‘craftsman’knowledge and attitudes, it is rather to say that the professional knowledge is built on shaky foundations.
Of course, the inevitable questions of what that foundation should consist of and when it should be built are answered by the claim that the period of initial training is too short and therefore such knowledge must be provided earlier by the academic course or later by in-service courses.
Perhaps the better answer would be that all three phases should contribute to such knowledge, and that the initial training phase should have an appropriate contribution rather than try to carry out all the work independently.
By suggesting what that contribution might be we shall show that it does not yet figure in the common PGCE topics and secondly that there is a kind of linguistic knowledge which is specifically appropriate to beginning language teachers.
The potential contributions of the academic and in-service courses must be left for another occasion.
Rather than describe the required knowledge in general terms, we propose to discuss a number of topics which would embody that knowledge and its relationship to foreign language teaching.
The ways in which these topics would be introduced into a PGCE course would be as varied as those already used for other common topics, and this aspect must be left to individual PGCE tutors.
There are six topics we consider important:
(A) CHILDREN'S LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT:
It is often forgotten that the introduction of a foreign language even at age eleven, takes place when children are still in the relatively early stages of language development in their first language.
Their fluency deceives and leads foreign language teachers to perceive their learners' command of the first language as perfect by comparison with their knowledge of the foreign language.
It is particularly with respect to written language that foreign language teachers are surprised to be reminded that their learners' written English is far from perfect and that they sometimes make higher demands than are made of native speakers by their colleagues in the school or, mutatis mutandis, by mother tongue teachers in the relevant foreign country.
It is therefore important that foreign language teachers should know about first language acquisition not only in children in the pre-school period, which is most often introduced to compare with foreign language learning, but also in the learners they are dealing with.
As an extension of this point, it then becomes necessary to integrate knowledge of L1 acquisition with knowledge of F.L. learning.
Although there is a wealth of literature on second language acquisition — usually in children of primary school age or younger, and usually as a consequence of schooling in a second language — the processes of the foreign language classroom are not necessarily identical or even generally comparable.
Nonetheless it is important that teachers understand similarities and differences in order to evaluate commonsense theories and scientific findings in their own work; this is all the more important because of the scarcity of scientific investigation of the processes of classroom language learning.
Such work as does exist usually approaches the issue by analysis of the language used by teachers and pupils in classroom exchanges (Mitchell, 1985) and this too needs to be integrated in this whole topic of children's language development.
Given the scarcity of research and the potential for teachers of collecting data in their own classrooms, trainee teachers can be introduced to research procedures in initial training although a more thorough approach has to be left for in-service work due to inevitable constraints on time.
(B) LANGUAGE ATTITUDES AND LANGUAGE IN IDENTITY
Given the widely-held view that foreign language teaching ‘failed’ in this country (e.g. D.E.S., 1986; 2) it is important for teachers' understanding of their work and their own self- esteem that they should know about societal attitudes to languages.
Attitudes to language learning in a society are crucial to success (Strevens, 1978), not only at the societal level of numbers of proficient learners but also in their effect on the individual learner's perceptions of language learning.
Teachers should therefore have an understanding of the complex relationship of language and national identity, the role of English and other British languages in the formation and maintenance of the nation-state and its attitudes to other languages.
With respect to the individual, foreign language teachers need to know how allegiance to a language is a significant trait in the individual's personal identity both because this has implications for the degree of acceptance of the foreign language by the learner — whether he/she is a speaker of English only or other languages too — and because the foreign language teacher may well have an advisory role to play in his/her school concerning the place of language and languages in the curriculum in general.
(C) THE NATURE OF LITERACY
The importance of recognising the difference between spoken and written language has been discussed already above.
Because most F.L. teachers have been concerned in their own learning almost exclusively with written language, it is necessary to treat this topic separately and relate it not only to the foreign language but also to the mother tongue.
It is in a sense a part of the issue of children's language development and links can and should be made.
It is, however, worthwhile deliberately to separate out this aspect because of the tradition that foreign language learning has as one of its most important aims the acquisition of a reading proficiency adequate for the study of literature.
For many teachers therefore written language is equated with literary language, with the polished performance of narrative, drama or poetry.
Consequently, other kinds of writing need to be studied and their value recognised, as well as the general distinction between written and spoken language.
(D) DESCRIPTIONS OF LANGUAGE
The current concern with concepts of ‘function’ and ‘notion’contrasting with syntactic and morphological analysis of language highlight the necessity for teachers to understand the nature of a description of a language.
It is brought into focus by the contrast between the descriptions in use when most teachers themselves were learners and functional/notional descriptions, but the significance of this issue is greater than current problems.
Learners use language descriptions as a crutch during the learning process; the teacher needs to know not only which particular crutch or crutches to provide but also what a crutch is.
Questions regarding the status and purpose of a standard language, the societal attitudes towards a particular accent or pronunciation, the acceptability of colloquial language used by a foreigner are related both to understanding the nature of language descriptions and to the earlier topic of language attitudes and linguistic identity.
The teacher daily makes decisions about which register to teach, which lexical items to emphasise, whether to teach colloquialisms, and such decisions are frequently based more on instinct than knowledge.
(E) LANGUAGE LEARNING AND CULTURAL LEARNING
The claim that foreign learning engenders insight, tolerance, ‘wider horizons’ and better understanding of other peoples and cultures is frequently made as justification for teaching foreign languages as part of general, non-vocational education (most recently in D.E.S.
1986:1).
If this is to be taken seriously as meaning that through learning language, rather than geography, history or other social sciences, pupils acquire better understanding of foreign cultures, then teachers need knowledge of the relationship between language and cultural learning.
This kind of knowledge is not usually made explicit, although teachers' own experience of the relationship is frequently profound and enduring.
At present, however, language is characteristically taught without any systematic link with culture; and cultural learning through language is replaced by simplified social studies approaches to factual descriptions of the country and people in question.
A study of the implications and status of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, for example, would begin to make explicit many of the assumptions and claims of language teaching.
(F) BILINGUALISM AND BILINGUAL EDUCATION
There are commonsense links between bilingualism and foreign language learning which often underlie learners' perceptions and expectations as well as societal attitudes to foreign language learning.
Thus this topic may also be treated as part of that dealing with attitudes and identities.
Similarly the scientific accounts of children's language development involve consideration of the nature of bilingualism in psycholinguistic terms.
However, as with the similar topic of literacy, I would argue that it is important to separate out bilingualism and bilingual education because teachers' personal experience and education gives them a particular view of the phenomenon.
There has long been a hidden agenda in foreign language teaching which included the notion that the ultimate aim was to create bilinguals in the foreign and mother tongues.
Behind this lay an undifferentiated view of bilingualism, equating it with ‘balanced bilingualism’, in fact an extremely rare phenomenon.
As with the specific issue of literacy, foreign language teachers have implicitly compared their learners and themselves with educated native-speakers — and thereby created inevitable failure for all but the most exceptional.
In more recent times the potential of bilingual education not only for a social elite as was traditionally the case but also for the disadvantaged and/or those already possessing a degree of bilingualism from pre-school experience has been much discussed and researched.
The language teacher needs knowledge of the ways in which this discussion has bearing on foreign language teaching and perhaps on the general teaching of those who are already bilingual.
To return to the question of how these topics can be integrated into the initial professional training of foreign language teachers, we would point out that none of the topics is entirely new even to those who have not been involved in linguistics in their academic course and, secondly, that they are all related to questions of classroom practice.
They are topics which will have occupied student-teachers during their own language-learning with differing degrees of explicitness and consciousness, and therefore are similarly relevant to the learners they now face.
The purpose of teaching these topics explicitly and formally is to provide student-teachers with the opportunity to evaluate their own experience and to make professional judgments about their learners based on scientific principles and evaluated evidence.
Clearly this cannot be a process completed during initial training but equally clearly it cannot be attributed to the sole responsibility of academic or in-service courses.
Similarly the recommendations of the NCLE working party earlier in this volume which are particularly pertinent to foreign language teachers (nos. 2, 4, 5, 7 and 8) cannot be carried out only within initial training.
Nonetheless the suggestions outlined in this paper would put new teachers in a strong position to teach language awareness, and make them familiar with important issues in the social dimensions of language in Britain today, both with respect to minority languages and with regard to the linguistic needs of society as a whole.
It is in this way that foreign language teachers will begin to see the importance of their work for all their pupils, not just those who become specialised in language and literature study.
REFERENCES
VI IMPLICATIONS: COMMUNITY LANGUAGES
The main distinctions between provision for foreign language teaching and community language teaching, as far as this working party is concerned, relate to the social context in which the target language is acquired and used.
These distinctions are vitally important: whereas teachers of foreign languages are working with a body of knowledge and skills which is expected to be put to use mainly in employment or during vacations abroad, community language teachers are relating to perceptions of identity, culture, and prejudice as experienced by dynamic sections of the population here in Britain.
There is a need for sensitivity to the political issues which arise in terms of racism and discrimination.
One would expect such issues to be handled in the training, both pre- and in-service, of all teachers, but our collective experiences and the responses received to the main LITE questionnaire suggest that they are not.
It would seem then to fall to those staff who happen to be bilingual, or to those few teachers who are actually engaged in the teaching of community languages, to raise general awareness in the few schools in which they are deployed.
The question as to what preparation these teachers receive in order to perform their roles is consequently posed all the more sharply.
THE RESPONSE FROM ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS
The Language in Teacher Education Questionnaire was sent out during 1985 to a number of colleagues working in areas and institutions where sections of the population use languages other than English for social, occupational and academic purposes.
At that time there were very few courses of any kind which recognised the value of an ability to communicate with members of different linguistic communities resident in Britain in their preferred language: the only academic institutions offering any kind of training for the teaching of community languages such as Bengali, Chinese, Greek, Gujarati, Hindi, Italian, Panjabi, Polish, Portuguese, Spanish, Turkish and Urdu (as used in Britain) were the bodies who had supported the initiative of the Royal Society of Arts in piloting a Certificate in the Teaching of Urban Educational Studies in the Inner London Education Authority, Moray House College in Edinburgh, Middlesex Polytechnic and St. John's College of Further Education in Manchester.
The course content was broadly along the lines first recommended in 1981 by the Working Party on Minority Community Languages in School, set up at the Second Assembly of the National Congress on Languages in Education: the fourth volume of NCLE Papers and Reports available from the Centre for Information on Language Teaching and research (1984) reproduces the proposal in full.
The Certificate has now become a Diploma and is offered in a number of additional centres: full documentation is available from the Royal Society of Arts.
The major contribution to the promotion of community languages which these courses have made has been to discover significant numbers of good classroom practitioners, good analysts, good coordinators and good teacher trainers, so as to build up a genuine national resource in terms of expertise.
Unfortunately, much of this expertise remains unrecognised by the British school system, largely because the RSA Diploma does not currently count for anything in the award of Qualified Teacher Status.
The value to the holder, apart from the intrinsic expertise developed, is only rewarded in some local education authorities where an extra scale point may be offered to an otherwise fully qualified teacher on successfully completing a Diploma course.
The Department of Education and Science remains unwilling to declare its criteria for the recognition of overseas qualifications; one suspects that the decisions are not based on any defined criteria, when one considers that British degrees are recognised irrespective of the class and subject in which they were taken, whilst a first degree in a community language from an overseas university will not generally be recognised.
It needs to be borne in mind here that for many community languages there is not a single institution in Britain offering degree courses.
In most of the cases regarding the equivalence of overseas qualifications which have been referred to the Darlington office of the Department of Education and Science, the minimum stated requirements have been a master's degree, the equivalent of ‘O’ level passes in English and Maths, plus a full teaching qualification from a recognised Department of Education.
There were no recognised Departments of Education offering a full initial teaching qualification in any community language (other than English or Welsh) at the time of the LITE survey: bilingual school leavers with the determination to promote their language in the British school system could perhaps take a degree by treating their home language as a foreign language where such courses existed, but the available Postgraduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) courses could allow them to qualify fully only if they selected a main teaching subject other than their chosen language.
This remains the case, despite the Further Professional Option: Teaching a Community Language, which was first offered in 1986 as a part of the PGCE course at the University of London Institute of Education.
The University of Manchester is embarking upon an initial course which will qualify bilingual teachers for the primary phase; Leeds Polytechnic is trying to introduce a two-year part-time PGCE for teachers currently working in the voluntary sector; the Polytechnic of North London is involved in the launching of a similar venture.
Thames Polytechnic is envisaging a course which will qualify teachers for the secondary phase; in the first instance this course will be open to teachers from the Inner London Education Authority only.
IN-SERVICE EDUCATION AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR INITIAL TRAINING
A curious feature has evolved concerning teacher-training for community languages: on the one hand there has been no initial training provision within Education Departments in Higher Education for languages such as Bengali, Gujarati and so on.
On the other hand, a number of the relevant Departments are organising in-service (INSET) courses for teachers of these languages.
INSET courses are normally conceived for practising teachers who require refresher courses from time to time: when unqualified teachers take part in them, they remain classed as untrained teachers by the end of their course.
In addition to the venture organised annually from 1986 onwards by the Language Teaching Centre in the University of York, in which teachers of South Asian languages follow a residential course alongside teachers of French, German and Spanish, there have been a number of other institutions volunteering their premises and the skills of their staff, including the Extramural Department of the School of Oriental and African Studies in the University of London, St. Martin's College in Lancaster, Chorley College in Lancashire, Tower Hamlets Adult Education Institute in the Inner London Education Authority and a number of others.
The failure at national level to recognise the need for initial training qualifications for community languages has led local education authorities and schools to deploy teachers whose initial qualification has been gained in a main subject other than the language which they are not asked to promote.
Other similarly inadequate and tortuous routes have been suggested to combine NNEB qualifications for nursery nurses with those offered for translators and interpreters by the Institute of Linguists, or for office workers, business people, and other professionals by the London Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
The lack of purpose-designed courses for teachers of community languages is causing a crisis of credibility within the existing school networks of colleagues promoting community languages.
This crisis is compounded by the lack of recognition for linguistic and educational qualifications acquired outside Britain, the lack of a nationally accepted status for locally-used languages within the normal school curriculum, the lack of a place for community languages within a broad consensus of timetable structure across different local education authorities and schools, the lack of syllabuses negotiated properly with the relevant language communities and learners, the failure to develop suitable teaching materials appropriate methods, and so on.
ANALYSIS OF NEEDS
Since professional development is a dynamic process, the training which some South Asian teachers have received in the subcontinent should not be condemned as totally inadequate as is currently the case in official circles.
Nevertheless it is important to organise in-service courses for such teachers where new approaches can be entertained — for example the communicative approach as opposed to the grammar/translation method or rote learning.
From a purely philosophical point of view, teachers who have been cut off from the mainstream of educational activity should be helped to understand the dynamism that underlies a teacher's personal development, the rapid changes in teaching situations and accepted methodologies, and also the changes which the target languages themselves are undergoing.
The need continually to monitor one's standards of attainment may be new to some teachers, but is an essential part of self- evaluation: community language teachers may not be ready for the responsibilities placed on them in terms of analysing pupils' needs and progress, or in terms of raising the status of a language.
Those local education authorities which have begun seriously to seek a place in the curriculum of their schools for locally-used languages have in many cases to be content with providing their own in-service training on a relatively ad hoc basis.
Some colleagues wrote to us to point out that the format of the main LITE questionnaire did not contain room for the kind of statements and categories which could display the situation in which they were working to develop the competence of their colleagues, both to enhance the strategies for promoting community languages in their area, and to raise general awareness of the deep educational implications of linguistic diversity.
With the help of the European Commission Pilot Project: Community Languages in the Secondary Curriculum, we therefore conducted a second survey amongst a sample of LEA coordinators of community language provision in order to discover how they were attempting to meet locally perceived needs: thirteen replies were received.
The time allotted in different local education authorities for solving the kinds of issue described above ranged from no time at all, through one day every term, two hours once a month, to one afternoon, and in one case a whole day each week.
Sessions have been offered by different community language coordinators on topics which include:
the development of oral communication skills
the development of initial literacy
the extension of reading and writing abilities
catering for a wide range of attainment
principles of course design
the assessment of progress and performance
the preparation of candidates for public examinations
the production of appropriate teaching materials
Sometimes the in-service provision relates to one language only: indeed it has been found that approaches to initial literacy are difficult to generalise beyond basic principles.
At other times the sessions are intended to serve the need of teachers of five of six languages at one sitting.
The responses to our questionnaire highlighted, amongst the many other observations to be made, a disparity and lack of national coherence in the approaches to such training programmes.
Analysis of the returns leads us to the following conclusions:
initial training for existing teachers of community languages has taken place without any, or much, linguistic input
teachers are not offered readily accessible descriptions of how their languages function in grammatical terms
opportunities are lacking for colleagues to develop their knowledge and experience of the languages taught in terms of linguistic, cultural or literary studies
support for the production of teaching materials is not coordinated and rarely involves monitoring the successes and failures arising through the trial of materials in classrooms
efforts to introduce literacy have not so far examined the question as to when it is right for particular students to begin reading and writing
judging by the way in which the discrete skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing are almost invariably discussed separately, it seems likely that the commonly recommended classroom activities will fail to integrate these skills in terms of complete forms of communication
It is necessary to investigate examples of theory and practice in community languages provision as offered in a wide range of local education authorities and to review these examples in the light of the accumulated experience.
It is also necessary to carry out further work on the production of teaching materials, identifying specific gaps in existing resources, whilst drawing general lessons for syllabus design, teaching methods and materials which can possible be applied to various community languages.
Although curriculum development support units in different local education authorities, and the EC Pilot Project: Community Languages in the Secondary Curriculum have assisted in the printing and distribution of individually produced materials, this assistance has not as yet proved to offer a viable return in either pedagogical or financial terms.
It would seem that practically all of the resources which have so far been made available are insufficiently accessible for any users other than their immediate designers.
Many materials have been produced for different languages by individual teachers: these have been shown to succeed in the very specific circumstances facing a particular teacher/author in his or her classroom, but it has not so far proved possible to generalise from the successes in terms of easily accessible materials usable by different teachers under differing circumstances.
It is quite problematical to envisage the design of relevant teaching resources and of adequate means of assessing performance and progress without first seeking some consensus on syllabus design and methodology.
Emphasis needs to be given to strategies and materials which reinforce knowledge made available elsewhere in the school curriculum, and valuable in the preparation of students for public examinations.
It is also still necessary to bring the majority of community language teachers closer to an understanding of the needs, aspirations and capabilities of their pupils, and to encourage collaborative work in the design of teaching materials.
VOLUNTARY COORDINATION
The main onus of filling all of the gaps appears to have fallen on the teachers of community languages themselves, and more precisely on the dozen or so coordinators employed by various local education authorities to supervise the insertion of community languages into the curriculum of mainstream schools.
Of all the people involved, these coordinators are often the least well-equipped, except in terms of will power, to rectify the years of neglect which they have inherited.
They have become coordinators largely because they have established their reputations as the first to counteract those years of neglect, but they have themselves suffered more from that neglect than the new generation of community language teachers which is at last emerging.
They meet under the auspices of the National Association of Coordinators of Community Languages in order to develop their expertise: a number of colleagues within this body have advocated the setting up of a recognised DES course to provide a further exchange of ideas as well as more official guidance to team leaders and coordinators.
This is particularly necessary where a single person is responsible for several languages.
Their main resource and support has been the voluntary work of bodies like the National Council for Mother Tongue Teaching, the National Association for Multiracial Education (now the National Anti-Racist Movement in Education) and the various grouping of teachers and activists promoting the cause of one particular language.
Case Study No. 6 gives details of the kinds of shared self-help initiatives being undertaken by teachers who are opposed to discrimination and committed to multilingualism.
To coordinate the efforts of people working in different parts of the country with different languages has always been a problem, whilst the failure to do so has tended to result in an unnecessary duplication of effort.
For more than ten years the membership of the National Council for Mother Tongue Teaching has kept itself informed through newsletters and regular conferences such as the one on Teacher Training held at Lancashire Polytechnic in 1985, and the one on Language Teaching Techniques held at Nottingham Language Centre in 1986.
The Association of Teachers of Italian attempts to balance the events which it organises between serving the needs of foreign language and community language teachers.
There is also a National Council for Urdu Teaching, formed from two previously existing working parties in 1984: its termly meetings bring together colleagues from a number of different areas.
A similar Council is being built for Panjabi, based in the London Borough of Haringey, and inheriting the work of two previous conferences at Middlesex Polytechnic.
Indeed, national voluntary networks are beginning to become established for each of the languages used in Britain, often surviving under the umbrellas of larger organisations, such as the Joint Council of Language Associations and the National Council for Mother Tongue Teaching.
Professional advisers from different local education authorities also meet on a voluntary basis principally through the National Association of Language Advisers, and the parallel organisation which serves advisers for Multicultural Education.
It is clear that political commitment is no more sufficient for the development of good pedagogy than is the ability to speak a particular language and to share in its associated culture.
Questions inevitably arise as to which individuals are really qualified to call themselves experts within a body of knowledge which is both politically and personally sensitive.
How many community language teachers have a sensitivity to variation within their own language which does not result in a damaging negation of the forms of language which their pupils are bringing into the classroom?
How many of our colleagues follow a perspective which involves the promotion of languages other than their own mother tongue?
How many have been trained to analyse their language from the perspective of a learner?
Is it possible for people who are not native speakers of a particular language to be fully aware of its social dimensions?
Can an exchange of ideas across different languages be of any general value?
Can an exchange of ideas across different languages be of any general value?
Who possesses the credibility to train future teachers and teacher trainers?
Such are the questions which still need to be resolved.
To recognise the continuing validity of such questions cannot however exempt us from attempting to construct and share in a growing body of expertise.
INSTITUTIONAL COORDINATION
The current financial situation facing local education authorities and academic institution makes it particularly difficult to overcome these problems without cooperation.
There are perhaps forty different local education authorities in Britain which have done some work with different community languages.
Documentation was supplied to the DES Invitation Conference in September 1985 by the following urban authorities and shire counties:
Official funded coordination would be valuable at a number of distinct levels from the schools (including supplementary schools) right up to local education authorities and departments of education in Universities and Polytechnics.
One crucial communicating network would link the individual schools promoting particular languages in which there has been continuity in terms of staffing and tutor-groups over a number of years.
An example of a network from the level of education officers down to practising teachers is currently in the process of being cemented between Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire and Wiltshire.
It would seem that groupings of authorities and academic institutions which are geographically close have much to recommend them in terms of the potential savings on travelling expenses, and this is clearly also true in terms of projects for the creation of teaching materials which need to bring together a number of practitioners from different schools on a regular basis.
The national coordination of teaching resources for multicultural education and community languages could be greatly assisted by the use of databases such as LARRIE, AIMER and NERIS, as well as by annual events such as the Multicultural Swapshop organised by the Minority Group Support Service in Coventry.
There would clearly be great value in building further networks of local education authorities and teacher training institutions which have expressed an interest in particular languages, and which are prepared to exchange some of their insights and resources.
VII SUMMARY OF GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
1.
Teacher education should explicitly address, through its content and organisational practice, the need for schools to bring languages together in a coordinated policy.
2.
Teacher education methods tutors in all subjects should explicitly address the issue of language as a medium of learning.
3.
All language teachers should be encouraged to teach about the nature of language, and should be explicitly trained in methods of doing this and co-operating with other teachers in so doing.
4.
That the social dimensions of language in Britain, and particularly of the languages and dialects of minority communities, should be specifically studied as part of the training of all teachers, and be seen as an essential major element for any teacher of languages.
5.
That primary teacher education should include components on the role of community languages, means of maintaining and developing pupils' mother tongues, and the possibilities of bilingual education.
6.
That there should be more research on the language needs of employment and that the relationship between such needs and the teaching of English, community and foreign languages should be explored in teacher education.
7.
Methods work in all language teaching should be sensitive to the historical, social and policy implications of joining the language teaching profession, as well as similar implications for the teaching profession in general.
8.
That all teachers, particularly those working at secondary level, require work to make them aware of the nature of language, in addition to work on language in particular subject areas.
Current work on language for primary teachers should be supported and strengthened.
9.
That teacher education should recognise the need for all teachers to be familiar with research on classroom interaction and language use in educational settings.
Trainee teachers should have the option of being prepared for research activity in this area.
A particular priority is research on classroom interaction in multiethnic and multilingual classrooms.
10.
There must be support for full-time courses in the area of Language in Education at Masters level, for advisers, teacher educators and school-based in-service and curriculum coordinators.
B. APPROACHES TO LANGUAGE IN EDUCATION: CASE STUDIES
COURSES IN THE STUDY OF LANGUAGE AT THE WEST MIDLANDS COLLEGE OF EDUCATION 1968–75:
a record and some reflections
PART 1.
THE RECORD OF EXPERIENCE
The first part of this paper is concerned with matters of record.
It is a case history of a range of courses designed for teachers and involving the study of language and of languages.
The courses were Linguistics-based and were designed to be professionally relevant in a broad sense, though they included much that made no claim to immediate practical usefulness.
They were introduced, developed and (in their developed form) discontinued, between the late sixties and the mid-seventies at what was then the West Midlands College of Education, in Walsall.
The institution was at that time entirely concerned with the education of teachers and future teachers, and recruited predominantly, though not exclusively, from the conurbation in which it was located, and which it was designed to serve.
The interest in these past events at the time of writing (1985) lies in the problems we addressed that are still unresolved.
The latter part of the paper is concerned with these.
The environment that gave us opportunity was so dissimilar from that of the present as to seem more remote in time than it is.
The College, opened in new buildings in 1963, had not, five years later, exhausted the strong initial impetus that belongs with a new venture.
There was pressure upon it, as there was then on teacher training institutions generally, to expand numbers rapidly and to attract numbers by the provision of a wide range of possible options.
Entry standards in such circumstances were not, and could not be, forbidding.
Five ‘O’ Levels, including English Language, was the normally acceptable minimum, though popular subjects, universally taught in secondary schools, could expect that most students would offer a level of qualification rather better than that.
A three year course, leading to a Certificate and, at the satisfactory completion of the probationary year, to qualified teacher status, was the usual course.
It comprised two main elements, professional and academic, each sub-divided.
A postgraduate Certificate in Education was about to be introduced.
Short courses, for teachers already in post, were arranged from time to time, though they assumed nothing like the significance that in-service provision was to have later.
A very small minority of students remained for a fourth year and, having successfully negotiated a third year examination hurdle, were candidates for an unclassified B.Ed degree of the University of Birmingham, and carried with them our hopes for a future graduate profession.
Like all such institutions, the West Midlands College depended on its close working relation with local schools.
Teaching practice involved, on a regular basis, every student and every lecturer.
Some schools — and their number was visibly increasing — already included numbers of pupils of Asian parentage, at various stages of learning English, and of West Indian pupils, speaking an English very different from that of their teachers.
At that time the presence of these pupils was seen as a problem, one that would very probably get worse before (and most people predicted) natural processes of assimilation and dispersal meant that it got better.
The Local authority was engaged in setting up an Induction Centre, where newcomers could concentrate on learning the language and accustoming themselves to a new climate and new culture.
The comfortable assumption that pupils would normally being with them to school the language which would be the medium of their education was, rather suddenly, no longer tenable.
This was one of two problems that loomed large at the time.
The other appeared quite unrelated to it.
English was the largest department, and the one able to be most selective, the source of more potential B.Ed.
students than the others.
Those students were required by the University to take an examination paper with the title Modern English Language.
There was no escape clause.
The notion of negotiation between an institution and its validating body was far in the future.
The secondment of one member of the English Department, and the appointment of another, was seen by the College as a solution to both problems, which had together created a need for lecturers formally qualified as specialists in the study of English Language.
One-year MA degree/Diploma courses, still rather recently established at the Universities of Edinburgh, Reading and Essex provided the source of such qualifications.
Once we were appointed and established, our immediate and inescapable responsibility was to design and teach courses that would enable students of English who wished to do so to take those examinations in Modern English Language, and to pass them.
The numbers of students might be small (and they grew, initially, only slowly) but the academic credibility of the College rested on them.
Otherwise, we were entrusted with a remarkably open brief.
We were to discover what opportunities there were, and use them as fully as we could.
In this last respect, though in no other, we were probably luckier than the other people, many of whom became (and remain) colleagues and friends, and for whom comparable educational problems opened up career opportunities very similar to ours.
In the immediate term, we saw ourselves as a resource which the B.Ed.
aspirants had been, in a sense, responsible for securing, and which could and should be made much more widely available.
We acted in the belief (for which there was statistical support) that the majority of students having obtained their Certificates, would look for their first jobs locally.
The number of jobs available at that time was in excess of the supply.
The urban Midlands had traditionally had difficulty in filling posts.
Future teachers need, we believed, understanding of language that is not included in the assumptions transmitted by the culture, and runs in some ways counter to those assumptions.
The effect of our experience was, as I shall show, to confirm and extend that belief.
We set about a series of innovations that would give them access to that understanding, by means that were practicable within an already existing framework.
That activity occupied us between our starting date (1968) and 1971, when the launching of Language Studies as an academic department marked the beginning of a second stage.
We worked through the medium of the Professional Course in English, designed to improve students' own English skills, and to equip them to handle English in the Primary School timetable.
It was compulsory for everyone.
The unit we offered was very brief, and, of necessity, highly selective.
We set ourselves to introduce a critical awareness of current misconceptions about language, to inform students of some differences between speech and writing, to make them aware that social and aesthetic evaluations of language are that, and nothing more (however confidently pronounced) and to sensitise them to some of the difficulties of pupils in English schools for whom English is not the mother tongue, or for whom their own English was a baffling unfamiliar variety.
In the 10 hours available to us, that was virtually all we did.
We faced an impasse within the second year.
If we were to continue teaching brief introductory courses to continually expanding numbers, constant repetition would impair their quality, and would eventually impair it beyond recognition.
In addition, there was much else that needed doing.
The decision we made was careful, it involved us in much work, and it was, in the event, I think, a seriously mistaken decision.
Obviously we needed additional colleagues, and we decided to involve a number in the Education Department, who were willing to work with us.
We put our materials in the form of a kit (teachers' notes, students' handouts, a tape).
We invited colleagues to sit in with students on our classes.
We prepared to hand over this, the developed area of our work, to people who brought to it experience rather different from our own.
Some of them brought to it a breadth of experience of teaching to which we could not lay claim.
For one colleague in that Department, this experience was the initial point of contact with the study of language in relation to the educational process, and it led him to undertake an Open University degree including as many options in that area as were available.
Having obtained the degree (with distinction) he eventually sought, and much enjoyed, a very successful career teaching English overseas.
In general, however, enthusiasm, sufficient at the start, quickly flagged.
Our materials were used, were not liked, and were soon discarded, and having once relinquished the courses we had developed, and involved our time and our energies elsewhere, we could not return to our earlier situation.
Better designed and better tested materials than ours have met with a similar fate.
It simply is not the case that the availability of materials will ensure their use, let along their adaptation and development.
Extended, even maintained development, required additional staff.
Other problems converged with this one, and the solution that was found constituted what seemed at the time a natural development, and seems in retrospect, the decisive start of a second stage.
One of these problems was the need to introduce the study (traditionally neglected in institutions like ours) of modern foreign languages.
The only existing course, of 2 years' duration, in the methodology of French teaching, was open only to those students who already had an A Level in the subject, and was seen as a holding operation.
Even with the buoyant recruitment of 1969/70, it was not easy to attract well qualified applicants to courses in French.
Recruitment was still predominantly local, and the low numbers who studied foreign languages in the sixth forms secured University places with little difficulty, and postponed their decision to teach.
(For the same reason, French as an option within the Postgraduate Certificate continued to recruit well throughout the seventies).
In 1970, the possibility was canvassed of setting up a Language Studies Department having, initially, two strands, English and French.
A commitment to the study of language would be common to every one in it.
Students of English would be offered a language-based alternative to the traditional literature-based course.
Students of French would be offered a course slanted towards the study of the contemporary spoken language.
(There was no question of excluding literature from either study).
Large numbers of recruits to English would offset the small numbers who were expected to apply for French.
A framework would be created for the addition of other languages as further options.
The first two groups would have much to gain from interaction in an educational setting designed to emphasise what they had in common, and the servicing role we continued to provide would benefit from the additional resources (of teaching and support staff, of facilities, equipment, and library provision, and of committee representation) available to us as a department within a developed departmental structure.
It appeared to be a feasible solution to a series of problems, and an interesting educational opportunity.
When the Language Studies Department opened in 1971, the predictions made about numbers were almost exactly fulfilled.
The initial intake to English was large — so large in fact as to require organisation in two parallel classes and to strain rather seriously the initially slender staffing position.
Recruitment gave us little cause for anxiety so long as the general level of recruitment remained high (Our intake regularly comprised, in a College that offered a total of 14 academic courses, some 12% of the total numbers, 7% in English and 5% in French).
With hindsight, it is clear that we should have taken very much more serious and careful account of the character of our intake in those years.
Recruits to French included a number of native speakers living locally.
They were of course more than welcome, and their contribution to the establishment of good standards was of very great value, but we knew that they represented a limited resource that would be quickly exhausted.
Our recruitment to English (and it is with English that I am in this paper principally concerned) was again untypical.
More than half of our first intake acknowledged that they would have preferred a traditional course, having the study of literature as its principal component.
What we saw as an interesting and unusual opportunity, they saw as a second-best.
Naturally the students who had not been admitted to the courses of their first choice were in general no more than minimally qualified.
At the time, the questions uppermost in our minds concerned the level of their motivation, which had to be sustained over three years, and the level of their eventual attainment.
In retrospect, it is easy to see that, should recruitment generally fall, ours would (unless the nature of our recruitment changed first) fall away disastrously.
Further, since the previous examination record of the majority of our students was the minimum required, we could anticipate few B.Ed candidates — even if students' response to what we had to offer proved to be very satisfactory indeed.
Among those recruited, there were many more men and women of mature age than usual.
They were attracted by a course having no direct A- Level antecedent.
They felt, rightly or not, happier starting a course on level terms with newcomers from the sixth forms, than one in which younger students would have the advantage of an A Level course in the subject.
These were among our most enthusiastic and responsive students, and a minority of them proved exceptionally capable.
Some of our misgivings proved unfounded.
We expected that a number — perhaps an embarrassingly large number — of students would decide that they simply did not like our courses, and we were prepared to smooth the path of transfer.
In the event, there were a few who wished to leave, and a few others who decided that other initial choices had been mistaken, and who wished to join.
In terms of students staying with their decisions, and continuing their studies to their conclusion, Language Studies was not distinguishably different from established courses.
Our experience did not support the view, then widely held, that a serious and extended engagement with the study of language simply is too difficult an undertaking for that band of ability from which the majority of future teachers is drawn.
Ours were, in general, rather less well qualified than students in the established departments, but their attainments were in every way comparable.
Certainly we had a minority of outright failures, whose grasp of their work was negligible, but that was generally the case.
Most students liked the study, stayed with it, perceived its relevance to their future work, and something of its inherent interest.
A majority, again, was markedly successful.
We were able to develop a scheme in association with people we knew at Birmingham and at Aston and at the Open Universities, whereby students could meet their fourth year dissertation requirements by working in association with publicly funded research and development projects.
Those students were well able to meet the demands that these external requirements necessarily and properly imposed.
External examiners (to whom in these formative years we were heavily indebted) spoke well of what they saw.
There were disappointments, and among these, our failure to establish and sustain common ground between English and French students and the one that I regret most.
Still, we were hopeful of the future of the still young department, when the decision was made to seek CNAA validation for the courses offered by the College, and we prepared to rewrite ours to take account of our experience, and to justify our intentions more fully than we had had to do before to critics from whom we expected scepticism rather than sympathy.
In fact they encouraged us most warmly, and we shared the general mood of elation at the overall success of the 1974 submission.
A third stage had begun.
It was decisive, in that it was marked by a shift in the character of the student body.
For the first time, the students whose sights were set on a CNAA validated degree were sufficient in numbers to set the pace and the mood.
They were serious, committed, and anxious.
Cheerful idleness was a thing of the past — and so was a readiness for whole hearted participation in activities unrelated to the business of getting grades.
Entry standards and attainments were set to rise.
In the mid-seventies recruitment fell, and the process of overall contraction in teacher education began, and rapidly accelerated.
Our recruitment fell disastrously in 1976 with the consequence that a College decision was made to close the department and to phase out the courses that had been developed.
We contested the decision vigorously, encouraged by strong support from outside the institution, but it did bring a significant and positive stage to an abrupt conclusion, leaving us to reflect on what we had learned, and were still learning, that might be relevant to widely shared concerns.
PART 2.
THE LESSONS OF EXPERIENCE
(1) INNOVATIONS WITHIN INSTITUTIONS
We experienced the operation of a principle widely applicable and perhaps more generally recognised now than it was at the time of the events I have recorded.
Institutions that train teachers have traditionally been sensitive to social need, and, through the controlling agency of public bodies, they have been quickly responsive to it.
The effect of this responsiveness is that they are well able to foster innovation, as they look for inventive solutions to emerging problems, but they are in no position to protect those innovations from fluctuating demand.
They were, in the sixties and seventies, vulnerable in ways that Universities, with their higher prestige, their more generous resources, and their guarded autonomy, were not.
The direction of tertiary education since the mid-seventies, as the process of contraction has continued, has been towards more responsiveness, more accountability, reduced autonomy.
It is of course open to question whether innovations should be protected against fluctuating circumstances and from changing demand.
This last has always to be measured in terms of numbers, and can take no account of degree of motivation.
Innovations are, after all, naturally and necessarily at risk, and can claim no exemption from the operation of market forces.
I would acknowledge the truth of this, and its importance.
I would also add that the unchecked operation of market forces in educational settings is wasteful of material and human resources.
Within tertiary educational institutions, there is already a familiar and well tested model that could usefully be extended to provide just such a check upon changing demand as is required to prevent such waste.
A new course in a number of respects resembles a research or development project.
It channels energies, it is expensive to set up, the outcomes are predictable only in the most general terms, and the value of those outcomes may range, in the long term, from outstanding to negligible.
The indicators of success and failure may well not be apparent except at a very late stage indeed to the administrators in the institution that is the location of the course and on which it is entirely dependent.
All research and development projects work within a limited and known time span.
The result is limited security that provides opportunity for concentration.
A project completed within that time span is adjudged to have been successful.
This is important to those involved with it, for whom that engagement is only part of a continuing career pattern.
If the time is to be extended, then the case for it has to be made again, and to take changed circumstances into account.
Project members are normally overseen by a Steering Committee, representing relevant expertise that is not to be looked for within the institution itself.
That Committee is at a remove from the day to day problems that harass the project members, and has a special responsibility for drawing attention to underlying problems and longer term implications.
It seems to me that innovative courses could with advantage be handled in virtually the same way.
There need be no implication that success is identified with indefinite continuation: costs, human and material, can be limited to what is acceptable within an agreed time span.
A steering committee need be neither large nor expensive, but it should have authority, and it should have the confidence of those involved with the course and the institution in which the course functions.
(2) THE CONTENT OF COURSES FOR FUTURE TEACHERS.
At the time when we were at work, interest in what we did was widespread and encouraging because the area in which we were engaged and the questions we addressed seemed to many people important.
What should be the content, the level and the limits, of preparation for teaching seemed significant questions, and not by any means only to those employed in training institutions.
The widely publicised work of Basil Bernstein had made a large public at least aware of the possibility that pupils' response to the process of education might be limited by their habitual uses of the mother tongue.
An important project, entitled Linguistics and the Teaching of English, based at University College, London, and directed by Michael Halliday, was by that time nearing completion.
Its shorter publications were becoming available and were soon to include materials of major importance, Break-through to literacy, and Language in use.
The British Association for Applied Linguistics organised two well attended seminars on the topic of Linguistics in Colleges of Education.
The D.E.S.
offered two linked courses on the subject of Linguistics and the training of teachers,(one at Lady Spencer-Churchill College, near Oxford, 1971, one at Coloma College, 1973).
Courses closely comparable to ours in scale and content were advocated by the authors of the Bullock Report as a future development in 1975 — when ours were on the point of being discontinued.
That interest is now largely in abeyance, the issues that were canvassed are still unresolved, and need again to be addressed.
In addition the opposition to the belief that studies of Language, Linguistics-based, should be part of the pre-service of teachers, that opposition that was at the time principled, serious and rigorously expressed and is still unanswered.
The experience I have recorded left us with the convictions with which we started in general confirmed.
We were, however, readier, I think, than at the beginning, to take seriously and to counter, the equally serious convictions of those who held that there was no place for courses similar to ours, of which there were at that time a number in various stages of development.
That opposition urged that all that was necessary was already being done.
It conceded that future teachers needed to know about children's language development along with their general development.
It was not disputed that teachers ought to be aware of the relation between educational success and failure and the language children being to school, or that some teachers need to give a good deal of time to the study of reading.
English as a Second Language too was increasingly an important specialism.
But, it was argued, all these things were taken into account by almost every training institution.
By choosing suitable options, a student in virtually any institution of good standing could learn something of every one of them.
Linguistics was an unnecessary and pretentious intrusion, serving only to divert students and lecturers from pressing and practical concerns.
Advocates of linguistically motivated courses like our own, became very familiar with the objection, overt or implied, that they spoke from ignorance of courses that they by implication criticised, and inevitably they sometimes did.
They could nonetheless claim with justice that if these topics were handled in isolation from each other, by specialists in Educational Psychology, in various methodologies, in literacy, or in English as a Foreign Language, nobody except the student herself was in a position to discern a relationship between and among topics taught by different people, at different stages of her course, and at extremely different levels of sophistication.
Dissociated from each other, the various topics were likely to be perceived as fragmentary accounts of practical and procedural matters.
Within a theoretical framework, they constitute the start, at least, of a serious and methodical study of language, though certainly one looking very different from a University undergraduate course in Linguistics.
It was again urged that any course that was at all demanding would be simply too difficult.
This was, as I have said, not our experience, and I believe that it rests in part on a very general tendency to undervalue the potential of well motivated students in the middle ranges of ability, in part on a rejection of the idea that the study of Language is very wide, and very various, that only some parts of that large landscape are accessible only to the most intellectually gifted.
There is abundant evidence that a serious interest in some sociolinguistic questions (for example) is very widespread, and extends well beyond the numbers of those with any claim to advanced formal education at all .
The argument that Linguistics-based courses are impracticable, cited a number of difficulties that are real enough, arguing that there is not time in a course already fragmented, and asserting that there were not enough people equipped to design and teach such courses as we envisaged and advocated.
These were serious problems, but they were not insoluble.
A much more interesting objection is that such courses might well be practicable given energy and determination, but were inherently objectionable, and should not be attempted.
This is the view cogently expressed by David Holbrook and it had many supporters among numbers in the National Association of Teachers of English.
It received a good deal less consideration than it deserved from those whose concern with the quality of teacher education led them (as it led us) to the opposite view.
This argument was often associated with alarm at the various and fragmented character of the future teacher's educational experience, but it went further than that.
Any Linguistics-based study, it was urged, was conceptually difficult, and made heavy demands of time and energy.
Worse, it ran directly counter to the liberating education of feelings, and imagination, and sensitivity that is the proper province of the study of English, and for which there is no substitute.
It virtually excluded from the student's experience (and so from the likely experience of that student's future pupils) any serious engagement with the imaginative and creative uses of the mother tongue.
These seem to me considerations that should be taken with a seriousness at least equal to that for which the case in favour of the study of language has been urged.
If it is the case that what teachers need to know, and to experience, cannot be continued within the limits of available time, then either that time must be extended, or some part of what is traditionally included must be curtailed or omitted or postponed to in-service training.
It is, after all, to be expected that the claims of elements central to teachers' professional preparation should raise questions of the entire content and structure of courses, and the present is a good time to address such questions.
Teacher education is a smaller scale enterprise than it was at the time of the events I have recorded.
It now takes place, for the most part, within large and various Polytechnics or in Universities rather than in monotechnic, specialist, institutions.
This should mean that smaller numbers of students have access to a larger range of resources than formerly.
Where numbers, and options, are reduced, the need to concentrate on essentials is the more compelling.
My conviction is that a serious study of the language that will be the medium of their teaching, is one, though not the only such essential, and that such a study is possible, though not easy, to organise, to teach and to study.
I would add that it can only be Linguistics-based, and that successful professional experience as a teacher, however desirable, is not in itself a sufficient preparation for lecturing and organising responsibility.
The objectives of these courses should be to make the future teachers aware how much mother tongue learning is accomplished in the years before schooling starts, and critical of the ideas and beliefs about language which are transmitted by the culture.
They should be aware at least of the extent of variation among Englishes, and distinguish between the linguistic adequacy of a variety and the social evaluation of it.
They need to distinguish between the rules of the grammar the native speaker operates and the conventions of written language that pupils have to learn both to interpret and observe.
They need to appreciate the situation of those pupils who are at various stages in the process of becoming bilingual.
All this not because these are inherently interesting and broadly educative studies (though they are) but because they are in the mid-eighties, whatever may have been the case at an earlier period, indispensable.
Teachers in schools simply have no alternative to making language their principal means of interaction with pupils, they have daily and inevitably to produce, elicit, and evaluate spoken and written text, to concern themselves with literary and language development.
J.M. Sinclair put forward at Coloma College (and elsewhere in print) an analogy between preparation for teaching and for a range of medical and para medical employment.
I believe it still holds good, and perhaps deserves to be extended.
A general education in the sciences, he argued, is a prerequisite of professional medical training.
Not every single part of it is directly relevant to the student's future, not every student finds it easy or indeed enjoyable.
Its demands probably do exclude some otherwise suitable candidates.
It is, for all that, an indispensable preliminary now, whatever may have been in the case in (say) the first half of the nineteenth century.
There are similar studies, and the study of language is one, that are on closely comparable terms now required by future teachers.
Whether these studies are traditional, or are readily attractive, are quite marginal considerations.
It would be arrogant and is in any case unnecessary, to imply that the study of language is unique in that respect.
Nor is there reason to suppose that teaching is the only occupation (though it may well be the most important numerically) for which a group of related studies including this one, is an indispensable foundation.
Established as the West Midlands Training College in 1963, the institution became known as the West Midlands College of Higher Education with the establishment of a range of diversified degree courses.
REFERENCES
SYLLABUSES IN USE IN WEST MIDLANDS COLLEGE OF HIGHER EDUCATION
Two syllabuses are offered, representing earlier and later stages of the work at the West Midlands.
1971
(i)
Third year syllabus: The Structure of Modern English
(ii)
Fourth year syllabus: Sections B &C, one option to be selected from each.
(iii)
Expanded versions of B ii and C vi.
1981
Unit 4
Language development in a multi ethnic context, a required component of a post-experience diploma, Teaching in the Multi- Ethnic School.
The first represents the work done in the late sixties and early seventies.
The courses taught were validated by the University of Birmingham which approved these syllabuses, designed by those who were to teach them.
These syllabuses are selections from the full collection, published by the Faculty of Education, University of Birmingham.
The second set belong to a much later date.
They were designed as part of a diploma intended for teachers in post with the title ‘Teaching in the Multi Ethnic School’ in the late seventies.
Validation was sought and obtained from CNAA for a start in January, 1981.
All syllabuses show the effect of many influences and are matters of composite authorship.
These are variously indebted, but in so far as authorship is attributable they are the joint work of the writer of the paper and Euan Reid.
We acknowledge with gratitude permission to reprint these from The Principal, West Midlands College of Higher Education, and the Secretary, University of Birmingham.
Syllabus for the Language component of Prescribed Subject course in English for the B.Ed.
degree
Section A.
A required course for all students, to be completed before the end of the third year, and to be examined by individual Colleges.
The Structure of Modern English: an introduction intended to familiarise students with the scope and techniques of Modern Language study.
(i)
Its Sound and Writing systems — an introduction to Phonetics and Phonology with reference to the varieties of pronunciation of English; articulation and hearing; the phoneme and phonetic transcription; intonation and stress; writing systems.
(ii)
Its syntax — a study of English grammar in the light of current descriptions of English.
Sections B and C:
Each student must select one option from Section B and one from Section C. These studies must be undertaken against the background of general linguistic theory.
These will be examined by the University at the end of the fourth year.
Section B.
(i)
Phonetics and Phonology:— An extension of the core course to include a detailed consideration of two of the following topics: Allophones and allophonic transcription, with reference to dialectal varieties of English; further work on supra-segmental features; the nature of orthography; introduction to acoustic phonetics.
(ii)
Models of Grammar
a)
Systemic
b)
Transformational
Students should make a study in some detail of one of these current and developing models of grammar, and should be able to show the ability to describe English in its terms.
They should make a less detailed study of the other.
(iii)
Semantics An introduction to the requirements of a semantic theory and the problem of meaningfulness.
Reference should be made to some of the following topics:— structural semantics, lexis, semantics and grammar, componential analysis, generative semantics, universal semantics.
Section C.
Suggestions following each heading are intended merely as indications of the scope of the topic, and are not of course exhaustive.
(i)
Language Acquisition:— Contrasted theoretical approaches, techniques employed for assembling data; first evidence of language; emergence of grammatical patterns; later stages in grammatical development; language and meaning; abnormalities in language acquisition.
(ii)
Language Development of school-age children:— some study of the early stages of language acquisition should be undertaken; collection and analysis of data; social and psychological factors; language in the educational process; initial and later literacy.
(iii)
Second language learning:— an examination of current language teaching procedures; some linguistic, social and psychological features which determine second language learning; an enquiry into the socio-linguistic consequences of languages in contact; aspects of bilingual behaviour.
(iv)
Literary stylistics:— a text-based study of the relation between the study of language and the study of literature; style and meaning; deviation from norms and foregrounding; parallelism and coupling; poetry as dialect; metrics; analysis of prose; objectivity in literary analysis.
(v)
Varieties in English:— the methods, objectives and problems involved in a description of language varieties; application of the concept of varieties to ideas of correctness and appropriateness; the speech community; the language of school subjects; practice in the analysis of spoken and written, literary and non-literary texts.
(vi)
Language in Society:— the basis of authority and acceptability with reference to pronunciation, grammar, and meaning: the functions of language: the relation between language and social class; language and educability; language interaction in the classroom.
B
(ii) Models of Grammar:
(i) Systemic,
(ii) Transformational
This part of the course is intended to enable the student to spend enough time on one current and developing model of grammar to be at ease with its fundamental concepts and to understand in some detail the application of these to the solution of actual problems in English.
It is our belief that the idea of a grammar as a theory, subject at every point to testing and criticism, is difficult to establish unless the student is in a position to contrast it with another.
It is expected however that students will give substantially more time and emphasis to one of the two areas of study outlined below:
a) Systemic Grammar:
This study will be concerned with the theory of categories related to the substance of language and to each other by scales, which M.A.K. Halliday put forward in 1961, and to the detailed description of English constructed by Halliday and others on this basis, and with the application of this to spoken and written texts.
It is expected that students will understand what is meant in this context by the terms rank, cohesion, and context of situation, and that they will know something of those recent developments with which the term ‘Systemic’ is particularly associated.
b) Transformational — generative Grammar:
It is expected that the emphasis will be on the 1965 model, though it is hoped that those students who choose this as the topic for more detailed study will learn something or earlier and later development.
They should understand what is meant by the term ‘generative’, by the distinction between ‘competence’ and ‘performance’and by that between ‘deep’and ‘surface’.
They should understand the operation of some major transformations, and be able to interpret, and to produce, the diagrammatic forms (both tree diagrams and brackets) by which the deep and surface structures of sentences are conventionally represented.
They should understand what is meant by Language Universals, and the reasons why the development of Transformational Grammar has given so powerful an impetus to the study of language acquisition.
The following books are recommended for use and for reference:—
C
(vi) Language and Society
Under this heading it is expected that students will be concerned with the following topics:—
Attitudes to Language: an exploration of the basis of authority in matters of pronunciation, grammar and meaning.
Functions of Language: a study of the ways in which language is used, and of some of the ways in which language functions have been classified.
Language social class and educability: the influence of the environment, of social class, and of education on the individual's control and understanding of language, and of the relation between aspiration and language use.
The early and later work of Bernstein is obviously important here, but some attention should be given also to the work of U.S. investigators in related fields.
Classroom interaction: a study of spoken texts produced by teachers and pupils in classroom situations, and of some recent and current attempts to describe and classify these.
The following books are recommended:—
Unit 4: Language Development in a Multi-Ethnic Context
Terms: 4,5,6.
Hours: 55 (including one whole day)
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The overall purpose of this Unit is to help teachers develop their understanding of the nature of language, and of its role in society, and on that basis to improve their classroom practice in teaching, through the medium of English, speakers of languages other than English, and speakers of varieties very different from Standard British English.
It is intended in addition that this unit of study should enable teachers to contribute to the formulation of school policies designed to take into account these factors:
(i)
the bilingualism or bi-dialectalism of significant numbers of pupils
(ii)
the effects of using English as a medium of instruction
(iii)
the continuing need for special provision for teaching English as a second language.
4.2 TEACHING METHOD
There will be lectures and seminars, to which teachers will be expected to contribute from their own experience, and in which taped and transcribed texts from their classrooms, and written work produced by their pupils will be discussed and analysed.
Additional supporting tapes and filmed materials will be used.
It is proposed to utilise the ‘whole day’ to examine and practice modes of analysing the spoken interaction between teachers and pupils in classrooms.
Materials designed for the international English teaching market, as well as the more restricted range intended for use in the United Kingdom will be examined and discussed, as will the growing body of materials designed to meet a local need, and informally circulated.
4.3 CONTENT
Section A: Language and its social context
(11 x 1 &half hours)
4.3.1 This introductory section is designed to inform the perspective from which teachers perceive the languages, and the variants, controlled by pupils.
It is intended to articulate, and to challenge, explanations in terms of deficit and difference, and to illustrate some of the ways in which the social realities of the classroom, and the learning opportunities in it are contingent on classroom interaction having language as its principal though not, of course, its only realisation.
There will be opportunity to examine the relation between non Standard English and the educational performance of minority group children.
(i)
A descriptive approach to language: language form and language function: their interdependence.
The centrality of language to the process of learning.
(ii)
Monolingual and multi-lingual communities; language, dialect and idiolect.
Changed and changing perceptions of teachers' experiences in United Kingdom classrooms in the past two decades.
(iii)
The educational performance of minority group children.
Attempts to explain disappointing performance in terms of linguistic deficit and linguistic ‘difference’.
Can we learn from recent experience in the United States?
(iv)
Language interaction in the classroom: the reciprocal roles of pupil and teacher, and the problems of the newcomer.
Towards an understanding of the predictability of discourse and of its educational function.
Section B: Language maintenance and public policy
(11 x 1 &half hours)
4.3.3 This section is intended to afford opportunity to consider the ways in which the problems indicated in Section A (above) have been perceived, and the varied responses, in terms of organisation and provision, that have been made.
In addition, it is intended to focus on the significance of his speech repertoire to the individual user, and of the significance to the particular community of the language that expresses and reflects its identity.
(i)
Language and conceptual development; the relation between Standard English and the process of education.
Assumptions implicit in text books and other books designed for educational use, and in the examination system that is increasingly influential at the secondary stage of education.
(ii)
The linguistic expression of ethnic identity; language as the embodiment of a culture.
Strategies for its maintenance, and the effect of these on neighbouring communities.
(iii)
Multilingualism and cultural pluralism.
Language as an expression of ideologies and a component of conflict.
Section C: Second Language Learning and Teaching (11 x 1 &half hours)
4.3.4 The assumption made in this section of the Unit is that many teachers will be in a position to collaborate with specialists based in Language Units or in Ethnic Minority support groups, members of which will assume responsibility for teaching the initial stages of English as a Second Language.
From the start however, pupils are likely to spend part of their working day as members of a multi-ethnic, multi-lingual class.
Teachers of these classes need to know the extent, and the limits, of special provision, and to be in a position to identify and meet continuing needs, and to explore the relevance for all pupils using English of the understanding that has developed specifically in relation to the teaching of English to speakers of other languages.
(i)
Examination and critical analysis of materials specifically produced for minority ethnic group pupils in Britain notably the SCOPE materials and Concept 7/9.
(ii)
New approaches and new materials for teaching English on a functional basis.
The development of communicative competence and the extent, and the limits of the applicability of English for specific purposes to young learners and to school settings.
(iii)
The identification and measurement of skills in relation to language use.
Course UEO 302 Course Title: The teaching of English
Brief Description
This course is designed to examine some of the processes by which English (and, by implication, language) is learned and taught in institutional settings.
It assumes in students lengthy exposure to the study of English and some experience (which may be quite limited) of teaching and coaching individuals and small groups.
It is concerned with English as both a subject and a means of instruction, with the ideas about language, teaching, and learning, which inform different methodologies, and with the verbal interaction that occurs spontaneously in classroom settings.
Some element of classroom observation and practice is included and is important for illustrative purposes.
It is not, however, so extensive as is usual in courses which are (unlike this one) designed as a stage in the professional preparation of a teacher.
Course No. 302 Course title: The teaching of English
Aims
To assist students to understand and interpret their own experience as bi/multi lingual users of language and as language learners of long experience, and in addition(where applicable) to understand their experience of coaching individuals and small groups in English, and to improve their performance in that role.
In addition, it is the aim of this course to extend students' understanding of the structure and functions of English by focusing on the problems of teaching and learning the language in a variety of settings.
Objectives
At the successful conclusion of the course students should be able to
1)
recognise and identify a variety of language teaching methodologies implicit in textbooks and teaching materials, and make an informed selection from those available
2)
have extended their knowledge of the sound and writing syllabus and of the grammatical system of English by considering ways in which language items can be presented and practised
3)
have gained some illustrative experience of observing lessons taught, and of preparing and presenting material to classes
4)
be able to make informed decisions about whether and how to further their own studies of English Language teaching
Students should be aware that the successful completion of this course does not constitute a qualification, formal or informal, for a career as a professional teacher of English.
‘Syllabus Course no. 302
1.
Language learning in institutional settings.
(1)
Traditions of formal and informal learning
(2)
Differences of focus: on the forms of the language on institutionalised requirements on the needs of the learner on social interaction
2.
Classroom strategies: English as a subject of study.
(1)
Methods and materials for use with beginning students.
(2)
Developing the skills of
speaking
listening
comprehension
reading
writing
(3)
Using textbooks: selecting, making and storing other materials.
(4)
The measurement of attainment and progress.
(5)
Reluctant and discouraged learners.
3.
Classroom interaction: English as the medium of study.
(1)
The language that occurs spontaneously in classrooms.
(2)
Contrasts with other social settings.
(3)
Strategies for getting outside classroom language.
4.
English teaching in observation and practice.
THE MODERN LANGUAGES PGCE COURSE AT THE LEICESTER UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
The word runs that an American professor entrusted with the evaluation of the College curriculum was asked by a colleague on the campus, ‘How's your wife?’
He replied, ‘As compared with what?’.
I too, feel sensitive to the prospecting evaluative probe: the course I am now running has not yet completed its first year.
Yes: like most PGCE courses we have undergone surgery in order to present a more vigorous profile to the cold light of the new dawn.
Consequently, the request to define my present practice finds me still searching out what it is.
The attempt to line up our thinking with what has been perceived as the most powerful of the current orthodoxies has certainly brought about a number of structural changes to the PGCE course the most important of which to affect the modern language group has undoubtedly been the decision to replace the single teaching practice in the spring term by two teaching practices, the first in the autumn and the second in the summer term.
This pattern poses problems for anyone operating in a split system such as is favoured in Leicestershire where the County schools are divided into High Schools (mainly 11 to 14) and Upper Schools (14 to 18).
The City system is again different.
Any tutors wishing to present their students with a more or less logical progression from year one to year seven, have to contend with the awkward fact that in the summer term the examination classes are only in attend for their examinations.
This effectively reduces the teaching practice experience to years four and six.
The School of Education is the centre for the French for Communication project in the East Midlands.
We have three levels of communicative assessments (covering roughly the first three years of the secondary curriculum) which I coordinate on behalf of EMREB and the LEAs.
We have now added to these three levels a Joint GCE O Level/CSE French for Communication examination (for which I am Chief Examiner for the Oxford and Cambridge and East Midland Regional Examination Boards).
The PGCE work takes place within the framework of the project.
The modern languages group consists of French or German Honours graduates.
All the German graduates have French; some of the students have joint degrees in French and German.
All have spent at least a year abroad in France or Germany, usually as assistants.
Up to October 1985, where the system required the students to spend the whole of the spring term on teaching practice, I was able to conceptualise the academic year like this:
Autumn term: preparation for teaching practice.
Spring term: teaching practice:
Summer term: preparation for the probationary year.
Under that system I used the first term almost entirely as a preparation for the teaching practice itself.
I say, almost entirely.
The first few weeks always included a number of experiences designed to undo at least some of the damage done to sensible language learning by our schools and universities.
But that apart, the main aim of the term was to give the students confidence that they could plan and teach a lesson at any point in the five year course.
The summer term, following the practice was then used to follow up the students' own interests; to deal with examinations (both school and public) and advanced level work.
The programme also included some reference to school visits and exchanges, the advisory service and some experimentation with computer assisted language learning.
The activities of the autumn term centred on four or five teaching visits to schools, one for each year of the five year course.
Each student would teach at least one lesson on each visit.
The teachers would prescribe the topics to be dealt with and give some account of what the class had done previously.
The students would plan their lessons in the seminar and eventually teach them.
We would all discuss the lessons afterwards.
I usually took the opportunity to teach on those occasions.
As a system, it worked reasonably well.
The students learned to work what were often open invitations rather than clearly defined topics or themes into coherent lesson plans for two or three lessons of which they taught the first.
As the teachers' notes had to be available at least a fortnight in advance of the visit, some lack of precision was inevitable.
The students seemed to gain in confidence in their ability to make decisions for themselves about what to teach and showed increasing understanding of the need to vary and sequence activities in the course of a lesson.
Besides these teaching visits to schools, the students were encouraged to make regular visits to their teaching practice schools in their own time.
Most managed at least a half day each week.
This regular weekly contact, together with the organised group visits, meant that the students approached teaching practice knowing that they could organise a lesson in terms of defining in advance what it was that they wanted the children to learn how to do; and then, by working backwards, sort out their materials, activities and procedures.
There were however, disadvantages.
The teaching seemed to concentrate on beginnings.
Consequently, presentation techniques tended to get highlighted at the expense of the developmental.
Given the structure of the PGCE week at the time, I was never able to involve students in a sequence of lessons with one class over a time span exceeding two days.
The preoccupation with beginnings meant that some students became addicted to the OHP, firm in the conviction that life without one was unthinkable and that every lesson must have one.
The attempt to cram sufficient experience of a five year span into a term of ten weeks brought with it superficiality and rush, leaving a guilty residue of feeling that not enough had been done thoroughly enough.
Teaching practice made me feel a lot less dispirited.
I was always impressed by the quality of the students' preparation for the lessons I observed on my weekly visits to them and by their willing capacity to learn by their mistakes.
I rarely saw a lesson in which the students had not gone to some considerable length to vary their material and their activities to take account of the level of the class, the length of the lesson and the time of day or week.
Lessons went wrong, of course, but not often because the students had failed to think out what they wanted to do.
Where they tended to go wrong was at the micro rather than at the macro level: a mishandling of the relationship between parts rather than the parts themselves.
All that is now firmly in the past.
Our restructured PGCE now contains two teaching practices; the time allowance for method work (formerly two whole days each week in the autumn and summer terms) now places the students on attachment to schools for one day each week, thus leaving one day for method, plus a half-day for second method.
The new pattern of teaching practice gives increased coverage of the secondary age range in a split system, but it is not without its own difficulties.
Whatever the disadvantages of the old system, at least I had a term in which to prepare the students for their teaching practice; now I have six weeks.
Previously, after six weeks the students would teach one (heavily prepared) lesson; now, in theory, at least, they could be expected to take responsibility for a class for six or seven weeks.
As I was unable to see how I could realistically expect students to take responsibility for classes after only six weeks in the School of Education, I decided (after much self doubt) to put the students on their first teaching practice in the fourth and fifth years of schools offering our joint GCE O Level/CSE French for Communication syllabus where they would be expected to work with the teachers in a variety of roles.
For their second teaching practice the students will gain experience of years one to three in schools involved in the first three levels of the French for Communication project.
Here they will be expected to take charge of full classes under the supervision of the teacher tutor for the whole of the teaching practice.
The decisions about teaching practice and the provision of second method time have changed quite radically my method course.
Under the old set up, I ran a course which looked at the problems of language learning chronologically.
Now, my students find themselves coping with the intricacies of the Negotiator/ Interpreter oral assessments of an examination syllabus with which they are not familiar after only a fortnight into the course.
As part of their familiarisation process with the new assessment procedures, the students tried out some of the tasks from the Negotiator module in pairs.
When they had completed their task, they went back over the language of their exchange, noting the semantic field of the vocabulary, listing alternative lexis and structure which was synonymous in meaning with what they had used.
This activity led to a consideration of the flexibility of the language items used; structures which can be used in more rather than fewer contexts have obvious attractions to the economically minded language user.
This is not an area about which one can be dogmatic: it is simply a matter of opening up students' minds to the need for some care in the matter of selection of learnable language.
Once the students had agreed the language to be taught-lexis, structure and discourse function — they were asked to work out in pairs how they would plan to prepare a class for the Negotiator assessment.
This entailed a study of the assessment objectives for the module (made available to them in a handout from the syllabus) and some consideration of the problems of presenting new language forms from these areas to their class.
They were also asked to think about how they would ensure that their pupils understood the new forms and used them appropriately.
As the pairs had a pattern to follow which was dictated by the components of their task — lexis, structure, discourse function — it was possible for me to stop the discussions from time to time to concentrate the attention of the whole group on specific issues like, for example, the meaningful teaching or certain lexis and grammar.
In all this discussion, whether I am moving round talking to pairs of students at work or talking to the whole group, I see my role as provoking thought and reflection, not as telling students what to think or do.
Pious it may sound, but I do actually believe that there is a sense in which a group of students do collectively know much of what they need to know about learning: the problem of the PGCE year is to give them confidence that they know; and the experience that knowing they can successfully act on their knowledge.
I would not wish here to be thought to be saying more than I am saying: my phrasing of the proposition is intended to stress the negotiation by which meanings are shared among us — not to presuppose some innate psycholinguistic stratum which can be laid bare by mere exposure to the ebb and flow of the dialectic.
Nor should it be assumed that the division of the language items into lexis, structure and discourse function presents students with problems of equal difficulty or me with identical roles in each case.
Although the students had few problems in discerning a variety of viable strategies for presenting new lexis in such a way that learners might be thought to be able to perceive its meaning without the intervention of English, the areas of structure and discourse proved less tractable.
The reasons are not far to seek.
In the main, the students come from (what they see as) a solid grammatical background.
In fact, by grammar, they usually mean the more easily statable descriptions of some writing conventions.
The idea of language as a network of systems with grammar as one organiser of meaningful discourse is not a concept with which they are familiar.
They tend to regard grammar as the touchstone of all language performance.
Effectively this means that some students at least are initially anxious at the prospect of any language work with a grammatical focus which does not include a formalisation of the data and a description of the rules by the teacher.
Discussions of this anxiety usually refer back to the students' own learning in which rules were formalised and exemplificatory exercises done.
If the students' memories are to be trusted, there is little evidence of any serious thought being given to the meaningful use of new grammar in either speech or writing.
Discourse presents even thornier problems.
Although some students have a good grasp of colloquial language, few have ever got to grips with the concept of register.
Essentially, they seem to think that communication is conducted in full sentences of a propositional character.
Consequently, I was not surprised in our seminar discussions to find myself directing more questions and raising more problems when we were talking about structure and discourse than when the focus was on lexis.
Nor was I surprised that I often had to show the students how language use might be made meaningful.
Learning by discovery doesn't mean reinventing the wheel each time you need to move the wagon.
Once the students had joined their TP schools on their weekly, one-day attachments, we were able to make their recounted experiences the starting point for the seminar work.
This was not planned in any way; it just happened.
The seminar work derived either from a student's account of a lesson observed or of a lesson taught.
As an example of a seminar based on an observed lesson the following will serve.
A student described how a teacher had attempted to begin a lesson teaching German modal verbs.
Arising out of her description, we set about grouping modal verb forms according to their meaning, making as much use as we could of both negative and positive forms.
Working in pairs the students readily found contexts in which some of the modal forms are used, but not all.
They were also able without too much difficulty to create a series of possible contexts in which (they hoped) the meaning of the forms chosen would be clear from the context itself.
It was during that discussion that (I think) some of them began to appreciate that the existence of a form in the language is no guarantee that is used.
The focus for method work was also provided by a student's account of a lesson he or she had taught.
Here we proceeded in exactly the same way, dividing the activities between paired and whole group work.
In one such session two students who had tried teaching a lesson in tandem, set out their objectives and procedures and tried to evaluate their success in the lesson.
The lesson in question had as its intended outcome a transactional dialogue in pairs.
The fifth form class were preparing to take part later in the term in the Negotiator/Interpreter assessments.
The students concentrated on a restaurant setting.
They presented a number of lexical items likely to be found on a French restaurant menu, together with the language forms they wanted the class to use.
Whilst the class were actively engaged in carrying out the transactions the students went from pair to pair and helped out.
The students who had done the teaching were very critical of the own efforts.
As they listened in class to the dialogues which the children were constructing for themselves they were able to see quite clearly where their preparation had been deficient and where their teaching of new material had not been thorough enough.
Beginners are often surprised at the length of time it takes a learner to learn something: they tend to think that they need to say something once only for the whole class to have it ready for use a few seconds later.
On teaching practice the students operated quite differently from what would have happened under the old system.
Instead of taking full responsibility for classes, they functioned in a variety of roles.
The teacher tutors took responsibility for the development of all the work of the classes concerned (fourth and fifth year).
The students helped in preparing language material; worked with individual pupils or small groups; functioned as an extra voice in the classroom; and also initiated and developed lessons with a whole class under the direction of the teacher.
My impression was that the students integrated well into the language departments and enjoyed the flexibility of their roles.
I saw them all in control of a class (or at least presenting to a large group) and I was well pleased with their competence.
Their close contact with individual children or small groups seemed to give them some measure of what children can actually do in a foreign language in a relatively non-threatening way.
It encouraged them to form good personal relationships with them instead of seeing children in the mass, differentiated only into those who can and those who won't.
At the end of the first teaching practice I asked the teacher tutors (who had all had experience of the previous system) to make any comments they cared to about the new set-up.
There were some worries, of course: I had not formulated any principles for the evaluation of an experience which was developing under our eyes; and there were some obvious discrepancies between what students experienced in different schools.
But, in the main, the teachers were well satisfied that they could make the new arrangements work to the advantage of the students.
In the spring term the students will be back in the School of Education.
Given the new licensing laws for teachers I shall give them some experience of the post 16+ area before embarking on the lower school work with which under the former arrangement I would normally have begun.
I shall no doubt operate on the usual principle that we start with practice and derive such theory as we need to understand and improve it.
I expect that I shall think of the term's work as a preparation for the second teaching practice.
I imagine that the work will be structured in two different ways.
The first will move in the direction of preparing lessons in terms of the realisation of defined sets of objectives.
The second will tend rather towards structuring the students' thinking towards the creation of language activities in different modes.
The first of these, the preparation of lessons in sequence will obviously deal with the formulation of learning objectives which can be realised in a particular unit of work.
This part of what we do will relate specifically to observations and teaching in schools participating in the French for Communication scheme.
The second activity will not be related to specific lesson preparation but have to do with language work related to modes of language use.
As far as the lesson preparation is concerned the students will have to become familiar with the three levels of the syllabus of the French for Communication schools.
They will have to assimilate from the syllabus guidelines and from class teachers what objectives are set for children in each of the assessment modes-talking, reading and writing.
They will have to learn how to present new lexis, structure and discourse forms appropriate to the tasks to be set in the assessments; to construct cue cards for the practice of the language functions; to manage the moves from class teacher to pair work organiser and to individual helper; and to carry out the assessments in a rigorous manner.
They will have to learn how to do all these things by a mixture of seminar work, classroom observation and classroom practice.
The classroom practice will be taken care of in a series of group observation and teaching visits and will be supplemented by their school attachments for the last four or five weeks of the term.
The second aspect is more difficult for those of us engaged in the communicative enterprise.
It is so much easier to think of the so-called four skills!
Then, all you have to do is to organise listening and reading comprehension, followed by speaking and writing.
So much neater than real life, don't you think?
I start from the assumption that we are interested in what is done in any communicative act.
This means that the framework for any activity is itself communicative i.e. that there is something to be communicated to someone for some purpose.
In the course of that activity the communicators will be operating sometimes as listeners, sometimes as readers, sometimes as talkers and sometimes as writers.
The problem for the teacher is to provide a source of language for their classes which is both language enhancing and has potential for communication.
This means both oral and written text which can be used to improve the linguistic command of the pupils and also develop their communicative skills.
In this way of looking at language, comprehension is not an end but the indispensable means to an end.
And, of course, the kind of comprehension needed in any instance is determined or at least influenced by the kind of action it leads to.
We are not interested in the ‘comprehension’ of text but in the understanding which leads to the successful completion of the task set.
In all the seminar based work mentioned above, I would expect the students to play a rather more organising role than previously.
They will be expected to make presentations to the seminar group, not only on lesson preparation but also on integrating communicative activities.
They will be asked to relate their seminar work to what is going on in their practice schools.
Arising out of the seminar discussions they will design an experiment for their second teaching practice assignment.
In the third term the students will not only be occupied with teaching practice but also with some work afterwards back at the School of Education.
Much of this work will relate to the assignment mentioned earlier.
This small bit of experimental work will become the focus of one or two in-service sessions of our regular fortnightly workshops for teachers.
Much of the students' year will have been spent in close cooperation with practising teachers in the French for Communication project.
The students have had the opportunity to take part in these sessions where they related to the 16+ examination in the earlier part of the year.
In the summer term, then, they will be becoming familiar, not only with learning from teachers but with learning with teachers: they will feel the full responsibility of sharing their experiences with others.
Since these experiences will have been in the schools in which the workshop teachers teach, it is obvious that there will be a great deal of sharing of ideas before the actual presentations and their subsequent discussions take place.
As their final experience before the end of their PGCE year, we hope to inform them fully about the role languages play in industry and even, perhaps, during their Week in industry attachment, give them some idea of how language learning relates to their immediate environment.
LANGUAGE IN EDUCATION: AN ACCOUNT OF WORK-IN-PROGRESS IN THE DIVISION OF EDUCATION, UNIVERSITY OF SHEFFIELD.
Bernard T. Harrison
This paper describes current work in the Division in Education and attempts briefly to evaluate the quality and influence of research and teaching provision in this area.
1.
A Background Note, c.1973 — 1983
In the ten years between 1973–83 two Lecturers and one Reader contributed full-time to research and teaching in the Language arts — Dr. Frank Whitehead (reader), Mr. Alan England and Dr. Bernard T. Harrison.
During this period a substantial number of students were involved at initial in-service and research levels, in work on Language and Education.
On average, about 25 PGCE students, 10 full-time M.Ed, 10 part-time B.Ed and 2–3 research students (M.Phil.
and Ph.D) completed courses each year which were mainly or exclusively concerned with Language and Education.
In addition to this, the three tutors contributed to the courses of all PGCE students (c. 200) M.Ed. students (c. 40 students) and B.Ed.
students (c. 30 students) each year.
In 1982 a part-time three-year M.Ed course in English and Drama studies was introduced which recruited 10 students.
The tutors were also involved in a wide range of L.E.A.
and D.E.S.
in-service work on Language in Education, regionally and nationally, as well as developing international links in the teaching of the Mother Tongue (for example Denmark and West Germany).
All three tutors were engaged in research into various aspects of Language in Education.
Frank Whitehead, Director of the Schools Council London Project on Children's reading, published Children and their Books (1977) and maintained a programme of research and publications in this area until his retirement in 1982.
It should be said that he provided a major influence on inspiration in the development of the Division's work in this area.
Alan England published Teaching Scripted Drama (1982) and several other publications on the role of scripted Drama in Education.
Bernard Harrison published a research report on children's writing in secondary schools, Learning through Writing (1983), and a number of other research and professional publications in the area of Language in Education, including English Studies 11.18 (1983).
He also acted as external examiner for Language in Education options and courses at the University of Birmingham (PGCE, B. Phil.
M.Ed), Exeter (M.A./Ed.
Ph.D) and York (B.Ed.).
Towards the end of this period there was notable research and teaching activity in the area of talk in the classroom, language provision for children with special needs, children's writing and the role of metaphor and imagination in Language and Learning.
Dr. Peter Clough, Research Fellow in the Division of Education, completed his Ph.D thesis on the phenomenology of classroom talk in 1983, and was appointed on a part-time lecturer in Division, 1983–5.
In 1985 he was appointed to a full-time lectureship in Education (Special Needs).
Following the retirement of Frank Whitehead (1982) and the early retirement of Alan England (1984) neither of the posts left vacant has still been filled; they are unlikely to be filled in the foreseeable future.
2.
PRESENT CONDITIONS AND PROVISIONS
Although there is now only one full-time post specifically in the area of Language in Education, a number of the present academic staff have an active research/teaching interest in some aspects of this area.
The main activities are outlined below.
2.1
Bernard Harrison (Senior Lecturer) has a range of research interests and teaching duties in Language and Learning, across initial and in-service course.
On the PGCE course he is tutor on the Mother Tongue method course (11 students, 16 recruits for 1986–7).
He is also responsible for providing the professional studies course with a teaching unit in Language and * (135 students), and teaches an option course on ‘Educating the Imagination’.
This course recruits 15 students across the method range; it dwells on metaphoric aspects of language and learning.
The professional studies course also draws attention to language issues through a number of other units — for example, the Equal Opportunities Unit (class and gender aspects of language), the multicultural Unit (problems and opportunities for enrichment through multilingual contact), the Parents and Schools Unit (the language of school-parent contact in reports, interviews, letters).
On their recent visit to the Division, HMI gave special commendation to these units and to their uses in PGCE seminars.
2.1a
For the full-time M.Ed. in Education Studies a one-term option course is provided in ‘Language and Learning’(10 students); up to c. 5 students will be supervised for M.Ed. dissertations on aspects of language in the school curriculum.
The part-time M.Ed. in English studies (formerly English and Drama) has recruited 15 students (1st and 2nd year, taught together).
This course includes one-term courses on Language and Learning and Teaching the Mother-Tongue.
Students are also involved on a programme of Independent Studies, many of which will be focused on issues of Language across the curriculum.
2.1b
As for research supervision, there are at present 3 Ph.D.
students, working on language provision for children with special needs, the uses of myth and drama in Language teaching, and teaching the mother-tongue.
One M.Phil.
student is working on a comparative study of principles and practice of teaching the mother-tongue in U.K. and Israeli schools.
Two teacher-fellows have been appointed, one for May and one for September 1986, to work on Language provision across the curriculum and a reading response.
2.1c
Beyond University teaching the tutor is also involved, during the present term, with in-service work for teachers (and after 6th formers) on curriculum developments for 6th form English studies in Lincolnshire, Humberside, Cornwall, North-Midlands and Northamptonshire.
All of these courses will provide a strong emphasis on small group discourse as an essential learning mode, on the new varieties of writing in course-work, on the individual nature of reader response, and on the potential of role-play in language work.
Other outside commitments include the Chair of Sheffield NATE, whose programme for this session provides a session of linked evening and weekend sessions on multi-ethnic issues in teaching the mother-tongue.
He has also arranged a visit to the Pedagogical Institute at Stockholm, to study principles and practice in mother-tongue teaching in Sweden (this links with previous visits to Arhus, Copenhagen and Regensburg).
2.1d
Research into classroom writing continues; recent publications include Sarah's Letters: A Case of Shyness (1986) and ‘The Pleasure of Writing’(in A. Wilkinson).
Current research interests also include Curriculum innovation in teaching the mother-tongue (especially reading-response to texts); language development of children with learning difficulties; and the uses of metaphoric language in the learning process.
2.2
The Belfield Reading Project
Dr. Peter Hannon, Lecturer in the Division of Education and tutor for the full-time M.Ed. course, directs the Parental Involvement in the Teaching of Reading Research Project (PITR).
This project originated from a recognition that a major concern in early childhood education in Britain at present is the role of parents.
Parental involvement in the curriculum is being explored, particularly in relation to the teaching of reading and this research aims to assist development here by clarifying problems and evaluating new forms of practice.
The research has required close collaboration with practitioners in the field.
The Division has worked with one school in particular, Belfield Community School, Rochdale, in carrying out a five-year project designed to increase PITR.
The Belfield Reading Project has attracted considerable interest and has provided a model for many schools in this country and abroad.
Research concerns such issues as implementation and take-up, educational home visiting, home- school communication, effects on reading test performance, and teachers' and parents' views of involvement.
One study has analysed and compared parents' and teachers' strategies in hearing young children read (Hannon, Jackson and Weinberger, in press).
There has been related research within the PITR Project into reading development and social class, components of reading test performance, current school practice in PITR, innovative practice in both home-based and school-based PITR, and appropriate forms of INSET.
Most of the resources for this work have come from within the Division's normal programme of research.
However, there has been financial support from the Rochdale LEA Curriculum Development Fund, the University of Sheffield Research Fund, the Division's own Research Initiatives Fund, and the Department of Education and Science.
The research team, led by Peter Hannon, also includes Angela Jackson and Beryl Page, Belfield Community School, and Jo Weinberger, Research Officer, Division of Education.
In addition several postgraduate students have made significant contributions to the project.
2.3
Language in Education: Focus on Disability
Dr. John Quicke, psychologist and Lecturer in the Division, has been awarded a research grant of £10,000 from the Mental Health Foundation,(with likely funding of a further £10,000) to explore ways in which schools can teach about mental handicap.
The starting point is an investigation of the constructs pupils use in every day speech.
Methods of engaging with those cultural meanings will be examined.
Pupils' argot is of particular interest.
Conversations with pupils about ‘handicap’ have already been carried out in a pilot study.
Transcripts of tape recordings have revealed a fascinating array of meanings; an attempt has been made to interpret these in the social and cultural context of the pupils' experience.
Several teaching approaches will be considered, for example, literature based (see Disability in Modern Children's Fiction, Quicke, 1984) and ‘experiential’ methods.
An important feature will be the contextualisation of the programme in the linguistic and curricular (both formal and informal) structures of the schools involved.
This research has been linked with teaching on two Master's degree courses entitled The Pupil Experience and Special Educational Needs in the Ordinary School.
Students have carried out small empirical investigations using tape recorders, video equipment and various forms of interviewing and observational techniques — objective and non-objective, structured and unstructured.
The material generated has been wide-ranging.
In addition to views on special needs, pupils' understandings of many aspects of school life from rules and regulations to teachers' personalities have been documented and analysed.
Pupils' concepts of justice have been particularly interesting.
This project was launched in 1984 and will continue until 1988.
2.4
Language across the Curriculum: an exemplary approach
2.4a
Geography (PGCE).
Margaret Roberts, tutor of the geography method course, has long-standing research and teaching interests in Language and Learning.
She is currently researching into the use of learning logs and Personal Journals and into classroom group work.
Her 1985–6 course applies insights from a wide range of innovative insights into Language and Learning, and covers:
1.
Reading.
One 3 hour method session
a)
Introduction to varieties of reading matter which can be used — including newspapers, adverts, novels, tourist pamphlets.
b)
Readability — application of formulae — discussion of usefulness.
c)
Preparing for reading with pupils — context, vocabulary, structure.
d)
Study of DART strategies (Directed Activities Related to Text)— encourage active participation in pairs.
2.
Writing.
One 3 hour, one 2 hour session.
A. As preparation for this session students complete questionnaire with four open questions.
a)
Why do you set written work?
b)
What instructions do you give a class when you do set written work?
c)
How do you mark written work?
d)
What use do you make of written work when it has been marked?
The method session is spent categorising and discussing the replies.
Discussion covered the following topics: audience of written work, modes of writing, dictation of notes, writing as a finished product, writing as a means of learning.
Focus on presentation of work, focus on meaning of work.
B. Marking Exercise
Students mark work by 4, 12 year olds.
The context of the work is explained but they mark without consultation.
All the marks they have made on scripts are categorised into these groups.
a)
corrections — e.g. geographical errors, spellings.
b)
judgments — e.g. grades, marks, evaluative comments.
c)
comment — on meaning of what has been written — dialogue with pupil.
The students' marking is discussed in light of these categories.
The Learning Log (Appendix II-iii) was originally set to provide a model of writing as a means of learning reflection, rather than as a finished product.
3.
Talking (Part of 3 Method Sessions)
Question/Answer in whole class situation
Tapes and transcripts are analysed.
Questions are categorised as closed (where teacher wants answer which is already in her/his mind) and open (where teacher is interested in knowing what is in pupils' minds).
Questions are also categorised according to levels of thinking required.
a)
Paired work on facilitator skills
b)
Role play exercises of facilitator plus small group with observers to observe facilitator and one group member.
The Teacher as Facilitator of discussion
Discussion of exercise.
a)
Role play exercise with small groups and observers
b)
Discussion of strategies for small group work
a)
Role play
b)
Discussion of use to promote discussion
Small Group Work
Simulation exercises
2.5 Philosophical Issues in Language and Learning
Peter Gilroy, Lecturer in Philosophy of Education, has developed research interests which constitute a radically innovative approach to philosophical aspects of Language in Education.
His research has concentrated on the nature of language and the apparent fact that it is a social instrument, socially constructed and thus dependent upon language of curriculum justification (see, for example, his ‘The revolutions in philosophy and philosophy of education’, 1982).
His present research, to be completed in 1986, is an examination of the philosophical bases for various theories of first language acquisition; it develops the thesis that non- verbal language is crucial for this area of enquiry, although it is ignored by most researchers in the field.
It will also provide a philosophical underpinning to such ‘language’.
Two sections of the thesis are to be submitted to Mind and Language for publication as separate papers at the end of March and the whole to be published by the Harvester Press as The Philosophy of First Language Acquisition.
He is collaborating with Professor Ruddock (Sheffield UDE) in writing a book on the nature of educational research for Falmer Press, his section being an examination of the problems involved in an uncritical use of the language of educational research.
This is to be completed during the summer of 1987 and has the provisional title, The Language of Educational Research — its Practices and Philosophy.
2.6 Two Writing Projects
2.6i
Learning through Writing in the Primary School Classroom Mr. Stephen Rowland, Lecturer in Primary Education, has studied aspects of children writing within the context of participatory observation in the primary classroom, where roles of teacher and researcher are integrated.
His main interest has been to explore how, through their own narrative writing, children's thoughts are directed towards continuous, critical appraisal of experience, as elements of fantasy and reality are related and the emergent living issues are explored.
This work is grounded in the view that this kind of awareness on the part of children as writers enables them to gain a degree of control over their imagination (see Rowland, The Enquiring Classroom, 1984 and ‘Responding to Children's Interests’, 1986).
His current research is extending into a study of how teachers' own writing about classroom processes makes explicit their implicit educational values, thereby enabling these values to be critically appraised by other teachers, and to be opened for further development.
2.6ii
Word-processing and the development of the written language Clive Opie, Lecturer in Education (Computer Studies), has launched a project during the present session which is looking at the development of the written language of ten year olds using word-processors.
Traditionally, for many school learners the physical process of writing is an inhibitor.
There is little doubt that their handwriting skills develop at a slower pace than their linguistic skills.
Young learners may have problems with spatial concepts, hand-eye co-ordination, laterality, concentration and presentation.
Writing appears to demand that they use muscular movements which are not natural to them.
Fine dexterity may not yet have developed.
Early failure is often reinforced.
The use of word-processing helps to release them to be concerned with the content and not restrained by the process.
Errors are not in the permanence of print, being easily deleted.
In addition, work which has been prepared on a word-processor and presented to teachers or assessors encourages them to concentrate on the content without being prejudiced by the presentation.
At a later stage the ease with which text can be manipulated provides learners with a powerful tool for thinking.
The success experienced by learners using word-processing enhances their self-confidence and very often motivates them to tackle the difficult task of handwriting; it can be seen to extend both the volume and content of their written work.
Whereas writing has usually been an insular process, word-processing lends itself more easily to a collaborative approach, offering exciting opportunities to share and extend ideas.
Whichever way word- processing is used it gives learners the means of refining text until it satisfies them.
The learner is enabled to edit and modify text in the same way, say, as an adult journalist would.
It is felt that traditional keyboard skills are not required by learners before they embark on work-processing.
The word-processor provides the teacher with a powerful resource with which to explore the body of experience or learning that waits to be arranged through the successful use of language.
2.7
Teaching English as a Foreign/Second Language
The PGCE Method Course in TEFL started in 1977, when it mainly attracted graduates in Modern Languages who wished to teach overseas for a least part of their career.
Some of these students became interested in teaching English to ethnic minority groups when, as part of the course, they spent a period of teaching practice in a school with an ESL Language Unit.
From 1981 onwards, applications were increasingly coming from candidates with a specific interest in ESL, many of whom were graduates in English.
TESL was run as an alternative methods course for a few years, until TEFL/TESL became a combined methods course in 1986.
Elizabeth Newman, course tutor,(who also lectures in the Department of Linguistics) has arranged teaching practice in schools with qualified, experienced ESL teachers on the staff, which has meant that not all the schools in Sheffield with a high proportion of ethnic minority pupils are suitable.
Links have also been established with schools in Bradford and Dewsbury.
The current trend away from separate language units towards support language teaching in mainstream classes is reflected in the training students now receive for TESL.
The multicultural and linguistic possibilities of multi-ethnic groups are emphasised on the course, along with the particular problems that are to be found in this area of teaching.
Experience of teaching both ESL and EFL is provided in further education colleges, where classes consist of adult immigrants and of students who will return to their home countries at the end of their course.
Many of the latter group are preparing for the Cambridge Proficiency Certificate and other Examinations.
2.8
Modern Languages and Language Awareness
There has been a long-standing and vigorous tradition of modern Languages provision on the PGCE course.
The present PGCE Modern Languages course offers combinations of French (lecturers Mr. Robert Pullin, Mr. John Trafford), Russian (Mr. Pullin), German (Mr. Trafford and Mrs. Ruth Deas) and Spanish (Mr. Hedley), and the course recruits c. 35 students each year.
Students follow specialist method courses and are also involved in an integrated course which focuses on, among other issues, Language in the Classroom and Language Awareness.
The tutors also provide supervision for M.Ed and research students, and have a wide range of in-service and extramural commitments in this area.
Current research interests include aspects of Language Awareness; a project in this area involving local middle school children is in progress during the present session.
2.9 Language and Science in Education
Extensive provision for study of classroom Language exists in the PGCE Integrated Science course, which recruits c. 30 students each year (in Physics, Chemistry and Biology).
Significant research in this area has been developed by Dr. Elizabeth Engel Clough (Research Fellow) who has initiated studies of the language that students use when required to make explicit their own understandings of scientific concepts.
Extensive data have been collected through interviews with individual students; analytic schemes have been developed that are grounded in that data, rather than in single learning theories or externally prescribed theoretical frameworks.
The findings to date have important implications for science teachers, educationalists and learners (see, for example, Engel Clough and Wood Robinson, 1985; also Engel Clough and Dower, 1986 — this paper was given the ‘Outstanding Paper of the Year’ Award by the Science Education Journal).
2.10 Language Provision for Children with Special Needs
Dr. Peter Clough (Lecturer in Special Needs Provision) has been concerned in a number of small-scale projects which explore continuities in Language provision between mainstream and special settings.
These have revealed some important areas for development, particularly if the learner with special needs is to be integrated in the spirit of the 1981 Act (see Clough, 1983, for principles underpinning this work).
3.
CONCLUSION
The picture of work on Language in Education within Sheffield UDE is one of vigorous and diverse activity.
However, some important common concerns may be discerned among the various approaches described above.
3.1
There is a concern, not so much about formal aspects of Language Study (linguistics) as for the learning relations that language involve, and the meanings to which Language points.
An emphasis is made on Language as Expression, and on Language as Communication, in the learning process.
3.2
When applied to particular aspects of Language, we ask how learners think, imagine, feel and make meaning through talking, reading, writing and non-verbal Language.
A particular study may involve focal attention to, say, a transcript of learners engaged in role-play or in some formal aspects of children's writing.
But such data gain significance only through serving a larger enquiry, for example into how children have a better understanding of a problem (or person) through role-play, or how a raw experience may be organised through a particular approach to writing.
3.3
There is a common concern in the Division that the values which guide research in the area of Language in Education, and which research findings confirm, should be revealed in all the teaching throughout the Division.
Lectures have been discarded in all in-service and (apart from occasional ‘distinguished person’ visits) initial training courses, in favour of workshop and seminar activities.
If knowledge is to be seen as a shared process (‘growledge’, to invoke Coleridge's term), then this must have an ineradicable effect on the curriculum, on styles of teaching and learning, and on the Language of Education in all its aspects.
4.
Publications mentioned in the Text:
THE TREATMENT OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LANGUAGE, LEARNING AND TEACHING DURING THE FIRST TWO YEARS OF A NEW BACHELOR OF EDUCATION DEGREE.
Colin Walter, Goldsmiths College, University of London.
The relationship between language use and teaching and learning in schools is an integral part of many contexts and processes in both initial and in-service teacher education courses in this School of Education.
The subject of this short ‘case study’ is the new Bachelor of Education degree and particularly the first two years.
This four year degree is in Primary Education, and prepares students for professional work in Nursery and Infant or Junior schools.
What follows is an attempt to demonstrate a number of examples of a very specific concern with language and education.
The degree is taught exclusively in the School of Education, takes place in College and School, and has three components.
In each of these the concern with language is represented.
These components are:
1.
Foundation Studies
2.
Curriculum Courses
3.
Professional Studies
These are concurrent and complementary elements throughout the four years of the degree.
Foundation Studies is an attempt, over two years, to provide a basis for classroom work by a detailed multidisciplinary consideration of essential issues in the theory and practice of educating.
The course is taught, exclusively, in seminar groups.
The broad areas of this course are as follows.
In Year 1 topics are grouped under ‘Life in Schools’ as perceived in novels, autobiography, and research; ‘the Nature of Teaching and Learning’; ‘School and Classroom Order’and the ‘History of Education in Britain'.
The topics for the second year are grouped under the headings of ‘Persons, Institutions and Education’; ‘The Curriculum’; ‘Tradition, Innovation and Change’.
It is in considering the nature of teaching and learning, early in Year 1, that the relevance of teacher and pupil language is introduced to students.
The second component, upon which students embark immediately, is the ‘Curriculum Course’.
All students pursue, in their first two years, a course in Mathematics, and one in Language study.
The intention here is to provide prospective teachers with a thorough understanding of language as a phenomenon in an educational context.
The course is taught by lectures, seminars and tutorials, and is college based.
The disciplines upon which it draws are, in the main, linguistics, psycho-linguistics, and sociolinguistics.
The following is a summary of the content of the course.
During term 1 it seeks to establish ground rules for thinking and reading about language.
Its direction is to introduce the nature of ‘grammars’, of the four modes of language, of non- verbal communication, of language variety, and of language change.
Term 2 introduces important features of approaches to studying the nature of the child's acquisition of the mother tongue.
Further, the topic of Bilingualism is introduced, and then the focus becomes the Language Curriculum in school.
This term ends with a detailed introduction to the nature of ‘narrative’, and of ‘poetry’, within the context of a consideration of children reading and writing in school.
In Term 3, which is partly devoted to a teaching practice, the notion of language ‘function’ becomes the focus.
A number of models are examined.
The second year of this course immediately introduces students, very specifically and in detail, to the matter of the relationship between language and thinking.
The second half of the first term emphasises workshop approaches, where the nature of both ‘poetry’, and of ‘narrative storying’, as products of one of the functions of language, are explored.
Term 5 contains a block teaching practice, and thus the course has a programme allocation of five weeks.
The language curriculum is again the focus; specifically the nature, scope and development of children's writing abilities.
Term 6 returns to a focus upon the home and the community of the child and teacher.
It considers the nature of teachers as ethnographers (Heath 1984), and examines, for instance, the special contributions of parents, as children read at home.
At this point in the course the consideration of recent published work leads to the invitation to the course of an eminent visiting lecturer.
In 1986 the visitor is Dorothy Hamilton.
Throughout the two years, tutorial contact with students seeks to support their reading, and essay writing.
It continues throughout this final term, as students prepare for their final examination.
The students' work on the course is assessed by means of one written three hour paper, and the submission of three essays.
The final component which this paper describes are the Professional Studies Courses in Language work.
First School students and Junior students pursue separate courses, as they prepare specifically for classroom work.
In both courses emphasis is placed upon an integrated approach towards school and college work.
Much of the teaching takes place in school; this, of course, is additional to the four main teaching practices which span the four years.
Professional Studies in the early years of schooling is a course which extends throughout the first three years of the degree.
The approach to teaching and learning on this course is developmental and therefore the students in a particular year group work with the same team of tutors who cover all aspects of learning and of educational provision for young children — including the development of language and literacy.
These tutors are responsible for the professional development of each student in the group and supervise the students on block teaching practices.
The course is taught partly in College, where students attend lectures, seminars workshops and tutorials, and partly in schools.
From the beginning of the course and throughout the three years, students spend one half day per week in schools (a different school each term) where they work with small groups of children under the guidance of teachers and tutors.
Although the three years of the course are planned as a coherent whole, themes are developed and elaborated upon as the course proceeds.
One such theme — and one of the most important — is the development of language and literacy in early childhood education.
This theme holds a central place in the discussions and analyses of all work undertaken both in College and in schools.
In addition to this general focus, the development of language and literacy is studied from a variety of perspectives and in a more focused manner at certain points in the course.
The course is under constant review and is planned flexibly to enable tutors to respond to the needs of particular groups of students, but the following three paragraphs itemise some of the particular emphases given to language during the three years.
In Year One the students work in Infant schools with children who are in the middle of the age range (5–7 year olds)— The students are introduced to three aspects of language.
The first aspect — the role of narrative in learning — is introduced through a study of literature in early childhood education.
Students study stories, story books and the role of the story teller.
They learn how to compile and use book collections in school, in College and in children's libraries.
The second aspect — talking with children — focuses on the discussions that occur in schools.
Students analyse their work and study how language supports the children's learning.
The third aspect — early literacy — is the main focus of the term three school visits.
At the beginning of Year Two the main emphasis of the work is with the youngest children (3–6 year olds) in nurseries and reception classes.
In term one the role of language in play is studied.
In addition to this, students deepen their understanding of early literacy and a special study is made of bilingual under- fives.
After their second teaching practice, which is in a nursery school, the emphasis shifts to the development of literacy in the Infants school.
The school visits made in the second half of Year Two are devoted to the teaching of reading and writing.
Different approaches to the teaching of literacy are looked at critically.
More complex issues are raised in relation to language.
These include multi-cultural issues and issues related to early study skills, books made with children, reference materials and early specialist language and involving parents in the teaching of literacy.
In the third year the main focus of the work is with the older children (6–8 year olds) in Infant and Primary schools.
The students study language and literacy in the First School, which includes a review of literature for older children.
The second term includes such topics as a study of poetry and the use of materials to support writing.
The above paragraphs indicate briefly how themes related to language and literacy occur and recur throughout the three years.
Language is also a required component in all course files (the mathematics file, the nursery file etc.).
It is of central importance, however, to two of the required files — the ‘anthology of stories and poetry’ and the ‘language and literacy file’— and in one of the examined reports — the year three essay on an aspect of literacy.
Students prepare many practical resources for their school work and many of these are related to language and the development of literacy in the classroom.
Throughout the course, the tutors both help students to relate general language issues which are studied in other parts of the degree to their work in schools, and introduce students to issues that are of particular importance to teachers of young children.
The last part of this paper describes the Professional Studies course which is pursued by Junior students.
This course about the ‘Language Curriculum’ of the Junior school takes place during the first two years of the course, and lasts three terms.
It is complemented by a number of other professional studies both in the first two years, e.g. Mathematics, Environmental Studies, Science, P.E.
and the teaching of poetry, and in the succeeding two years of the degree.
The course aims to prepare students for quite specific kinds of work in school, and yet must acknowledge the relevance of language use and function in the whole junior school curriculum.
It proceeds by seeking active collaboration with four local inner-city schools.
For part of each term, students and tutors work with teachers and children in these schools.
Increasingly, it is hoped that members of the schools' staffs will join staff and students in college.
This course lasts for the equivalent of three terms, and has two distinct parts.
The first consists of two terms; first year students join it immediately.
The second part starts at the beginning of Term 5, before the first teaching practice; it continues for four further weeks at the beginning of term 6 in the same teaching practice school.
Thus the course is completed by the end of year two.
Teaching takes the form of lecture, and workshop/seminar sessions.
It is designed to complement, and be complemented by, the language curriculum course, and the foundation studies course.
Thus tutorial support of students' progress remains an important teaching strategy.
The four tutors on this team work closely together, meeting regularly to monitor school and college work.
The theoretical framework which underwrites the planning, attempts to keep together the four modes of language and their relation to learning and teaching in schools.
This, in respect of children and students alike.
Within this context, the work of the first term concentrates upon the teacher's role in helping the child to develop as reader.
Lectures, audio visual presentations, the examination and collection of resources, visits to a local primary education and language centre, school work, and workshop activity are directed to this end.
During college based sessions the first part of the morning is spent on a whole group presentation; the second in a workshop/seminar situation.
These are practical sessions where students and tutors prepare themselves for work with children in the second half of the term.
Thus during the first half of this first term, students begin to develop their work as collectors and presenters of story and poetry material, and of becoming more expert in children's fiction of every kind.
They begin to discover a rationale for selecting and using information books, and they select a number of these to support children's development of a ‘topic’ theme.
They build criteria for studying approaches to supporting the children in reading in the schools in which they will work.
And they prepare to work with an individual young reader of six or seven, and a group of children aged between seven and eleven.
Thus, the school work in this first term consists of five complete mornings in school during which the time is divided between helping an individual child with his/her reading, and working with a small group of older children.
At the end of each morning, teacher and students meet together to assess what has occurred, and plan future sessions.
The second term concentrates upon the child as writer.
It, again, entails college work, and school work, with the group of children which the students joined in the first term.
One priority is to introduce students to the notion of the ‘development’ of children's writing abilities.
Not only does this entail our recognising the specific demands of writing as an activity, but also the varying purposes of writing, and the need for a whole school policy towards it.
Over the term the value of neo-grammatical approaches to children's writing, and the value of a functional approach is introduced, and their value as models for assessing children's development considered.
This is one point in the course, and it is but one example, where the inter-relation between Professional Studies and the Curriculum Course is a matter for explicit emphasis.
The term starts with Drama workshops.
It proceeds, via lecture and workshop, to explore the nature and purposes of children writing.
As before, teachers and tutors seek to work together with students and children.
The students' work with the children takes the form of planning and teaching a writing ‘project’ where the various purposes of writing are explored within the context of established primary school practice.
Three weeks before the end of the term the students and tutors return to college based work.
The first week back is spent reviewing the practice and materials produced during the school sessions.
Also, and very specifically, the principles upon which the students depend for preparing their work on language for the approaching teaching practice are reestablished, and explored.
In the following week the students visit their school practice school.
The final week of the term entails tutorials where specific guidance is given in the planning of work to support the preparation for the four week school practice.
These tutorials involve the class teacher with whom the student worked in the previous two terms, as well as the course tutor.
This part of the course is assessed by reference to the student's production of course work manifest in a course file.
The essential elements of this are as follows:—
(a)
A brief description of the language policy of the school, the classroom, and the organisation of both.
(b)
Weekly plans of activities for children with commentary and evaluation.
(c)
A concluding summary saying what the student feels has been learned about children and language from the school work.
(d)
An annotated anthology of children's fiction, poetry and story grouped under appropriate headings.
(e)
Materials produced during the course.
There remains only the second part of this course to describe.
As already noted, it occurs in two parts.
The first is a five week preparation by lecture and tutorial for a piece of field work conducted by the student in the school practice school, after the end of that practice.
The period of practice will facilitate, therefore, necessary consultation and planning activity.
The students attend the school for four sessions at the beginning of the summer term, to carry out their assignment.
This paper has focused upon various elements, as they are presently constituted, of the first two years of a new degree in Education.
It is not intended therefore to be comprehensive.
Rather, it has set out to demonstrate how seriously we take the many connections between pupil and teacher language and learning and teaching in schools, and to describe something of how staff and students proceed.
That which is described here is one result of our judgment of what is an appropriate structure for a Bachelor of Education Degree in Primary Education.
We are at present much exercised in considering the possibility that in order to satisfy the CATE criteria, particularly the one which stipulates two years of subject study, our commitment in this area of work may have to be reduced.
LANGUAGE AWARENESS TRAINING FOR SUBJECT SPECIALISTS
Elizabeth Hoadley-Maidment
INTRODUCTION
Language awareness training for subject specialists has developed from work done by Industrial Language Training (ILT) in the 1970s.
When ILT was established as a national scheme in 1974 its brief was to improve communication in the multi-racial workplace.
One element of this was teaching English as a Second Language (ESL) to ethnic minority workers but the two-way nature of communication was recognised in the accompanying training for management, training staff and trades unionists.
Initially this consisted largely of background information about the cultures and languages of the workers together with exercises which enabled the managers to examine their own use of language.
Since then the methodology has been greatly extended to reflect new developments in linguistic theory, new approaches in language teaching methodology and, most importantly, to respond to new pressures in the social and economic climate particularly the growth of racism in Britain.
(Roberts and Brookes, 1985).
Outside ILT those who were working with bilingual students in general community and adult education also found that they were being asked to provide language awareness training for groups who had contact with their students, e.g. health workers, careers advisers, librarians, workers in advice agencies.
Similar training methods were used and, with the publication of many of the ILT materials (Yates, Christmas and Wilson, 1981) these approaches became available to a wider range of trainers.
The growth of this type of training, however, has not been determined solely by the providers.
ESL has been a particularly dynamic area of language teaching and one area of provision has always been for students who wish to continue their general education in this country or to take up training opportunities in MSC-funded schemes.
The particular language and communication needs of these students were analysed by ESL teachers, drawing on a variety of theoretical and educational developments including the concept ‘language across the curriculum’, sociolinguistic research evidence on classroom interaction and the work done in the area of English for Specific Purposes.
More recently it has been recognised that students will benefit more from the provision of good quality language support than from long periods spent learning English in ESL courses and this has led to a shift in resources towards the mainstream classroom.
In the early 1980s linked-skills courses were established in which bilingual students studied vocational or recreational subjects with language back-up being provided by an ESL teacher who was present throughout the subject session.
(See ILEA Linked-Skills Handbook, 1983).
The CET courses run by the Lancashire ILT unit (NS) and work done at Shipley College, West Yorkshire (McAllister and Robson, 1984) also developed models for team-working between subject and ESL specialists.
All these initiatives meant that bilingual students were being taught by staff whose training was as specialists in vocational or academic areas.
While many of them had developed techniques for checking understanding when teaching ‘traditional’ FE students, some of which were also useful when working with bilingual students, few of them had any professional training in the part that language plays in classroom learning.
It has therefore become apparent that if language support for bilingual students is to succeed it must be accompanied by planned staff development for the subject specialists.
LANGUAGE AWARENESS TRAINING IN THE ILEA
The training to be described in the remainder of this article is that which is currently being offered by the Inner London Education Authority.
As the largest LEA in the country, the ILEA offers a wide range of provision for bilingual students wanting to continue their general or vocational education (see Hoadley- Maidment, section 2) and is able to provide a variety of in- service staff development courses as part of this development.
The models of language awareness training described in Tables 1 and 2 have been developed in work with staff in further education colleges.
Staff who have attended courses have included those teaching academic subject such as maths and sciences, and vocational lecturers in engineering, business studies, hairdressing and clothing.
Work has also been done with English and communications skills staff who have been offered separate introductory courses which build on their existing expertise in language analysis.
Similar approaches are now also being used with mainstream tutors in adult education and with staff working in vocational training centres.
Many subject specialists have voiced concern about teaching bilingual students.
This varies from a reluctance to enrol bilingual students onto courses on the grounds that their English is ‘not good enough’ through feelings of helplessness at not being able to ‘get through’to bilingual students to a wish to learn about approaches and materials that will enable these students to complete courses and pass examinations.
The demand for in-service training has grown enormously over the last three years in response to the following factors:
1.
the publication of Authority policies on equal opportunity in the areas of race and sex.
These have led colleges, departments and individual staff members to recognise the need to provide effectively for a multi-racial and multi- lingual student body.
2.
the development of a range of provision for bilingual students with particular emphasis on providing language support for students on mainstream courses.
3.
work being done in the area of Afro-Caribbean language including the development of materials and methods to develop language awareness in both students and staff.
PLANNING TRAINING PROGRAMMES.
The following tables summarise the range of training models currently being offered in the ILEA.
The variety of models reflects the need to respond to the immediate needs of staff and to work within institutional and financial constraints.
There is, however, an agreed approach underlying the different formats and the content and training methods used are very similar.
The following steps are carried out at the planning stage:
1.
Analysis of the trainees' needs as perceived by they themselves, by ESL specialists working with them, by college management and by trainers with experience of this work.
2.
These needs are divided into three areas: skills, knowledge and attitudes.
Realistic aims for each are chosen in relation to:
(a)
participants' present knowledge about and experience of working with bilingual students
(b)
the types of course on which they are working e.g. some staff are teaching groups composed entirely of bilingual students while others have small numbers of bilingual students in groups of mostly English-speaking students.
The amount and nature of language support available to different courses also varies
(c)
participants' previous training, if any, in this area
(d)
practical and financial constraints.
These will often determine the length of the course and the number of participants
3.
The trainers are then chosen.
Since there is at present only a small pool of people with experience in this area the use of practitioners as trainers provides an element of ‘training the trainers’ in the course team.
Courses are generally run by two ESL specialists, one of whom is an experienced trainer but who does not necessarily have classroom teaching experience in the subject area being addressed while the second is chosen because they have worked in the subject area, usually as part of a language support team, but sometimes because they themselves have training and/or experience in the subject area.
Where possible a subject specialist who has worked with an ESL tutor or team is also involved.
This is almost essential for sessions which examine different forms of language support and team working.
4.
Course content is then agreed.
All courses have an underlying philosophy that emphasises the positive value of bilingualism, recognises the importance of anti-racist approaches to curriculum, materials and methods, acknowledges the role that mother tongue may play in learning and draws attention to the fact that bilingual students may have already studied the subject in their own country and need to transfer knowledge rather than to learn from the beginning.
Content and methodology are closely linked and both are decided at this stage in the planning.
Content and Methodology Most of the training currently being offered is at an introductory level.
All these courses therefore aim to familiarise participants with a range of issues and to provide practical help for situations they face in their day-to-day teaching.
A core of topics/issues now exists and trainers select from this, supplementing it with material that is directly relevant to the college or subject area.
Second level courses, such as the nine-hour courses for subject and language specialists, are able to work more intensively on specific topics e.g. analysing classroom language, choosing and developing materials.
THE CORE:
Introduction to Cultural Diversity:
A brief introduction is given, usually through experiential exercises e.g. filling in an application form in another language/script, stereotyping exercises.
The aim is to help participants identify their own learning needs in this area and to then suggest ways in which they can increase their knowledge e.g. by providing a suitable booklist on cultural background and immigrant experiences.
In addition to this short formal session issued related to culture and race are considered as they arise in other parts of the course.
Introduction to Language:
All participants need to acquire some knowledge of the main features of language before moving on to examine its use in the classroom.
Some groups appreciate a formal input in lecture form but other methods may be used e.g. asking participants to reflect on language they would need when holidaying or living in a country such as Greece or China, and then drawing out the theory from the discussion.
Experiential methods are also used e.g. participants are given the chance to learn another language.
Rather than using a traditional ‘foreign language lesson’ participants are often asked to learn a craft skill in another language.
While this is sometimes taught in a language spoken by their students e.g. Bengali, French often in chosen because it is the only language that most English people will have learnt at school.
As most bilingual students studying subjects are not beginners in English this experience more truly reflects their situation than does a lesson in a totally new language.
Exercises which have been used include: pattern-cutting in French (with engineers), making beurre maniere (with engineers), interpreting the general instructions on a French dressmaking pattern (with clothing staff) and dictation of a list of names from different languages and cultures (with business studies staff).
Student Language Use: As many bilingual students in FE appear to be fluent users of English and speak in local accents it is important to alert participants to the fact that they use two or more languages regularly and operate in two cultures in their daily lives.
This is done through exercises such as the study of a communications network, and case studies.
On longer courses participants may be asked to talk to one of their own students and then report back to the group on his/her pattern of language use.
An important part of the course is the examination of examples of students' use of English, both spoken and written.
Participants analyse examples of student writing and speech and, after discussion of the reasons for errors of different types, the session considers strategies that they may use to help students overcome these.
Group work is often used here.
ISSUES IN CLASSROOM TEACHING
(a)
Teacher Language:
ESL specialists find that bilingual students often misunderstand subject teachers because they are unable to follow their methods of presenting information.
These may include a lot of colloquial language and idiom, and few opportunities for checking understanding.
Discussion of practical ways in which teachers may adapt their methodology when teaching bilingual students is done through exercises and often based on the analysis of video or audio tapes.
(b)
Study Skills:
Many bilingual students lack appropriate study skills and appear to take little responsibility for their own learning.
This session provides an opportunity to learn about forms and styles of education in different cultures, to examine the relationship between developing study skills and general language learning and to make practical suggestions which will help students to develop skills that are needed for studying within the British educational system.
(c)
Teaching Materials and Assessment:
Since much of the teaching materials used in FE is written (textbooks, handouts, worksheets) and examinations have until recently been almost entirely written to time, examples of material are examined and participants work on adapting and writing supplementary materials for use with bilingual students.
This session also provides an opportunity to look at cultural bias and racism in materials.
WORKING WITH ESL SPECIALISTS IN COURSE TEAMS
Work is currently being done on models of language support (FEU Project No.).
Most courses use examples from this and other work as the basis for discussion of the nature of the partnership between language and subject specialists.
Many subject specialists have questions and some understandable fears about this new way of working so the session is normally run jointly by an ESL practitioner and a subject lecturer with experience of language support work.
Issues covered include: who controls the syllabus?
How to liaise effectively outside the classroom?
What can/should the ESL specialist do when giving language support within the subject class?
CONCLUSION
The work described in this paper is a recent development in in-service training and as such is still changing rapidly.
It is hoped that readers will feel able to draw on the ideas presented to develop the work further and to apply it to a wider range of contexts.
Greater prominence has been given to the role of language in recent government initiatives including the Swann report and in new curricula developments such as CPVE and GCSE and this type of training will be required if classroom teachers are to implement their proposals.
REFERENCES
SELF HELP IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF LINGUISTIC EXPERTISE AMONGST COLLEAGUES IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS
— an account of a workshop organised within the framework of the June 1985 conference on The Supply and Training of Community Language Teachers by the National Council for Mother Tongue Teaching in conjunction with Lancashire Polytechnic.
John Broadbent and Brijinder Singh Sahi
EC PILOT PROJECT: COMMUNITY LANGUAGES IN THE SECONDARY CURRICULUM
This Conference was staged at what has since proved to be an important turning point in the provision of training facilities for colleagues involved in the promotion of bilingualism and community languages.
Taking place some two years after the publication by the National Council for Mother Tongue Teaching of a discussion paper on Community Languages: the Supply and Training of Teachers, the Conference revealed in the wide range of its workshops an enormous variety in the initiatives taken by members of the National Council.
Plenary sessions in the Conference had, one after the other, commented on the absence of any relevant courses at University Departments of Education, on the similar failure on the part of other institutions of higher education to develop qualifications which might secure recognition from the Council for National Academic Awards, and on the apparent unwillingness of the Department of Education and Science to recognise overseas qualifications whilst at the same time refusing to take a lead in a field which could be shown to be a priority area.
Each of these points was vigorously argued by Dr. Madeleine Atkins who spoke principally about the findings of her six-month study on Training Teachers of Ethnic Minority Community Languages, undertaken with Professor Maurice Draft of the University of Nottingham for the DES Committee of Inquiry into the Education of Ethnic Minority Children (the Swann Committee).
The study had revealed that there was virtually no provision in either initial teacher training institutions in England and Wales, or in institutionally-based in-service courses, for training to teach community languages.
The only award-bearing courses were those offering the Royal Society of Arts Diploma: Teaching a Community Language.
There was no quota of candidates in community languages for the Postgraduate Certificate in Education, and not one DES regional advisory body had initiated work in the area.
With no more than fourteen university lecturers in the whole country with a knowledge between them of five South Asian languages, there was clearly a dearth of linguistic knowledge in higher education which was unlikely to be rectified through new appointments, given the shortfalls in funding.
Sabbatical leave, further training for teacher trainers themselves, and the buying in of linguistic expertise could only go part way in breaking the vicious circle.
Akram Khan-Cheema, speaking for the Directorate of Educational Services, City of Bradford Metropolitan Council, spoke of an increasing workload for those teachers who were engaged in promoting community languages against a background of confusion regarding strategies, objectives and methods.
Courses were necessary for mainstream teachers, including headteachers, to help them cater for the multilingual population of their schools, and Heads of Modern Languages, who were often given responsibilities for South Asian languages despite the current limitations of their professional competence to foreign European languages, were a prime target for reorientation courses.
Christopher Brumfit, Professor of Linguistics in Education at the University of Southampton, suggested that a closer interaction with the teaching of English might be more productive, both in teacher training and at the level of the school.
He proposed a series of research enquiries which might yield useful insights regarding processes occurring across the full range of subjects in multilingual classrooms, oral literature, specific needs of particular groups of pupils in schools, attitudes of educational administrators, and the phenomenon of ethnocentrism.
Despite the clearly negative context within which committed groups and isolated individuals were being forced to operate, the workshop presentations were a powerful testimony of the inventiveness and determination of the membership of the National Council for Mother Tongue Teaching.
Separate discussions centred on the training of teachers of African and Afro-Caribbean languages in the Inner London Education Authority, on the RSA Diploma courses, and on local initiatives based in Birmingham, Bradford, Dudley, Tower Hamlets Adult Education Institute in Inner London, and the London Boroughs of Haringey and Newham.
Our workshop, on Staff Development for Language Teachers in Secondary Schools, although highlighting the informal possibilities which can be developed by committed teachers operating collectively wherever they happen to be working, was not intended to weaken the case for proper provision for community languages with proper validation of the existing expertise.
We do believe however that mutually rewarding relationships with colleagues, with pupils and with the parents of our pupils can only really be developed within their local political context, rather than by being researched, reported on and learned about in the abstract.
It is indeed becoming increasingly recognised that a number of skills vital to our success as teachers can only be acquired within the context of schooling as it is currently organised.
This is why, to mention but one example of a national trend, the University of London Institute of Education is strengthening its involvement on several levels with those schools which accept its students on teaching practice.
We had intended to ask participants in our workshop to consider what the major constructive influences on their own teaching had been, whether training at college, advice from colleagues, intuitions from pupils or their own previous experience as learners.
As it turned out, the wide spread of professional competence present in the workshop made questions as to where individual expertise had been acquired recede in importance compared to the real advances in thinking which could be made through an immediate exchange of ideas.
The participants included five practising teachers of different community languages working in different parts of the country in secondary, further and adult education; two coordinators of community language teaching teams from Bradford and Slough, as well as a local authority inspector with a brief in this discipline; mainstream language teachers of various subjects, including foreign languages and English, as well as one teacher with a role of community liaison; and teachers attached to units providing instruction in English as a Second Language.
The Workshop aimed to draw on the experience of participants in exploring the benefits to be obtained from a deliberate encouragement of professional interaction between colleagues within and across, secondary schools.
The level of knowledge about language issues in British schools is, to put it kindly, easily susceptible of being raised.
Fewer than one in ten of LEAs in England and Wales have conducted thorough language surveys, which means that we can assume that most schools still have less than adequate knowledge about the languages and dialects known to their pupils.
There has been progress in the integration of community languages into the mainstream curriculum but the progress is pitifully slow, with a number of factors compounding a lack of confidence amongst those campaigning for greater sensitivity towards and encouragement of the forms of language brought by pupils into British Schools.
The various participants in the workshop identified a wide range of constraints which can broadly be categorised under five main headings — political and administrative constraints, ethnocentrism and its effects, inadequate resources, and a need for a purpose-designed methodology:
1.
POLITICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE CONSTRAINTS
There seems to be a general lack of encouragement and political will on the part of local education committees and their officers.
Even where elected representatives are aware of the vote-catching potential of courting the ethnic communities, they have given little thought to the educational implications of their policies, and even less effort to ensure that the policies are implemented.
This has resulted in a general failure on the part of local education authorities to plan for the promotion of community languages across all phases of the education system.
2.
ETHNOCENTRISM AND ITS EFFECTS
Mainstream teachers and heads of language departments often seem to be lacking in knowledge of their pupils' languages.
This ignorance combines with the effects of an overall racist environment in Britain and feeds a poor attitude amongst pupils towards black teachers, and towards their own varieties of language.
There is little discussion in many schools between the different disciplines of language teaching, and indeed a lack of mutual support amongst colleagues in general.
There is rarely any liaison between maintained schools and relevant community organisations or supplementary schools.
Inadequate timetabling, the organisation of lessons during lunchtimes and instead of normal lessons or assemblies, the allocation of unsatisfactory classrooms, the poor arrangement of furniture for learning purposes, the lack of suitable materials — all these factors tend to discourage learners of community languages, especially where they have had little influence on the choice of their subject options when a community language is involved.
There is a further danger where community languages have been brought into the curriculum on a par with foreign languages that this concession might be seen as a sufficient response to the failure of the education system for black children as a whole.
3.
INADEQUATE RESOURCES
These are reflected in a lack of materials for teaching Arabic, Bengali, Chinese and so on, even including Italian, as community languages.
Each need identified has its own place in the vicious circle: a reluctance on the part of schools to deploy community language teachers as part of their staffing establishment, and to offer adequate capitation for teachers deployed from units outside of the school; a shortage of Section 11 staff to meet the demand from schools for community language provision; a lack of back-up facilities in local institutions such as teachers' centres, curriculum development units and local universities and polytechnics.
4.
A NEED FOR A PURPOSE-DESIGNED METHODOLOGY
The wide range of motivation and attainment encountered amongst pupils opting to study a community language is sufficient argument for a deliberate concentration on methods of teaching which can adequately meet the needs of the different categories of learners.
A singe classroom in which for example Gujarati, pupils who speak a closely related language or a variety of language such as Katchi, pupils who can understand Gujarati, but not speak it, pupils with Gujarati surnames but with no knowledge of the language whatsoever, pupils with no family connections with the language, and so on.
Different combinations of problems can be partially solved through the seeking of support within the local administrative structure of education, within the local community and within the school itself.
Different potential sources of help were reviewed in the NCMTT Workshop.
Sympathetic members of a local education committee could often be usefully approached: many of them kept special surgery hours for such consultations.
The Chair of the Education committee was often a key figure whose ear it might be useful to have.
Local education authorities should not be allowed to evade their responsibility to implement a full policy for the promotion of community languages.
Certainly they should not be allowed to fall back on supplementary schools as an alternative to mainstream provision.
The cooperation of the local authority inspectorate was recognised as very important, given the assistance which inspectors and advisers can lend in raising the status of community language teachers.
One case was reported whereby the intervention of the local inspectorate had resulted in one afternoon per week being set aside for INSET.
Stand-by or supply teachers are needed if community language teachers are to be released to carry out the necessary development work.
In the past too much essential curriculum and materials development has occurred as a result of goodwill rather than policy and planning.
Policy statements, DES/HMI publications, or research findings, whilst they are a useful source of encouragement for use with doubting colleagues, are of course no guarantee of action on the part of their authors, but often provide a useful framework in which to operate.
Parental involvement is crucial, both in terms of political campaigning and in terms of developing relevant language teaching practice.
When a community language teacher makes her or himself available to parents, especially in times of crisis, greater support and recognition can be gained, and the traditional mistrust of secondary schools on the part of parents, particularly working class parents can be eroded.
Schools have a tendency to call in parents on their own terms only: the genuine involvement of parents must include curriculum development, not just being brought in as cheap labour to read stories in the classroom.
We need to provide resources which can contribute to the growth of awareness amongst parents and the wider community about the functioning of the educational system and the importance of the encouragement of home languages, in some cases to offset feelings of inferiority.
At parents' evenings, teachers involved in language provision should take care to provide more information about their aims and methods, and should seek to involve parents in the processes undergone by their children.
Schools which observe a principle of ‘open house’ are better able to achieve this, because they encourage parents and local residents to make visits during school hours, and have been shown to make notable improvements in the quality of the education which they provide simply by working with parents on a basis of equality.
In all phases of the education system, community language sessions have to be made enjoyable: such language learning is a process which has a real capacity to engage the learners even where there may not be significant material rewards.
Much of the day to day motivation to learn depends heavily on the ingenuity of an individual teacher, but the load can be shared with the pupils.
Negotiation with community language classes through questionnaire or confidential interview yields rich insights which can do much to enhance the learners' participation, as can discussion with older pupils and pupils who have recently left school.
So far as the variability in the attainment of learners is concerned, it has to be said that the situation is not unique: strategies of other disciplines of teaching can be successfully adopted.
Teachers who on their own make the effort to design appropriate materials are doing a great and necessary job in the promotion of community languages, adding to the growing storehouses of available approaches: working groups for the creation of teaching materials can make this activity more efficient and exciting, especially when headteachers can be convinced of the value of such activities in the framework of the normal timetable of departmental meetings, perhaps using ‘slack time’ which becomes available during examination periods.
Where they exist, it is valuable to involve school librarians and media resources officers.
Participation should not be restricted to linguists: art teachers, drama teachers, humanities teachers, all have a contribution to make.
Isolation in the staff room can often become part of the community language teacher's experience but that should not deter the teacher from becoming more outgoing and willing to share, even where others initially are not so forthcoming.
The Workshop heard reports of Modern Language departments in secondary schools which had shown themselves to be welcoming and useful.
One head of English in a comprehensive school described the compilation of an anthology of students' writing which had included writing in languages other than English.
Through the British Association of Language Teachers, the Joint Council of Language Associations, the Modern Language Association, the National Council for Mother Tongue Teaching, the National Anti-Racist Movement in Education, and other similarly voluntary professional bodies it is possible to locate interest and potential assistance, more easily than by a direct approach to local teacher training institutions, colleges of further education and so on.
Deliberate programmes of staff development in individual schools and community language units clearly cannot solve all of the problems mentioned by the participants in the NCMTT Workshop: good will and voluntary effort will never be enough to eradicate popular conceptions of second class status as they affect community languages.
Until we secure proper in-service education and adequate release for classroom practitioners they remain our only supports.
A LANGUAGE AWARENESS PROJECT IN WIGAN
Mary Mason, formerly Birmingham Polytechnic Faculty of Education
Those of us lucky enough to be linguists involved in teacher training have long felt that the potential contribution of linguistics to education is enormous.
However, this has not been immediately obvious to the unconverted.
Although linguistics courses in teacher training have raised the general level of awareness of language among some young (and therefore uninfluential) teachers, linguistics has as yet failed to deliver the goods to the classroom in terms of improved performance across the curriculum.
This has, in part, been a failure of linguistic theory at two levels: semantics and discourse.
My own work is a contribution to the first level.
Such work as ‘Reading for Learning in Science’(Davies and Greene) and Michael Hoey's work based on Eugene Winter's pioneering analysis of academic discourse are possible models for a serious contribution at the second level.
One red herring that has been produced by increased language awareness among teachers has been to try to rewrite academic texts so that pupils can cope with them.
In my view this is an evasion of the teacher's duty to enable pupils to get to grips with academic language.
This is established as the language of academic discourse in all disciplines throughout the world.
Scientists and politicians are not going to change their language to suit the alleged capacities of pupils in schools.
Pupils in schools who want the opportunity of participating in that discourse will have to learn how to do it.
My own work offers a model of language which reveals where the principal difficulties lie.
The practical outcome is a series of three school textbooks.
The model is based on the philosophical position that language is constitutive of thought: it exposes the linguistic mechanisms that make abstract thought possible.
No-one above the pathological level has any trouble with literal language — defined in psychological terms as language with immediate sensory feedback.
In linguistic terms it is analyzable in terms of traditional parts of speech (nouns are naming-words etc.) and Halliday's transitivity system.
Learning difficulties for both first and second language speakers without an academic background lie in the abstractions which are made possible by certain specific linguistic mechanisms.
This is not the place for an exhaustive description of the model.
It is possible to analyse any text in terms of it.
The major features only are described here:
1.
Changes of word-class
(a)
changing verbs to nouns enables us to talk about processes (e.g. distillation)
(b)
changing adjectives to nouns enables us to talk about properties (e.g. strength)
2.
Metaphor: e.g. chain reaction
3.
Personification: e.g. The nutrients are used by the tissues for building and repair.
These processes are often combined and reduplicated (and concealed in English by derivation from the classical languages).
e.g. utilisation: Latin uti (to use)…util (useful)
l.
English utilise…utilisation
‘The utilisation of Mineral Salts’ personification (with loss of agent).
The above examples are taken from scientific subjects, but the same mechanisms are used in humanities texts.
I am writing a textbook for mixed ability classes in comprehensive schools based on this model.
It is intended to familiarise pupils with academic language, so that they can read it comfortably.
This is the second book of the series.
The third will deal with the discourse level and concentrate on writing.
The first book is a language awareness course.
It has been trialled with encouraging results: in an informal trial ending in the summer of 1984 the mixed ability class which had done some of the course came out ahead of parallel classes in all subjects.
A more formal trail is being conducted this year.
The trials have been conducted in Shevington High School, Wigan.
The Metropolitan Borough of Wigan has been sufficiently impressed with the results so far to finance the printing of enough copies for the first year pupils of three comprehensive schools beginning in September 1985.
The book has been rewritten in consultation with the teachers using the first draft.
It is now programmed so that the core course can be done by pupils working in pairs.
No equipment is needed but the textbook and paper to write on.
(There are optional tapes, games, suggestions for role-play etc.)
It demands no linguistic knowledge by the teacher.
There is no marking or testing.
This is obviously an unsatisfactory paper on linguistics in teacher-training!
My language awareness course is intended to obviate the need for it by enabling any teacher to learn alongside the pupils.
Any linguistic knowledge the teacher can bring is a welcome bonus.
Languages and Culture in the European Workplace
Edited by N. Reeves and R. Hardie
National Congress on Languages in Education
Conference 26 May 1989
NCLE research project
translation and training in leading West European companies
Stephen Hagen
A Research Project, sponsored by the National Congress for Languages in Education (NCLE) in association with the British Association of Applied Linguistics (BAAL)
Summary paper.
Research hypothesis
Given earlier findings identifying a statistically significant correlation between a company's export growth and the language proficiency of its personnel (see Schlegelmilch &Ross, Journal of Marketing Management (1987), vol.3 No.2), an investigation of the most ‘successful’ companies in Europe (by economic criteria) should reveal an explicit corporate commitment to language training and translation.
Indicators of such a commitment would be:
1.
a long-term language training strategy in the corporate plan.
2.
existence of an in-house language training facility (wholly owned or managed by outside contractors), with established staff of qualified trainers.
3.
a well-resourced in-house translation unit employing salaried staff translators and on-line computer facilities.
4.
high status location for both language training and translation facilities.
5.
integration of units within a well-defined corporate management structure with clear reporting relationships, with stated ‘mission’.
work targets and in-built performance indicators.
6.
adequate level of internal subsidy (with unambiguous pricing and funding mechanism) ensuring continuity of service.
Research study objective
To test the appropriateness of the model by empirical study of data from leading international companies in the same or related manufacturing sectors and set up comparisons with consumer-orientated companies (e.g. electronics, electrical goods).
Companies in survey (Translation and training)
To ensure confidentiality of information sources, companies have been given the following tags.
C1: Large, multinational company (wide-ranging chemicals, pharmaceuticals and allied products)
C2: Smaller multinational company (limited range of chemical products)
C3: Major chemicals and pharmaceuticals multinational giant
C4: Major chemicals and pharmaceuticals multinational giant
Ph: Pharmaceuticals and chemicals giant
E1: Electronics multinational giant
(N.B. not all companies participated in all aspects of the survey either by express wish for total confidentiality or by unavailability for interview).
Synopsis of training
All companies showed a strong commitment to language training which varied between 20% and 65% of the company's training budget.
While no company employed trainers on salary (i.e. tenured staff), each had 2 full-time staff managers who handled between 10 and 60 regular part-time or freelance trainers.
Regular courses operated daytime and evening across the major four European languages (Eng, Fr, Sp, It).
The companies catered for particular times and needs; in order of importance — weekly ‘drip-feed’ courses, intensive courses, apprenticeship (and secretarial) courses and cultural briefings (involving specialist non-language departments).
It is questionable, however, whether continuity of quality and delivery were achieved in all cases due to the excessive dependency on outside subcontractors for the service, and the absence of full-time qualified trainers as salaried directors of study to monitor the performance of subcontractors.
The lack of involvement by established business examination boards in the training activity (especially in final testing and in-course monitoring) suggests the possibility of over-subjective processes of central quality control in operation in some of the companies.
Brief summary of translation facilities
All companies except C2 maintained a strong team of full-time translators on the staff, providing continuous high quality service for the major European languages.
Nationals had been employed in the home base and liaised with their opposite numbers in the foreign subsidiaries for the production of publicity and other information in the foreign language.
In all cases, translation work was carried out speedily and efficiently, using, as necessary, teams of outside freelance translators.
The value of subcontracting out translation work raises questions of quality control, continuity, and speed of reaction (especially where no in-house monitoring team exists, as in C2).
Conclusions
It was felt that, although widespread commitment to languages was apparent through the extensive resourcing in all companies surveyed, staff interviewed frequently felt undervalued and under threat from central management.
The traditional view by senior managers of the Language Service as a means to an immediate end (i.e. training for a specific market or translation of urgent material) meant that languages personnel did not enjoy the long- term commitment given to the ‘production’ personnel such as research scientists, the commercial section, or even technicians.
BRIEF SUMMARY OF CORPORATE LANGUAGE TRAINING SURVEY
Training in foreign language as percentage of all language training in company
Report on The Cross-Cultural Dimension in Management Training
Muawiya Derhalli, Deputy Director, The Centre for International Briefing, Farnham Castle
Mr. Derhalli's paper was divided into seven sections:
1.
The importance of cross-cultural training.
2.
The cultural gap and how to bridge it.
3.
The basis of training as self-recognition.
4.
Cultural shock and adjustment.
5.
The interaction between culture and language.
6.
The need for effective training.
7.
Coping with stress.
1.
Cross-cultural training
In the UK there is no universal practice of cross-cultural preparation for employees that are to be sent to live and work abroad, even within the individual employing companies.
Some five years ago, a survey was carried out by a major British company on this subject.
82% of the respondents thought that cultural preparation for working overseas was necessary and important and 54% stated that the preparation they received was adequate, while 36% thought it was inadequate.
This is a substantial figure and suggests that individuals see the need more clearly than organisations.
This contrasts with the practice in the remainder of the EC.
2.
The cultural gap
There are layers of differences between cultures.
Below the more obvious levels of customs and business practices there are more subtle but deep-rooted ones.
For example the accepted social distance between people can vary, even at the level of physical contact in everyday greetings.
This visible difference reflects differences in values.
In the UK one's first loyalty can be to one's work and to one's profession.
In Japan it will be to the particular company, while in the Arab world it is the family which is the key to social, business and over-arching structures.
This centrality of the family is even reflected in the Arabic word for ‘welcome’ which wishes you literally ‘a smooth way into the family’.
3.
The basis of training
Recognition of these types of different values clearly make a core feature in cross-cultural training.
But the first stage is to learn to step back from yourself and identify your own values.
Here Farnham Castle uses a scale of key attitudes to family, the other sex, authority, elders and so on, on which the participant marks off his/her own position.
It is vital to realise that while such values and those of the other culture are only perceptions, such perceptions make up a social reality.
4.
Cultural shock
The Swedish researcher Torbion has questioned Swedish expatriates in 26 countries, grouped broadly into related countries, on thirty issues.
The shock and adjustment curve followed the same pattern in all countries but the timescale differed.
The deterioration and shock phase were most delayed in what might be called culturally ‘comfortable’ countries and yet was still followed by eventual adjustment.
The group of countries where the Swedes felt most alien were Central Europe, Africa and the Middle East, and where they felt less alien was in Latin America, while by far the most important factor was the happiness of the spouse.
The parameters established were good predicators, and the more the cultural barriers to adjustment, the less the satisfaction in these countries.
Language was an important element in adjustment.
Furnham, in his study Culture Shock believes that training can overcome personality difficulties that come to the fore in this experience.
5.
Interaction between culture and language
In many cases values are expressed and embedded in the language.
This raises the issue whether cross-cultural training can be effective without language training.
Mr. Derhalli was of the opinion that it is ineffective without some language training and that language training also needs to be matched by cross-cultural training.
But many companies are not prepared to allow the necessary time, despite the fact that without the language in some countries it is impossible to operate.
Company meetings can take a number of linguistic forms: the formal use of international (or ‘off-shore’) English at the negotiating table, with informal exchanges in other languages; meetings in the language of the country (perhaps with interpretation at least of the whispered type) or multi-lingual meetings where each participant contributes in his own language.
In all cases, knowledge of the foreign language(s) is valuable, sometimes essential, to understand underlying attitudes and values.
6.
The need for effective training
Effective cross-cultural briefing, such as that practised at the Farnham Castle International Briefing Centre, has to be more than the provision of information.
It has to be so organised, as a learner-centred activity, that it sensitises the participant to cultural differences.
7.
Coping with stress
In the ensuing discussion, it became evident that a principal feature of cross-cultural experience is stress.
Exposure both in working life and everyday living to different sets of values, assumptions, expectations, and behaviour patterns places a severe strain on the individual.
This strain may be exacerbated by extreme and/or unaccustomed climate conditions.
Mr. Derhalli pointed out that the most secure people are those who are firm in their own value sets and identity and can then venture out from this base into other ways of living and working.
Support from one's own culture group can also be important.
Even those who seek to be integrated into the new culture (or ‘go native’ as it used to be called) will remain strangers in the new culture.
It is not, in the long run, conducive to satisfaction.
The discussion concluded with a brief look at the structure of the Farnham Castle courses.
COMMUNITY LANGUAGES IN THE WORKPLACE
A sociolinguistic appraisal
Mahendra K. Verma Lecturer in Linguistics &Hindi Dept. of Language &Linguistic Science University of York, YORK.
1.
Introduction
The aim of the paper is to initiate a discussion of the economic advantages of tapping the resources of the mother tongue of those minority adults, who are generally referred to as South Asian minorities.
In any attempt to assess and understand the use and function, the economic and social benefits of community languages in the restricted domains of the work place and in the public services i.e. outside the domain of the household, it seems imperative that one look at the sociolinguistic and socioeconomic profiles of the different speech communities and the uses they can and do put their languages to.
Another dimension, which is in no way less important, is the politics and economics of the history of migration, and the possible negative impact of the ‘Europeanism’ of 1992 on the status of the languages of the Afro-Caribbean and Asian communities.
One evidence of this is found in the National Curriculum, which has created two different schedules.
Schedule 1, which contains the ‘working languages’ of the European Community, includes those minority community languages of Britain which happen to be the mother-tongues of members of the white population e.g. Italian, Spanish and Portuguese.
In Schedule 2 are included some of the minority community languages e.g., Hindi, Bengali, Panjabi, Gujarati, Urdu.
In addition it also contains Russian.
Some members of the minority, as a result of this stratification of languages and reallocation of values accorded to the white minority languages, have begun to perceive a drift from Commonwealthism and Internationalism to Europeanism.
Even if the two lists are merged at a later date, the historical traditionally positive attitudes toward the European languages may continue to permeate the philosophy underlying the education system (including the curriculum and examinations).
2.
Immigrants and Language rights
The post Second World War period led to a massive and rapid industrial regeneration in Britain.
This economic expansion required a large number of unskilled as well as skilled recruits to a ‘labour force’ from abroad because the locals were not interested or willing to work long and unsocial hours with low wages coupled with poor and insecure working conditions.
A massive recruitment drive enabled the employers to persuade a large number of people to migrate from ex-colonies (South Asia and the West Indies) and from Italy to work cheaply but efficiently.
In addition, the politics of the Africanisation movement in ex-colonial East African countries resulted in an influx of many skilled and unskilled South Asians holding British Passports.
Thus the ‘immigrants’ and the ‘refugees’together transformed the British urban environment from being monolingual and monocultural to being multilingual and multicultural.
Today the minority populations are distributed across the country with large concentrations of settlements in Greater London, Bedfordshire, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Lancashire, Leicestershire, the Midlands and Yorkshire.
Initially, the minorities who were skilled and had competence in English, as well as those who were unskilled and had little or no competence in English, were offered unskilled jobs in textile firms, foundries, hospitals and in public transport.
A minority with professional qualifications e.g. doctors, nurses, accountants, had the privilege of working outside the more difficult and depressing areas.
But the beginning of the end of economic growth in the seventies resulted in massive unemployment which affected the minorities more than it did any other group.
Many of the South-Asians responded to this crisis by organising self-employment or by working in new small or medium sized businesses set up, owned and run by members of their own communities or by members of extended families.
In their study of Asian entrepreneurs in wholesaling and manufacturing in Leicester Peter Clark and Mukesh Rughani observed, the family and the family kin grouping were directly involved in the financing and control…of businesses.
…It is likely that the recipes and stocks of knowledge appropriate to the small business sector were acquired within the family context….
The linguistic significance of the ‘family context’ lies in the ethnic and linguistic work environment that the minorities created for themselves.
The right to use their skills and talents and the right to assert their employability through the use of their own language was possible only in this kind of work environment.
The freedom from linguistic inhibition which was the result of linguistic freedom to operate in the mother-tongue contributed to their confidence and the success of their employers.
3.
Linguistic resources &language needs in the work place
The newer minorities had a wide range of languages in their repertoire when they arrived here.
Bilingualism and multilingualism was, and continues to be, a norm among the various South Asian communities.
But majority of the population, especially those from rural areas, and women, had little or no competence in English.
Even those who had formal qualifications in English had difficulties in communicating with the monolingual English line-managers in their work places and with others in the public services.
What came to be known as ‘inter-ethnic communication’ problems were quite often triggered off by prejudice, racial discrimination and stereotypes.
The Tavistock research into Race Relations Policy in the Civil Service (1978) revealed significantly greater problems for fluent and well- qualified people from the ethnic minorities than for white people at selection and promotion interviews.
The recognition of the linguistic (English) problems was occasionally articulated.
There must be an awareness by the majority of the difficulties for most people in acquiring English and the limitations must not be confused with lack of ability or a lack of motivation to participate in wider society.
In line with this general official approach the potential for harnessing the mother-tongues of the minorities in the workplace and in public services was not even considered.
Instead The Industrial Language Training Service and the Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit were established to help the minorities with their English.
ALBSU has had a wider brief to facilitate literacy and numeracy among the native and non- native speakers of English.
Many LEAs provided courses in ESL for adult immigrants.
Unfortunately these courses failed to attract many students.
In fact these courses had a high dropout rate (Clyne, 1972).
A whole generation of non-English speaking minorities had to make do with an ad hoc system which provided makeshift translators, interpreters and semi-interpreters in G.P.'s surgeries, Hospitals, D.H.S.S offices, the Police Station and the Magistrate's courts.
In the eighties it became clear that the social and ethical consequences of this state of affairs could be catastrophic.
The linguistic rights and the potential of the mother-tongue in the workplace and in the public services has had to be acknowledged.
The linguistic needs of the non- English speaking bilingual and multilingual adults began to receive some attention.
In the introduction to this paper we discussed the effect of the recession on the minorities in the seventies, when ethnic businesses began to be established.
The workplace became the main interface between these economic and political pressures and the members of linguistic minorities…the role of language in the workplace is a crucial factor in helping us understand the relations of production in which members of linguistic minorities are involved.
During the early eighties the Linguistic Minorities Project carried out a survey of Language Use in the workplace.
They reported that as many as 17 percent of Panjabi (U) workers in Bradford work for Panjabi speaking employers.
They also observed that in the linguistically most diverse city of London it was quite common in the ethnic workplaces for the ‘boss’ to speak to the employees in their mother tongues (Greek, Turkish, Italian, Bengali and Chinese).
Reasons for needing to speak the minority language in the workplace usually centred around communication with workmates or occasionally with customers or the ‘boss’(LMP).
Thus, in areas like the East End of London, a particular sector of the local economy such as the garment trade may even produce a situation where minority language skills have a positive economic value within the local setting.
The work of Gumperz et al clearly demonstrated how communicability — interethnic communication — in the workplace, and in public services, including public places like schools was affecting the careers and lives of non-English speaking adults.
The socio- psychological stress positively discouraged people to participate in the socioeconomic and sociolinguistic life of the wider community.In industry with a large ethnic, non-English speaking labour force any ‘vertical communication’ from the top to the bottom can be greatly facilitated by the use of a language that the participants in the discourse of instruction or socialisation understand and identify with.
The concentration of ethnic minority women workforce in the garment industry owned by minority businessmen is a good illustration.
In such sectors of economy the use of the community languages and the status given to it on the shop floor is very significant.
…. a small proportion of our students have found jobs, some within their own language communities, for example in a Chinese bookshop or an Indian restaurant…some are very active in community work, for example teaching children their mothertongue in a Saturday school (McLaughlin, 1985).
In small businesses like a grocery shop, a newsagent or a small restaurant most of the workers recruited are invariably speakers of the same community language, and where it is not a homogeneous linguistic group, there is a common language, a linguafranca which is not English but Hindi-Urdu (among the South Asians).
If the role of language is central in the training of a work force, so is the role of language in generating confidence among the employees, who feel secure working in such an environment.
4.
Some responses &future possibilities
There has been in recent years a steady increase in the number of courses in ‘bilingual training for business people’.
The City Polytechnic Ethnic Minority Business Unit and some Economic Development Units in London are worth mentioning.
The initiative taken by the B.B.C. and the National Extension College in Cambridge, which resulted in a series of T.V. programmes for minorities called The Language of Business and the publication of several books also confirm the need for recognising the importance of the community languages in businesses.
In many areas the Social Services departments have created the posts of interpreters to ‘enhance service delivery, not to detract from the ongoing objective of attracting more staff with language skills.
We have moved forward in this area, although there is still an under-representation of qualified social workers.
The council have agreed a 10 % salary supplement for staff with language skills’(*).
The obvious interpretation of ‘language skills’ is bilingual language skills.
The role that community languages can play in the efficient functioning of speech therapists working with bilingual children is also significant.
‘As speech therapists, we are unable to cope with such a divergence of languages, although a number of therapists do speak a number of the West European languages’(*).
In other areas such as the public libraries ‘Greater use of library services by ethnic minority communities is often facilitated by the employment of ethnic minority staff.
This provides not only a familiar and welcome face to people who have not been exposed to library services but also provides a medium of communication through the use of community languages.
Furthermore, the library services are then not only being promoted to the wider community but also genuinely reflecting and recognising that Britain is a multiracial society’(*).
Some local authorities have initiated a Multicultural Arts Action Plan which offers training for employment in Arts, Drama and Music.
A knowledge of community languages enhances one's prospects of participating in this area.
The local radio stations that broadcast ‘community programmes’ to cater for the cultural and socioeconomic needs of the minority community depend on these languages to make their services more accessible to them.
Only the hope that their languages are being maintained sustains the minorities, because they are convinced that English, important though it is, cannot and will not be the medium for the transmission of their dynamic culture and tradition.
5.
Conclusion
This brief contribution simply highlights the lack of research that has gone into the social, cultural and linguistic needs of the adult minorities.
What this pilot survey does illustrate is the widespread use of the community languages in various sectors of economy, public services and other institutions e.g., the recent growth of the bilingual support teachers' jobs in schools and the continuing need for bilingual ESL teachers for the adults.
We have explored only some of the areas but it should be sufficient to establish the need for more comprehensive research into the use of community languages outside the domain of the family and the community.
Apart from public education, my own field of interest and experience has been in the discourse analysis of language in the magistrates' court, where I have played the roles of a bilingual interpreter and of a sociolinguist observing the language scene.
Several sociolinguists have discussed the ethnography of cross cultural discourse conventions in the law court in the United States.
Research on language and law, language and industry should be of benefit to both monolinguals and bilinguals.
Notes:
This paper is based on a pilot survey conducted through correspondence.
(*) indicates the statements of individuals and organisations.
THE LX NETWORK
Dr J L Kettle-Williams National LX Coordinator, Language-Export Limited,
CONCEPTS, PHILOSOPHY AND PRACTICE
LX role
The role of the National LX Network is to provide at local level those services required throughout the country to enhance the nation's export profile by supporting British commerce, business and industry in sustaining international pressures and in penetrating foreign markets.
LX services, specifically but not exclusively geared towards small/medium size enterprises (SMEs), are designed, provided and delivered by trained teams of professionals efficient in
(i)
needs analysis,
(ii)
effective delivery to suit demand,
(iii)
follow-up and
(iv)
post-evaluative exercises.
A company can make one single contact with its local LX and receive:
1.
Language training to suit specific needs
2.
Translation and Interpreting
3.
Cultural and orientation briefings
4.
Export advice
5.
Promotional materials (e.g. video production)
6.
Consultancy and complementary services
LX flexibility
Any company can look to the network for help with its marketing overseas.
A small company, perhaps exploring foreign markets for the first time, will have requirements different from those of larger institutions which may already be tried and tested in the international arena.
Whereas one company may require briefings on how to behave with foreign counterparts (e.g. shaking hands, giving flowers, kissing etc.) plus advice on the cultural acceptability of its product (even its colour!) and basic language teaching, another company may need interpreters, assistance in translating contracts and guidance in coping with export documentation.
Yet another company may be looking to identify target markets and to train its Export Manager in negotiating at high level exclusively in the foreign language.
Another may want to train each and every one of its telephonists in a different language!
Flexibility is the LX keyword: flexibility in design: flexibility in delivery — total flexibility to suit the particular needs of the client.
LX expertise
The local LX can offer a wealth of expertise.
This may be held ‘in-house’, locally or even further afield.
It is the nature of an LX to be a consortium established on the FHE resource base.
Being LCPs (Local Collaborative Projects), the LXs have been U63 pump-primed by the DES and TA to act in the first instance as venture companies designed so that collaborating partners — they may be translators, interpreters, printers, camera crews, copy- writers, export consultants, marketing advisers, experts in cultural briefings etc,— collectively address a market they could not individually satisfy.
LX expertise is on tap to meet a company's demands, and to satisfy those demands as they continue to expand and develop.
LX Liaison
Effective liaison is at the heart of LX philosophy: effective liaison inter se (Networking/cohesion/coordination), effective liaison with/through all manner of UK organisations with which the network maintains contact: CBI, BOTB, Chambers of Commerce, Language and Export Associations, DES, Regional Pickup Offices and all associated initiatives (e.g., LENS, TOURISM &other LCPs, TAPS, Open Learning Centres, LINGUA, The Pickup Europe Unit) plus the educational sector.
The main areas for LX attention include:
Project Management
Tutor Preparation and Training
Materials Development
Marketing
Collaborative Response
LX contact
Those interested in the services offered by the LX network at regional level should contact the LX in their locality.
All other company enquiries should be directed to Dr J L Kettle- Williams .
Plenary Session
Notes from Rapporteurs
Workshop 1.
Foreign Language Training for 1992 in British Industry
Discussion Leader: J.Kettle-Williams, LX Ltd.
Chair: Stephen Hagen, Study Centre, Newcastle Polytechnic
It was recognised that companies should implement a company- wide policy to address the specific professional needs of company personnel and that the LXs had established an effective model in skills auditing and needs analysis.
Discussion focused upon how educational institutions should respond to the challenge — particularly in the light of limited resources — and tailor their response to the specific needs of clients.
The group highlighted the low level of public awareness of the need for foreign language skills and associated this with the low status of foreign languages and foreign language learning.
U63
It was recognised:
i)
that Adult Education teachers were valuable to such initiatives as the LX for their experience in teaching adults
ii)
that part-time teachers, constituting an under- privileged and often exploited sector of the teaching profession, could offer more valuable support in the teaching of foreign languages if their interests were better protected, if training packages were introduced and their potential were harnessed.
The following areas for potential research and development were identified:
1.
Experience of teachers in Adult Education
2.
Potential of part-time teachers
3.
Awareness raising among the public at large 
4.
Materials development
5.
Developments in EFL (Teachers and Methodology) to enhance FL provision
Workshop 2.
Minority Community Languages in the Workplace
Discussion Leader: Mahendra Verma, University of York
Chair: Ali Houas, Chairperson, NCMTT
This session focused on a pilot survey and gave an account of the range of employment possibilities for minority language speakers, e.g. public services (education, law civil service, broad-casting etc.) private sector (computer technology and word- processing, publishing, banking and financial services, travel and tourism, and the garment industry).
A further point considered languages and language learning in relation to 1992 and stressed the need for skills outside the ‘major’ EC languages such as Turkish, Urdu).
There would be opportunities here for a cross-European sharing of expertise built up around bilingual skills.
Another issue raised was that Europe was not just a commercial union but a global power bloc which would need to consider external relations outside Europe.
Finally, it was considered important to recognise the international value of the minority community languages.
This means that bilingual education must be focused on from an early age and given a high profile throughout the school system.
A discussion followed in the plenary session in relation to the two language schedules.
It was pointed out that these lists should not be seen as hierarchical.
The second language list, which included those languages other than the ‘major’ EC languages, should rather be seen as representing a major step forward in the recognition of the importance of, for example, Urdu.
Workshop 3.
Language Training in European Industry
Discussion Leader: Director, Stephen Hagen.
International Study Centre, Newcastle Polytechnic
Chair: Tonni Cooper, President, ADULT
The workshop discussed the reseach done by Stephen Hagen at major industrial companies on the continent of Europe.
His findings were:
1.
Noticeable commitment to training in general and to foreign language training in particular.
2.
Broad range of languages and flexible range of course types on offer and the rigour associated with their implementation, such as continuous monitoring and assessment at the end of each course.
Objective quality control and outside assessment, however, is generally absent.
3.
There tended to be a permanent core of linguistically trained staff engaged on programmes within companies, either freelance or on renewable, semi-permanent contracts.
4.
Over-reliance on ‘in-house’ provision (materials, courses, evaluation) with little contact with the language training profession at large.
5.
Imaginative use of ‘networks’ to find part-time staff; such as engineers, or untrained native speakers connected with the company.
6.
Domination of English as the first foreign language.
7.
Different attitudes to translation compared with the UK, in that there is a primary concern to recruit translators with a narrow specialism in line with company products.
Preference for industrial specialists with language skills rather than general translators.
UK linguists tended to lack the technical knowledge of EC linguists who developed specialist expertise in different technological areas.
Technological changes may change the position of translators.
It appeared generally true that FL training was very much built into the industry infrastructure (particularly in Germany).
This was likely to produce a more systematic and predictable response which would, however, lead to more regimented and enshrined systems and teaching dogmas.
A discussion then followed about the strengths of a less centrally controlled and ad-hoc response, which was broadly the case in the UK, and which produced some interesting and innovative approaches.
Workshop 4.
Cross-cultural Dimensions in International Management Training
Discussion Leader: M.Derhalli.
International Briefing Centre, Farnham Castle
Chair: Professor Nigel Reeves.
Chairman, NCLE
A key statement of the workshop was — perception is reality.
It was stressed that it was vitally important for those going to work in other countries to have training in the cross- cultural dimension.
The cultural gap was often deep-rooted yet subtle and imperceptible, which led to an illusion of understanding.
The basis of all training was the recognition of one's own values, assumptions and standards.
The cultural shock and stress experienced when working in another country should never be underestimated.
There needed to be an interaction between cultural adjustment and linguistic knowledge.
The need for effective training, for sensitising people to cultural differences, was immense.
An additional comment, raised during the plenary session, was that those from ethnic communities were rarely seen as a positive resource able to offer a new expertise, but that, rather, they were regarded as being doubly disadvantaged in that they were often seen as not being fluent users of English and not being part of the British culture.
February 1990 ETHNIC MINORITY TEACHERS LEARNING TO TEACH THEIR OWN LANGUAGE.
Ali Houas
The supply of mother tongue teachers
There are no comprehensive statistics in this area, but a CRE survey (1) concludes that the number of ethnic minority teachers the eight LEAs is very small, that they are on the lowest scales and have no career progression.
Naturally they feel discriminated against.
In teacher training, in 1896 only 2.6% of final year students came from ethnic minorities.
With regard to qualifications, there are no statistics as to how many have no recognised qualified status.
In terms of subject areas ethnic minority teachers are under-represented in modern language and feel marginalised as in some cases these posts are section 11 funded or concentrated in the areas of special needs.
It is only recently that the DES has introduced ethnic monitoring in mainstream institutions and some LEAs embarked on equality targets.
In Further and Higher Education, no access courses specifically targeted to develop teaching and training in community languages are available.
In teacher training only 1 in 40 students come from the Afro Caribbean or Asian community.In PGCE and final year Bed courses about one third of PGCE and a little over two-fifths of B.Ed.
courses had no ethnic minority representation at all.
A more recent survey by the National Council for Mother Tongue Teaching covering 4 LEAs reaches the same verdict particularly with regard to the inadequacy of training (2).
Provision for the Teaching of Community Languages It is evident from the surveys alone that apart from the growth over the years of supplementary schools, the provision in the mainstream is appallingly minuscule.
The prevalent educational myopia at national level has impoverished language education through a misconceived language policy which treats bilingualism almost as an oddity.
It is no accident therefore that many of the multilingual communities develop their own resources and language infrastructures.
Training Opportunities
One of the few developments was the piloting in 1983 of the Royal Society of Arts certificate in the teaching of community languages which was later developed into a diploma.
Although the qualification was very much sought after in the beginning with the burgeoning of more centres running it up and down the country, the trainees soon realised that in spite of the skills they gained, the diploma was not recognised by the DES even as a first stage towards further accreditation.
Furthermore, many graduates never even used their skills once they had finished the course.
More recently some Universities and Polytechnics developed courses for ethnic minorities — but these when they were focused on developing multilingual skills were not intended to lead to a specialism in minority languages but simply to serve support strategies which fall far short of teaching the languages as such.
The criteria for admission to PGCE and B.Ed.
courses are also such that a substantial number of candidates never make the grade.
There is a lack of provision focusing on creating a pathway for cumulative accreditation and the criteria often dissuade many who feel that the types of training on offer are unsuitable for mature students.
The Present Context
The need for training has been highlighted in many major reports.
the EEC directive in 1977 and a number of national projects, particularly MOTET have recommended training as an essential means for providing an adequate supply of teachers.
These experiments and findings have never been implemented.
Other initiatives like the recent Lingua programme is extensively focused on European languages ignoring that Europe today is actually multilingual.
The licensed teacher scheme could be a major breakthrough but apart from teaching community languages in the secondary phase there is no provision again in this scheme to teach specialists with a view to reach these languages in the primary sector.
The Section 11 review has clearly put a stop to any funding for mother tongue teaching shifting the emphasis towards support for English.
The recent legislation with the shift of financial management to institutions will inevitably make things even more uncertain and dependent on the extent to which governors are committed to nurture bilingual development.
The cumulative effect of all these changes do not auger well for the supply of teachers.
It is very difficult to predict what developments are likely in the future except for communities to realise more and more that this issue is very much part of the struggle for human rights and that perhaps the specific right to one's mother tongue is something multilingual communities need to think about when they go to the ballot box.
The Untapped Resource
The EFL Experience
For a speaker of English as a mother tongue, taking up EFL as a career is a quixotic choice, full of opportunities but also full of uncertainties and pitfalls.
The reaction of my careers adviser at University when I confessed my inclination was gloomy but perhaps at the time realistic: ‘That's all very well, but what are you going to do when you grow up?’
From my present perspective twenty years on (whether grown up or not), it is interesting to look around and see how far the same comment would be appropriate today.
Mrs Worthington's daughter might well still be warned off the stage; what about EFL?
1.
Why go into EFL?
A number of motives may lead people into taking up EFL.
The most obvious perhaps, is the ‘globetrotter’.
Few skills are as much in demand throughout the world as are those of the English teacher.
With even a fairly low-level British qualification, a teacher can find employment in many countries, and for many the opportunity to travel is a very significant aspect of the attraction of a career in this field.
The drawback here is precisely the one which my careers adviser brought up.
Many young people are attracted by the idea of a few years teaching EFL overseas on the basis of a minimal qualification, and the employment situation is therefore an essentially transient one.
At the age of 21 it may be attractive to work in an exotic location on an hourly paid basis with minimal regard for the niceties of work permits and income tax; but it may be a great deal less attractive twenty years later.
EFL teachers in their early thirties wanting to ‘come home’ to settle down are a very familiar part of the scene.
The problem is, where do they go?
One answer is to the EFL schools and colleges operating in this country.
This is an area which has expanded enormously in the last twenty years, and there are now a large number of independent schools (of varying degrees of professionalism and quality), as well as state sector Colleges of F.E. and H.E.
(of varying degrees of professionalism and quality) offering courses in EFL either year round or just in the summer months.
Working in EFL in this country offers the opportunity to be an ‘armchair globetrotter’ in that the students one deals with may come from all over the world, and the cosmopolitan atmosphere of the classes and the schools is often very exciting.
Even here, though, employment is not without its problems.
Because of the very seasonal nature of the demand for EFL courses in this country (overwhelmingly concentrated in the summer months), the number of permanent jobs on offer is relatively small and competition is fierce.
In addition, there is the problem of the very fragmented and varied nature of the employment market.
As mentioned above, there are openings in both the private and public sectors.
But neither of these is fully regulated which means that teachers may perhaps find themselves working for less than fully professional organisations.
In the private sector, the British Council runs a Recognition Scheme under which more than 200 schools are now regularly inspected in terms of stringent criteria; a similar scheme has just been established for State Colleges.
But inspection under these schemes is entirely voluntary, and although it is impossible to gather figures, it is certain that many more organisations (both private and public) operate outside the recognition schemes than operate within them.
Employment conditions and professional standards are thus very varied.
Fragmentation is a problem because the vast majority of EFL schools are very small.
Career development is thus very difficult to achieve within any single organisation, and a teacher entering the profession at age 30 may find it very difficult to progress.
It is perhaps important to redress the rather gloomy tone which has crept into this section, by making two points.
The first is that amid all the uncertainties of the employment situation, there are several beacons of excellence that cast a rather better light on the situation.
Organisations such as the Bell Educational Trust in this country and the British Council overseas offer a package of employment terms and conditions which are extremely generous; in addition they provide the environment, the resources and the facilities to enable teachers to develop their professional skills.
The second is that for many EFL teachers, the material and tangible aspects of employment are not the only standards they apply.
Of course we have to pay the mortgage, but it is important to be able to do so in a way which contributes to international understanding and equips our students with worthwhile and important skills.
There may be times when, in the pressure of a hectic Monday morning, this may seem of marginal relevance; but there are plenty of times when it does not.
2.
How to Become an EFL Teacher
In obvious ways a native-speaker setting out to become a teacher of her/his mother tongue has a clear head start.
Indeed one of the professional battles which EFL had had to fight has been the assumption that any native speaker of English is ipso facto equipped to teach it.
There are now a number of routes to obtaining a qualification in the field.
Some of these lead to DES Qualified Teacher Status, notably the PGCE courses offering TEFL as a major or subsidiary subject available at a number of universities.
However, the majority of EFL-related qualifications operate outside the QTS field.
This is because many intending EFL teachers have already obtained QTS (perhaps through a modern languages PGCE) and are now looking for an ‘add-on’ EFL qualification; others may have decided that they want to work in a context (usually adult education in Britain or overseas) where QTS is not necessary or appropriate.
Of the non-QTS qualifications, the best known are those developed by the Royal Society of Arts and now administered by the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate.
Two levels of certification are offered: the Cambridge/RSA Certificate in Teaching EFL to Adults and the Cambridge/RSA Diploma in Teaching EFL to Adults .
The Certificate is essentially a pre-service qualification designed to quip native speakers (typically recent graduates) with some basic insights into the methodology of language teaching and the ‘content’ of EFL classes.
An important feature of the courses which lead to the awarding of the Certificate is the teaching practice with small groups of real students.
Courses are typically 4–5 weeks in length on a full-time intensive basis or nine months on an evening class basis.
The Diploma is an in-service qualification, designed to broaden participants' understanding of the principles as well as the practice of teaching EFL.
Typically a preparatory course will last between 10–12 weeks full-time, or the equivalent on a part-time basis.
These two qualifications have now achieved a very wide currency both in the UK and overseas as the basic requirements for an EFL teacher.
At the globetrotting stage described above, the Certificate will open many doors; but when it's time to come home and settle down a Diploma is needed.
If you intend to ‘grow up’ in the profession, it may be necessary to aim even higher.
There are now a wide range of postgraduate degrees in diplomas with an EFL orientation.
most MA's in Applied Linguistics, for example, are based on teaching EFL; of even more direct relevance are MA's in TESOL (Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages) or TEFL such as the one run by the Centre for Applied Language Studies at the University of Reading.
This is a very practically-focused course which even looks at areas such as the management of EFL institutions.
3.
So How Does It Feel?
The previous two sections have reviewed briefly some of the career openings and the training possibilities for EFL teachers.
But perhaps the most important aspect of any career is the very personal one: how does it feel to be an EFL teacher?
Clearly there may be as many answers to the question as there are individual teachers, but my own personal experience would suggest that there are both negative and positive ‘vibes’.
Negatively, I think that many EFL teachers in the UK suffer from a lack of a clear role or status in society.
Within the UK educational scene, EFL is a very marginal activity and most educationalists have little idea of its nature or its concerns.
And within society at large, there is even more ignorance.
Most people ‘in the street’ recognise what a teacher is; most would accord a teacher of (say) French a certain status (though perhaps not as much as the deserve) as being someone who has a special skill or expertise.
But a native-speaker of English teaching EFL in this country has no such position.
What is EFL — and what's so clever about teaching it?
Everybody speaks English don't they?
More positively, it undoubtedly feels good to be involved in teaching a subject where your insights and intuitions as a native speaker are positively sought and welcomed by your students.
You can provide valuable data just by opening your mouth — and although some students undoubtedly abuse this position by opening their mouths too much, this is an enviable position.
If I were a teacher of French, I would be worried that 50 million French people would know ‘my’ subject better than I do; as it is I have no such fears.
In professional terms, not needing to be constantly concerned to update their language competence, EFL teachers have been able to focus on methodological developments.
Over the last 15 years particularly, this has undoubtedly led to real progress in the methodology of teaching EFL — much of which has now spread into the teaching of other languages.
So in personal and professional terms EFL can feel good.
It's not all sunshine and roses, Mrs Worthington, but as long as she has her eyes open, your daughter should give it a try.
And you don't need an Equity card.
The Certificate in Language Teaching to Adults; Professional Development and Diversification
Lore Arthur
It is not my intention to describe in detail a particular course at a particular institution.
First of all, I do not need to publicise a successful venture in order to attract more applicants, and secondly, it would not do justice to the conference theme which aims to discuss aspects of untapped linguistic resources and teacher training.
Instead, I shall seek to attempt to raise issues which relate above all to the relationships between
transferable teaching skills
theory and practice in adult language teaching
increasing professionalism and expectations of employers
However, I would not be here were it not for the Certificate which I shall outline briefly to you.
The one-year, part-time Certificate was set up for the first time in 1983. it was, and still is, aimed at developing professional competence in language teachers in adult education mainly on a pre-service and, in a more limited way, in-service basis.
Adult education is to be understood in its wider sense of continuing education (Venables, 1976) that it is with reference to teaching undertaken in adult education institutes, community colleges, in further and higher education, as well as in organisations within the private sector of industry and commerce and the numerous private language schools.
In practice it means that course members may end up teaching in any of these institutions either at home or abroad.
It is interesting to note that quite a few are now teaching in the secondary school sector without DES QTS.
Such is the current shortage of foreign language teachers.
Uniquely perhaps, the course is aimed at tutors of EFL (English as a Foreign Language) and ESOL (English to Speakers of Other Languages) as well as those of Foreign and Community languages who hitherto trained, if at all, in highly segregated fields of practice each with their own specific aims, objectives and philosophies.
For example, some colleges will offer only EFL while others, mainly those in the adult education sector, concentrate on highly subsidized ESOL courses.
In-service training in these areas again tends to be separate and specialized.
As far as pre-service training within adult education is concerned, however, the mother tongue speaker will find it very hard to find a suitable course in his/her area.
Very little is being done in initial teacher training for either ESOL, or Foreign and Community Languages.
EFL is, of course, in a much stronger position.
There are the well-established and highly sought after RSA preparatory courses in addition to numerous other less well-known ones.
But TEFL is regarded by many, including school teachers, as a ‘way out’, an alternative, a new career and direction, either at home or abroad.
Most native speakers of the other languages, on the other hand, want to find a ‘way in’, a way into the system, a more rewarding job, with more social recognition, better pay and perhaps prospects.
The Goldsmiths' College Certificate offers such a chance.
Languages represented on the Certificate over the years have ranged from the more predictable European ones to Urdu, Hindi, Bengali, Chinese (Mandarin and Cantonese), Japanese, Danish, Russian as well as English.
Teaching support is offered either at Goldsmiths' College in our own language classes with the help of experienced support tutors or in neighbouring adult education institutes, particularly those which offer community languages or ESOL.
Follow-up research has shown that 95% of all successful course members found at least hourly paid part-time teaching posts either after completion of the course or increasingly during the course.
Predictably, there have been numerous success stories often involving mature women whose domestic commitments had prevented them from returning to employment, who had lost confidence in themselves or, if they were working, had little or no recognition for their linguistic and human management skills.
Most of these women have since experienced a considerable sense of satisfaction.
Teaching in adult education is, after all, a great deal of fun!
Some former course members have since obtained fulltime teaching posts in adult education.
Others have become examiners for the Institute of Linguists.
Quite a few have gone on to postgraduate teacher training to teach in the secondary sector.
The course has also attracted former school teachers with PGCE qualifications who had left teaching years earlier to raise a family and then found they needed a refresher or updating course before returning to full-time and or part-time work.
Much had changed in language teaching since the hey-day of audio visual methods with intensive drilling according to behaviourists principles.
However, success stories in themselves are not unusual and most certainly part of any teaching environment.
Otherwise we all might have packed it in long ago.
Transferable teaching skills
The strength of this particular course, I feel, lies in its mixed-culture, mixed-experience and mixed-purpose nature.
It is possible to end up teaching both EFL and ESOL and, if appropriate, a foreign or community language.
One particularly gifted black student refused to be stereotyped into teaching only ESOl and literacy by potential employers.
Instead, she now teaches EFL as well as ESOL not to mention Spanish and French, all with considerable success.
This student had at one time worked in catering until her love for learning foreign languages prompted her to tackle French and Spanish as a mature student.
She gained a degree in both languages and subsequently enroled in our course.
It is possible, then, to teach more than one language.
A Portuguese or Greek student could teach his or her mother tongue in this country or English back home.
A Hindi student could teach both ESOL and Hindi.
Alternatively, someone initially interested solely in EFL may discover more affinity with ESOL.
Provided there is a common understanding about aims, objectives, learner's needs and motivation, lesson planning and use of appropriate resources many communicative language teaching methods can, indeed, be transferred from one area to another.
The differences, where there are any, will be dictated by the target group of learners and their particular needs.
Thus, Bangladeshi women in an area such as Tower Hamlets, many of whom have additional difficulties in literacy, will require a different approach and different learning materials compared with overseas students staying in this country for a limited period only.
The same applies to a business executive needing a foreign language for specific rather than for holiday purposes.
However, a sensitive and intelligent tutor will and should be able to respond to any of these need without too many difficulties.
As Strevens (in Altman 1979) points out ‘In order to focus better on the learner we must also produce teachers of a calibre to do the focusing.’
There is, however, another dimension which helps to enrich cross-cultural language teaching and teacher training.
The English language is not only international or intra-national.
In Britain today English remains the language of literacy in the work place, in public, in the media and in all other spheres of British life.
The ability to read and write formal English is often the prerequisite for achievement in education and, in many instances, promotion at work.
British education systems as much as most have traditionally been used to inculcate a single concept of mainstream culture and to allocate young people to the occupational market on the basis of their receptivity to that culture and willingness to mirror values, language and behaviour (Lynch 1981).
Most tutors in EFL or ESOL are a product of that system.
They are more often than not monolingual and monocultural and, as language teachers, in a position of power.
Those from other countries and cultural backgrounds, on the other hand are bilingual or even pluralingual.
Many potential foreign language tutors are also linguistically better educated.
They tend to have more empathy towards anything foreign and are more aware of language learning difficulties — having struggled to master English to a fairly high level.
By having to learn from one another this power relationship is better balanced.
Monolingual British course members wishing to teach EFL or ESOL are certainly not better students, they do not achieve higher grades and are not in a dominant position within the group.
The Certificate in Language Teaching to Adults, then, seeks to develop precisely this understanding of each others cultures, languages, learning styles, learning and teaching expectations.
Course members reflect the multicultural, mixed ability, mixed experience as well as mixed age and social background nature common to most adult education settings.
Hence the course's educational philosophy which is based on students' needs, experiential and facilitative in teaching methods with a strong emphasis on developing autonomy, self-reliance and self- confidence towards professional competence.
Theory and Practice in adult second language teaching
Several more generic issues emerge, however.
It is interesting to note that we often refer to the training rather than education of language teachers.
Equally, we tend to see the learning of a foreign language as mastering a skill, thereby perhaps doing ourselves a disservice.
We train to do something for a particular purpose, to develop the performance of specific tasks or skills.
In contrast, the concept of education has normative overtones and we think of the processes of education as being of value apart from its instrumental use, that is education is seen as being concerned with the development of autonomous individuals who are able to adapt and influence their circumstances rather than be constrained by specific roles (Stephens 1988).
The underlying educational values in language teaching, then, are not often clearly stated or conceptualized.
A better framework is required.
Stern (1983) argued that a good pedagogical theory — or as adult educators would say a good andragogical one — would enable us to view language teaching in a much better perspective and to recognize its relationship with other kindred activities.
Language teachers are, however, pragmatists.
They tend to concentrate on HOW and WHAT rather than on the more fundamental WHY.
They deny any great interest in theory: yet, as Peck points out, all must have a vital concern with theory if their teaching is to avoid being aimless and purposeless (Peck 1988).
This is particularly important at a time when we as trainers are concerned with the ‘communicative approach’ to language teaching; when there are no specific methods, there is no one way of doing things, when a eclecticism rules, when almost everything the teacher does is fine provided it involves variety, the use of authentic language and authentic materials based on the learning needs of the individual and achieves effective communication — whatever this may mean.
Previous methods, such as the audio- visual method, based stimulus and response theories, where language teaching practices followed a tightly controlled pattern, were, indeed, more comfortable to the novice teacher.
Then it was simply a question of following step 1 then 2 then 3 etc.
There was no need to understand any theory for practical, everyday purposes.
Nowadays, it is not quite so straightforward.
Many of our course members are confused by this absence of one particular method of teaching; the rules and boundaries are not clear to tutors and learners alike.
The learner, too, needs to have a sense of purpose, and wants to regard the tutor as the professional in charge of the learning situation (FEU 1990).
The communicative approach, however, requires from the tutors the ability to relate language to specific meaning, social context, and communicative function.
‘The learner can be placed in situations where he must use language as an instrument for satisfying immediate criteria, and where the criterion for success is functional effectiveness rather than structural accuracy.’
(Littlewood 1985).
The DES publication ‘Languages for Communication’ lists a complex series of characteristics of unpredictability and social-cultural competence (Salter, 1989).
Tall orders, indeed, for the hapless language tutor needing to prepare his/her lesson, choose materials and activities and appropriate methods without tight guidelines.
In addition, many in adult education believe and practice a ‘self-negotiated’ syllabus whereby students and tutors negotiate course content and mode of teaching at the beginning of a course.
This will require considerable competence on behalf of the teacher who will need to set the general framework.
The term ‘self-negotiated’ can, however, also cause confusion, particularly in language teaching where students see their measure of success in their ability to speak and understand the target language and the progress they make in one particular course book.
In practice, then, expediency alone demands in most cases a curriculum-controlled, albeit student-centred, approach.
Student-centred, is the key word here.
Hence the teaching of adults requires, above all, an understanding of adults as learners , that is an awareness of their extrinsic and intrinsic motivation to learn, the importance of previous learning experiences, learning styles, age, memory, attitudes, anxieties and barriers to learning (Rogers, 1977; Cross, 1981).
Knowles (1978), with reference to adults, claims that there are four main assumptions which differentiate andragogy — the art and science of helping adults learn — from pedagogy in the context of school education.
These relate to changes in self-concept, life experiences, readiness to learn and orientation to learning.
While these assumptions are considered by many educators to be oversimplistic, they nevertheless serve to draw attention to specifically adult learning needs of which tutors in adult education need to have and understanding.
Increasing professionalism
Neither adult education nor foreign/second language teaching, however, can be regarded in isolation.
They relate and interact with other educational disciplines and practices as well as their social and political environment.
Most of adult education is market-determined and market-led.
Numerous academic debates seek to distinguish between the servicing role of adult education and one which is based on individual or collective needs within the context of social action.
In the final analysis all power relationships depend on resources, be it those obtained from the state, the respective local authority or the private individual who is to be willing to pay for a specific service.
Ultimately, so we are led to believe, the customer has the right to expect ‘value for money’.
Adult education, on the other hand, has for many years suffered from a kind of amateurish approach — part of its charm no doubt.
Tutors were offered little or no training, or even access to fulltime employment, not to mention a career structure.
Most of the teaching is still done by hourly-paid staff who enjoy none of the benefits such as holiday — or sick pay or even protection of employment.
The DES survey of Foreign Languages Courses for Adult Students while praising the quality of students' work as well as the commitment of the majority of teachers confirmed that 52% of foreign language teachers had no training to teach a foreign language at all— although some of them held a general qualification to teach adults (DES 1988).
Yet the market-led demand for foreign language courses, particularly in view of 1992, has most certainly resulted in an increasing shortage of language tutors everywhere.
I have, I hasten to add, no precise statistics on hand.
However, in my role as language courses co-ordinator in charge of a large languages programme I face a daily pressure from my superiors to generate income for our College.
This is, as many of my colleagues will confirm, not uncommon nowadays.
I juggle between putting on lucrative foreign language courses for the business world and at the same time offering a flexible service to the community, while maintaining and promoting tutors.
In addition, most of us face complexities such as performance appraisal, staff appraisal, course evaluation.
However, that is what I am paid for as a full- time member of staff.
Hourly-paid language tutors, too, face increasingly demanding employers.
They will not escape evaluation of a sort.
In addition to being good teachers able to motivate their students they are also expected to be able to plan and present a scheme of work, write a syllabus with clear aims and objectives.
They need to be aware, and should be, of equal opportunity policies as well as trends and developments in their professional environment.
These may refer to technology such as computers, satellite TV, the multi-media approach within the context of open learning centres and independent studies, the whole area or foreign/second languages for special purposes and vocational training, testing and assessment.
For example, many adult education institutes, traditionally non-vocational, now put on courses for specific language examinations, that is either GCSE or A-levels with a choice of examination boards, those of the Institute of Linguists, the RSA or in the case of EFL, the Cambridge examinations amongst many others.
We are then faced with more than one paradox.
The language tutor, be he or she in EFL, ESOL, or Foreign and Community languages, is increasingly expected to be a highly competent professional able to tackle an increasingly demanding and diverse teaching environment.
In addition, there is a growing demand for language courses coupled with a shortage of trained language teachers.
Yet London alone offers an enormous linguistic resource.
One simply has to refer to the ILEA's language census of 1987 which traced 172 languages spoken by children at home.
Adults are not mentioned in this context.
The major languages include Bengali, Turkish, Arabic, Greek, French, Spanish, Portuguese.
In addition, there are numerous foreign graduates from the Continent and elsewhere with considerable linguistic skills selling hamburgers or working as waiters with poor pay and no social recognition or status.
By offering pre-service training we can surely do no worse than act as honest brokers in a fairly honourable profession.
NCLE/BAAL RESEARCH PROJECT ‘Language in the European Workplace’ Review of Progress — Stephen Hagen
Overview of Research in Progress
1.
Phase I: German Multinationals
At the NCLE Conference of 26 May 1989, ‘Languages and Culture in the European Workplace’, the first phase of this complex research project was nearing completion.
The primary objective of this study had been an investigation into the in-house language training programmes of leading, multinational German manufacturing companies.
In some ways, the findings were predictable: unlike British multinationals, the German companies in the sample were characterised by a similar pattern of commitment:
(a)
foreign language training occupied a substantial share of the overall training budget (between 20% and 65%);
(b)
English was the dominant target language (i e accounting for 50% to 75% of all in-company language training), though provision was also found to be high for French and Spanish, less so for Italian, Japanese and Russian;
(c)
the courses on offer were both intensive and extensive;
(d)
regular learners were numbered in 100's and in one case 3,700 workers/managers were on courses;
(e)
companies' commitments however, fell short of establishing a core of permanent staff, relying instead on full- time managers overseeing part-time and freelance trainers.
A distinction has to be drawn here between occupational use of the FL i.e. at an individual level and company use at a global level.
This is perhaps best illustrated in the case of Niemeyer: while the Dutch subsidiary's commonest FL is English, the marketing manager spends his week using mainly Dutch (60%) and then foreign languages (40%).
Of these he uses German the most (40%), then English and French (30% each).
This supports the view that English is only one of several languages in use within the European workplace.
In this case a lower than expected use of English results from the secretary being required to rewrite the manager's reports in English on the basis of notes.
Since 70% of Niemeyer's reports have to be in English, bilingual secretaries form an indispensable linguistic support.
Indeed, the increasing use of English for reports is apparent across other international companies.
The leading accountants, KPMG, has now adopted English as its world-wide company language; reports, board meetings and contracts have to be in English.
indeed, the fourth Directive of the European Commission, which requires a unified reporting system, has lead to consolidation of the position of English as the dominant language of company reports across European multinationals.
To summarise:
(a)
the Dutch workplace is truly multilingual ; the workforce at Gebr, Meijer, for example, is already considered virtually bilingual in Dutch and German (70% understand German; 20% speak it) whilst 20% of all verbal communication on the shop floor is a mixture of languages where English forms approximately 20% of all dialogue — apparently because computer software is American.
(b)
English is predominant; varying between 70% — 80% of all use of the foreign language.
But German is perceived as a second mother tongue, not a foreign language.
(c)
The major sub-skills required in our sample are:
(i)
English for computing (e.g. accounting, invoicing software)
(ii)
report writing in English
(iii)
telephone skills (English/German/French)
(iv)
reading documents (legislation, import/export documents in English).
(d)
All companies were dismissive of the value of using professional translation agencies and sought to be self-sufficient (either within own plant or through their international network).
2.
Phase II: Variables in Corporate Language Strategies
2.1 Ensuring discussion at the conference raised several key issues about the development and direction of the research project.
Firstly, it was not entirely unexpected that giant multinational German companies would be committed to providing a comprehensive language training service.
However, the scale of resourcing for the service was staggering, in one case reaching DM 4 mill., p.a.
Secondly, it remained uncertain whether continental western European corporate language policy varied according to country and company size or type.
Clearly, further comparisons were needed with samples segmented by country and company-type.
2.2 The first German sample provided the pilot for the following surveys:
(a)
survey by questionnaire of 164 SME's in North East Holland (in collaboration with Hanze Polytechnic)(early 1989)
(b)
survey by questionnaire of circa 100 companies in Augsburg, Germany (primarily SME's)(December 1989)— data still under analysis;
(c)
intensive study of 4 Dutch companies (from small to medium-sized and large) by interview.
The sampling of companies both by direct means (interview) and indirect means (questionnaire), firstly, enabled questions to be tested across cultural boundaries; secondly, permitted a more accurate checking of findings; and, thirdly, facilitated comparisons and generalisations to be made between Germany, Holland and the UK.
3.
Summary of Findings; Holland
3.1.
Survey (a)
Over 50% of the Dutch sample of 164 SME's experienced daily contact with foreign trade partners and nearly 35% had direct contact once per week.
Given the location of the sample (North East Holland) German was most used (90.3%) followed by English (82.3%), French (27.4%), Spanish (6%), Swedish (4%) and Italian (3%).
This ranking order reflects the region's key trading partners —
(1)
Germany;
(2)
Belgium;
(3)
G.B./Ireland;(4) France;
(5)
Italy;
(6)
N. America.
Staff at executive and managerial level were expected to speak at least two foreign languages; German and English or French).
Some 73% of the sample claimed to have middle or senior management capable of using both English and German, though knowledge of French was limited to some 24%.
Beyond this, however, fewer than 5% claimed in-house skills in other languages.
Over 25% of the sample companies felt the linguistic skills of these staff were inadequate for the job and over 50% of these companies had experienced poorer export performance as a direct result.
The linguistic skills where a deficiency is most frequently cited are:
(a)
oral proficiency; i.e. (in order—telephoning, company presentations, face to face meetings and negotiations;
(b)
reading and writing — specifically for
(i)
comprehending and producing commercial correspondence and
(ii)
reading leaflets, brochures, manuals and reports.
When these needs are converted into demand for training, they translate into
(a)
courses aimed at improving oral fluency;
(b)
commercial correspondence courses in the specific line of business and translation courses.
In North East Holland, the sectors most in need are:
(a)
food processing
(b)
construction
(c)
wholesale and retail trade.
The external services employed by the companies were found to be inadequate by 24% of the sample — specifically
(a)
for the lack of relevant fluency training in
(1)
English;
(2)
German;
(3)
French;
and
(b)
due to the inadequate standard and quality of translations of commercial correspondence and product literature (into the foreign language).
3.2 Survey (b) January 1990
Four Dutch companies were identified as a representative sample of Dutch industry (and most comparable with the U.K. and German samples).
Three manufacturers were selected and one accountancy company:
Overall Characteristics of Sample
Unlike the German or British environment, the Dutch workplace was found to be multi-lingual from the smallest to the largest enterprises.
In this sample — due to location — the foreign language most needed was English.
Since German was not perceived as a foreign language.
In terms of company performance, use of foreign languages was vital to survival — though frequency of use depended on company-type and the position of the language user.
The importance of reading and writing skills in English is clearly increasing for all four companies whereby the position of English as the ‘Latin’ of European business for written communications is becoming more and more consolidated.
What is apparent, on the other hand, is that the oral/aural use of the other languages is not diminishing.
In Niemeyers, for example, the company language is English which is used for 70% of all non-Dutch communication (with French and German each approximately 15% to make up the rest).
However, whereas the balance of skill use for English is 60% (oral/aural) and 40% reading/writing) since all reports are in English, the proportion of spoken to written for both German and French is 90:10.
A similar balance was identified in Meijer BV where 90% of all telexes received were in English and only 10% in German.
The smallest company, Dutchman Biscuits, surprisingly identified an even greater predominance of English (80%) over German (20%) due to its importance for the Scandinavian market.
The M.D. of the company pointed out, however, that business opportunities were lost for lack of French: letters in French were left unattended and eventually thrown away.
The breakdown of FL use in Dutchman Biscuits was: 50% telephone skills; 30% handling and interpreting written material (including book-keeping and computerised accounts) and 20% writing in the FL.
This simple and straightforward balance of skills appears typical of the operation of small enterprises in the multilingual market of European business; i.e. focusing on two major tasks: response to verbal and written enquiries and handling the accounts on computer.
The important supportive role of secretaries was clearly apparent across this small sample of Dutch companies.
The managers interviewed in all four companies expected to initiate matters in the foreign language (usually verbally — by telephone; but also by producing draft written outlines of reports) and then subcontracted the work to highly skilled subordinates, such as bilingual secretaries.
Compared with their British counterparts, our sample of Continental companies in Germany and Holland recognise the importance of foreign language skills.
This is, moreover, reflected in either their personnel policies or investment in training or both.
English may be predominant in training and use — but other languages, notably French and German in Holland or French and Spanish in Germany, receives sizeable commitment of resources — on average half that of English.
OUTLINE OF PAPER
Language Training in a Bilingual Context
1.
The Community Interpreter Project
2.
The related examinations:
i)
the Bilingual Skills Certificate
ii)
the Certificate of Community Interpreting
iii)
the Post-graduate Diploma in Community Interpreting Training Techniques
3.
The Course Scenarios
4.
What is a Language Enhancement Coordinator?
5.
Catering for more than one language at a time
6.
Conclusion — bilingual awareness for a wider constituency
Language Training in a Bilingual Context
The Community Interpreting Project
Over the last six years I have been closely involved with the Institute of Linguists Community Interpreting Project, coordinated by Ann Coresellis whose paper this afternoon will be discussing the emergence and future of the profession of Community Interpreting.
Much of the early work of the Project was aimed at identifying the training needs of those who already do or would like to work as community interpreters and also at considering the needs of the staff working in statutory services who have to work through interpreters.
It is clearly pointless and ineffective to qualify community interpreters without the professional cooperation of the services.
This has to be based on an understanding of the code of ethics, working to an agreed code of practice and so on, and Ann will be saying more on this.
i) the Bilingual Skills Certificate.
ii) the Certificate of Community Interpreting and iii) the Post Graduate Diploma in Community Interpreter Training Techniques
i) An early result of several course which were piloted as part of the project, was the Bilingual Skills Certificate , now offered by the Institute of Linguists.
This is a Certificate which can be taken in English and any one of more than a dozen Community Languages.
Over 20 Colleges in Britain now run course leading to that examination and more are envisaged.
It should be stressed that this is not a qualification in interpreting or community work.
What it does is demonstrate the candidate's ability to operate in English and a community language adequately in ordinary community contexts.
It is also to be seen as a stepping stone to further bilingual specialisation.
The nearest one can get to a level equivalence is to say that it is at roughly A Level standard, though it differs hugely from any actual A Level examination, and this comparison should not be taken too literally.
The Certificate consists of two written and two oral translation tests, using community-based material,(on topics such as housing, health or education) into and out of English, one letter to be written in each language, for example to the DSS on behalf of a non English speaker about benefits, or from a school head to a non-English speaking parent, two short monolingual roleplays — one in each of the two languages concerned, and a short (scripted) liaison interpreting exercise.
ii) At a much higher level of bilingual proficiency is the Certificate in Community Interpreting .
This has also been thoroughly piloted, in Peterborough, Cambridge, London, and Bedford.
This Certificate qualifies a person to work as a Community Interpreter in a particular context: the exam is offered either in the context of the Health Service, the Legal Services or Local Government .
iii) The most recent pilot course has been the first Post-Graduate Diploma course in Interpreting Training Techniques , funded, like the other pilots, by the Nuffield Foundation and held at the Polytechnic of Central London in 1989.
You will meet diplomates from this course later.
3.
The Course Scenarios
With regard to the theme of today's Conference — namely the retraining of language teachers, I hope that my experience on these pilot courses will be of interest, and may even ring some bells.
Here are come of the issues and challenges we faced.
I was English Language Tutor on all three of the courses outlined just now.
On each one there were between 8 and 22 students who were all more or less bilingual — or even trilingual —(and biliterate) in English and either Panjabi, Urdu, Bengali, Gujurati, Vietnamese, Polish, Spanish or Italian.
Their levels varied depending on the course, but all had written and spoken assessment in both languages before being selected.
it should be remembered that though these students often have no recent formal education, their motivation and potential learning power is very strong, stemming from their constant exposure to a bilingual environment, and the realisation that a certificated functional bilingual environment will raise the chances of their and others' access to education, employment and public services.
My own position and title has also been varied,(most recently being called ‘Language Enhancement Coordinator’!)
I speak English, French and Spanish but not the others mentioned, so I have had to be very open to inferring sociolinguistic information and to being wary of my own assumptions.
4.
What is a Language Enhancement Coordinator?
it sounds like a Trivial Pursuits question, but I hope the analogy ends there!
Where to begin?
I have found that the rich linguistic background of the students themselves is always a good start: for example.
I ask them to build up a Personal Language Profile (either on their own or by interviewing each other) which they then share with others in the group.
This profile contains information such as: what they consider to be their mother tongue,(which is not always a straightforward matter), what other language with whom, in what medium and in which domain etc.,) what other languages they have learned, acquired and used in their lives and also highlights the diverse linguistic abilities that people already have before going on any course — this often comes as something of a surprise — even to the people concerned!
Then, one of my main tasks began to emerge as that of raising language awareness with reference to English , encouraging the students to use this awareness to examine and analyze their other language (which was usually their L1, though not always) in order to equip them to describe the rules of use of that language.
To do this we look at the factors involved in communicative competence, the relationship between form and function, the language of different registers, discourse features and cultural appropriateness.
The level at which this is pitched and the textual content naturally varies depending on the course and the contexts range widely: one day we might focus on the language of a rape victim in Panjabi (which we roleplayed in Bedford Police Station), the next a simulated interview in Arabic on child abuse, and the next a Vietnamese patient explaining her persistent earache to the doctor, a symptom masking the deeper one, i.e. the trauma of being a refugee.
Minefields in any language!
5.
Catering for more than one language at a time
As I said, apart from Spanish I am not a speaker of any of the other languages I have recently been involved in.
We were frequently fortunate to find some very good tutors in the other languages, but four points are worth noting about this:
a)
Planning the appointment of a language tutor in advance can be more difficult than it sounds.
With a field in its infancy such as this one, it has not always been known which languages were going to be involved until the students were actually recruited.
Indeed we had a whole term of the Bilingual Skills Course in Bedford without an Urdu tutor at all— the students preferred to stay and act as their own tutors until one was found — and proved to be an excellent self-help language group.
If on the other hand you specify the languages in advance, you may be leaving out a language group in which there are people who want to train that you did not know of.
To avoid this means careful research of community needs, time and knowhow to conduct it and of course funding.
(And finding examiners is not always easy either…when looking for a Polish one, I was recommended the very student who needed one!)
b)
Much of the time available to the other language tutors appointed had to be spent of the vital tasks of practical translation work and the making of term banks and so on— leaving little time for broader ‘language awareness’ issues to be addressed.
This is unfortunate.
After all, even when teachers are teaching their students to communicate in one language at a time they need to examine the principles of communication.
Their students learn that to make effective choices about what to say, how, when and whether to say it, a speaker has to take contextual elements into account: the topic involved, the setting of the encounter, the role relationship between the speakers, the extent of shared knowledge between them, any cultural expectations one or other might have and so on.
How much more of a task does an interpreter have then, when faced with two sets of all these things to consider and two different languages?
A difference in age or gender between speakers of English, for example, may or may not affect the way things are said, whereas in Urdu, such differences are always reflected.
(Ali Haouas will tell you how!)
The community interpreter has to be able to juggle this kind of information all the time.
He/she must walk a tightrope too: interpret a tentative remark too directly and you may sound rude — but reproducing it too closely to the original may sound so tentative as to be confusing in the other language.
So an understanding of the relationship between linguistic accuracy and cultural appropriateness is clearly crucial.
Normally one is only oneself, one half of an encounter — but an interpreter has to ‘be’ both sides, and with equal ability.
The nature of the choice of language is, of course, slightly different from that of most speaker/listeners: it is a more closed choice —‘dictated’ by the clients, but this can make it more difficult, not less so, particularly since so much can depend on choosing appropriately and being able to do so both ways: clearly a community interpreter cannot work brilliantly into one language and culture and poorly into the other.
c)
In some cases the language tutors' own training and experience lead them, understandably, to a rather prescriptive, narrow approach to language use and learning.
Thinking systematically about the linguistic and cultural flexibility needed in this field, and applying the insights produced by such thinking is a relatively new activity, as is also the realisation of how very stressful the work can be.
So it is not surprising that few people exist who have ideal qualifications.
After all, imagine the job advert, which might read something like this:
Professional Community Interpreter trainer required, with relevant experience in the community and the classroom with strong background knowledge of at least one service agency.
Must have a good understanding of the ethnography of speaking in the bilingual context, particularly that of interpreted interviews.
Counselling skills an advantage!
How many do YOU know?
d)
Lastly, there are important resource implications if more than one tutor is involved.
It is clearly necessary to cater for all the languages in the group and ‘double’ resourcing or ‘triple’or even more, has been possible for us with Nuffield Foundation funding, but it is far from being seen as an obvious need by those who hold the State sector purse strings, for example!
All these four points clearly indicate a need to coordinate objectives.
CONCLUSION — bilingual awareness for a wider constituency
For any innovative training, the issue of who will train the trainers, and even the trainers of the trainers (!) is a pertinent one, and one which needs careful thought.
The language tutors we have had on our courses were certainly not always given sufficient help to do the job asked of them, and as Language Enhancement Coordinator, I take my share of responsibility for this.
Indeed, it is not an exaggeration (or a slur) to say that the students were sometimes a jump ahead of their tutors, not for the first time in the history of education!
Now I would imagine that the aim is for the English retrainer of the French teacher of English, say to be fully bilingual (however defined) and qualified to do the job, though my guess is that this will not in fact always be possible.
I have a feeling that I may not be the only language tutor who has asked herself:
How do I ‘get at’ at the problems and values embedded in a language I don't share, and make sure the students focus on appropriate aspects of that language?
All the discussion in the world about register and appropriateness in English might still fail to reveal crucial aspects of Panjabi, Gujarati or even German, and may even cloud the issue.
One has to develop a bilingual atmosphere in this kind of training, and use techniques which will foster this.
Interpreting roleplays for instance are not only useful in interpreting courses — they are already used sometimes in other areas of language teaching to good effect.
The point here is that language equivalence problems emerge in a natural way, bringing to the surface characteristics of a particular language, not necessarily previously thought of.
Furthermore, recording them on video allows for discussion in which the ‘rules of appropriateness’ can begin to be described rather than being left to instinct.
Short translation exercises can have a similar function: e.g. Student A translates a paragraph from L1 into L2.
Student B translates it back into L1 without looking at the original.
They then compare the two L1 versions.
While showing up weaknesses in language structure.
It can also be quite revealing about the individual's translation strategies and their views on the nature of the translating process.
At the same time, differences in the way the text is handled often highlights particular L1 features, which can then be discussed in either language.
There is undoubtedly a growing interest in the bilingual aspects of language teaching generally — and the days of the direct method may be receding.
It is beginning to be recognised that proficiency in more than one language often carries with it the need to be what one might term ‘crosslingual’, that is, able to generate connections across languages rather than only using them independently of each other .
Many people need to use more than one language in the same domain.
Professional interpreters and translators are not alone in needing to be able to display bilingual skills: teachers, businesspeople, administrators, welfare service personnel and trade unionists are going to want such skills, but none more so, perhaps, than those who train language teachers.
Catherine Wrangham, January 1990
Outline
Training European teachers to teach their mother tongue
Background Factors
The move to comprehensive schools in the sixties and seventies led to a broadening of the ability range facing language teachers in British schools.
The implementation of the National Curriculum in the nineties will lead to an extension of that broad span of ability up the age range.
At the same time, the aims of language teaching have become more practical and the methods more ‘communicative’.
The policy of diversification of the first foreign language should mean an expansion of German and Spanish teaching.
These factors add up to a teaching force facing rising demands on its skills with falling numbers.
‘Euroteachers’ project
Whilst Britain is suffering a teacher shortage, some other EC states have an oversupply.
With financial support from the DES, the Language Teaching Centre is investigating the feasibility of recruiting trained foreign language teachers, particularly in the Federal Republic of Germany, which has a considerable surplus, and reschooling them in a custom-made, one term induction course prior to their taking up a teaching-post in a British school.
The induction course
The course assumes that the teachers are qualified teachers of at least one foreign language (probably English) in their own country, that they are native speakers of the language they are going to teach in Britain, and that they have a good practical command of English.
What they lack, and this is what the induction course will principally offer, is formal knowledge about their own language and detailed information about British secondary education — school system, teacher and pupil roles and expectations, curricula, methods, materials, assessment and examinations, etc.
They need to become explicitly aware of patterns which are implicit in their native language, so that they can, when necessary, help pupils to see those patterns.
This heightening of awareness needs to be approached cautiously in order to avoid destroying one of the great assets of native speakers when teaching their language — their natural focus on message rather than medium.
They need also to be familiarised with the methods and materials that are used to teach their native language as a foreign language in British schools.
They need to be informed about the aims and content of foreign language teaching in this country, as laid down at present by exams such as GSCE and in the future by the National Curriculum.
They need, above all, to become familiar with the British role model for a school teacher in general and a language teacher in particular.
The latter cannot be adequately transmitted in seminars alone: the course will also offer direct school experience and the opportunity to work alongside British teacher-trainees.
Peter S. Green
NCLE CONFERENCE 10/2/1990
UNTAPPED LINGUISTIC RESOURCES: THE CHALLENGE TO UK LANGUAGE TRAINING.
Training European teachers to teach their mother tongue
Peter S. Green, Language Teaching Centre, University of York
1.
Preamble
I am addressing this meeting, not because I am an expert in the field of training European teachers to teach their mother tongue, but because the Language Teaching Centre (LTC) of the University of York is running a project to bring over qualified language teachers from Germany and France and retrain them to teach their mother tongue as a foreign language in British schools.
My background is language-teacher training but as part of a PGCE course, which is normally concerned with training native speakers of English to teach French, German, etc. in British schools.
So that is an important limitation to the subject of my talk: I am concerned with training European teachers to teach their mother tongue in British secondary schools .
In practice, that means training them above all to teach beginners, since at present perhaps half of those who start learning a foreign language in the first year of secondary school have given it up by the end of the third year.
Some background factors
I should like to remind you of five background factors that are relevant to the training course we propose.
2.1 The first is the move to comprehensive schools in the fifties and sixties, which broadened the ability range of the learners facing language teachers in schools, from the top 30% perhaps in the days of the grammar school to virtually all pupils in the first two years of secondary school today.
2.2 Secondly, the implementation of the National Curriculum through the nineties will mean that the ‘horizontal’ extension of school language teaching across the ability range will be followed by a ‘vertical’extension up the age range, since a foreign language is to be a foundation subject for all pupils between the ages of 11 and 16.
2.3 As the nature and number of the learners have changed and partly as a consequence of that change), so has the nature of the teaching.
The aims of language teaching in school have become more practical (as a comparison between the GCSE and the old O- level clearly shows) and the methods used to achieve them more ‘communicative’.
2.4 It is Department of Education and Science (DES) policy, and is enshrined in National Curriculum documents on modern foreign languages, ‘to encourage diversification by widening the choice of first foreign languages available’ in schools.
A consequence of this policy should be an expansion of German and Spanish teaching at the expense of French.
2.5 Whilst the foregoing factors have created the need for more language teachers — teachers, moreover, who have been trained to cope with new challenges — the supply has been falling, to the point where they have been labelled in one study ‘an endangered species’.
The ‘Euroteachers’ Project
Whilst there is a shortage of teachers in the UK, there is currently an oversupply in some other member states of the European Community — in Belgium, in the Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg and Spain.
European Community Directive 89/48/EEC, which is concerned with the mutual recognition of professional qualifications and which comes into force throughout the Community in January 1991, has already been implemented by the UK, as regards teachers, with effect from September 1989.
Thus, a language teacher who has qualified to teach in the Federal Republic of Germany is already regarded as having ‘qualified teacher status’(QTS) here and can apply for teaching posts in UK schools.
All these factors led the LTC to propose a pilot project to the DES aimed at investigating the feasibility of recruiting unemployed German and French language teachers and offering them a one-term induction course at the LTC prior to their applying for posts to teach in schools in the UK from September 1990.
The DES agreed to fund a pilot project for the ten months from October 1989 to July 1990. it aims to identify and recruit twenty German and French teachers for a ten-week course in the coming summer term.
4.
Recruitment
We expect to recruit mainly from Germany, since there is widespread unemployment among trained language teachers there owing to the system of free admission to teacher training.
The employment prospects vary from one federal state to another, but in Schleswig-Holstein, for instance, the chances of employment on completion of training are described in a 1989 ministry document, as ‘slim’, both now and in the immediate future.
France, with its competitive admission to training, is able to match the number of entrants to available posts and therefore, apparently has no teacher unemployment.
For that reason, we are unlikely to find French recruits with QTS and they will have to seek employment here as ‘licensed teachers’.
It remains to be seen whether of not that will prove a handicap, given the current UK shortage of language teachers.
That possibility is, at any rate, being made clear to French applicants without QTS.
Our problem is how best to bring our course offer to the attention of potential recruits.
For Germany, our main approach is through ministries and teacher-training institutions, who at least have the last-known addresses of teachers who have completed training but not found employment.
In France, we have mainly approached the university departments of French as a foreign language.
We have also used the services of the British Council in both countries and the media, through press releases.
Officialdom has proved entirely cooperative and our publicity has probably reached a wide audience.
There are, however, two severe deterrents to enrolment.
The first is that we cannot offer employment, as an LEA can if it decides, as ILEA and Havering have done, for instance, to recruit directly abroad.
We are offering a relevant course of training with good prospects,but no promise , of employment at the end of it.
The second deterrent is a financial one: course participants do not have to pay fees, since the course itself is financed by the DES, but they do have to fund their living costs over a ten-week period — a not inconsiderable financial commitment.
We have applied to many sources of possible grant support for these costs, such as the Lingua Project, the DAAD and industry.
The French Embassy in Britain has generously offered to give some financial assistance to French course participants.
5.
The Induction Course
Our planning of an appropriate induction course for the French and German teachers is based on a number of assumptions about what they already have and what they lack:
They have a native command of the language they are going to teach in this country, but they lack formal theoretical knowledge about it.
They have theoretical knowledge and practical experience of language-teaching methods, but they lack knowledge of the methods and materials used to teach their native language as a foreign language in the UK, and have only limited familiarity with British secondary education — the school system, teacher and pupil roles and expectations, curricula, assessment and exams.
They have a good practical command of English, but they nevertheless lack the register of classroom English.
Of course, individuals will vary.
Those teachers who have served as foreign-language assistants will start out from a much better knowledge of British schools than those who have not.
Those who have taken a course in German or French as a foreign language will already have some formal knowledge of that language.
The course will concentrate entirely on the teachers' deficits and have the following components:
5.1 Teaching the native language as a foreign language
This course component will adopt both a theoretical and a practical approach.
On the one hand, the teachers need to have certain patterns of their language over which they have implicitly mastery raised to the level of explicit knowledge, in order to help pupils to recognise those patterns where necessary.
We shall, however, take care not to prejudice the great asset that native speakers have a tendency to focus more on message and less on medium than non-native foreign-language teachers do.
On the other hand, the teachers need to be familiarised with the methods and materials commonly used to teach their native language as a foreign language to British pupils.
5.2 British schools
The kind of areas that will be covered in this course component are types of schools, their structure, management and ethos, the roles and expectations of both teachers and pupils, teachers' working conditions and status, pastoral care and discipline.
5.3 The National Curriculum and assessment
The teachers need to be informed about the aims and content of foreign language teaching in the UK as it is controlled at present by exams such as GCSE and in the future by the National Curriculum.
They need also to learn about assessment, from school exams through graded tests to GCSE and A &S levels.
5.4 The language of the classroom
The teachers will, it is hoped, use their native language extensively in the foreign language classroom.
Nevertheless, they will need to address pupils in English, and that will call on a register of English with which they probably have little acquaintance despite their good overall common of the language.
use of inappropriate language could have very negative effects on the teacher's standing with pupils.
5.5 Experience of the classroom
The teachers will observe and, hopefully, participate in language lessons in local schools during a day or half-day each week.
the purpose will not only be to form an impression of methods and levels of language teaching but also to observe how teachers and pupils talk to each other in the UK.
5.6 Sharing the PGCE programme
As the induction course runs concurrently with the summer term of the PGCE programme, the foreign teachers will join the PGCE students for method seminars on one day each week.
In doing so, it is hoped that they will not only benefit from the content of the seminars (topics such as sixth-form teaching and exams) but, by rubbing shoulders with and getting to know British teacher- trainees, come to a better understanding of the role-model of a language teacher in the UK.
5.7 Applying for jobs
As the teachers will have to compete for jobs on the open market, it will be important to offer them guidance on how teaching posts are obtained in the UK.
A number of seminars will deal with locating adverts, writing for further particulars, composing a CV and application, and above all undergoing a job interview.
As the latter is likely to be completely unknown territory, each course participant will be given a simulated job interview with a panel of three unknown interviewers.
The induction course will last for the whole of the university summer term, ie for ten weeks from April to June 1990.
Conclusion
This project was designed to study the feasibility of recruiting unemployed French and German teachers and retraining them for jobs as teachers of their native languages in Uk schools.
Put briefly, the key questions to be answered are:
Can we reach the teachers?
Will they come?
What do they need from an induction course?
Can we give it to them in ten weeks?
Can they get jobs at the end of it?
Will they stay in the jobs?
The first question can be answered with an unqualified yes.
The second can also be answered affirmatively but with a proviso.
Although the course is free, accommodation and living are not, and for an unemployed teacher that is a major stumbling block.
We may — just — achieve our target of twenty recruits, even though we cannot offer financial assistance to the majority of them.
To bring over any substantial numbers in the future would certainly require a source of grant funding.
The remaining questions are all still open.
We think we know what the teachers need and that we can give it to them.
We think they should be able to get jobs and hope they will stay for a few years at least.
But we shall not know for some time yet.
I am convinced, however, that language teachers coming from abroad to work in the UK should be seen as something positive and not just as a stop-gap measure to alleviate a national shortage.
The purpose of the European Community's Directive on professional qualifications is precisely to foster mobility of workers between member states.
Working abroad is particularly appropriate for language teachers.
Not only will the German and French teachers themselves benefit, in their increased command of English and knowledge of British life and institutions (as large numbers of British teachers of German benefited who worked in German schools during the seventies, when Germany had a teacher shortage) but they will bring their great asset of native-speaker fluency and intimate knowledge and experience of the foreign country to foreign language classrooms that are increasingly practical and communicative.
When foreign-language teachers are nowadays being encouraged to ‘play the role of a sympathetic native speaker’, there must be something to be said for their actually being ‘sympathetic native speakers’.
Notes
1.
‘However, many pupils give up learning a language at the end of the third year.
While the proportion of pupils continuing to learn a foreign language to age 16 has improved in recent years, to a little more than two-fifths, the drop-out rate, particularly of boys, remains regrettable’.
Modern Languages in the School Curriculum: A Statement of Policy.
DES/HMSO
2.
Eric Hawkins &Gordon Lawrence, ‘Modern language teachers — an endangered species’, Education, Vol. 171, No. 25, 24 June 1988
3.
Joanna Le Mètais, The impact on the education service of teacher mobility, A Report for the Association of Education Committees trust, NFER, 1990.
4.
5.
Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (German Academic Exchange Service).
6.
A native speaker of German and trained teacher of English, who was a (successful) candidate for a Lektorin post at the LTC some years ago was asked at interview to explain when to say ‘in die Schule’ and when to say ‘in der Schule’.
After some reflection, she was unable to offer any rule but said, quite correctly, ‘It seems to have something to do with the verb.’
THE POSTGRADUATE DIPLOMA COURSE IN COMMUNITY INTERPRETER TRAINING TECHNIQUES: THE SEED CORN OF A NEW PROFESSION
Introduction
The first postgraduate diploma course in community interpreter training techniques (Dip.
CITT) was piloted at the Polytechnic of Central London last year.
This course has great significance in the development of this new profession.
it is difficult, however, to appreciate that significance without knowing something of the context in which it takes place.
I would like therefore to begin by looking briefly at that context and then move onto the skills which the diplomates will train their students to achieve, the level of skills their students are likely to have already and outline some of the issues met by the Dip.
CITT course in training people to bridge that gap.
Context
It has been estimated that, by the year 2000, 30% of the population of urban Europe under the age of 35 will not originate in the country where they are living.
In the case of the UK these figures are supported by surveys such as that carried out by the Inner London Education Authority which showed that over 22% of the children it its schools spoke a language other than, or in addition to , English at home.
An increasing number of people will move between countries — voluntarily or involuntarily, permanently or temporarily — for work, education or pleasure.
In Britain, unlike some countries, there will be multiplicity of languages involved — African, Asian and, particularly after 1992, European.
A significant number of people will not learn the language of the host country to a level which will allow them to communicate effectively outside their day to day routine.
A great deal has been said about the need to improve language skills in order to deal with the needs of trade and industry in the contemporary multi-lingual world.
I am inviting you to consider some of the steps which have been developed to promote the level and quantity of language skills which are needed to sustain and develop the social infrastructure in relation to the public services in a multi-lingual Britain.
First of all, it might be useful to confront what will happen if this issue is not addressed systematically.
What will be the result if a significant proportion of the population cannot, because of language and cultural differences, gain effective access to the legal system, to the health services and to local government services — including housing and social services?
What will happen to the most vulnerable, who cannot even complain because they cannot communicate — even though they pay their taxes to support these services?
What will be the effect upon the providers of those services who will have to be professionally responsible for decisions made upon inaccurate or incomplete information?
The results are beginning to show.
There have already been, for example, incidences of miscarriages of justice because of inadequate communication (Iqbal Begum v Regina) and statistics reveal a higher incidence of infant mortality among non-English speaking language groups.
There is increasing concern among service providers who are being expected to provide an equal standard of service to all their clients without the necessary language facilities.
Bilingual children are losing out on their schooling because they are out interpreting for their parents in totally unsuitable situations such as family planning clinics.
The absence of the adequate language skills is causing real and unnecessary damage.
The Community Interpreter Project was set up in 1983 to develop and pilot a practical model which would enable people to communicate effectively within the context of the main public services in a multi-lingual Britain.
The word ‘community’ is intended to describe the whole community of a town or country, not one particular language group.
The project has been run under the auspices of the Institute of Linguists Educational Trust and funded by the Nuffield Foundation.
The model has been developed in collaboration with many people from all sorts of linguistic, cultural and professional backgrounds.
Approach
The approach has reflected the collaborative nature of the work.
At the outset we looked at the traditional ways in which new developments have been incorporated into the domain of the public services.
In the last twenty years, those of us who work in these services have seen revolutionary changes which have been brought about by the use of state-of-the-art scientific technological developments.
The equivalent changes in language usage have not kept pace with contemporary demand.
The scientific developments have been created by co-operation between the service provider, the service consumer and the expert and this has been our approach.
It was important to involve the consumers — in this case, the non-English speaking language groups.
The courses, examinations and working practices have been based on their perceptions.
They wanted a model which reflected their need to retain control of their own affairs as individuals and their concern not to allow any cosmetic compromises.
I is interesting to not how closely their perceptions of what was needed tallied with what the service providers perceived as the language skills which were needed to allow them to work effectively.
Information Gathering and Sharing
In the academic world there is a feeling that nothing exists until it is written down.
In this practical field the reverse often applies.
Information has been gathered and shared among consumers, linguists and public service personnel by working alongside each other, listening and discussion.
A network of contacts has been built up.
The traditional way of disseminating and institutionalising information within the services and among language groups is not in the main by the written word but by showing and sharing.
If you have spent a twelve hour day coping with the daily realities of road accidents, the elderly incontinent, housing the homeless — usually with inadequate resources — I promise you that you rarely want to go home and read about it.
Gathering accurate information and perceptions on which to base our work has been a time consuming and laborious exercise but we have all learnt a great deal in the process and the model which has emerged appears to be acceptable to all of those who have been involved and the information networks have begun to do their time honoured job.
The Language Skills and Structures Required
The model involves three interdependent groups of skills —
1 Bilingual Service Providers — people who are both qualified to provide a service (such as doctors, policemen, lawyers and environmental health officers) and are competent to offer that service in either English or another language.
These people have to have an objective understanding of both culture bases and of the professional implications involved.
Indeed in some disciplines, such as diagnostic speech therapy and psychiatry, it would be difficult to provide the service other than through a bilingual professional because so much of the information needed is contained in the language usage.
There is a need for a team of such people with a national remit.
However, there are about 170 different languages spoken in London alone, so that it would be logistically impossible to have an adequate number of bilinguals for each service and language.
Therefore, there is a need for —
2 Interpreters, who are trained and qualified to a nationally consistent standard, to work with service providers who are trained to accommodate language and cultural differences.
The long term objective is to have a national data base containing details of all qualified interpreters.
When that happens, it will be possible for anyone who needs an interpreter to contact one by telephone and know that, when the interpreter arrived, he or she was competent and worked to a nationally recognised code of professional practice.
Interpretation on its own is not enough.
The appropriate information has to be exchanged through the interpreter, so that a service is given which is both within the remit of the service and acceptable to the individual recipient.
There is not point, for instance, in having accurate interpretation and then serving pork chops to elderly Muslim patients.
3 Consumer skills
Consumers have to know what services are available to them and how to access and use those services effectively.
Anyone who has been involved in deciding career choices with their children, finding suitable accommodation for elderly relatives or reporting a traffic accident in their own country will appreciate this.
Finding a dentist on a Sunday can require a high level of skills!
Giving this sort of information in an accessible way to non- English speakers demands high standards of linguistic skills and sensitivity, interdisciplinary co-operation and considerable management skills.
The straight translation of culture bound information leaflets is usually the first approach of services who have made the momentous discovery that not everyone speaks English — and the least effective.
It would be no way to sell a washing machine, much less ante-natal care.
There is a need for talks by bilingual service providers, information tapes and videos with voice overs in different languages.
It would be cost effective to have a national, multi- lingual information resource.
The Existing Language Skills and Attitudes
There is a substantial dormant language potential in the UK which, if it achieved nothing else, this project has shown that it is possible to activate to a useful level.
When we started the project in 1983 we began in Peterborough, a fairly average city you would think, whose population contains about 17% of people of non-English origin.
We advertised by personal contacts and through the media — the local TV, radio, and press — for potential bilinguals to come and be tested with a view to training them as interpreters.
The results will not be surprising.
Most of those tested were incomplete bilingually.
On the whole, they had either been through the English education system and had therefore a good command of English and a limited domestic register in their other languages, or they had been educated abroad and learnt their English as adults when they arrived in this country.
In the latter group there had often been erosion of their first language and their command of English was confined to the language they needed for everyday use.
Neither group had the bilingual competence which could form a sound basis for interpreter training but it is easy to forget what a considerable achievement the language skills they did possess demonstrated.
The second group of existing language skills I would like to address is that of the service providers.
The numbers of the bilingual service providers which are already mentioned are growing slowly.
They are coming from the second and third generations of families who have migrated to this country, families who have encouraged their children to enter the professions and vocations as lawyers, doctors, nurses and local government officers and to retain their competence in their own language.
As travel becomes easier, more and more young people are spending time visiting relatives in both countries and continuing to sustain and develop their interest both languages and cultures.
The present generation of young people is acutely aware of the need for a second language.
They know that, for instance, after 1992 many professional equivalencies will be recognised within Europe.
They are going to have to compete for jobs, even in the UK, with their contemporaries who have trained elsewhere in Europe and who are competent to work in English.
There is a growing number of course in higher education with a language component but — apart from the law degrees — not enough for the service professions and vocations.
It has of course been said that it is possible to practice veterinary medicine and that many doctors do not communicate in any language but it has to be said that there is room for improvement.
Apart from the bilingual element, most service providers will have an increasing number of clients with whom they do not share a language and culture and will have to develop the communicative skills to accommodate this.
The existing communicative skills of competent service providers are often underestimated.
If you watch an effective policeman or nurse giving the same information to a row of people from different backgrounds, you will be surprised at the range and flexibility of the instinctive code switching.
They develop a surprising ability to exchange information verbally and non verbally within the culture groups they are familiar with.
What they must consciously develop are strategies which will enable the same degree of information exchange with other culture and language groups through an interpreter.
It is also worth mentioning three sets of existing attitudes which have to be overcome because it is always wise to know what you are up against.
Theses are often the result of a lack of understanding by non-linguists of the implications involved and of an unwillingness to confront them.
These attitudes have acquired their own shorthand titles.
The first if the ‘bottom of the in-tray phenomenon’ which refers to the continuous marginalisation, trivialisation and the hope that if the language issue is ignored everyone will learn English as they come through the Channel Tunnel.
The second is known irreverently as the ‘unholy trinity’.
This is a usually unconscious, and therefore very powerful, negative collusion between teaching centres who are anxious to fill places (there have been instances of courses to train interpreters to below A level standard lasting six weeks), service providers who really do not understand the level and type of skills required and have no strategies to locate them and unqualified interpreters who feel their jobs are threatened.
These people cannot really be criticised for doing their best with the resources available to them and could be brought into the new developments.
The third set of attitudes relate to those who are known to my Asian colleagues as the ‘muesli missionaries’(as in ‘Miranda had an unhappy love affair/acne/a need to save the world, so she has gone to work with the ethnic minorities’.)
This is the same set of attitudes which causes people to clear out the unwanted gear out of their lofts to send to Ethiopia rather than enabling the Ethiopians to get the best training possible as irrigation engineers, doctors and agricultural scientists and economists.
It is about double standards.
Conversion
I have already mentioned the need for systematic training of bilingual service providers.
What I would like to see would be language centres for the professions and vocations as well as for export.
The medical, legal and local government discipline should have the facilities to enable their potentially bilingual students to study for at least an additional term in order to enhance their language and cultural knowledge to a defined level and to extend their professional expertise to accommodate the main different professional dimensions — such as Islamic matrimonial law and sickle cell anaemia.
There are already law faculties which offer an extended course for European languages and I do believe that the expertise is available to set up more of such centres.
It would be an exciting and worthwhile challenge, for instance, to set up a centre for medicine with Urdu or French where professionals could receive additional training and which would also could become the focus for expertise and research in that area.
The Bilingual Skills Certificate originated in this project and is designed to lay the foundations for such a development.
It was designed in co-operation with our students to reflect the language skills they needed to address the bilingual context of their everyday lives.
It assesses practical basic language skills in English and another language in the context of the public services at about A level.
It can also be used by the consumers to promote their communicative skills and provide a bilingual base on which community interpreter training can be added.
However, as it is the only qualification in this area, we have endless problems in discouraging people from attributing to it all sorts of accreditations for which it was not designed and have to point out that it does not qualify people to interpret, give advice or act on behalf of others.
The central set of skills which are needed are interpreting, translation and the complementary skills for service providers.
It became clear during the piloting of the original interpreter training courses that there would be a need to train trainers with specific skills if the model were to be adopted on a national basis.
Only a skilled community interpreter with teaching skills can teach community interpreting.
It is horses for courses.
Teaching language for the literature and history of a country is a valuable and essential exercise but it is as different from teaching community interpreting as dressage is from steeple chasing.
Eventually the traditional route to professional training will emerge whereby qualified community interpreters will, after a defined period of professional practice and experience, be trained to pass on their skills.
At the moment, this opportunity does no exist because there are still few qualified community interpreters.
One had to start somewhere and work quickly to meet the growing social need.
It was essential to provide an identifiable core of people with professional training skills to act as the standard bearers for the future; to attract, sustain and develop the specific skills and to lay the foundation of the new profession.
A pilot course to teach community interpreter training techniques was set up at the Polytechnic of Central London last year.
The course consisted of two parts.
The first part involved full time study for six months, from January to June, and the second part, which finished in November, involved working on a supervised project.
We wanted to attract mature students with a high level of skills and commitment and were able, through the Nuffield Foundation, to provide student grants for the first part of the course which either paid for secondment salaries of allowed people who were, for instance working interpreters, to forego part of their normal paid employment.
There were twelve students — 4 Spanish, 2 Arabs and 6 Asians.
All of them had degree level competence in both their languages, and had relevant experience in the field and had teaching potential.
Half of them were based in London and the rest in Scotland, East Anglia and the Midlands.
The general objectives of the course was to train able linguists —
1 to select, train and assess others to practice as interpreters in the context of the public services to at least the level required by the Institute of Linguists Certificate in Community Interpreting;
The examination leading to the Certificate is accredited as one specific module of the Institute's new Final Diploma.
Unlike conference interpreters who usually have advance warning of their assignments, community interpreters have to be able to work without having time to prepare and have to be familiar with the specialised contexts.
Therefore the Certificate can be taken in one of three specialisms;— the legal, health or local government services (which includes the housing and social services).
The examination has four sections, interpreting, translation, full and gist sight translation and a paper on the background knowledge of the public services concerned.
2 to contribute, on matters involving community interpreting, to the training of public service personnel who may work through interpreters;
Interpreters cannot carry the whole of the interlingual and intercultural burden of the communicative exchange.
if the interpreter is also acting as culture broker, guide, philosopher and friend several things can happen; the level of interpreting accuracy diminishes as the interpreter addresses these additional roles, both the non-English and English speaking clients lose control over the content of what is said, and, if the interpreter takes it upon themselves to decide what is to be interpreted, the standard of service usually diminishes.
Many of the service professions are now addressing this issue in their own training and might be glad of the help of specialised linguists.
The most effective strategy which has been found so far is to involve as many as possible of the key local service providers in the interpreters' training, so that during the repeated role plays they learn to work together.
3 to collaborate with each other and with the relevant other disciplines to develop a co-ordinated professional structure for community interpreters.
Professional training cannot take place in a vacuum.
One cannot train students and then let them fall off the end of the course into a professional abyss.
In the established professions, there are clear structures to support, maintain and develop professional practice.
new practitioners are gathered into the professional ‘family’.
Community interpreting is a new profession and the structures are still embryonic.
A professional regulatory body is being formed for those who qualify.
Working arrangements regarding accountability, pay, legal indemnity and insurance have been begun to be addressed during the pilot courses.
Interdisciplinary relationships are being defined in an area where team work is essential to work together quickly and safely — interpreters, ambulancemen, policemen, doctors and nurses have to know about each other 's roles and responsibilities before the accident.
A great deal has been done but there is much more to do.
If the trainers each encourage a similar pattern of professional practice, in-service training and working arrangements, then in five years time a national pattern will emerge so that clients and interpreters can have recognised expectations.
For this reason, the Institute will restrict the examination to candidates who have been trained by holders of the Dip CITT. for a few years and then review the situation to see whether the professional structures have developed enough to sustain new entrants.
This will mean, of course, that the trainers will have to work with the students and the qualified interpreters to develop these structures.
This is a new role for many of those whose background has been restricted to teaching but an entirely familiar one to those whose background has been in interpreting.
This is a tough remit but then the student trainers we selected are tough — a battle hardened crew from the cultural interface, who are either full-time interpreters or language teachers — and of whom I am inordinately proud.
It says a great deal for the language faculty of the Polytechnic of Central London that it not only survived having this vociferous cuckoo of a course in its midst but is planning to repeat it.
The students quickly bonded themselves into a tight knit group and they fought, argued, demanded and were encouraged to come back for more.
The teaching team, many of whom had not been involved in community interpreting before, rose to the challenge and fought, argued and demanded and came back for more.
The teaching staff at PCL are used to addressing practical language use and found themselves extending their area of lexis to exploring with their students the precise equivalencies in various languages to express ‘multiple occupied tenancies’, ‘child abuse’, ‘warrants not backed for bail’ and ‘don't go telling me porkies sunshine’.
Essential elements of the course were contributed by representatives from the services, who patiently and generously gave their time and expertise for the students to learn about their services — their structures, processes and procedures — and, above all, about the language and communicative strategies used in them.
Colleges and interpreting units generously provided the opportunity for teaching and interpreting practice.
In a perfect world the course should have lasted not one year but three — but there were neither the time or resources; nor can one train trainers as well as one would like in a field where there are as yet no models to emulate and no specific literature.
ON the other hand such a situation provides a welcome opportunity for innovation and dispenses with the need to follow any hide bound tradition.
Obviously the course centred on training techniques for adult students, with which you will all be familiar.
Our trainers, as many of you do, will encounter students from different cultural backgrounds who will have different traditions in learning.
It is probable that there will be several different approaches in one class and the trainers will have to enable each of the students to take control of their own learning and develop skills in a way which is most effective for them.
The trainers not only have to develop skills but also the professional maturity which enables the interpreter to use those skills responsibly to a defined code in the professional context and to confront and absorb in a positive way the inevitable stresses that come with the job — working in situations which may involve death, birth, bereavement, trauma or abuse.
The students have to learn to confront these things without making overt moral judgements, without lessening their competence or self discipline and without being sick in the ambulance.
We are proud of three students who trained in one of the pilot courses who are now working with UNHCR in Hong Kong and the way in which they are trying to keep up their standard of interpreting in appalling rat infested conditions which, one hopes, are not likely to be encountered here.
In a field which is continually changing, the trainers have to keep their own interpreting skills up to date and their knowledge of the services in which they are training students to work and continually improve their understanding of the cognitive and linguistic processes which underpin those skills.
Above all, they have to keep in touch with each other so that they and their students can develop this new profession in a co-ordinated and systematic way.
This new branch of the language professions has an exciting future.
It has a future because the demand for those professional skills will inevitably increase.
I foresee a time when there will be degrees in Community Interpreting as there are in Australia and I hope that there will be a recognition of equivalencies will allow interpreters to work in the countries of both of their languages.
It is an exciting future because it will put linguists in the forefront to meet the greatest contemporary social challenge which is, as we see every day from our newspapers, language groups learning to live together within one country.
This project would not have achieved what it has without the professional generosity and sense of professional responsibility of the language and service disciplines.
The research and development phase of the work is nearly complete and the Dip CITT trainers and their students are setting out on their journey.
I commend them to your care.
February 1990
Ann Coresellis
Co-ordinator
The Community Interpreter Project
Institute of Linguists Educational Trust
