5
When, after eight days, Helen had heard nothing more from Giles Carnaby she was bleakly self-contemptuous.
Her heightened condition persisted, there was nothing she could do about that: the swerves of mood, the burning senses.
In an animal, she told herself savagely, it would be called being on heat.
Her mother, who had been fading hitherto, returned to fill the black hole by the kitchen sink or to confront Helen on the stairs, saying smugly that she could have told her all along what to expect.
Louise came again, towing Suzanne, who spent the entire time shuttered off within the earphones of her Walkman; if spoken to she smiled with bland and tolerant self-absorption, like the very old.
There was much complaint of Phil.
And, obliquely, of Tim.
Helen, alarmed and suspecting infidelity (there had been an episode in the past concerning which Louise had boiled away on the telephone for months on end), asked what was wrong with him.
‘Nothing's wrong,’ said Louise irritably.
‘Tim is precisely as he always is.
That's the problem, I suppose.’
‘Don't you love him?’ asked Edward.
Louise rolled her eyes in exasperation.
‘God!
You simply don't know the first thing about marriage, do you?
Well, bless you how could you?
Listen —tout passe ,tout casse ,tout lasse .
Right?’
‘What?’
‘French expression suggesting instability.’
Edward appeared to think hard for a few moments and then got up and left the room abruptly.
‘And what's the matter with him, come to that?’ said Louise.
‘He's the nearest I've ever seen him to snappish, for someone constitutionally incapable of bad temper.
The trouble with  Edward is that he's practically a saint.
I honestly think he's never thought anything nasty about anyone in his life, which is what makes him occasionally so impossible.
Just as well he never got married — no one could have stood that.
Not of course that it was ever on the cards.’
‘He has been a bit edgy,’ said Helen.
‘Mother, maybe.’
Louise sighed.
‘He's left it about forty years too late to get uptight about mother.’
‘Is there some trouble with Tim?’
‘Tim and I,’ said Louise heavily, ‘are going through what is called a bad patch.
We get on each other 's nerves, to put it bluntly.
Hence me here and him there.
He is not, so far as I know, having it off with anyone and I certainly am not, more's the pity in a sense, though to be honest I've never felt less inclined in my life.’
She stared glumly at the window.
‘Frankly, I seldom get a glow about anyone these days, including Tim, which I daresay is partly what's wrong.
How sex does bugger things up…
Sorry.
I shouldn't talk like this.
I know you…’
The sentence was left unfinished.
‘You know I what?’ said Helen tartly.
Louise gave her a searching look.
‘Now you're starting to sound like Edward.
I don't know what's got into you both.
I just meant I know you're…it's not a subject you get very enthralled by.
Sex, I mean.
There!
Your expression's gone all peculiar at once.
Anyway…
Tim and I are just simply out of sync at the moment — I can't think how else to put it.
We're not connecting.
Don't worry — we're not going to split up, at least I trust not.’
Suzanne came into the room, the earphones clamped to her head, exuding a distant tinny jangle.
She sat down by the window, smiling vaguely.
‘It's not that we don't love each other,’ explained Louise.
‘Within the context of how long we've been together.
It's that…’
‘Ssh…’ murmured Helen.
‘She's dead to the world.
Lucky little beggar.
Extraordinary, isn't it?
Were we like that?
No, of course we weren't.
Not even me.
Anyway, as I was saying, Tim…’
Edward appeared, looking agitated.
‘There's a boy digging up the old kitchen garden.’
‘Yes,’ said Helen.
‘It's Ron Paget's son.
You know about it.
This is Saturday.’
‘Do I?
Oh — yes.
Is this a good idea?
Surely we're not really going to grow vegetables?’
‘Ron Paget?’ said Louise.
‘Nobody told me about this.
Anything set up by Ron Paget has got to be suspect.’
Helen explained.
‘One fifty an hour would be considered exploitation in London but I daresay it's par for the course round here.
I wouldn't put it past Ron to be taking a cut for himself.
Mind you give it to the boy personally.
What's he like?’
‘I didn't notice,’ said Edward.
He went to the window and stood there wiping his glasses: they could all hear, now, the distant thwack and flump of spade-work.
Edward turned round, walked irresolutely around the room and then headed for the door, where he halted.
‘I'm off now.
There's an RSPB field-trip — I won't be back till late.
‘Bye Louise…and, er…’— he glanced at Suzanne, who smiled blankly and placatingly.
‘Oh Helen, by the way, I forgot — that lawyer rang, he wanted you to ring back.’
‘When did he ring?’ asked Helen after a moment.
‘Um…
Yesterday, the day before…’
Edward left.
Suzanne, who had neither moved nor altered her expression, continued to jangle by the window in her private world.
Louise began to recount further discontents, unheard now by either her daughter or her sister.
Helen postponed telephoning, as one might hoard some delicacy, to savour it the longer in anticipation.
When at last she did so Giles Carnaby was warmly effusive.
‘Oh, what a relief!
I was beginning to think I must be in the doghouse for some reason.’
He spoke as though they knew each other well and over a long period.
‘You didn't get the message?
I shall have to speak severely to your brother.
Anyway — now that I've got you at last…
I have a proposition.
The choir…my little Monday diversion…
We have our big night next week — performance evening.
Towards which we've been striving for weeks.
Will you come?
We all bring friends and family — please come and be mine.
We perform and then everyone gets together over wine and cheese.
Usually quite good fun.
Please say you will.’
Later, released from the spell of that voice, she was plagued by niggling incredulity.
Me?
Me ?
Why?
What does he mean by it?
Does he mean anything at all by it?
Why me out of all the other women in Spaxton?
They're all married, said her mother.
Not that that would bother most people nowadays.
He must wonder why you're not, come to that.
And look at you jumping to conclusions, going the right way to make a proper fool of yourself.
Why should the man mean a thing by it?
You're a client, aren't you?
If he took all his clients out to expensive lunches, invited them to concerts…
Maybe he does, said her mother.
Once in a while.
How are you to know?
She was working in the library her regular three days a week now.
It seemed amazing to be able to leave the house each time without feeling furtive, and irritable at being obliged to feel furtive.
Her mother had never grasped that a job is a commitment.
‘I want you to put off the library today,’ she would say.
‘I need help with bottling the plums.’
In bad weather she would watch Helen's preparations for departure with contempt: ‘It's completely ridiculous to go out in this.
I can't imagine why you don't leave it till tomorrow.’
During her final illness, when Helen took unpaid leave, she had announced to visitors, with satisfaction, in moments of clarity: ‘At least I've been able to make Helen see sense about trailing off to that wretched library day after day.’
Edward, on the other hand, had always been accorded a mysterious potency: ‘They do so depend on him at Croxford.’
This was curious; in all other areas she treated — always had treated — Edward as negligible.
If he embarked on a task she stepped in and took it from him; she interrupted him when he  spoke.
‘Let him do it!’
Helen had raged, time out of mind ago, aged fifteen, eighteen, twenty-one.
‘Leave him alone.
Let him finish what he's saying.’
‘He'll only break it,’ would come the reply.
Or do it wrong: too fast, too slow, not in the prescribed way.
And he doesn't know what he's talking about: he's too young, too inexperienced, too Edward.
When, in his thirties, he took driving lessons and passed his test Dorothy refused to go out in the car with him: ‘I intend to live to a ripe old age, thank you very much.’
In fact, Edward was a good driver, if somewhat decorous.
Dorothy waited patiently and had her moment of triumph when someone went into the back of his car at a traffic light — clearly his fault for not getting a move on quicker.
Helen worked because she needed the income, quite apart from anything else.
Her mother had never understood that, either.
‘You've got Daddy's money,’ she would say.
‘I can't think why you want to go grubbing around for more.’
Helen's dividends, like her own, had dwindled to smaller and smaller sums; even for someone as uncommitted to possession or luxury as Helen was it had become necessary to top them up.
But the library was a refuge, most importantly of all.
It was an impersonal sanctum that was not Greystones.
There, Helen became someone else; she became brisk efficient well-liked Helen.
Helen who had been there years and years, knew all the ropes, could be relied on to deal tactfully with difficult customers, with the intransigence of the county library system, with errant books and tiresome children.
Helen who evinced endless patient interest in others, who remained politely anonymous herself.
Her colleagues came and went; they had got younger and younger, it seemed, as time went by; those who were career-minded departed for lusher pastures, more Susies and Karens took their places, giggling in the cloakroom, muddling up the reservation cards.
Only the senior librarian remained constant, Joyce Babcock, a contemporary of Helen's, stuck as far as she would get on the ladder of professional advancement, suspicious of the girls but tolerant of Helen, who offered no threat.
Part-timers did not become senior librarian, however highly regarded.
She was a woman without vision or curiosity; her distaste for  books was equalled only by her dislike of people.
She sat out her days behind the central desk, complaining of her superiors, of technological innovation, and of the weather.
Helen, marvelling at Joyce's capacity for self-protection, often wondered at her choice of career.
It had something to do with order, she decided; Joyce mistrusted books for their content, but liked the way they could be marshalled.
The readers were simply an unlooked-for hazard.
Now, she sensed a shift in Joyce's attitude towards her.
‘I suppose,’ Joyce said, with studied carelessness, ‘you may think of going full-time now you haven't got your mother.’
Helen understood.
Joyce feared potential rivalry; her status might be threatened if Helen, a favourite of the county librarian, were more available.
‘Possibly,’ she replied.
With an uncharacteristic spurt of mischief she added that she was considering the matter.
Joyce flipped feverishly through a reference book; her neck had gone red with emotion.
Helen, relenting, said ‘I daresay not, in the end.
I rather like the idea of some time to myself.’
‘I should think so!’ cried Joyce.
‘I mean, if anyone deserves it you do.
Oh, I don't think you should take on any more, definitely.
You want to spoil yourself a bit, that's what.’
Restored to normal confidence, she gave Helen a sharp look.
‘You've had your hair cut differently.
It suits you.
Was it that place on Market Street?
They're pricey, mind, but good if you want something a bit out of the ordinary.’
‘I'm glad you approve,’ said Helen, applying herself to the acquisitions file.
The library was empty except for an elderly man pottering in Biography and a couple of schoolchildren in the reference section; there was opportunity for what Joyce called a natter, and no escaping it.
‘You'll miss your mother,’ stated Joyce.
‘I know.
Paul wasn't himself for months after his went.’
Paul was her husband.
‘It's a shock, however much you know it's coming.
It'll take you time to adjust, you'll find.’
‘Mmn,’ said Helen.
Comment was neither possible nor invited.
‘Of course, you've got your brother.
Let me see now, I always forget — is he older or younger?’
‘Younger.’
‘It's funny he's never married either — funny coincidence, I mean.’
‘Isn't it,’ said Helen.
This was familiar ground.
Joyce, frustrated, moved on to consideration of yesterday's weather, complaints about the new trainee and an attempt to enlist Helen's support in resisting the county librarian's enthusiasm for a local history section at Spaxton.
Joyce had a special hatred for history.
She was interrupted, however, by a schoolchild in search of a reference and had to break off to give grudging and limited assistance.
Helen returned to the new acquisitions.
She had been noting various titles during Joyce's discourse; there was a new book about bats that Edward would want, and one or two things she would like to get hold of herself — the sole perquisite of this trade was a surreptitious early pick of incoming titles before they went on the shelves.
Helen read a great deal.
The feel of a book in her hands was an ancient solace — not, originally, because of what lay between the covers but as a screen, a defence, a shield.
The book she was reading had once been the physical barrier between her and her mother.
‘Head in a book as usual,’ Dorothy would say with contempt.
‘You should be doing something, not just sitting there.’
Helen had drawn Edward into this sheltered place, and read aloud to him.
And presently what was within the books became significant also — quite small books would do, she discovered, because of what they said, one did not always have to get behind Bartholomew's atlas or the bound volumes of Punch that lurked in the bottom of the sitting-room bookcase.
She read her way through what was in the house — not a daunting process, given her mother's resistance to the printed word — and then resorted to libraries.
Her choice of occupation, she realised, had perhaps been fore-ordained, written into the scheme of things like some genetic prescription, laid down by her mother's inclinations.
Dorothy did not care for books, so Helen became a librarian.
She read anything; she read in all directions.
She read to learn and she read to experience.
She identified areas of special interest — Greece and Rome, popular science, cathedral architecture, arctic exploration — and burrowed happily away; she reconsidered herself and others through the lens of that well-constructed lie that is a good novel.
She became book dependent, for better or for worse.
‘Anyone would think we were some kind of free education service,’ grumbled Joyce, having disposed of the child and returned to her central eyrie.
‘That's just what we are,’ said Helen.
Joyce shot her a look in which surprise and indignation were nicely fused.
Edward, at the same time and eight miles away, was dispensing some moderately expensive education to the Lower Fourth at Croxford House.
The Lower Fourth numbered eighteen ten- and eleven-year-olds, sagging over their desks in assorted attitudes that were meant to indicate intense attention, dreadful weariness, shrewd insight or rapt admiration.
Most of them weren't listening.
Some of them were whispering to each other.
Edward was talking about the Galapagos finch.
This was a new series of lessons, rather grandly called Biology, in which he wandered happily around various special fascinations of his own and tried to tell the children something about natural selection and the origin of species.
He had brought along several exhibits, including a portrait of Darwin he had found in a junk shop and an assortment of feathers and fossils that the children were passing from hand to hand.
None of them took any notice of Darwin, but the feathers and fossils aroused mild interest.
Edward was now drawing a diagram of a feather on the board — with some difficulty and much rubbing out — to illustrate its complexity and lead up to a discussion of the evolution of birds.
Sandra Willmot put up her hand.
Edward was not fond of Sandra; she was a prissy little girl, always fastidiously turned out and given to exclamations of disgust and revulsion.
Her parents were prominent local business people; her mother was chairperson of the Parents' Association.
‘Yes, Sandra?’
‘Please, Mr Glover, my mother says things like feathers prove there must be a God.’
‘Really?’ said Edward, stalling.
‘Yes.
Because they're so complicated.
Somebody must have made them.’
Sandra stared smugly at the blackboard.
‘I mean, they couldn't just happen, could they?
So someone must have made them.’
‘Who?’ enquired Edward with resignation.
‘God, of course,’ said Sandra, buffing her fingernails on her sweater.
She looked round piously for support and approval.
Edward knew that he was on treacherous ground.
Those of the children who were not squabbling over fossils or sticking feathers in their hair gazed expectantly at him.
He said carefully that while everyone was entitled to feel and believe what they liked about God it really wasn't possible, given what we now know, to say that His existence is proven by feathers or fossils or by anything else in the world.
He continued in this vein for a couple of minutes, tripping himself up several times.
The trouble was that imprinted in Edward's own mind was a charming array of creatures like a Noah's Ark procession, from ant to man, that sprang from the illustration in a fatally misconceived nature book he had had himself as a child.
An image of the Great Chain of Being was at the very heart of him; he often had considerable difficulty in marshalling the arguments for apostasy.
It must be a bit like being a lapsed Catholic, he thought; you knew you were right but felt you were wrong.
He waxed vehement about dinosaurs and extinction, about continental drift and the good old Galapagos finch.
He concluded by saying that if you believe in God you have to find other ways to convince people that He exists, and that was not something to be discussed in this lesson.
Sandra Willmot listened — or appeared to listen — with an icy stare.
Several hands shot up.
‘Yes?’ said Edward unwarily.
‘Please, Mr Glover, don't you believe in God, then?’
‘No,’ said Edward, after a moment.
A rustle of interest ran around the classroom.
One or two people announced that they didn't either; others declared loudly that they did.
Croxford House was given to morning prayers and all the outward  trappings of Church of England belief; it even had a chapel.
Now that he came to think of it, Edward was surprised this point had never cropped up before; Biology was obviously a dodgier area than English and History.
‘Anyway,’ he said firmly, ‘what I believe or don't believe is neither here nor there.
We were talking about feathers.
I want you all to get out your exercise books and copy what is on the board…’
The children subsided, more or less.
Most of them applied themselves to their exercise books, their faces contorted with intellectual effort.
Some continued to daydream.
Sandra Willmot was whispering urgently to her neighbour, with occasional furtive glances in Edward's direction.
‘Would you please get on with your work, Sandra,’ said Edward with unusual severity.
She was a peculiarly unlikeable child, he thought; the sort of child — or person — who refuted any notion that homo sapiens is the pinnacle of creation.
The Galapagos finch was a darn sight more valuable than Sandra Willmot.
When Helen arrived at the hall in which the choir concert was to be held she could not at first see Giles Carnaby.
There were a great many people milling around, the cream of Spaxton society, indeed, many of whom she knew or recognised.
She was about to find herself a seat when she caught sight of him, in conversation with a rather pretty dark young woman, both of them laughing a lot.
Looking at them, she experienced a curious sense of exclusion; she wondered who the woman was; she wondered how well Giles knew her.
And then he looked in her direction, smiled and waved over the woman's shoulder, continued to talk to her for a few moments, then laid a hand on her arm for an instant and moved towards Helen.
Later, she saw the woman among the sopranos, and noted her.
She noted everyone in the choir, indeed, as part of a determined effort not to gaze all the time at Giles Carnaby, who was in the back row, in the middle of the tenors, straight ahead of her, where she could consider him in detail — silvery hair, grey  herring-bone tweed jacket, greenish shirt, paisley patterned silk tie (so much for not gazing…)
And then there was the wine and cheese, in an adjoining room where tables were laid out and choir and audience enabled to mingle.
Giles seemed to know everyone.
Indeed he seemed to have to keep rushing off to have a word with this person and that; Helen found herself on her own a good deal of the time, glimpsing him across the room in spirited conversation.
She saw a lot of his back, of his distinctive head moving from one group to another.
She talked to various acquaintances.
One woman asked curiously ‘Do you know Giles Carnaby well?’
Helen, faintly ruffled, replied that she didn't — not all that well.
‘He's very charming, of course,’ said the woman.
The room thinned out.
Giles returned to her side.
He seemed cheerful and stimulated.
‘Oh dear — I kept getting caught by people.
Have you had enough to drink?
Are you all right?
And there hasn't been a chance to talk…
You will come back for a cup of coffee, won't you?
Or the tea — the famous Earl Grey.’
He took her arm, shepherded her out of the building, into the street.
‘You've got your car?
Bother — so have I. We shall have to go in a convoy — it's only five minutes away.
Sunderland Road.’
The house was unexceptional, one of those in Spaxton's prosperous Edwardian suburb.
Within, there was an atmosphere of chintzy comfort.
Helen, thinking of the wife, sat almost apologetically on a plump sofa.
On the mantelpiece was a photo of a pleasant-looking woman, fair hair, not beautiful, not glamorous, quite ordinary really.
Giles went to the kitchen to make coffee, refusing offers of help —‘I should get in a fuss and make a fool of myself if watched.’
Helen inspected the room.
Other people's houses always intrigued her by the contrast they offered to Greystones; she would see suddenly — with detached interest and quite without envy or criticism — the extent to which other people's preoccupations differed from her own.
Here, someone had gone to considerable lengths to get the cushions toning in nicely with the curtains.
There was a fireplace with realistically glowing coals and the cosy flicker of flames around them that was, she soon realised, a gas fire; no bother with cleaning it out, then.
The  pictures were unprovocative landscapes or flower paintings that neatly fitted the spaces allotted to them.
The books were all behind glass.
A low table carried some tidily arranged journals and newspapers; letters on the desk top were pinned down by a silver paper knife.
She felt again the presence of the wife, looking kindly and securely at her from the photograph; don't resent me, said Helen, I am really neither here nor there, I very much doubt if I signify, you needn't mind.
Giles returned.
There was a bottle of brandy on the tray as well as the coffee.
‘You will, won't you?
We need warming up that hall is arctic, I perish every Monday evening.’
He poured out, sat back at the other end of the sofa, looked at her.
‘Thank you so much for coming, Helen.
Did you enjoy it?
I kept taking quick glances but you always looked inscrutable.
It went quite well, I thought-a bit shaky at points in the Britten.
Good fun, anyway — but oh dear, people do nobble one, don't they?
It was wonderful having you as a defence.
Provincial life is very demanding, don't you find?
All these nice people wanting you to join things.
But of course you've known Spaxton for so long.’
‘Yes,’ said Helen.
‘I'm generally regarded as a lost cause by now.’
He laughed.
‘I wish I were!
Anyway, you have your village to cope with — that must be quite enough.
Except that you're regarded as eccentric — is that right?
You and your brother — I do want to meet your brother, by the way.
I think I must cultivate eccentricity — would I make an eccentric?’
He beamed at her.
Charmingly.
Helen gazed at him.
The room lurked at the edges of her vision — chintz, pictures of woodland or roses, that paperknife.
No, she thought.
Something else brooded, indefinable, padding doggily around; she tried to ignore it.
They drank the coffee, the brandy.
Giles talked of Spaxton acquaintances, of a visit to the opera, of an entertaining incident in his office: bland impersonal discourse, given somehow an edge of intimacy.
It seemed to Helen that the room became very warm and enclosed: she basked, as she later thought of it.
And then suddenly it was midnight, a clock delicately chiming outside in the hall, and she was getting up, with him protesting — really  quite fervently protesting.
‘No, I must,’ she said.
‘Edward will wonder where on earth…’
‘Then if you must, you must.
Please drive carefully.
I'm inclined to ring in half an hour to see you've got there safely, but I suppose I'd have your brother hopping out of bed.’
He helped her into her coat; again, his arm lay on her shoulders after he had done so.
He escorted her out into the street, held the car door open for her, leaning in the window as she started the engine, exhorting caution.
His hand closed on hers as it rested on the wheel: ‘Thank you again, my dear, God bless.’
And he turned and was gone, briskly, into the house.
Greystones, when she reached it, seemed even colder than usual.
The lights were all out and Edward in bed.
Helen, climbing the stairs, burned with a curious mixture of exaltation and foreboding.
‘You were very late last night.
I didn't even hear you come in.’
‘It was only about half past twelve.
I went to that concert in Spaxton.’
‘Oh yes — with the lawyer.
What on earth for?’
Edward added after a moment.
‘I mean, one pays lawyers, surely.
There's no need to go and hear them sing as well.’
Helen appeared to be distracted by the back of the cereal packet.
‘Well, it was very charitable of you,’ said Edward.
‘By the way, we're out of bread.
Is it my turn to shop or yours?’
‘Mine.
Edward, if people phone when I'm not here do please remember to tell me.’
Edward looked across the table at her in mild surprise.
‘Of course.
I thought I did.
You always say you're glad they didn't catch you.’
Helen was now bent sternly over a shopping list.
She had written ‘bread’ three times, Edward saw.
‘I never realised you felt like this, Edward,’ said Mrs Fitton petulantly.
‘It really is the most awful nuisance.
Parents just  don't like it, you know — quite a lot of parents.’
From outside the window came the shrill piping sound of the juniors playing netball.
The school secretary put her head round the door; ‘No !’ snapped the headmistress, ‘I'm in a meeting.’
She was a small round woman, puffed out with frilly blouses and an energetic hairstyle.
When crises arose she went into a condition of sustained fizz; you almost expected bubbles to come popping out of her head.
She was in this state now.
‘I mean, Mrs Willmot won't be the only one — or rather, Mrs Willmot will see to it that she isn't the only one.
I wish you'd told me before, Edward, I mean, it's entirely your own affair of course but if I'd known forewarned would have been forearmed and we could have avoided this sort of thing.’
‘You never asked me,’ said Edward reasonably.
‘Well, I suppose not…
One just assumed…
I mean, we are a C. of E. school.
Oh dear what a bother .
And most other parents one could have calmed down — smoothed things over somehow — but Mrs Willmot, well, we know Mrs Willmot, don't we?
On the phone to all her cronies at this moment, I don't doubt, and this is the year we hoped to get the swimming pool appeal off the ground.’
‘Sorry,’ said Edward.
‘What I can't understand is why God had to be dragged into it in the first place.
Can't you simply leave that sort of thing out?
I mean, tell them about natural selection and all that and don't mention God.
After all, it was biology, not Religious Education.
Charlotte Havering does R.E.
She expects to cope with that side and she's C. of E.’
‘I was leaving God out,’ said Edward.
‘The children brought Him in.
Sandra Willmot, to be precise.’
‘Tiresome child.
Well, the damage is done now.
All we can do is hope that Mrs W. will cool off and in the meantime, Edward, I'm sorry but honestly I think Mary or Janice had better take over Junior Biology.’
There was a silence.
Mrs Fitton began tetchily shuffling a pile of letters.
Edward looked out of the window, where rooks beat across a turbulent sky.
At last he said ‘I suppose really I should resign.’
Mrs Fitton bucked in her chair.
‘What nonsense, Edward.
What absolute nonsense.
Of course you don't even have to think of resigning.
All right, we're a C. of E. school but that doesn't mean every single one of the staff has to be a signed up communicant.
In fact come to that I myself…
What I mean is, it's a personal matter except in so far as it affects the syllabus.
If you stick to English and History like you used to and…well, just avoid the issue…then we shan't have any more problems.’
‘I don't mean resign because I don't believe in God,’ said Edward.
‘I mean resign because you won't let me teach biology because I don't believe in God.’
Mrs Fitton gazed at him.
Her hands twitched on the letters; she blinked once or twice.
‘Well, that I simply wouldn't have thought of.
I don't know what's got into you, Edward, you don't seem to be quite yourself.
You can't possibly resign.
I won't hear of it.’
‘Then can I teach biology?’
‘No !’ cried Mrs Fitton.
‘Edward, be reasonable!’
They stared at each other; Mrs Fitton crackling with emotion, Edward apparently tranquil.
Behind Mrs Fitton's head the rooks were now tossing and tumbling like blown leaves.
It occurred to Edward that he knew little or nothing about rook behaviour.
‘You're not serious?’ demanded Mrs Fitton wildly.
‘You're not really going to resign?’
‘No,’ said Edward with a sigh.
‘I don't suppose so.’
It was Helen who pointed out that Mrs Fitton would have been concerned about the newspapers, as well as with her regard for Edward and for Edward's welfare.
Edward looked incredulous.
‘Would there really have been a fuss?’
‘Of course,’ said Helen.
‘Properly handled.’
‘It would almost have been worth it.
Perhaps I'll change my mind.
I'd have been a martyr, wouldn't I?
Victimised for my beliefs.
But that wretched Sandra would have had a field day too — her picture in the local rag in her best dress.
No, it's not worth it, on reflection.’
Helen made no comment.
‘You think I should have done, don't you?’
‘Most people would have, I suppose.’
‘But not me,’ said Edward with sudden bitterness.
‘Oh, I know, I know.
The thought of finding another job….
And it all seemed so silly.
And I know perfectly well Croxford is a crummy school, but it suits me and I suit it, which doesn't say a lot for either of us.’
He was pulling on his anorak now, no longer even apparently tranquil.
‘I'm going out for a bit.’
He drove to a favourite spot and walked, in the late afternoon, up the long flank of a hillside, in the lea of an old hedgebank.
On one side of him was the complex inhabited thicket of the hedge in which flocks of bullfinches competed for fodder and invisibly singing warblers were stationed at thirty-yard intervals; on the other was a great sloping reach of field, the earth a reddish copper colour and patterned like a Japanese garden with the swirls and furrows left by machinery.
The sun, a scarlet disc, was perched just above the horizon.
The land folded in on itself as far as you could see — green and brown hillsides sinking down in repetition, marked by the dark masses of trees and hedges.
Here and there a grey farmhouse or cottage was tucked into a hollow.
In the far distance was the blue outline of yet further hills.
The impression was of some sparsely populated, unchanging landscape; it was hard to realise that Birmingham was less than thirty miles away.
At the top of the hill the bridle-path entered a small copse.
Immediately, the sense of distance gave way to intimacy and detail.
Edward stood still; he had once seen a whole flock of long-tailed tits here, swinging like pink jewels among the flickering leaves of a silver birch.
He told himself that this was what he was now searching for again.
In fact he was waiting for the place, its calm and its unconcern, to make him feel better.
lo make him feel less alone, less disturbed, less hungry.
He was howling once more, within.
And the place did nothing, nothing at all.
It simply went about its business.
And its business, of course, at this fecund point of the year, was that of survival — survival and reproduction.
As  Edward looked around he saw everything determinedly perpetuating itself — buds forming, leaves unfurling, seeds setting, the whole place off again on the same mindless uncaring cycle, while Edward stood there in the midst of it, quite alone.
6
‘I been having a little think,’ said Ron Paget.
‘About your patch of waste ground.’
Edward and Helen gazed at him without expression, a practised process.
They were all three standing in the lane outside Greystones.
Ron had pounced from his car, screeching to a halt ten yards ahead of them.
He had opened with a solicitous enquiry as to whether young Gary was giving satisfaction.
‘I mean,’ he continued, ‘it's a bit of an albatross, isn't it?
The upkeep and that.
What I was thinking was…’
‘We don't keep it up,’ said Edward.
‘It keeps itself up.’
Ron shook his head censoriously.
‘That's just the point, Mr Glover, if I may say so.
There's a lot of work needs doing in there.
You've got dead and diseased trees need felling, you've got bramble and stuff needs clearing out.
It's not healthy, the way it is.
But with a bit of money spent you could have a nice little spinney there — be pretty in the spring.
You could do a bit of landscape planting, azaleas and rhododendrons and that, camellias maybe — you know, like your National Trust sort of place.’
‘Those things don't grow on limestone soil,’ said Helen.
Ron opened his mouth and then closed it again.
Behind him the engine of his new red Rover was still running — a barely audible hum.
Ron stepped aside, opened the door and turned the ignition.
‘Point is, to do something about the place you need finance, right?
I know what it's like these days — we're all stretched as far as we can go’— he sighed —‘but I've had a little think and I see a way round it for you.
Now you've got quite an area there — two acres, is it, two and a half?
What you do is you make one half of it finance the other.
You do a little development on the far side — three, four nice houses, something along those  lines.
I can see to all the nitty-gritty for you — I know you're not a family for bothering your heads with that sort of thing, you've got better things to do.
I can handle it for you and see you clear enough to lay yourselves out something really nice with what's left, really classy bit of landscaping.
And a fair bit left over to put away for a rainy day, I daresay.’
‘No,’ said Edward.
Ron looked sadly at him.
‘You're saying that off the top of your head, Mr Glover.
Think it over.
There's the question of what's good for the community, too.
You'd be doing the community a favour.
Desperate shortage of housing these days.’
‘Was it council houses you had in mind?’ asked Helen.
‘Well, no,’ said Ron.
‘I mean, what's needed in the village is more by way of quality housing, isn't it?
Another nice little executive estate, like the Barratt.’
‘I don't see that as fulfilling a social need,’ said Helen.
Ron gave her a bad-tempered look.
There was a sense of time and patience running out.
He opened the car door and got in.
The engine purred again.
The driver's window slid down; ‘Well, think about it, anyway.
It would be in your own best interests, believe me.’
The Rover accelerated round the bend.
Edward, who had seemed despondent hitherto that morning, laughed.
‘You have to hand it to him, he's never short of a new idea.’
They were on their way to the churchyard.
The firm from whom the gravestone had been commissioned had telephoned about dimensions and other details.
Having reached the initial, simple decision about lettering (plain, unadorned and to the point) and material (unpolished limestone slab) they were now floored over questions of layout and surroundings.
Did they want chippings?
Did they want a flower container?
They walked slowly up the church path, past the old graves, those so seared by time and weather that they stood as grey shapes furred with lichen, names and dates no longer legible, uniform in obscurity.
Where the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries gave way to the nineteenth, things became crisper: you read of a profusion of Elizas and Thomases, of beloved wives and lamented parents: white marble crept in with the grey limestone.
It was round the back of the church, though, where the more recent graves reached away to an expectant area of bare grass ending at the village allotments, that variety and self-expression were rampant.
‘I realise what chippings are now,’ said Edward.
‘No.
Definitely not.’
Most of the newer gravestones presided over a neat granite-edged rectangle packed with green crystal chips.
The effect, from a distance, was disconcertingly like a series of little swimming-pools.
Closer to, memorial detail became apparent: elaborate confections in the form of open books inscribed with the particulars of the departed, weeping cherubs and angels, praying heads and exuberant crosses.
It disposed entirely of any notion of the rural midland English as a phlegmatic and undemonstrative lot.
Many of the graves had flowers on them — wilting asters and marigolds in jam-jars, or vases of plastic roses and daffodils in luminous colours.
One unkempt mound bore a glass with a Harp Lager insignia, filled with greenish water.
Edward and Helen approached the sycamore tree and stood before the raw earth of Dorothy's grave.
In the month since the funeral, infant weeds had sprung up, and some blades of grass.
‘No chippings,’ said Edward.
‘No thing for vase.
I'm not even sure about this kerbstone business.’
‘You can have granite chips, but they're almost as bad.
Just grass, then?’
‘Just grass, yes.
It would be nice to try to naturalise some fritillaries.
Or those small grassland orchids — Lady's Tresses.’
‘Oh, Edward,’ said Helen with a sigh.
‘Just a thought.’
They stood there uncomfortably.
Both had a fleeting vision of what lay beneath the mound of earth: the varnished wood, the brass handles, their mother.
Edward, fighting the thought, imagined decay; Helen remembered the posy of flowers from the garden that she had tried to fix to the coffin lid with sellotape.
Sellotape will not stick to varnish, she had discovered; she ended up with hammer and tintacks, shrinking at the unseemly noise and violence.
The flowers would be withered now, down there.
Both recalled the funeral, calculated time: a month, already, when we have been without her.
Both examined their feelings.
I am adjusting, thought Helen, I am stepping aside.
But funny things are happening.
In some way she is more here than she ever was.
It is as though she had not died but been transformed.
Edward thought: It is as though I were adrift, untethered.
I don't think of her much, no more than I ever did, but something terrible is going on.
At moments all is well, and then at others I think that I am flying apart.
Helen took a tape-measure out of her pocket and suspended it above the grave.
‘That height?
Or a bit more?
They want to know.’
‘It doesn't matter,’ said Edward.
‘Two foot six, then.
And just ‘Dorothy Edith Glover: April 10th 1907–May 24th 1987’.
They seem to feel it's a bit stark.’
‘It is.
Compared with everyone else.’
Edward looked around.
Deeply lamented.
In loving memory.
Pray for the soul of…
R.l.P.
Helen rolled up the tape-measure and pushed it into her pocket.
‘Well, I shall just have to be firm, then.
They obviously think it most inadequate.’
They turned and walked back towards the lych-gate.
‘Presumably,’ said Edward, ‘they take it to mean we weren't all that fond of her.’
‘Or else that we're hard up.
More lettering costs more.
Polished granite is more expensive than limestone.
The angels and open books and things cost a packet — I looked at the brochure.’
It was Saturday morning, which meant that the village was fairly populous; on weekdays it was emptied of all but the old, the very young and those tending them.
The central green had cars scattered all around it.
Ron Paget's Rover stood outside the Swan, the more plushy of the two pubs.
A sinister looking cluster of motor-bikes huddled in front of the other one, the Goat and Compasses; as the Glovers passed two more arrived with a deafening roar and two androgynous figures, clad in skin-tight leather as though for a bout of deep-sea diving, went into the  pub, stripping off immense gauntlets.
From within came the crash of reggae music.
A BP oil tanker was blocking the narrow lane down to the Old Forge, towering over the thatched cottage to which it was attached by its pipe-line as though with an umbilical cord.
Beyond, the post van hooted indignantly.
An old man sat on the bench by the War Memorial.
From the gravelled sweep of the entrance to the Old Rectory came Mrs Hadley on a gleaming chestnut horse; she clattered past the Glovers, the old man, other passers-by with the age-old superiority of the mounted over those on foot.
A car slowed down to pass her and she raised her crop graciously.
‘We need something for lunch,’ said Helen.
‘And dog food.
And cereal.’
And detergent, she added to herself.
‘You may as well stay outside, there's an awful crowd in there.’
She stood in a queue at the single check-out; the village store had supermarket aspirations without the amenities.
Two young women in front of her were murmuring confidentially.
One said ‘I gather Brown Owl has resigned…’
It took Helen a moment or two to realise the affairs of the village Brownie pack were under discussion.
She looked over their heads and caught the eye of an acquaintance, who smiled faintly and dipped away in embarrassment, observing the quarantine imposed upon those recently bereaved.
There we go again, she thought, mother is still here, still making herself felt.
She paid for her purchases, tucking the detergent under the other things.
Outside, she found Edward in conversation with Peter Sidey, the leader of the preservationist element in the village.
The preservationists, over the years, had lost ground — quite literally.
They tended to be schoolteachers, academics and the recently retired; against them were ranged builders, farmers and most of those who, by luck or good management, owned a half acre or derelict cottage ripe for profitable transformation.
Such people were adept at the manipulation of planning committees, the lobbying of local government officers.
The preservationists, pinning their faith to moral superiority and persuasive argument, were beaten back every time.
The cause at issue right now was the planning application for half a dozen houses in the orchard attached to a cottage in the  centre of the village, the property of a local farmer.
The farmer, himself a member of the planning committee, had recently removed his stockman from the cottage had built him a modern bungalow on the farm, an arrangement now recognised as less altruistic than it might appear.
Peter Sidey was explaining all this to Edward.
Edward, Helen could see from his stance, was bored: he had his head tilted on one side and was watching a bird in a tree behind Peter Sidey's left ear.
People believed that Edward, as an ardent nature conservationist, must be similarly passionate about all environmental matters.
This was not so.
He found it difficult to get worked up about buildings and tended to think of landscapes as habitats rather than objects of aesthetic concern.
‘Clegg will make about a hundred thousand,’ said Peter Sidey, ‘if his application goes through.
And the village will lose its last open space.
I've seen the plans for the houses and they're peculiarly insensitive — more suitable for Milton Keynes.’
He was a retired architect, past seventy now, who had exhausted himself over mainly fruitless endeavours to obstruct the likes of this opportunist farmer.
He would have had a much more tranquil retirement, Helen thought, in some already brutalised corner of the country.
The Glovers made appropriate noises of concern.
Peter Sidey outlined the opposition plans and urged them to write letters and attend a protest meeting.
‘If that piece of land is developed there will be no large open space left in the village except the Green itself.
And of course the Britches, thanks to your mother's public-spirited stand over the years.
By the way, had you ever realised the name is Saxon by origin?
From braec — a word meaning land newly taken into cultivation.’
‘Well, it's the opposite now,’ said Edward.
‘Extremely uncultivated.’
‘Quite.
Interesting, though — the indestructibility of a name.’
Helen and Edward broke away as soon as was decently possible.
They were both tickled at the image of Dorothy as a defender of the public good.
‘Perhaps we should have told him she spent twenty years not selling the Britches simply to annoy the people who wanted to buy it,’ said Edward.
‘Certainly not.
The result remains the same, whatever her reasons.’
As they approached the front door of Greystones Helen heard the telephone ringing within.
She felt a rush of excitement and anticipation, and realised that in the preoccupations of the last half hour she had not thought of Giles Carnaby once — definitely a record.
Fumbling with the latch key, she rushed for the telephone, thrusting the shopping basket at Edward.
It was Joyce Babcock.
Reminding her at length, in case she hadn't made a note of it, of the Christmas holiday schedule for the library.
When at last she put the receiver down and went into the kitchen she found that Edward had unpacked the shopping.
The bottle of detergent stood in reproachful isolation at one end of the table.
Thinking of Giles Carnaby, of course, was not so much a considered process as an involuntary twitch.
She did not want to think of him but could not help it.
Indeed he was there most of the time, presiding within her head, dimming a little when her attention was engaged, all-pervasive in times of relaxation.
At night he filled the room.
She heard again every word he had spoken; she reconstructed his face, his body, his clothes.
A man she had met three times.
With whom she had spent six hours or so.
Who had displayed a friendly interest in her.
She saw herself, and did not care for what she saw.
She stood to one side and observed this pathetic self-deluding fifty-two-year-old in a state of romantic yearning and sexual excitation.
Given to the observation of others, she now observed herself, but without charity.
She agreed with her mother: riding for a fall, driving nails in her own coffin, only herself to blame.
And there was nothing, absolutely nothing, to be done.
Edward, offended by the detergent, wandered out into the garden and was instantly distracted by the sound of digging from beyond the yew hedge.
Rather desultory digging.
Of course that boy was here.
He went to the gap in the hedge and saw  Gary at the far end of the kitchen garden.
He was not digging at all now but taking a breather, evidently.
A prolonged breather, during which he took a bar of chocolate out of his pocket and unwrapped it in a leisurely way.
Edward stood there.
Gary half-turned, spotted him out of the corner of one eye and began to dig again with great fervour.
Edward continued to stand there for another minute or two.
Then he plunged off into the Britches to check the nest-boxes.
‘He what ?’ exploded Louise.
‘A row with the headmistress about evolution ?
Only Edward could have a row about evolution.’
‘On the contrary,’ said Helen.
‘It was the stock subject for argument in the late nineteenth century, in some circles.’
‘Oh,then …
Trust Edward.
I wish he had resigned — it would have been hilarious.
So what else is new?’
Helen reached out for Edward's anorak, lying on the oak chest, and put it round her shoulders.
She wished, not for the first time, that the telephone was not in the hall, always the coldest place in the house.
The telephone was in the hall because Dorothy had said that telephones had to be in halls; it occurred to Helen that there was no longer any reason for this to be so.
In one moment of combined panic and acceptance she knew that the telephone would stay exactly where it was.
‘I've ordered the memorial stone.’
‘The what ?’
‘Gravestone.
Sorry — it's what the brochures say.’
She described the choice.
‘Do you think that sounds all right?’
‘I suppose so.
God!
What a thing to have to do.
I'm sorry everything gets shoved on to you.’
‘Edward helped.’
‘Well, good.
But now I'm feeling guilty.
I ought to be there.
Actually life has been fairly murderous lately.
The office.
And Tim has been having a go of his sinus plus conjunctivitis and something else he describes as angst and is being generally unsupportive.
And Phil is playing up.
Actually I think I may come down this weekend, just to escape.
So…anything else?’
Helen put the anorak on.
‘Ron Paget tried to get us to build on the Britches again.’
Louise laughed.
‘Tell him Edward's turning it into a conservation area for endangered species.
Actually, Ron doesn't know it, but he's got a point — you really ought to think about money a bit.
Tim wants you to see some people he knows who do investment advice — then you'd get more out of those shares.
Apparently they're all in the wrong things.’
‘We don't want…’
Helen began.
‘Don't be silly.
Tim's going to fix it up.
You can have a nice day out in London — do you good.’
‘We don't…’
But Louise was off on another track.
Helen stared at the oak chest and wondered what was in it.
She couldn't remember anyone having opened it in years.
There was a torn squab cushion on the top and it was traditionally used as a place to dump coats, scarves and gloves.
Helen thought she could distantly recall having seen it open with her mother upended over it, rummaging.
It had been Dorothy's territory, as indeed had all of the house, except for areas of communal use.
It occurred to Helen — listening to Louise, contemplating the chest — that in all the years she and Edward had lived at Greystones they had fully occupied only their own bedrooms; elsewhere, they perched.
As soon as Louise had rung off she removed the cushion and opened the chest.
The contents reeked of damp.
On top was a rug, colourless with age and stained with mildew.
Helen picked it out and dropped it on the floor; beneath was a tangle of string.
So that was where mother had kept all that string from parcels which must not be discarded lest it be needed.
There was a stack of crumpled brown paper, some of it addressed to herself and to Edward or Louise and bearing injunctions about not opening before Christmas; she recognised the handwriting of aunts and godmothers.
Beneath the layer of string and paper was a foetid mass of material: old curtains and cushions, felted blankets, a porridge of gloves and belts, garments decayed almost beyond identification.
Moth and mouse had thrived down here.
Helen reached in and stirred with distaste; a brown knitted pixie hat surfaced that her  mother used to wear long ago, unravelled now to a skeletal condition.
She spotted a sweater she once gave Edward for a birthday, and various throw-outs of her own.
She remembered her mother, standing squarely at the front door, fending off supplicants from the village school Parent-Teacher Association, the Darby and Joan Club, the summer Fete; Greystones never had jumble.
Had her mother harboured some primitive superstition about the totemistic quality of one's possessions?
Rejected the thought of her things in other hands?
She poked again — dug right down to the bottom and up through the shambles came something that signalled with painful clarity.
Honey-coloured muslin.
Mousseline de soie , to be precise; a grandeur of definition that she had cherished, aged eighteen.
Faded now to dirty cream, and thrust down in a crumpled ball to the base of the chest — but still instantly known.
That dress.
She pulled it up and shook it out.
There it was — complete with the taffeta underskirt that had once (once only) rustled so satisfyingly.
She sat down and examined it minutely — spread it over her lap and investigated.
It was undamaged; creased into a wrinkled network, yes — its honey glow extinguished — a poor drab thing but unstained, untorn, unshrunk.
She smoothed the dress across her knees and pondered this.
The cupboard in which it was not.
The moment of surprise, of faint alarm.
The rail of intimately known clothes — her two tweed skirts, her three cotton frocks, her winter coat, her wool pinafore dress.
And an airy space at the end where should have hung, in all its glory, the honey-coloured muslin — her first and only evening dress, the amazing, unexpected, enhancing present from her godmother.
‘Mother!
My evening dress isn't in my cupboard!’
Dorothy's back view, squat and priest-like before the altar of the kitchen stove.
Stirring a pan, her head wreathed in steam, hairpins jutting from the bun at the nape of her neck.
‘Mother!’
‘I heard you.
No need to shout.
That dress went to the cleaners.’
‘But mother …
It didn't need cleaning.
I've only worn it once.
And I need it for Saturday — for the Clarks’ dance.’
‘It had perspiration marks.’
‘Oh mother, it didn't…
Never mind, I'll go and get it.
It will be ready, won't it?
Where's the ticket, I…’
And Dorothy turns, red-faced from her brew, or so it seemed.
‘They had some disaster with it, apparently.
No point in going round there.
It was spoiled.
The stuff they use — these chemicals.’
And turns again to the stove, furiously stirring.
‘No!
Oh no…
Oh,mother …
But then I've nothing for Saturday.
Nothing at all.’
‘Nonsense,’ says Dorothy.
‘I'll take in my old brown silk for you.
There's a good hem on it, too, it can be let down.
That'll be perfectly all right— Rose was out of her mind buying you that ridiculous creation anyway, far too low cut and tight in the bust.’
And what, one now wonders, happened to the brown silk, of which there is no sign — neither here in the chest nor upstairs among mother's things.
It is all too well remembered: the slimy feel of it, hanging limp and unfitting around her as she stands awkward on the threshold of the Clarks' drawing-room, where the carpets are rolled back, the parquet gleams and in the corner the big hired radiogram is asserting that the lady is a tramp.
She prays to be noticed; she prays to be ignored.
Gone is the rapturous unfamiliar feeling of equality, of authority, induced by the mousseline de soie at her cousins' dance two weeks before.
She does not look nice; she knows that she does not look nice.
A few yards of material have changed her from one person into another.
Is one's grip of things to be always so fickle?
‘I've emptied the hall chest.
I thought you might use it for your files.’
‘I didn't know there was anything in it,’ said Edward.
‘It was bung full.’
‘Stuff of mother's, I imagine.’
‘Not entirely.
There was a dress I had when I was eighteen.’
Edward looked at Helen warily, alerted by her tone.
‘A dress mother said the cleaners ruined.
Not the case, it now seems.’
Edward, shying away from disagreeable exposures, supposed that mother must have made a mistake.
‘Mother didn't make that kind of mistake.’
‘So long ago,’ murmured Edward, sidestepping.
‘I don't know how you can remember…’
‘Since when,’ said Helen, ‘does one forget?’
He remembered now, though would not have done so otherwise.
He left Helen and went to have a bath and in the cold steamy bathroom there came to him this vision of a distant unreal Helen looking — well, radiant was the unexpected word that came to mind — looking not her usual self at all in some frock that glowed and billowed and rustled as she came in at the front door late, pink-cheeked, a touch dishevelled and greeted by the stone wall of Dorothy's disapproval.
Where had he been then?
Lurking on the stairs; listening from his bed?
Edward lay in the bath as the water cooled around him — as usual it had never been adequately hot — and allowed physical discomfort to complement his state of mind.
He thought of Helen, with distress and in helplessness.
He did not know quite what was implied by all this business of dresses, but he sensed something ugly — and flinched.
His mother trundled around on the edges of his thoughts and he tried to push her away.
She came back, unquenchable and impervious.
‘When he was very small Helen had been all that he was not; wise, mature, equipped with skills and resources.
He sheltered under her wing; above all, he sheltered from their mother.
And then had come the awful perception that Helen too was vulnerable; he had seen her exposed, humiliated, disappointed.
He had realised that the refinement of distress is that you are obliged to suffer not just for yourself, which is the easier part, but for others as well.
He suffered for Helen, and suffered again now in retrospect in the chill bathwater in the dank Greystones bathroom where condensation sent rusty trails from the pipes  down every wall.
He thought of Helen, and felt for Helen, as some wincing extension of himself.
If anyone had asked him God forbid — what were his feelings for his sister he would have replied that he was fond of her.
When Edward was about twenty he had once intercepted the look exchanged by a young married couple.
He could no longer remember who they were, but their faces were with him still, and that look: those two pairs of eyes, from which shone a brilliant collusive intensity — an intensity that excluded the rest of the world.
On that occasion he was awed and intrigued; he hoped and expected that one day he too would share such a look with someone.
Subsequently, he came across the look on various faces — a mother lifting a baby from a pram, a child running towards its father, a woman sitting beside a hospital bed, lovers by the dozen.
Awe gave way to a certain bleakness; he felt the excluding quality of those eyes — they were never looking at him.
The only eyes that ever gazed thus into his were those of a succession of dogs.
Nor did he ever so gaze himself.
At the only time in his life when he would have liked to he was so crushed by doubt and diffidence that he kept his eyes scrupulously trained upon the ground, or the table in front of him, or the wall behind the shoulder of the person concerned.
Whole conversations took place during which Edward stared out of windows, or at carpets or pavements or the branches of trees.
‘Do you realise that you have this exasperating habit of never looking at one, Edward?’
Oh yes.
Only surreptitiously, when unobserved — soaking up, then, the tilt of the jaw, the structure of the hairline, the wonderful singularity of nose, of mouth, of eyebrow.
‘Edward, are you with me or are you not?
I sometimes wonder.’
Only too much so, alas.
Only too much so.
Those times were reduced now to a swirl of unchronological slides — images of a room, a street, a skyline — some with accompanying sound.
A tube train.
Circle Line.
Paddington, Bayswater, Notting  Hill…
An advertisement about Amplex: two people staring in distaste at an unsuspecting third.
‘Well, Edward — what about this Italian trip…
Would it be fun?’
And the whole scene becomes incandescent: the cheerful rocking train, the interesting faces of people, promise and potential.
The Chinese restaurant.
Waiting; alone.
Watching the door.
Through which, at last, comes the expected face and with it another, known also, and the evening is dashed, the stomach twists, the chop suey smells sour.
Greenwich Park.
The perfect ginger circles of autumn leaves beneath the trees.
A tug hooting from the river.
Sparrows at their feet.
His own hand reaching out in despair to touch another, which is instantly withdrawn.
‘Sorry, Edward…’
Trudging from one grey day into another, on and on, until at last it doesn't matter any more, or so it seems.
7
‘This is a complete waste of time,’ said Edward.
‘Louise arranged it — at least Tim did.
We could hardly say no.’
‘Couldn't you just have written these people a letter?’
‘Apparently they like to see you once to begin with.’
Edward, still rebellious, gazed out of the train window.
He hadn't been to London in years, and didn't wish to.
‘It's your money too,’ said Helen reprovingly.
‘There isn't much of it anyway.’
‘That's the whole point.
These investment-people can make the capital produce more — put it into different things.’
Edward grunted, apparently intent on Didcot power station.
In fact he was observing a flock of lapwings in a flooded field; his spirits lifted a notch.
The lapwings were followed up by some tufted duck on a reservoir — a frustrating snatched glimpse but enough to dispel most of his gloom.
By the time they reached Paddington he was more cheerful.
They studied the Underground map to see how to reach their destination.
Both were made nervous now by the prospect of the appointment and the tricky matter of timing.
How long would it take to get there?
Should they go at once or have a cup of coffee first?
Too late would not do; too early would be awkward.
They stood amid the station crowds, arguing.
Edward was in favour of coffee; Helen wanted to go.
‘It takes half an hour to get anywhere in London on the tube,’ said Edward.
‘Twenty years ago.
And anyway we don't know exactly where it is.
I forgot to ask Louise.’
Helen was becoming flustered.
‘Ring her up then.’
This presented a further problem.
Neither of the Glovers had used a public telephone for a long while and were astonished to find themselves confronted by a totally unfamiliar contraption.
They stood before it in perplexity, Edward banging his head against the plastic hood, and tried to work out what to do from the illustrative diagram shown, like foreign tourists.
Behind them, other intending users glared in contempt.
Eventually Helen got through; Louise was in a meeting, she was told, and could not be reached.
They took the tube.
Emerging at the station in the City (with fifteen minutes in hand, Helen noted to her relief) they found themselves in an alien landscape.
Blank-faced office blocks reared around them; everyone else carried a briefcase and a daily paper.
They hesitated, getting in the way of this purposeful world.
Eventually, Helen asked directions of a newsvendor.
Their destination turned out to be one of the largest and glassiest of the office blocks.
The Glovers approached it with apprehension, unused to such places.
The central lobby was several stories high.
It included a number of thirty-foot trees and a tide of foliage that would not have disgraced Kew Gardens.
One entire wall was constructed as a glass cliff down which fell a waterfall some six feet wide; the pool into which it tumbled smoked with spray and the whole effect was disconcerting, as of some plumbing disaster on a majestic scale.
The Glovers stood around at a loss; this did not seem to be the sort of place in which business could be carried on.
Eventually Helen spotted a reception desk, discreetly tucked away behind a large weeping fig; they advanced across wastes of polished marble and were directed to a lift.
As it rose Edward said thoughtfully, ‘One gets the impression that this sort of place must cost rather a lot of money.’
The lift stopped.
The doors opened and they stepped into a thickly carpeted, perfectly silent and very large room, again rampant with greenery, in which a girl was sitting behind a desk smiling brightly.
At the sight of them she sprang forward and offered to get them a cup of coffee.
She ushered them into deep leather chairs, offered Edward a copy of the Financial Times (which he took, cravenly) and pranced off down a corridor.
She  wore an emerald green silk shirt, a very short black leather skirt and black tights.
Edward dropped the newspaper on to the carpet.
He gave Helen a look of reproach and accusation.
Helen stared doggedly at a Swiss cheese plant.
The coffee arrived, followed a few minutes later by two tall and thin men who introduced themselves and led the Glovers to another room, barely identifiable as an office except for one discreet filing cabinet.
An immense window overlooked the river.
More foliage.
A large low glass table to one side of which the Glovers were directed.
Their hosts drew up chairs on the other; the one who was apparently the senior of the two said, ‘Julia, I think we could manage some more coffee…’
The leather-skirted girl tripped off.
Courtesies were exchanged.
The Glovers, cautiously, observed their hosts; both wore suits that spoke of much expense, the senior and thinner with a striped shirt, the other with a lilac shirt and pink silk tie.
They sat there drinking coffee and looking at the Glovers with detached interest.
Edward wore his green suit, Helen her camel coat.
Both, in fact, were dressed as for their mother's funeral except that Helen had a new white blouse with a frill down the front and her pearl necklace.
Edward's shoes were dirty and bits of the Britches still clung to his trousers.
The striped shirt man now began to talk about the portfolio.
Pink tie tapped at a calculator.
Striped shirt said that the position could undoubtedly be improved, with a judicious mixture of playing safe and maybe doing something a bit interesting with Japan or the Far East but of course unfortunately there wasn't all that much room for manoeuvre.
He wondered if there were any other assets.
Helen explained about the house.
Striped shirt nodded.
He asked if there was anything else.
Edward looked warningly at Helen and Helen heard herself say that there was a small piece of land.
Striped shirt and pink tie perked up a little.
They asked for particulars; pink tie made some notes.
‘But there's no question of selling it,’ said Edward.
Striped shirt raised an eyebrow.
Edward lapsed once more into strangled silence.
Helen explained why it was impossible to sell the Britches.
This took a  couple of minutes, during which striped shirt and pink tie sat back, long legs crossed and polite smiles of amusement or possibly incredulity on their lips.
Pink tie tapped again at his calculator and wondered, with a quick glance at striped shirt, if Miss Glover and her brother had considered that realisation of the asset would bring in…well, at a conservative estimate around ten, fifteen thousand extra income?
Helen replied that they had.
There was a short pause.
Edward, who appeared to have detached himself from the proceedings, stared out of the window.
Helen now had a curious pricking sensation up and down her spine.
I am not to be intimidated by house plants and silk ties, she thought.
Striped shirt tapped a gold pencil thoughtfully against his teeth and said that of course one had every respect for someone wishing to take such a stand and that in that case we must see what could be done with the portfolio as it was.
Such as it was.
He flashed Helen a nice white smile: ‘We can certainly get the income up on what it is now.
And I don't imagine you have particularly expensive tastes, either of you — vintage claret or fast cars.’
Both men were now smiling genially; the sort of smile people give to earnest but not very bright children, or to social inferiors.
And why the hell shouldn't I have a penchant for claret? thought Helen.
She felt as though, had she been a dog, all her hair would have been standing on end.
She looked stonily across the table, telling herself that all she and Edward had to do was get out of here, as soon as possible compatible with the observance of social niceties and the maintenance of civilised behaviour.
She forced herself to sit tight and retain a noncommittal but not overtly offensive expression while striped shirt talked about unit trusts and pink tie came in once or twice with deferential follow-ups or corrections.
She counted to a hundred, in her head, twice, and tried to think about something wonderfully different.
Edward was now looking at the river with great intensity; he leaned forward a little, as though to see something better.
And then at last everyone was shuffling chairs on the pile carpet and getting up and there was a lot of shaking of hands and  Edward and Helen were in the lift once more, smoothly and silently descending.
Edward said, ‘What terrible people.’
‘Mmn.’
‘Do we have to pay them a lot of money?’
‘I imagine so.’
But it was clear that his attention was now elsewhere.
He set off across the marble lake at a canter, with Helen panting behind.
Outside, he headed for the bridge and there, halfway across, he came at last to a halt, with traffic rushing past, the river gleaming below and the city reaching away in an infinite complex parade of shining white and pearly grey with light snapping from windows and cars.
He leaned over the parapet and gazed.
Helen joined him.
‘What are you looking at?’
Edward pointed.
‘Terns.’
Helen looked down.
The water was a greyish-green, streaked with gold by the sun, and above it wheeled and drifted numbers of birds.
Others floated slowly downstream, sitting upright like bathtoys amid a flotsam of bottles and skeins of plastic and what seemed to be sandwiches, while several more patrolled a little shingly beach almost beneath the piers of the bridge.
‘I thought they were just gulls at first,’ said Edward.
‘I could see them from the window in that place.
Then I realised they were terns.’
‘I thought terns liked coasts and estuaries, not the middle of cities?’
‘They do.
That's the point.’
The Glovers stood alone on the bridge and watched the terns.
They dipped and swirled over the golden water, disappearing sometimes under the bridge, sweeping off in a flock to examine the wake of a passing launch.
One small colony remained all the time on their beach, an isolated solitary place of grey pebbles below greenish breakwaters; high above them the blind-eyed office blocks glittered pink and yellow in the sun.
Edward was enthralled; he leaned his head on his hands and gazed.
Once, he turned to Helen and smiled apologetically; ‘Sorry…
We'll go in a minute.’
But Helen was in no hurry.
She stood there beside him, acknowledging the marvellous presence of the terns, and as she did so the thought came to her that striped shirt, and pink tie, and Julia of the leather skirt, presumably passed them by five days a week without knowing that they did so.
One is supposed to feel a charitable surge at revelations of deprivation, but oh how satisfying not to do so.
Edward straightened.
‘I'm hungry — aren't you?’
‘Yes.
Well find somewhere for lunch.’
They were both, now, in a state of mild exaltation.
This curious fusion of experiences had made them elated and slightly feverish.
Helen clutched Edward's arm as they dodged through the traffic.
They remembered details of the past hour, giggling.
‘What are unit trusts?’ said Edward.
‘I couldn't understand a word he was saying.’
I'm not sure — but did you notice his socks ?
I never saw such smooth socks on a man.’
Forging onwards in this way, they found themselves away from the river and in a hinterland of commercial London that was as alien to them as New York or Hong Kong.
Money reared up all around; it towered in the form of plate glass, stainless steel, polished marble, Portland stone, concrete, brick and slate.
For Helen, London meant the leafy calm of Twickenham, where they had lived in early childhood, subsequent rare excursions to the Royal Academy or the Tate and occasional visits to Louise in Camden Town.
For Edward, it was a bed-sitter in Bayswater, the rioting children of the secondary modern and the distresses of those disturbing years.
For both of them the landscape in which they now stood was quite unrelated to any of this.
They came to a stop.
Edward said ‘This doesn't look like the sort of area for restaurants.’
He gazed at a glass block, soaring upwards, in whose mirror cliff-face swam the distorted white reflection of a Wren church spire.
‘No.
Where was that French place Louise used to take us to?’
‘Somewhere near South Kensington tube station, wasn't it?’
Clutching at the safety of recollection, the Glovers set off for more familiar regions.
And indeed, surfacing again at South Kensington, some atavistic instinct for the lie of the land took them directly to the street in which Louise had had an office, fifteen years or so ago, and where two or three times a year they had met for a meal.
‘That's it!’ said Edward.
And then, more doubtfully, ‘Isn't it?’
‘I think so.
The outside's different, somehow.
Better go in and see.’
Once in, there was no going back.
Handed from one briskly obsequious waiter to another they found themselves tucked into an upholstered corner, served up with menus and dealt drinks that neither of them was conscious of having ordered.
It was very noisy; every other table was full and music babbled from the walls.
‘It used to have check tablecloths,’ said Edward.
‘And artificial onions and fishing nets hanging from the ceiling.’
‘Well, they're gone.’
‘Never mind.’
Edward picked up the menu.
‘It's called Maggie's Wine Bar now, apparently.
Looks rather expensive, I'm afraid.’
They ordered.
Edward finished his glass of sherry; he seemed quite restored now.
‘You were very good with those men.
I'm afraid I rather backed down.’
‘You did,’ said Helen.
‘They made me feel like…some species that had got into the wrong time slot.
That ought to be extinct.’
‘Do you feel more comfortable now?’
‘Marginally,’ said Edward, glancing round.
‘I could put up some sort of valiant struggle for survival.’
‘You'd have to adapt, not just survive.
Even I know that.’
‘Once.
That might be more difficult.’
They grinned at each other.
‘So what do I say to Tim?’ enquired Helen.
‘Say we were too small fry for them.
He ought to have known that anyway.’
‘He meant well.’
‘People are always meaning well,’ said Edward.
‘That's often the trouble.’
The food arrived, and a bottle of wine.
Edward looked warily at it.
‘Do you think we'll manage all that?
I ordered a half carafe.’
‘They've taken the cork out now.’
‘Oh well…’
‘The problem about us,’ said Helen, ‘is that we've never felt the same way about money as most other people seem to.’
‘I've never thought of it as a problem.’
‘It's the only way we seem to be like mother.’
‘I hope so,’ said Edward fervently.
‘Louise isn't interested in money as such, but she quite likes things .
Buying things.
You and I can't manage even that to any extent.’
Edward was tucking in to his meal.
‘This is rather good.
Perhaps eating in restaurants is nicer than I think it is.
I suppose the difficulty about us is that so far as money and possessions are concerned we're at a more primitive stage than the rest.
We're not interested in surplus.
It's like being aborigines or North American Indians after the colonists have arrived.
When everyone else is busy accumulating they get bothered about anyone who is quite happy with a modest sufficiency.’
‘And look what happened to the aborigines and the Indians,’ said Helen.
‘Mmn.
Perhaps that's why I felt so uncomfortable with those men.
But then there were the terns getting away with it on the other side of the window.’
‘The terns get away with it because they aren't noticed.’
‘I've always thought I did quite well at being inconspicuous myself,’ said Edward.
‘But I take your point.
One hasn't a hope, really.
With the likes of Ron Paget around, and those chaps in their glass skyscraper.’
Plates were removed.
More wine was poured.
Helen caught sight of a silver-grey head at the far side of the room and twitched; not Giles Carnaby, of course not, how could it be here?
And I hadn't thought of the blessed man in the last two hours — at least barely thought.
Ten days now and he hasn't telephoned.
‘What's wrong?’ enquired Edward.
‘Nothing.
Do you imagine that we are the way we are about money because of mother or because we would have been like that anyway?’
‘Interesting.
I don't know.
Conditioning must have something to do with it — it always does.
We weren't trained to be acquisitive.’
‘Presumably the children of the poor aren't either.
And we've never been the poor, in a proper sense.
Tim obviously thinks we're going to be, in our old age — that's why he got us involved with these investment people.’
Edward sighed.
‘Old age will be quite bad enough without being patronised by people like that.
I think I'll settle for poverty.’
‘It's not just conditioning,’ continued Helen.
‘Presumably inheritance comes into it too.
Inherited characteristics.
Like we've both got slightly flat feet, the same as mother, and Louise has her wiry hair.’
‘We'd better not push this too far,’ said Edward.
‘Or we shan't like what emerges.’
They were both now inflamed by the unaccustomed wine.
Neither particularly wanted any more but a lifetime's resistance to waste went deep.
They drank, doggedly.
‘Flat feet and a tendency to be frugal are nothing very terrible.
You aren't like her in any other conspicuous way.
Nor is Louise.’
‘And nor are you,’ Edward put in, promptly.
‘Look at us, though — sitting here talking about her.’
Edward pondered.
‘When she was alive we hardly ever did, do you realise?’
Helen nodded.
Tacit acceptance; the occasional glance of collusion; unspoken shared expertise in methods of evasion and camouflage.
‘There was no need, was there?’
‘Then why do we do it now?’
‘Exorcism,’ said Helen briskly.
‘Or something of that order.’
‘Don't you feel guilty?
I do.’
‘Of course.’
Edward tipped the last of the wine into their glasses.
‘When did you first realise other people's mothers were different?’
‘When I was about five, I think.’
‘You were always more sophisticated.
I was twenty-one at least.’
‘In any case,’ said Helen, ‘we mustn't exaggerate.
Other people have difficulties with their parents.’
‘Do they?
Good.’
‘We could always have moved out, both of us, but we didn't.
Why not?’
‘Inertia,’ suggested Edward.
‘Do you honestly think so?’
Edward avoided her eye.
‘In your case, possibly,’ she went on.
‘Or at least inertia certainly comes into it.
In mine, I think the whole situation is more dubious.’
‘Helen…’
Edward began, warningly ,
‘I can see, with detachment, a certain lack of enterprise, to put it mildly.
Perversity, even.
Masochism.’
‘Oh, don't be silly,’ said Edward.
‘What woman of any initiative would have spent almost her entire adult life living in discord with a difficult mother?’
‘You…coped with her.
She'd have been lost without you.’
‘No she wouldn't,’ said Helen.
‘Mother was entirely self-sufficient, and you know it.’
They regarded one another.
‘I told you we shouldn't push this too far,’ said Edward.
‘At the time one justified it in various ways.
There was always next year, and the one after.
One was just biding one's time.’
‘Of course,’ agreed Edward.
‘And anyway…’
‘One was always about to get the serious, definitive job.’
‘Exactly.
And in any case…’
‘Or get married.’
Edward, furiously scouring his plate, rambled on about Dorothy.
‘Instead of which suddenly I'm fifty-two and mother isn't there any more.
I wish I could subscribe to your theory of mother-as-obstacle.
It would be comforting.
It looks to me, frankly, like a clear case of chronic timidity, laced with apathy.’
‘Oh, well in that case, what about me?’ said Edward wildly.
They looked at each other.
The waiter, practised at the disruption of moments of intimacy, plumped the bill down beside Edward's plate.
‘In fact,’ said Helen, ‘I'm not feeling particularly glum about all this.
It's a question more of assessment.
Taking stock.’
Edward picked up the bill and examined it.
‘Mother's part in it is one thing.
One's own is quite another.’
‘This seems to say three hundred and seventy-five pounds,’ said Edward.
‘Can that be right?’
Helen took the bill from him and indicated a decimal point.
‘Oh, I see.’
He examined his wallet.
‘I still don't have enough.
I hope this doesn't mean you're going to rush off and become County Librarian now.
Or…’
Helen laughed.
‘I shouldn't worry.
Neither is likely.’
The waiter hovered.
Helen fished in her purse.
Between them they came up with a pile of notes and coins.
Neither of them possessed a credit card, and it did not occur to them to offer a cheque.
The waiter watched this display with patient interest and carried the loaded saucer away ceremoniously, as though it were a church collection plate.
Outside the restaurant they paused.
‘I rather enjoyed that in a funny way,’ said Helen.
‘Have you ever noticed that we seldom talk to each other at meals normally?’
‘Of course we don't,’ said Edward.
‘What is there to say?’
‘Quite a lot, it seems.
Oh well…
What shall we do now?
It's only half past two.
We could go to an exhibition or something.’
Edward looked unenthusiastic.
‘Or do some shopping.’
‘Shopping!’
Now he was aghast.
‘It's Louise's birthday next week, you know.
And she's coming down this weekend.
We ought to buy her a present.’
‘We don't know what she wants,’ said Edward, fighting desperately.
‘As a matter of fact I do.
She's got all these photos she took with that new camera — all jumbled up in an envelope — and she was saying she ought to put them into something.
We'll get her a photo album.’
‘We — you — could get a photo album in Spaxton.’
‘We can get a better photo album in London.
A more Louise sort of photo album.
An up-to-the-minute photo album.’
Edward gave her a surly glance.
‘It's the wine.
I knew a whole bottle was a mistake.
All right, then, if you insist.
Where?’
‘We're not far from Knightsbridge,’ said Helen.
‘Big smart shops.
That should do.’
She still felt interestingly exhilarated.
Maybe the wine.
Or maybe the sun on white stucco (really London was much prettier than one remembered) or the cheerful scarlet of buses or the continuously satisfying recollection of the terns and the oblivious complacency of pink tie and striped shirt in their sealed air-conditioned office.
Or maybe something else; this curious sensation one had all the time now of the blood running a little faster, the senses being more keenly tuned, of tomorrow or next week being more inviting.
Giles Carnaby might be phoning Greystones at this very moment, the phone ringing in the empty hall…
Maybe he was putting the receiver down and picking up his pen to write a quick note instead, handing it to his secretary to pop in the post, saying ‘Mind you don't forget that one, it's rather urgent.’
Or maybe not.
‘Surely this'll do?’ said Edward.
‘It looks quite big enough and smart enough.’
Hoisted back to the London street, she saw them both reflected in the plate-glass of the shop window, superimposed in transparency above silk and fur, gilt and leather, the swaggering dummies with blind inscrutable gaze in their preposterous clothes.
Their reflections, gliding above these sumptuous displays, showed a shabby pair, distinctly down-at-heel, as sharply contrasted as the proletarian flotsam in some Victorian street scene, dingy spectators of the nobs in their satin and feathers.
The dummies in the windows wore clothes so unlike Helen's that they might have stepped from some other culture: rainbow colours, fabrics of wondrous texture and design, skirts like puffballs or split like a dancer's.
The chairs upon which they sat or leaned were gilded or of shining chrome and glass; bales of material were half unfurled to spill around more silk and satin; jewellery was flung down in handfuls upon tables or simply on the ground.
Prices, where stated at all, were scribbled in decorative script upon tiny cards, an afterthought.
Helen watched her own face swim above  these rich and glowing caverns; did it have a lean and hungry look, deprived, excluded?
Well, no, not really.
It was her usual face, homely, familiar — diminished merely and made incongruous by the setting; it wandered ghostly, with Edward's alongside, across the Aladdin's caves beyond.
Any more of this, thought Helen, and I shall have doubts as to who I am, like Alice.
I'll be getting into conversation with one of these fibreglass ladies.
‘Explain yourself!’ she'll say, and I shall be hard put to it to do so.
Her preoccupations would not be mine at all.
‘What are you worth?’ she'd ask; I'd certainly have trouble with that one.
‘What do you cost?’ would be a bit easier; around £4.50 an hour would be correct I think.
Plus second-hand value of what I stand up in, which by current jumble sale rates would be maybe ten pounds or so.
She, on the other hand, top to toe, comes out at well over two thousand; as for structural costs…does one buy or hire her, I wonder?
‘Come on ,’ said Edward.
‘I can't hold this door for ever.
You're the one who wanted to come here.’
Within, there was that rich smell of better-class department stores: an expensively achieved amalgam of perfume, out-of-season flowers, new leather and virgin fabrics.
Pace seemed to have slowed up; people did not walk but drifted; sound was muted, mopped up by space and carpeting.
The Glovers hesitated.
Edward looked accusingly at Helen.
‘This way,’ she said firmly, and plunged off into a perfumery hall of gleaming marble, as lush as some Byzantine church.
Edward followed; she heard him skid on the floor, in whose black and shining depths were reflected the chandeliers above their heads.
All around were Arab women, heavily robed, sniffing their wrists.
A bottle of perfume, Helen saw, could cost £110.
Edward now wore the manic look of some animal transferred into the wrong environment, as though he might run amok, or bite.
Each counter had an assistant behind it, none of them doing anything.
Helen headed for the nearest one and asked about photograph albums.
They were directed onwards.
Perfumes gave way to leather goods, and leather goods to food.
The air was scented now with chocolate, coffee and freshly baked bread.
They passed a counter above which hung trusses of  pigeons, pheasants and other less identifiable but more disturbing birds; Helen grabbed Edward's arm to hurry him on but he was already gazing at a row of hares suspended by their feet from a rack.
He turned and caught her eye.
‘The butcher in Spaxton has hares,’ she said defensively.
The assistants behind the counter wore what appeared to Helen to be fancy dress: boaters with scarlet bands and elaborate aprons.
One of them — an adolescent with the fair, downy looks of a choir boy — reached up with a pole to bring down a clump of unidentifiable silvery speckled birds.
Both Glovers had come to a halt now, mesmerised despite themselves.
The boy reached for a chopper and began briskly to decapitate the birds.
Enough! thought Helen; she turned to Edward — and he was not there.
She looked round.
Everywhere, expensively dressed people were buying food with an air of dedication.
She couldn't see Edward.
She walked from one end of the hall to the other; no Edward.
Irritation gave way to a feeling of panic.
She told herself to calm down: at the worst they had lost each other and would have to go home separately.
She had Edward's ticket, which was a nuisance, but never mind.
But even as she went over all this she continued to hurry from one section of the store to another, searching, her heart thumping.
It was ridiculous.
Once, when Edward was five, she and Dorothy had mislaid him in Woolworths.
Dorothy had glared phlegmatically around and said that would teach the silly little wretch to wander off on his own; it was Helen who had rushed to and fro and eventually found Edward, white with shock, cowering beside one of the tills.
She moved from handbags through gifts to the flower shop and eventually reached a men's outfitting department where, suddenly, she saw Edward.
He was sitting on a chair beside a display of furled umbrellas; he had his head in his hands and was being eyed dispassionately by two male assistants in dark suits.
As she approached, one of them broke ranks and went to stand over Edward, apparently addressing him.
Edward neither looked up nor moved.
Irritation now displaced concern.
‘I've been looking everywhere for you,’ Helen snapped.
‘We have a First Aid Room on the second floor, if the gentleman isn't feeling well.’
Edward took his hands from his face and sat up.
He was shaking, Helen now saw.
He quivered, very slightly, all over, as though he were perished with cold.
He simply sat there, shaking.
‘The nurse is always in attendance.’
‘I'm not ill,’ said Edward.
He glanced at Helen as though he had never seen her in his life, and made no attempt to get up.
The assistant inclined his head diplomatically and when an American was heard to make enquiries about cashmere sweaters he stepped aside.
Helen said, ‘Are you sure you're all right?’
Edward nodded.
He stood up.
She put a hand on his arm and felt the rhythmic shivering through the stuff of his jacket.
‘Let's get Louise's photo album and then go.’
She steered him into a lift.
She tracked down, at last, the right department.
Photograph albums, it turned out, could also cost £110, or thereabouts.
They came in tooled leather, they came gilded and embossed and with special paper made in Florence.
They also came, if you insisted and were prepared to accept a measure of mild public humiliation, in plastic and plain paper.
Edward stood in silence while Helen negotiated.
The shaking appeared to have stopped but he looked dazed.
She guided him back to the lift, down to the ground floor and the street and into a taxi.
Just before they reached the station she said, ‘Was it the birds?’
‘Birds?’
He seemed almost normal again; he had been staring out of the window and had commented on a street name he remembered from his London period.
‘Those silver birds.
At the butcher's.’
‘They were guinea-fowl,’ said Edward.
He spoke quite composedly.
The whole thing, Helen saw, whatever it had been, was to be ignored.
‘I can't imagine why anyone would want to eat them,’ he went on.
‘There'd be nothing on them.
You'd get twice as much off an ordinary chicken.’
In the train, Helen thought about money.
Money, she realised, had changed its nature over the years.
There was both less of it about, and more.
Today's world was one in which five-pound  notes gushed benignly from the walls of banks at the touch of a button, in which people had only to scribble their names and anything they wished for was theirs; a world in which — as she had seen on a television programme — unimaginable sums of money flew about the globe at the whim of shirt-sleeved young men who sat tapping idly at keyboards.
A world in fact in which the stuff itself — the coins, the notes — seemed barely relevant and indeed a trifle indecent.
Sayings of Dorothy's came to mind: ‘It doesn't grow on trees, you know.’
‘You've got to learn the value of money.’
Impossible nowadays to say such things to children, presumably.
As a child she had had a piggy bank; she could recall the physical satisfaction of its jingling weight in her hands.
That was wealth.
The child of a neighbour in the village had showed her last week his newest share certificate; he had bought British Telecom, he told her gravely, and was thinking of going into Gilts.
The family lived in one of the Barratt houses and did not seem to Helen unduly prosperous, but clearly one was losing one's eye for these things.
She looked at Edward.
He seemed quite all right again.
He had bought himself the latest issue of Wildlife and was immersed in an article about otters.
The day would be held against her, she knew, if only in the muted way in which Edward was capable of bearing a grudge.
8
‘Thank you,’ said Louise.
‘It's exactly what I need.
However did you guess?
Mind, God knows why I keep on recording the children for posterity, the way they are now.
When I look back I could weep — dear little things tottering about on beaches.
Phil hasn't addressed a civil word to us in weeks.
Anyway — thanks.’
‘It's from Edward too.’
‘I took that as read.
Since when did Edward go shopping on his own behalf?
Where is he, anyway?’
‘In the Britches, I think.
He's been trying to do something about the brambles and nettles.’
Louise flopped on to the sofa.
‘How did you enjoy your day in London?’
‘It had its moments,’ said Helen evasively.
‘What about the investment people?’
‘They made it fairly clear we were too small fry for them.
And the place was more like a botanical gardens than an office.’
‘Tim knows some other people.
I'll tell him to…’
‘No,’ said Helen.
‘We have still to recover from those.’
‘Think about it,’ conceded Louise.
‘So what did you do after that — it can't have taken you all day?’
‘We had lunch in that restaurant in South Kensington.’
‘It doesn't exist any more.’
‘Exactly,’ said Helen.
‘So we discovered.
We had lunch on its ashes, as it were.
Then we went shopping.’
‘Well!
Quite a spree!
Very good for you both.’
‘Don't patronise,’ said Helen.
‘We're less socially disadvantaged than you imagine.
The village provides resources undreamed of in Camden Town.
Though I will admit that I find London disconcerting these days.
The landscape.
Everything  seems to be built of mirrors — what on earth has happened to brick?
But I grant you that I'm behind the times in some ways.
Architecture and offices full of botanical specimens are the least of it.
Social etiquette, for instance…
What's done and what isn't.’
She shot her sister a crafty glance.
‘Most of it is quite irrelevant to me, of course, but one keeps a sort of technical interest.’
‘Huh?’ said Louise.
‘What are you blathering on about?’
‘Oh, I don't know…
How people behave…
Men and women, for instance.
Such as…
Do women take the initiative nowadays?’
She felt the beginnings of a disastrous blush and busied herself with a dirty mark on the window, getting out her handkerchief and scrubbing, her back to Louise.
‘I mean — time was, you wouldn't…
Nowadays, would they ring up first — that sort of thing?’
‘How should I know?’ said Louise sourly.
‘I'm married, aren't I?’
‘Well…your friends…’
Helen persisted.
‘For instance, if someone hadn't heard from a man friend for — oh, for a couple of weeks or so-when he'd said vaguely he'd ring — I mean, she might wonder if there was something wrong, if he was ill, or if she'd offended in some way.
Would she feel nowadays it was up to her to make contact?’
‘Look, what is all this?’ demanded Louise.
‘I'm just curious.
Detached interest.
One ought to know how things are.
If they've changed or not.’
‘You are a funny old thing,’ said Louise.
‘You're making that window worse, you know.
Haven't you got any Windowlene?
Actually so far as I can see it's sod's law for women, just as it always has been.
You know my friend Judith?
Well, she's been having an affair with this bloke for the last year or so and then out of the blue he turned round and…
Here's Edward.
Open the window and he can come in this way.’
Edward was advancing across the lawn.
‘What did he turn round and do?’ said Helen.
‘Oh, some other time…
Hi!
Thanks for the birthday present.’
Edward came in at the french window and stared blankly at  his younger sister.
After a moment he said ‘Oh…
Yes.’
And then, ‘Many happy returns of the day.
How old are you?’
‘It's next week, not today.
And I'll be forty-three for Christ's sake.
There's this piece of contemporary mythology that the forties are the best time of your life.
A load of cock, so far as I'm concerned.
What about you?’
But Edward had lost interest, apparently.
He turned to Helen.
‘Have we got any wire anywhere?
I want to mend the fence.’
The question of age, in fact, filled his head these days, but it was not a matter he wanted to discuss with Louise.
Or indeed with anyone.
He did not want to be young again — that time had had particular and transcendent horrors — but the thought of being any older filled him with panic.
He could not imagine finding tranquillity of soul in old age; if he could only be allowed to mark time for a while all might yet be well, one might suddenly achieve equilibrium, certainty, serenity.
There would still be possibilities.
Hopes.
When his mother died it was as though his youth began to slip out of sight.
Her existence, he now realised, had implications far beyond her abrasive and insistent presence: it had tethered him to a distant shore.
Now, the shore was fading and there was no going back.
And every now and then there came these appalling moments when feeling boiled, when, it seemed to him, he became slightly mad.
Most of the time one was all right— or at least as all right as one had ever been — and then out of the blue it struck, a hideous uprush of fear, of longing, of shame.
It could be prompted by anything, or nothing.
It could come in the wastes of the night, or at the most humdrum moments of the day.
It had surged forth in that dreadful shop in London, when he had stood transfixed — not, as Helen thought, by bunches of guinea-fowl but by the bare arms of the butcher's lad adroitly trimming a carcass on a block beneath.
The boy was done up in a long striped apron and straw boater in arch Victorian pastiche but his arms were all that Edward saw: young, dusted with golden hairs  and somehow indisputably male.
Beautiful arms; he looked at them and wanted to cry.
He could fend them off, the appalling moments.
Fight them.
The thing was to keep occupied.
He banged about in the scullery, hunting for wire.
He would make the Britches impenetrable, tackle the dead trees and plant saplings.
As soon as Louise had left, Helen went to the telephone.
She picked up the receiver, dialled Giles Carnaby's number, and then replaced the receiver before the connection was made.
She wasn't quite ready yet, after all.
In fifteen minutes' time, she told herself sternly.
Just a little longer to get oneself into the right frame of mind, run over the right casual, uncommitted phrases.
‘It just occurred to me you might like to…’;
‘If you're free on Wednesday, I thought maybe…’
She too resolved on activity.
She had been intending for days to make a start on clearing out the cloakroom; now was the moment — she would make a preliminary survey, set aside what should be kept, see if there was anything good enough for Oxfam.
Then, suitably relaxed, she would telephone Giles.
Properly.
The cloakroom led off the hall.
It was large, ill-lit, exceptionally cold, and housed a primitive washbasin; the lavatory was separate, an internal room of its own.
The walls were lined with layers of raincoats of a uniform dun, as though their colours had run together; they went back years — some had even belonged to her father and were so stiff and cracked that they could have stood unsupported.
There was a pair of mackintosh waders; there were shooting-sticks and an Egyptian fly-whisk and an alpenstock.
The pegs above the raincoats were occupied by assorted headgear — berets and peaked caps, a riding bowler, sou'westers, knitted hats, deerstalkers.
Everything had associations — Dorothy's, Edward's, given by so-and-so, bought on a particular holiday, left behind by relative or friend; Helen saw an insistent kaleidoscope of references, shimmering tiresomely behind the garments and the implements, as ineradicable as the blackberry stains on a sleeve or the ingrained mud on everything.
And the whole lot smelt — a pervasive stench of damp and mildew.
High time something was done about it.
Starting in one corner, Helen began to lift garments from pegs and drop them on the floor in a pile — a mack of her father's, something of Edward's not worn within living memory, a very ancient corduroy jacket of Dorothy's, also unused for many a year.
It occurred to her that it might be wise to go through the pockets; her father's garment yielded an old penny and a broken pipe.
In Dorothy's jacket was a letter.
Unopened and addressed to Helen.
She knew the handwriting at once, of course .
Until ten years or so ago a bundle of similar envelopes had lain in a drawer of her desk; one day in a fit of vigour she had torn them up and thrown them away.
She sat down on the battered settle and opened the letter.
‘Dearest Helen,’ he began; that was interesting — the letters in the destroyed bundle usually began with ‘Dear’or ‘My dear’.
He went on to say that he felt they were both being rather silly and he wanted to make amends.
He was missing her, he said.
He had phoned a couple of times but she had been out.
Anyway, maybe he could say what he felt more easily in a letter.
She knew he wasn't good at expressing himself.
If she was still cross with him please would she stop.
He was sorry about what was mainly a misunderstanding.
He wanted very much to talk to her.
There was something in particular he wanted to talk about.
Please would she meet him for a long dinner on Friday — he would expect to hear from her tomorrow or the next day.
He signed himself ‘With a great deal of love — Peter.’
The postmark on the envelope was March 10th 1965.
The hand of fate is brutal but impersonal.
The hand of one's mother is something different.
Witting or unwitting?
Carelessness — the thing picked up off the hall mat, thrust into her pocket and forgotten — or deliberate appropriation?
If the latter — why had she not gone the whole hog and burned it?
Well, one would never know and either way the effect was the same.
Helen began to shake.
She saw her own hands with a certain detachment, holding the letter and trembling convulsively.
She did not otherwise feel at all detached.
Her mind raced.
A number  of things fell into place — click, click, click — with distant muffled echoes like stones dropped into a well.
That time.
The tiff.
The coolness about…about what had it been?
‘A misunderstanding’.
Those weeks, not seeing him, wondering, too proud to make the first move.
And weeks becoming a month, two months, three…a year.
Anger giving way to misery and then to regret and eventually to…nothing.
Until now, when one sat here in the cloakroom, surrounded by old raincoats, shaking as though struck down by fever.
One could, presumably, trace Peter Datchett.
It would be relatively simple — she could think at once of how it could be done: the casual enquiry of a mutual friend with whom she still exchanged Christmas cards, the phone call to the college at which he had been a lecturer.
And then the reply: ‘Dear Peter, I have at last received your letter of March 10th 1965.
I hope it is not too late to say yes, I'd like very much to have dinner on Friday and I too feel we've been rather silly and it has all been a misunderstanding…’
And there is Peter, on the receiving end, opening it over breakfast with his wife and children…no, children if any are flown by now, Peter is fifty-six…with his wife (and the wife one is of course assuming, merely, but the assumption seems reasonable enough, things being what they are), who says ‘Who's that from?’
And he shoves it in his pocket with some dismissive remark and wonders what the hell he is to do.
How embarrassing, he thinks.
God — poor old Helen.
No, one will not set about tracing Peter Datchett.
At this precise moment, thought Helen, I hate my mother.
It was a refreshing feeling — invigorating, even.
And worth indulging: it stifled various other feelings.
She knew that she would not have lived happily ever after with Peter Datchett.
No one lives happily ever after.
Very likely there would have been a further coolness or misunderstanding and they would have parted.
The point was that one would never know, now.
And so would wonder, and go on wondering.
One would construct alternative scenarios, and brood about them.
One would furnish houses and arrange landscapes; one might go  dangerously far and people them with…children.
One would conjure up occasions; things would be said and done.
All this thanks to Dorothy.
Still ordaining.
No, said Helen.
She rose from the settle.
She put the letter in her pocket.
In due course she would dispose of it, but not just yet.
Think of what was, she told herself, since only that is relevant.
What might have been is neither here nor there.
She tried to reconstruct the physical Peter Datchett: tall, thin, black hair that tended to flop forwards, a mole on one cheek.
He taught at the College of Further Education a few miles from Spaxton; she had met him through a rambling club.
His physical presence was all mixed up with muddy tracks, overgrown woodland paths, rain and barbed wire fences and glasses of beer in steamy pubs.
And then of course the relationship had become more personal and exclusive: lunches and dinners, films, visits to stately homes or places of scenic interest.
Intimacy, of a kind; they were both reserved people, they didn't rush things.
She did not remember passion, but a certain eroticism — that, definitely.
They were on the brink of sex; it was a matter of time, she had known — next week, the one after.
She had explained to him about her mother; he had met her mother; he had seemed to size up the problem, had said the right things in his oblique way.
Dorothy had referred to him as ‘that chap with the birthmark on his face.’
Love?
It had been in the air, certainly — around the corner, along with sex.
What she remembered was a sense of expectancy, of confident expectancy.
They had been a unit, had shared jokes, exchanged small gifts, written to each other when unable to meet for a week or two; the assumption was always that this would continue, and expand.
Why didn't he write again?
Telephone?
Arrive on the doorstep?
Because, thought Helen, he was as he was.
Reserved; a touch diffident.
And why did I do nothing?
Ditto.
She went out into the hall.
She picked up the receiver and dialled Giles Carnaby's number.
The ringing tone came: once, twice, six times…
Out, she thought.
Good.
Reprieved.
But honour is satisfied.
You can put the thing down.
‘Hello?’ said Giles.
‘Oh.’
The prepared words evaporated.
‘Is that…?
Could I speak to Giles Carnaby?’
‘You are.’
‘This is Helen Glover.’
‘But how very nice.
I didn't recognise your voice.’
‘I was wondering…’
‘And I'd been thinking of you only yesterday.
How are you?’
‘Very well.
I wondered if…’
‘Your mother's affairs progress.
Slowly, as I'm afraid is always the case.
The Probate Office moves in its own mysterious way.’
‘Actually,’ said Helen, ‘that wasn't what I was ringing about.
My brother and I are having a few people in for a drink before lunch on Sunday.
I wondered if you might be able to come.’
There.
No going back now.
‘But I'd be delighted.
What fun.
Last weekend I was away but this one I'm as free as air.
I shall look forward to it.
By the way I've finished the Earl Grey.
Things are getting desperate.
And you never did come and have a cup.’
‘Oh.
No.
You can buy it at the delicatessen in Long Barton, you know.’
‘I'm never in that direction.
Do you think you could get me a packet next time you're passing?’
‘I'll try.
I mean yes, I will.’
‘Bless you.
And thank you so much for ringing.
What time?’
‘Time?’
‘On Sunday.’
‘Oh — twelve, I think.’
‘Twelve.
Splendid.
Till then.’
‘We're having some people in for a drink on Sunday.
Before lunch.’
Edward, dealing out Puffed Wheat to the birds, swung round sharply.
‘Whatever for?’
‘I thought we should.’
‘But we've never done it before.’
‘It's the sort of thing that's done all the time, in other households.’
‘I can't think why.
Who, then?’
‘Doctor Taylor and his wife, I thought.
A few others from the village.
And our solicitor, Giles Carnaby.’
‘But you went to hear him sing,’ said Edward.
‘Surely that was quite enough.’
‘They will arrive at twelve and stay probably for an hour and a half or so.
I'll get the drink but you'll have to help pour it out.
Is there anyone you'd like to ask?’
‘Certainly not.
And I hope this isn't going to be a precedent.’
She made telephone calls.
She hoovered and dusted the sitting room.
She found glasses that were unchipped and as nearly matching as possible.
She bought sherry and white wine and whisky.
She bought bags of little biscuity things.
‘You make me laugh,’ said her mother.
‘I never saw such a carry-on.
Who do you think you're fooling?’
‘Nobody,’ Helen replied.
Least of all myself.
‘And that chap — Giles Thingy — do you imagine he's going to be taken in?
A man like that.’
‘Enough,’ said Helen.
‘You have no right.
Nor ever did.
From now on I'll be mine own executioner.’
‘Whatever have you done to the cloakroom?’ complained Edward.
‘Cleared it out.’
‘I liked it the way it was.’
‘We've still got nine raincoats and anoraks between us.
And eight different hats and an alpenstock and a flywhisk and four walking-sticks.’
‘I used to enjoy the way you never knew what you'd come across next.’
‘I don't share your feelings,’ said Helen.
She considered making a ceremonial pyre.
She would burn Peter Datchett's letter and that dress in one fine condemnatory blaze.
There you are, mother — there they go, properly disposed of at last.
A few years too late.
Or did you always think they had  been?
Were you careless or calculating?
And what did you do it for?
Were these sins of omission, or a devilish scheme?
I can't know if you succeeded in changing the course of my life, but it's possible.
And for a person in a somewhat delicate emotional condition, as I believe myself to be, this is hard to contemplate.
She did not believe that marriage, or pairing, or however you cared to define a sexual relationship, was the key to happiness and fulfilment; you only had to look around you to see that this was not so.
Which was worse — to have tried and failed or never to have tried at all?
She thought of her father — that grey and distant figure associated only with anchovy paste and a rustling newspaper.
It was not comfortable to consider her parents' intimate life; she could recall no demonstrations of affection or indeed even of much displayed interest in one another.
Usually, Dorothy had been engaged in shifting her husband around like an inharmonious piece of furniture.
His own image was one of compliant self-effacement.
He went out to work by day, conveniently, at a firm of accountants; in the evenings and at weekends he made himself as unobtrusive as possible.
God knows what went on at night.
In the end she pushed the letter into the drawer of her desk and left the dress where it was, in the corner of the wardrobe.
All in good time.
Edward, practised in self-deception, forgot about the guests until Sunday morning and was therefore surprised to discover Helen, at ten-thirty, wearing unexpected clothes and straightening cushions in the sitting room.
She was also flushed and evidently in a state of unrest, which made him feel chivalrous and sympathetic.
He decided to be nice about the whole business, though he still could not see the point of it, and offered to put the little biscuity things into bowls.
He gave some of them to Tam in the process.
It was not so much that he had anything against people in general, more that he saw no purpose in deliberately setting up occasions on which you stood around trying to think of something to say.
Moreover, the whole process was self-perpetuating; the guest became the host in an act of social revenge and thus it  went on for ever.
The only sensible course was never to start it in the first place.
He could not think what had got into Helen, normally as rational as himself about all this, or so he had thought.
Nevertheless, when the doorbell rang he was ready and waiting, with an agreeable expression and a fluent command of what to offer by way of drink.
He had been feeling a bit better for the last few days: He had repaired the fence between the Britches and Ron Paget's yard, filled two black plastic sacks with rubbish and had embarked on a vigorous assault upon dead and decaying trees.
It all felt very positive and forward-looking.
The visitors arrived.
There were not enough of them to make the large Greystones sitting room look as though much was going on; people stood in small clumps, eyeing one another; awkward silences broke out.
I told you so, thought Edward, ploughing valiantly around with a bottle in each hand.
Tam scrabbled at each pair of legs in turn, remembering the biscuits; the more uninhibited guests kicked, furtively.
Apart from the doctor and his wife and Giles Carnaby they were all people from the village who had not had an opportunity for a good look at the inside of Greystones for quite a while and were busy taking note.
‘I s'pose you may be thinking of selling the Britches now, Edward?’ asked a neighbour.
‘Oh no,’ said Edward.
‘There's no question of that.’
He couldn't remember her name; her face was as familiar to him as the frontage of the village shop or outline of the church tower; he had always been hopeless at names.
The solicitor detached himself from another group and joined them.
‘Giles Carnaby — we haven't met.
Your sister is busy hostessing so I'm introducing myself.’
‘Oh,’ said Edward.
‘Yes.
Hello.
This is Mrs…’
He gazed wildly at the neighbour who said crossly, ‘Jean Powers.
Actually Edward's known me for ten years, but there we are.
You live in Spaxton, don't you?’
Edward, thinking with relief that he could leave them to it now, began to withdraw, clutching the bottles that gave him a certain exemption, free to come and go.
The solicitor laid a hand on his arm, making Edward wince: he didn't like to be touched.
‘Were you talking about the famous Britches?
Helen's told me so much about the place.
May I have a conducted tour sometime?’
No you certainly can't, thought  Edward, and what's all this ‘Helen’ stuff?
He said, ‘There's absolutely nothing to see and it's awfully full of nettles’; at the same moment Jean Powers was saying noisily that not a solitary soul had been into the Britches in years and the village wondered what Edward got up to in there — ha ha!— some people said he must be into black magic, or maybe he was growing cannabis.
Edward laughed politely, slid from Carnaby's grip and edged towards the group by the window, who were talking about hedges in tones of some desperation.
As he did so Helen passed him; her neck was red, a sure sign of agitation.
She hissed, ‘Do do something about the Taylors and old Mrs Phipson.
They've been stuck together for hours.’
‘How?’ enquired Edward; he meant it — he had absolutely no idea of the mechanics involved.
Helen gave him a look of fury.
The group by the window turned to him anxiously: ‘Is that hedge yew, Edward?
None of us can decide.’
Really, thought Edward, people must be out of their minds, submitting themselves to this sort of occasion quite voluntarily.
Kill or cure, Helen had thought.
As soon as she set eyes on Giles Carnaby again she knew that whatever it was it was not a case of cure; her heart thumped, she felt unstable.
There he was.
Here he was.
Smiling at her over people's shoulders while she could not move because someone was telling her at length how much she must be missing her mother.
And then she saw him talking to Edward and Jean Powers and then someone had mislaid their glass and she had to find another and then there was the problem of the Taylors and old Mrs Phipson.
And then eventually she could cross the room towards him.
‘There you are,’ he said.
‘I have been most restrained — I could see you had your hands full.
But I have met your brother at long last and Mrs Powers has been regaling me with the most fascinating pieces of village gossip.’
This set Jean Powers off on a torrent of exclamations and denials so that Helen could not have got a word in had she wished to; she stood and looked at Giles Carnaby and tried to be calm.
She tried to see him dispassionately as a grey-haired solicitor rather too well endowed with easy charm; indeed, she  saw him thus, but she also saw him otherwise, and could not help herself.
When he turned to look intently at Jean Powers she felt a twinge of jealousy; his arm, brushing momentarily against hers, made her tingle all over.
This sort of thing was bad enough at eighteen, she thought; at my age it is ludicrous and humiliating.
Jean Powers moved away.
Giles said ‘Dear me, what a demanding woman.
She's not a great friend, I hope?
Anyway, now that I've got you to myself for a moment can we make some plans?
First of all, am I going to be able to persuade you to…’
‘Oh Helen!’ cried the doctor's wife, appearing at their side, ‘We're going to have to rush off, I'm afraid.
John's on call today.
But first I must just have a word with you about…’
She attended to the doctor's wife.
She got the doctor and his wife into their coats and saw them out of the front door.
She returned to the sitting room and struck Tam, who had knocked the bowl of biscuits from the table and was wolfing them off the carpet.
She refilled three glasses.
She went into the kitchen to see if there was another packet of biscuits.
I am not enjoying myself, she thought — but then I was never supposed to, was I?
She sought biscuits in the bread bin, the vegetable rack, on the dresser.
No damn biscuits.
Giles appeared.
‘Is there anything I can do?
You look harassed.’
‘I am harassed,’ said Helen.
‘Edward's wretched dog has eaten the biscuits.’
‘People can live without biscuits.’
‘I know,’ she replied.
‘But it doesn't seem so at this moment.’
I just may burst into tears, she thought.
I just might, appallingly, sit down on the kitchen chair and start to weep…
Giles put his hand on hers: ‘Stop worrying about the biscuits and talk to me.
We were interrupted.
I was in the middle of trying to find out if you'll come and have dinner with me next week.
At home.
I'm not much of a cook but I do a passable roast.
Thursday?
Friday?’
She subsided onto the chair.
She was not, she found, going to burst into tears after all.
The biscuits became unimportant, and the guests.
‘Thursday,’ she said.
‘I'm not doing anything on Thursday.’
The kitchen became a warm and friendly place; she sat in it smiling at Giles Carnaby.
I'm happy, she thought in surprise, at this precise moment I am happy.
9
Hemp agrimony —Eupatorium cannabinum — flourished in the Britches, as it happened; Jean Powers was not so wide of the mark.
Edward of course was unaware of its connotations and encouraged it as a handsome and relatively uncommon plant.
It grew in a boggy area where there was a spring and a small stream which flowed in a desultory way after the autumn rains but almost dried up in summer.
Other water-loving species turned up here from time to time also —Mimulus and forget-me-not and Water Speedwell.
The Mimulus was in fact a garden escape, but he allowed it all the same, while conceding that a purist would not.
Once there had been kingcups, but none had been seen now for at least ten years.
The whole area was much dryer than it used to be, and Edward suspected that something had interfered with the water table; there had been nesting moorhens at one time — now only the occasional toad was left.
But the hemp agrimony continued to grow strongly, rather swamping the more genteel species, indeed.
Now and then he was obliged to curb it in order to give a chance to the bluebells and the wood anemones, which were both getting sparse to the point of extinction.
He sometimes had the feeling that all the more delicate growths were being quenched and ousted by the rougher stuff, if one did not intervene.
He saw himself as a wise and benign deity, presiding over his kingdom and seeing to it that evil did not always prevail; a hollow symbolism of course and anyway he rather liked hemp agrimony and ground ivy.
The real war was waged against nettle and bramble — now there you really could persuade yourself that some malign force was at work, set upon reducing the whole place to a rank and thrusting wilderness, in which the weakest went to the wall.
Edward felt that he and the malign force were fairly evenly matched.
In a few hours of concentrated assault he could destroy months of determined surreptitious growth; but then he would discover some other, overlooked area where things had been going to the dogs unheeded and some valiantly struggling patch of wood anemone or bluebells had been choked to the last gasp.
One thought, of course, in such terms: malign, surreptitious, struggle, valiant.
He was well aware of the anthropomorphism and indeed found it satisfying; it was as though, in the Britches, thigh-deep in lashing nettle and octopus strands of clutching bramble he was coming to grips at last with a great many things and, as often as not, getting the upper hand.
He spent the afternoon in the Britches, as soon as the last of the party guests had departed.
Half of a perfectly good Sunday had been wasted, but there were still several hours till dark.
He was working in a thicket of briar, elder and dead wood from a fallen tree.
From time to time he resorted to the saw; the noise he was making deafened him to Ron Paget's approach.
When he spoke Edward jumped so violently that the saw fell from his hand.
‘You're not getting far with that, are you?’ said Ron.
‘Tell you what, I'll have one of the men come over with some proper equipment.
Have that lot out in no time.’
Edward picked up the saw.
‘Thanks, but I can manage perfectly well.’
And get out, he fumed, you've no business marching in here like this.
Through the gap in the fence, I suppose, the place I didn't wire up.
Ron gave him a look of amusement.
‘You do like to do things the hard way, don't you, Mr Glover?
I heard you at it so I thought I'd pop in and pass the time of day.
How's Miss Glover, then?’
‘She's very well,’ said Edward.
‘I'm glad to hear it.
I've a lot of respect for your sister.
Quiet but got a mind of her own, know what I mean?’
Edward stared coldly.
‘I've lost track of how long it is now we've been neighbours.
I was saying to Pauline the other day, there's some people you  grow old with, willy-nilly, without noticing it — not that we aren't all wearing pretty well.’
Ron laughed.
Edward thought of the previous, discarded Mrs Paget.
He made no comment.
‘You remember my first wife, of course.
Well, these things happen, don't they?
You pick yourself up and soldier on, don't you?
Of course, you're not a family man yourself…’— Ron's eyes flickered momentarily —‘…but we all have our ups and downs, I daresay life's dealt you out one or two, one way or another.’
Shut up, thought Edward.
And go away.
‘Anyway — it's nice to have a word from time to time.
I miss your mother, I really do — we had our differences but we'd got the measure of each other, as you might say.
I often think of her.
Gary doing his stuff all right in your vegetable garden?’
‘I think so,’ said Edward.
‘It's my sister's preserve.’
Ron's glance had fallen upon the huge mound of nettle roots and bramble stems that was the product of Edward's afternoon.
‘I don't know why you bother doing all this by hand.
Half an hour with a drum of selective weed killer and a spray and you'd put paid to that lot for good and all.’
‘Plus much else.’
‘What?
Oh, the wild flowers.’
Ron smiled indulgently.
‘A year or two and they'd be back.
But you wouldn't catch me sweating my guts out like that when there's an easy way to set about it.
Take advantage where you can, that's what I say.’
‘I'm sure you do,’ said Edward.
Ron looked at him narrowly.
There was a brief silence.
‘Well,’ said Ron.
‘I'd better be off — Pauline'll be after me.
And remember, any time you feel like changing your mind about what you're going to do with this place, let me know.
I'll be ready and waiting — put a cheque in your hand any time you want it.’
Edward sighed.
‘I'll remember.’
He listened to Ron crashing his way out of the Britches.
At last there was silence.
A robin began to sing, and presently a chaffinch.
The light was fading and it was getting cold; Edward decided to pack it in.
But first he would have a few minutes of  self-indulgence.
He sat down on a log and tried to perform what he thought of as the vanishing act, whereby you became insofar as it was possible a part of the surroundings: breathing, seeing, hearing only — merely an aspect of the place, a dimension, like the robin or the moss-covered log or the leafmould on which his feet rested.
You tried not to think or to feel — just to be.
Whimsy, as he well knew — an affectation, even — but satisfying nonetheless.
There he sat, and the Britches darkened around him.
For Helen, all that week, Saturday shone like a distant sunlit hilltop.
She was in no hurry to reach it — contemplation was almost as satisfactory as arrival.
Anticipation is one of the choicest forms of pleasure; it was a long time, she realised, since she had experienced it.
Conditioned to observe, she noticed what it did to her; the feeling of vigour, the brisker step, the tendency to be nice to others, to talk to those whom one usually avoided.
In the library she negotiated a cease-fire between Joyce Babcock and the new trainee, a girl fatally endowed with enthusiasm both for books and for people, and therefore threatening the entire ethos of Joyce's empire.
The girl, Lorna, announced her intention of applying for a transfer: ‘I don't know how you've stuck it with her so long, I really don't.’
Helen replied enigmatically that it was all just a question of experience.
Monday gave way to Tuesday, the day on which she did not go to the library.
She walked to the village shop to collect the bread and was waylaid four times and treated to opposing viewpoints on the two current matters of local dispute.
Helen, neutrally listening, anaesthetised by her state of uplift, thought that they nicely illustrated the condition of the place.
One controversy was about visual amenities; the other concerned noise.
Both had implications about prosperity and the power of cash.
Someone had applied for planning permission to knock down an old cow-byre in his garden and build a bungalow; the environmentalists raged at this further desecration, the laissez-faire element saw no reason why people shouldn't do what they wished with their own.
The village youths had taken to roaring  round and round of an evening on highly powered Japanese motorcycles from which the silencers had been removed; those distressed by this were invoking the law, the youths laughed, their friends and relations pointed out that they'd paid their road-tax, hadn't they, like anyone else?
Words like freedom and rights were bandied around on both sides.
‘Your mother would have been with us,’ said one of the waylayers with a touch of reproach, presumably sensing Helen's lack of commitment.
He was right.
Dorothy, in her time, had been an active member of an organisation called the Noise Reduction Society, which had campaigned valiantly and indiscriminately against lawnmowers and jet aircraft.
It had disintegrated (in despair, one assumed) many years ago, but Dorothy continued to bawl furiously at passing vehicles and to write letters to the commanding officer of the local airbase, who returned each time the same duplicated reply of infinite courtesy and obscurity.
What is at the bottom of all this, thought Helen, is that people — some people — have inappropriate expectations.
This is the country.
The country is supposed to be peaceful and beautiful.
Traditionally people — some people — have retreated to it in search of spiritual solace.
Others, of course, have seen it quite differently — as a source of income or a place of work.
These points of view are now fatally and perhaps finally opposed.
Money and technological advance intensify the problem.
She considered all this as she listened to the heated opinions forced upon her outside the shop (where the throbbing engine of the Findus delivery van obliged everyone to shout), on the corner by the church and at two other points on her route back to Greystones.
And at the same time, behind her own thoughts and over the faces of those who spoke to her there hovered the mirage of the distant sunlit hilltop: promise and expectation.
‘How are you, Helen?’ people said, without waiting for a reply, and silently she answered: I am really quite extraordinarily well, thank you, I have something to look forward to, I believe I am happy.
Edward was crossing the hall as Helen came down the stairs.
He halted and stared at her.
She had put on a pale green dress that she seldom wore.
She had added a large floppy white collar bought in Spaxton, and one of her few pieces of jewellery — a Victorian cameo on a gold chain.
The effect of the collar and the cameo were remarkable, as Helen herself had dispassionately noted a few minutes before in her mirror: they made her look softer, prettier and younger.
She saw this again in Edward's stare.
‘I'm going out,’ said Helen defensively.
‘I'm having dinner with Giles Carnaby.
I told you.’
Edward snatched off his glasses and began to scrub them.
He peered again at Helen.
She could see fly across his face a whole sequence of emotions and responses.
‘What shall I eat?’ he enquired petulantly.
‘Anything you like.
There are fish fingers in the fridge.
Or some ham.
Or tins in the cupboard.’
He put his glasses back on and rallied, with dignity.
‘What time will you be back?’
‘I've no idea.’
‘I won't lock the front door, then.
I hope he isn't going to expect you to listen to him singing again.’
‘Don't be silly, Edward,’ said Helen.
He looked at her bleakly and turned back into the kitchen.
As she put her coat on she could hear him rattling about in a conspicuous way with pans and dishes, and talking to Tam.
Just as she was about to leave he came out and complained that he couldn't find the tin-opener.
‘Try the right-hand drawer,’ she said.
‘Where does he live?’
‘In Spaxton.
I told you that, too.’
‘It's pouring with rain.’
‘I'm intending to drive there,’ said Helen.
‘Not walk.’
Edward returned to the kitchen, banging the door.
Helen, ruffled but in control, hurried into the car.
By the time she reached Spaxton her control was a little less certain.
She stood paralysed for several moments on Giles Carnaby's doorstep.
Her mother stood behind her, giving tongue: ‘He's got you on the end of a string, that fellow, hasn't he?
Like some silly schoolgirl.
You're fifty-two, Helen.
I don't know what you think's going to come of it.
Riding for a fall, I'd say.’
She rang the bell, and there he was, suffused in the warm golden light of the hall, his sleeves rolled up, pushing that silver forelock back from his eyes.
There was the smell of meat roasting.
They both spoke at once: cries of welcome from him, apologies for lateness from her (she was, by sixteen minutes).
He drew her inside, removed her coat, shepherded her into the sitting room.
‘So here you are,’ he said, beaming.
‘What a becoming dress, if I may say so.’
He glanced at his watch, became distracted: ‘Forgive me just a moment — kitchen duties.
Make yourself comfortable.
A drink?
On the side there.
Oh, I have been looking forward to this evening…’
He went.
She sat.
Then rose and strayed around the room.
She looked again at his wife, securely smiling behind the glass of her photograph.
She noted the flowers agreeably disposed in a vase on the mantelpiece, the recent issues of magazines arranged upon the table, the Radio Times open upon the desk with a programme encircled in red biro (a talk on Handel operas).
An orderly man.
I know nothing about him, she thought, nothing at all; he could have robbed banks for all I know.
He came back into the room.
‘All is well.
I tend to panic unnecessarily.
And you haven't given yourself a drink.
Sherry?
Vermouth?
Sherry — right.’
No, country solicitors don't rob banks.
But there are other offences, less conspicuous.
The point is, I seem to be past caring.
‘And what has your week been like?’ he said.
‘Mine has been unspeakably mundane.
By the way, we progress a little with the Probate Office — but I'm not going to talk business tonight.
That will do for another time.’
He came to sit beside her on the sofa; she felt him look at her, intently.
‘I've had a good week’, Helen said.
She told him about dissension in the library, about the village feuds.
He appreciated; he laughed; he pressed for further details.
She was made to feel  witty and entertaining.
She expanded like a plant turned to the sun; she flourished and was gay.
The room enclosed them both: exclusive and private.
The door bell rang.
‘Oh, my goodness!’ he said.
‘The Watsons.
I'd almost forgotten about them.
You know them, I daresay?
James Watson who's headmaster at St Bartholomew's and, um, Julia.’
He hurried out.
She heard the opening of the front door.
Greetings.
The closing of the door.
The Watsons.
Ah.
No, I don't as it happens know the Watsons.
He never said, she told herself, that it would be just you and him.
Never once.
So why did you assume that?
You have not been misled.
You can't complain.
So continue to smile and be gay.
The evening progressed.
They moved from the sitting room to the dining room.
They consumed avocado pears followed by roast lamb followed by a fruit salad and assorted cheeses.
Julia Watson, who evidently knew Giles quite well, insisted on popping in and out of the kitchen to help; laughter and exclamations could be heard from beyond the hatch.
James Watson told Helen about unrest in the teaching profession, at some length.
They moved back into the sitting room and drank coffee.
Julia, a dark woman in her early forties, asked Helen in a kindly interested voice about the extension plans for the library.
Giles offered brandies; Julia said, ‘Giles, you are a wicked man, you know I can't resist — be it upon your head if I have a hangover tomorrow.’
Giles said, ‘My dear, we shall suffer together.
Helen?’
Helen replied that she had better not, since she had to drive.
The Watsons eventually rose, and Helen with them.
Giles made no attempt to restrain her; he said, ‘You're all going…?’
In the hall, he helped her on with her coat, his hand resting on her shoulder for a moment — or so it seemed.
The Watsons got into their car, and Helen into hers.
She had to drive to the end of the street to turn round; when she passed Giles's house on the way back the door was closed.
She drove home through further rain.
Her mother rode in the back seat — silent, exuding complacency.
As soon as Helen had gone Edward was overwhelmed with self-contempt.
Bleakly, he sat at the kitchen table eating spaghetti bolognaise out of a tin.
Tam watched, drooling.
Half way through Edward gave up, scraped the rest into Tam's food bowl and put the kettle on for a cup of tea; behind him, Tam slurped as though rescued from the brink of starvation.
Edward, leaden with gloom, waited for the kettle to boil; as he did so he watched the steady progress of a wood-louse across the wall behind the sink.
There were many wood-lice at Greystones; the wood-louse is a kind of prawn, surprisingly — hence its preference for damp places.
In an age of central heating and renovation Greystones presumably featured as a rare unspoiled habitat.
Dorothy had persecuted the wood-lice, in Edward's view; she stamped on them, swept them up and even poured boiling water upon whole colonies of them.
Edward, observing the patient journey of this one (from whence? and why?), experienced a momentary consoling detachment.
He put his reading glasses on and looked more closely at it; there were, he knew, dozens of different kinds of wood-lice, all classified, all named, distinguished by minute anatomical refinements, small but significant differences in the antennae or the genitalia.
Goodness only knew what this particular one was, toiling down towards the crack behind the sink, but it seemed profoundly satisfactory that it should have the dignity of documentation.
Even more important was the fact that people had devoted their lives to establishing the identity of such creatures; that for someone the original distinction between Porcellio and Armadillidium had been a matter of life-consuming importance.
Edward envied such people.
Those who knew of his predilections often wondered why he had not become a botanist, an entomologist, a biologist.
At school, the few masters who had noticed him at all had tried vaguely to direct him towards science.
In fact, Edward did rather worse in scientific subjects than in others.
He was not systematic; formulae and calculations confused him.
Presented with a diagram of the alimentary canal, he tended to marvel at its artistry rather than study its efficiency.
As an amateur ornithologist he knew himself to be far behind those people who could identify from a snatch of song or flicker of a wing.
He could never remember the names of rarer plant species.
The kettle boiled, spurting scalding water everywhere, as usual.
The wood-louse had vanished, and with it Edward's temporary distraction from his gloom.
He felt alone.
He felt a recurring flash of resentment towards Helen.
Tam brushed against his leg in passing and Edward leaned down to pat him but Tam, replete, was staggering towards his favourite sleeping place by the cooker — he shrugged Edward's hand off and collapsed with a noisy sigh.
Edward observed him with a certain bitterness; such simplicity of need could seem enviable.
He switched on the radio.
The kitchen was filled instantly with a loud snuffling noise, interspersed with grunts; Edward, perking up, poured out his tea and listened attentively.
After a few moments the snuffles and grunts were overlaid by a voice explaining in sympathetically conspiratorial tones that we were listening to the sounds made by mating koalas in the Pilliga Nature Reserve in New South Wales.
The koalas faded and their place was taken by a studio discussion about threatened habitats and imperilled creatures.
The pig-footed bandicoot, the trumpeter swan, the scimitar oryx, the sperm whale, the cheetah, the bower bird…the list went on and on.
Such has been the destruction of the Brazilian rain forests that only about two hundred of the golden lion tamarin survive in the wild.
Their relative, the cotton-top tamarin, fares little better.
Edward, who had seen both of these creatures on the television screen, pictured the tiny animals, with their sad wise old men's faces framed by silky manes, their long, long tails, their agility.
A few hundred of them, and five billion human beings.
The tamarin will be preserved, in all probability, only if zoos throughout the world cooperate in breeding programmes.
The programme concluded with a snatch of birdsong, a low trill, repeated several times before dwindling into silence; this, the presenter announced, was the song of the dusky seaside sparrow, a species of which the last  survivor had died a few days before in its aviary at Disney World in Florida.
This sound would never be heard again on earth.
Edward, much affected, switched off the radio.
The unutterably sad sound of the sparrow lingered in his ears.
His own depression was compounded now with this global malaise , a process he found paradoxically satisfying; it was acceptable to weep for the dusky seaside sparrow, but not for oneself.
He went to bed, and lay awake.
At one point tears rolled from his eyes; they crept down the side of his face, and into his ears; he continued to lie rigid.
Tam snored at his feet.
‘Did you have a nice evening?’
‘Quite,’ said Helen.
‘What's the matter?’
‘Nothing.’
‘There's no need to snap,’ said Edward piously.
Helen poured herself another cup of tea in silence.
The phone rang.
She jumped up.
‘I'll go.’
Louise, in Camden, was in full torrent immediately.
‘Is that you?
God!
as if I hadn't got enough on my plate with Tim throwing a mid-life crisis and Phil doing the disturbed adolescent bit-now if you please Suzanne comes in at three-thirty in the morning, and me lying there sick with worry, she having never thought to phone, and London with rapists on every street corner or so one's told.
And then her only response is to burst into tears.’
‘Why?’
‘She's in love.
I thought she was the one with some sense.’
‘Ah,’ said Helen.
‘What's the matter?’
‘Nothing,’ stated Helen, ‘is the matter.’
‘Well, you're not being very sympathetic.
I'll go, then.
I only wanted a shoulder to weep on.
I've been awake all night and I've got a hell of a day ahead, meetings from morning till night.’
Helen returned to the kitchen.
The phone rang again.
She said to Edward, ‘You can go this time.’
‘It won't be for me.’
‘Then let it ring,’ said Helen.
Edward rose and went into the hall.
He returned.
‘It's that man.’
‘What man?’
‘The solicitor.’
Helen stared at him.
The kitchen, which had been a uniform grey, was dappled with sunlight, she saw; outside, a blackbird sang.
‘He's waiting,’ said Edward.
‘I suppose.’
He dropped a half-eaten piece of toast into Tam's bowl.
Helen went back to the phone.
‘Hello.’
‘It's me — Giles.
Am I interrupting your breakfast?’
‘No.’
‘Bless you for helping me out with the Watsons.
You were heroic — he is unstoppable, once in full flow.
I saw you enduring.
But then you rushed off and left me without a chance to say the most important thing of all…’
Edward appeared, clad for school, briefcase in hand, scowling.
‘I'm going.’
‘Excuse me a moment,’ Helen said to Giles.
‘I'll see you tonight then, Edward.’
He went out, banging the door.
‘I'm sorry…
Edward was just leaving.’
‘Please give him my regards.
We didn't get enough chance to talk at your party.
Anyway…the thing is, I have tickets for the opera on Friday — are you free?
Don Giovanni-it's the touring company, you know, usually very good.’
‘Well…’ she said.
‘Yes.
Yes, I'd like to.’
And so there shone yet another distant sunlit hilltop.
How do people endure this switchback of emotion?
Helen wondered.
They have no choice, of course.
She felt as though flung from health to illness and back by the day, by the hour.
She thought of Giles Carnaby both continuously and not at all; he was permanently in the head, but as some unavoidable elemental force — she could not consider him as a person, reflect upon  character or deeds.
He was there, simply.
For better or for worse.
She telephoned Louise, who was grumpy.
‘And the school term ends in another week, which means the children either mooching around the house all day under-occupied or vanished and one's wondering where the hell they are.’
‘Is Suzanne still…?’
‘Besotted.
Yes, poor little wretch.
Thank God one is beyond all that.
Getting older has some compensations.
I occasionally find myself eyeing some bloke and thinking I wouldn't mind popping into bed — but passion…no thanks.’
Edward's term too would end shortly.
It was high summer.
A year ago Dorothy had been in the first, ominous stages of her illness, furiously denying that anything could be wrong, her normal ill temper exacerbated by discomfort and increasing disability.
It had not been a pleasant summer.
Helen had attended Dorothy and tried to be as patient as possible; the doctors told her, privately, what to expect.
Edward kept out of the way.
When confronted by his mother he was propitiating to the point of servility.
‘What's wrong with him?’ demanded Dorothy.
‘Why's he being so obliging?
I suppose he imagines I'm going to die or something.’
She laughed.
Edward had not taken to Giles Carnaby.
His usual attitude towards people casually encountered was one of absent-minded indifference.
In this case, though, hostility had festered.
He told himself that the man was arrogant, self-satisfied, and smelled of after-shave stuff; Helen was an idiot to let him pester her like this.
Also he appeared to have corrupted her: she was alternately prickly and forgetful.
She snapped at Edward; there was no bread.
Edward, brooding, remembered a summer long ago when Helen had brought back a schoolfriend and he had felt pushed aside, abandoned.
He saw himself then, and now, and did not like what he saw.
Act One concluded.
The curtain came down.
Giles said, ‘We'll stretch our legs, shall we?’
The little theatre was full; they joined the crowd moving towards the bar.
A woman alongside Helen said uncertainly, ‘Well!
What a commotion!’: the stated purpose of the enterprise was to bring opera to those who do not often experience it.
He went to buy drinks.
Helen was greeted by an acquaintance; ‘Hello!
We spotted you from above — we're in the circle.
Isn't that Giles Carnaby you're with?
My sister knows him.’
Helen said ‘Yes.’
There was the slightest pause.
‘He's very popular, apparently,’ said the woman, moving away.
Giles returned, his hands full.
‘There — worth the struggle, let's hope.
Well — what do you think of it?
Personally, I'm wallowing.
It never fails, with me.
And this isn't a bad production is it?
Elvira is a bit weak, but the Don is doing fine, and the orchestra has plenty of dash.
And the best is yet to come.’
‘The flames of hell…’
‘Exactly.
Operatic plots are so satisfying.
Everyone getting their just deserts.
Perhaps that's the secret of its appeal — opera, I mean.’
‘Oh no,’ said Helen.
‘It's the singing, so far as I'm concerned.’
Giles shot her a look tinged with disappointment.
‘Well, of course, yes.
The music…’
‘I don't mean music.
I mean all that systematic expression of emotion.
That's why you come away with a sense of release.’
The look changed, rapidly.
‘How true.’
After a moment he added, ‘I don't know you all that well as yet, of course , but I imagine you're not a person who throws emotions around, yourself?’
‘No, I suppose I'm not.’
‘Infinitely preferable,’ said Giles.
‘Operatic behaviour in real life is intolerable, of course.
One has experienced it occasionally.’
Helen nodded.
An image flew into her head of Dorothy as some Wagnerian virago; it was not entirely inappropriate — there had been a whiff of the Valkyrie about her mother, with her alternating hairstyles of frayed bun or plait wound around the head and tendency to long brown shapeless garments.
She smiled.
Giles also smiled, enquiringly.
‘I was thinking of my mother.
She was uninhibited in that respect.’
‘I wish I had known her.
I get the feeling that I have missed quite an experience.’
‘Possibly,’ said Helen.
‘Well, at least she brought us together.’
He beamed at her, and took her arm.
‘Come along — they're ringing bells at us.
Let's go back in and wallow.’
He stopped the car outside Greystones.
Only the hall light was on, Helen saw; Edward must have gone to bed — or at any rate was in his room.
She hesitated.
Giles got out and came round to open her door.
‘Would you like to come in for a…cup of coffee or something?’
‘Do you think I should?’
The query seemed enigmatic.
Not knowing how to deal with it, she began to walk towards the front door.
Giles followed her.
They went in.
Instantly, Tam flew from the kitchen and embarked on a histrionic welcome display.
‘Be quiet!’ ordered Helen.
‘Get down!’
Tam continued his staccato barking.
If Edward had gone to bed he certainly would not be asleep.
Helen waited to hear a door open.
The house remained silent.
Tam lost interest and returned to his basket.
She led Giles into the kitchen.
‘No coffee,’ said Giles.
‘Nothing, in fact.’
‘Then we should go into the sitting room.
It's not very comfortable in here.’
‘But I love your kitchen.’
Helen thought of his — fragrantly warm, humming with appliances.
Behind her, both taps dripped.
Tam was snoring.
There was a smell of rotting dishcloth.
Like Dorothy, Helen and Edward used swabs of mouldering grey stockinette; they festered by the sink and were known as dead rabbits.
She saw one now, and shuddered.
‘It has a sort of museum appeal.
One almost expects a mangle, or a posset stick.’
And me? thought Helen.
Am I one of the exhibits?
Of nostalgic charm?
‘The thing about you, Helen, if I may say so, is that you are so refreshingly detached from all that one finds disagreeable about contemporary life.’
‘Unfashionable,’ said Helen.
‘Is that what it is?
Then do please stay that way.’
‘I doubt if there's much chance of anything else.’
Giles laughed.
He moved closer.
‘You're not acquisitive.
You appear to have no pretensions whatsoever.
Your opinions are your own.
You're the most attractive person.
And you seem not even to know it.’
She stood there.
He put his hands on her shoulders.
And then leaned forward.
He laid his cheek against hers; she felt his warmth, and smelled him.
He turned his head and kissed her cheek.
At the same time his hand slid down her arm and reached behind her; it slid swiftly over the curve of her buttocks.
The erotic effect was electrifying; it could not have been greater if he had plunged his hand into her crotch.
He stood back, releasing her.
‘What a lovely evening, my dear.
We must talk very soon.
Don't let me out — I know my way.
We've probably disturbed Edward as it is.’
She heard him close the front door gently behind him.
She continued to stand in the middle of the kitchen, ablaze.
10
‘Where are all the dead rabbits?’ complained Edward.
‘There's nothing to wash up with.’
‘I threw them away.
We're going to use those scourer things in future.’
‘Why?’
‘They're more hygienic.
And they don't smell.’
He looked affronted.
‘Don't you ever realise,’ said Helen, ‘that the way we live is unlike the way other people live?’
‘On the whole I should have thought that was cause for satisfaction.’
‘Actually,’ she continued, ‘when I come to think of it — you never go into other people's houses, do you?
Anyway, if a sanitary inspector came in here I should think the whole place would be condemned.’
‘What else are you going to chuck out?’ enquired Edward, with resignation.
Helen sighed.
‘Oh, I don't think I have the stamina for a full-scale assault.
Aren't you going to be late?
It's after half past.’
Edward glanced at her with reproach.
‘It's the sports day.’
The Croxford House sports day, the culminating event of the year and last day of term, was his annual torment.
All the staff, whether sporting or not, were required to be in attendance.
‘So it is,’ said Helen.
After a moment she added, in an offhand tone, ‘By the way, have there been any phone calls this week when I've been out?’
‘No.’
In other years she had displayed appropriate sympathy about sports day.
Edward, resentful, set off in an even more dour frame of mind than usual.
He knew all too well what to expect: several hours of bad behaviour from the children — over-excited and freed from the constraints of routine — and importunate conversation from the parents.
He would have to dredge up an interest in his least favourite pupils and submit himself to a barrage of child-obsessed monologues from people he barely remembered from the year before.
Parenthood brings out the worst, it seemed to him; vicarious ambitions and frustrations raged all over the lawns and games fields of Croxford House on sports day.
The sports were in fact more of a backcloth than the central event; the real purpose of the day was for the parents to prowl around the school inspecting the various displays of work set up in the classrooms, and compare the achievement of their offspring with that of others.
They all expected each member of the staff to express — discreetly — particular and intense interest in their child.
The whole process was, it seemed to Edward, a fine manifestation of the single-minded ruthlessness of species in pursuit of survival and improvement — if you considered Willmots and Handley-Smiths and Stannards as species.
He arrived late.
Things were in full swing.
Posses of girls rushed about shrieking.
The parents moved in couples, greeting one another with false enthusiasm and competing for the attention of the staff.
Mrs Fitton patrolled continuously, displaying a feverish combination of anxiety and benevolence.
From time to time she hissed instructions at teachers or senior girls.
Edward, hoping to slink past unnoticed, was pounced upon and told to hurry to his classroom, where the Lower Fourth had an exhibition with a literary theme.
Edward had conceived and arranged the exhibition himself and was aware that it lacked verve: he was not good at these things.
In desperation, the previous week, he had ordered the children to select a favourite passage from books he had been reading with them, write it out in their best handwriting and then add some comments on what they enjoyed about the piece and about the book in general.
Those with artistic inclinations were encouraged to illustrate as well.
Most of the  children said they couldn't remember any bits they liked; eventually, with much prompting and nagging, everyone came up with something.
The results were pinned up around the walls of the classroom.
Edward, re-inspecting them, saw even more clearly the perfunctory effect, and blamed himself.
He sat down gloomily behind his desk to await custom.
He knew that he would never have survived as a teacher in the state sector: he was both not good enough and not bad enough.
He could never have been one of those charismatic men and women who inspire and enthuse; equally, he could never have achieved an indifferent acceptance of failure.
At Croxford House the luxuries of small classes and lavish facilities, plus moderately compliant children, cushioned his inadequacies.
Here, he was not a particularly good teacher, but he was by no means a disaster.
He did the best he could.
Quite often he enjoyed what he was doing.
Not, though, at this particular time.
Small groups drifted through the classroom: mothers and fathers, large numbers of children — Edward's pupils along with older and younger siblings.
It was all very noisy.
No sooner had Edward attended to one lot than he was seized upon by another.
In addition to the literary exhibition the class performance lists were displayed, at Mrs Fitton's insistence.
Edward disliked these intensely.
Croxford House deployed a competitive system within which girls were ranked according to performance in every conceivable area; since intellectual ability was not all that highly valued, marks were given for trying, for behaving well, for being punctual and helpful and energetic and tidy, indeed for anything at all.
These various ratings adorned the walls.
The parents studied them intently.
Edward, spotting Sandra Willmot's mother, hastily crossed to the other side of the room.
He was at once ambushed by the Stannards.
Mr Stannard was a partner in one of the leading county estate agencies; his name graced the pages of the local paper each week, spread like a banner above photographs of houses all priced, it seemed to Edward, at a quarter of a million pounds.
He was a big man, crammed into a tweed suit despite the weather, and flanked by his wife, done up in what even  Edward recognised as a seriously competitive dress.
Their daughter Caroline lurked behind them; she was a small pale child of determined anonymity.
Edward rather liked her.
She appeared to have no qualities at all to speak of, either positive or negative, and spent her time trying not to be noticed.
He had made various bids at drawing her out, to no avail; now he felt in sympathetic collusion — thus had he survived his own schooldays.
Today the entire Stannard family was present — three more children, all strapping creatures like the parents.
Caroline, evidently, was the runt of the litter.
‘You've seen Caroline's display?’
Edward enquired.
Caroline smiled wanly.
Her choice had surprised him.
She had been the only one to choose a piece from Alice in Wonderland .
Mr Stannard was inspecting it closely.
At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in his notebook, called out, ‘Silence!’ and read out from his book, ‘Rule Forty-Two.
All persons more than a mile high to leave the court .’
Everybody looked at Alice.
‘I'm not a mile high,’ said Alice.
‘You are,’ said the King.
‘Nearly two miles high,’ added the Queen.
Beneath this Caroline had written: ‘I like this bit because it is funny.
The reason it is funny is because a person could not be a mile high.
I like Alice in Wonderland because of the funny creatures and because they talk like people except it is not what you expect.
Mostly in real life you know what people are going to say.’
Edward had been startled when first he read this.
Now, reading it again, he was positively awed.
One could only pray for Caroline, given her circumstances.
Mr Stannard turned from the display and said heavily, ‘The second line isn't good grammar.’
Edward explained that in order to encourage freedom of expression he preferred not to jump on every solecism.
Mrs Stannard said, ‘Don't you read Roald Dahl with the children?’
Edward replied that he did not.
‘He's very good, you know.’
Edward inclined his head, without comment.
The books from which the children had taken extracts were laid out on Edward's desk.
Mr Stannard picked up Alice , riffled through the pages and put it down again.
His expression was that of a bibliophile rejecting a volume of neither commercial nor idiosyncratic appeal.
‘It's a classic,’ said Edward craftily.
Mr Stannard's confident manner faltered for an instant.
His hand hovered over the book as though to give it a second chance.
‘The boys adore Roald Dahl,’ said Mrs Stannard.
Caroline's brothers grinned alongside her, clones of their father.
Behind, an older sister manifested sophisticated boredom.
Mr Stannard had turned his attention to the class performance lists.
Edward, knowing that Caroline's name appeared towards the bottom of all these, sought a distraction.
He tried to interest Mrs Stannard in some art work.
‘The best Caroline's done,’ pronounced her father, ‘is thirteenth for effort.’
‘It's a shame,’ said Mrs Stannard.
‘The boys were in the top three for everything this term, and Emma had the tennis trophy.’
Mr Stannard shook his head.
‘Is she being pushed enough, one asks oneself?’
Edward, who could see Caroline cringing behind the blackboard, lost control.
‘Frankly,’ he snapped, ‘if I had my way those lists would go into the dustbin, the lot of them.
They serve no purpose whatsoever.’
The Stannards stared at him, evidently rocked by this heresy.
Even the boys dropped their look of unshakeable well-being and gaped.
‘If a child can't see how it's performing,’ demanded Mr Stannard, ‘how's it to know if it's doing well or not?
Just tell me that?’
‘Achievement isn't necessarily measured by competition,’ returned Edward.
‘Oh, I can't agree with you,’ said Mrs Stannard.
‘I mean, in  this day and age you don't get anywhere by just sitting back, do you?
We've always felt Caroline's got it in her if only she's handled right.’
Mr Stannard was now contemplating Edward with the air of a man who wonders if he is getting his money's worth.
There was a silence.
‘Well,’ continued Mrs Stannard briskly, ‘we'd better get on.
We've not had a chance for a word with Mrs Fitton yet.
Nice exhibition, Mr Glover.’
The Stannards departed.
Before Edward had time to simmer down he was buttonholed by Mrs Willmot, who had been lurking.
Sandra was at her side, looking smug; her name topped several of the lists.
If that woman utters one word about God or evolution, thought Edward, I shall do something irrevocable.
But Mrs Willmot had more important things on her mind, it seemed: she wished to enlist Edward's support for the Parent-Teacher Association fund-raising concert in the autumn.
‘Do you sing, Mr Glover?
We're in desperate need of a few more tenors for the choir.’
Edward declared himself without musical talents of any kind.
Sandra stood by, quietly amused: she wore a sugar pink track suit with matching plastic hairslides in the shape of elephants.
Edward could see quite clearly behind her shoulder, like the aura visible to spiritualists, the woman she would be in thirty years time.
There is probably nothing to be done about people, he thought, nothing at all, nor ever has been: processed, from the cradle to the grave.
Most neither know nor care, which makes it worse.
Mrs Willmot was now going on about a film evening in October: ‘I thought you could lay on some nature things — I know that's your forte .’
Sandra, from time to time, performed a little pirouette, as though warming up for Swan Lake .
Nature, nurture…thought Edward, and God knows which does most harm.
He had a sudden vision of families in endless reproduction — Willmots and Stannards and the rest replicating themselves down the years, perfecting their most infamous capacities.
Sports like Caroline, of course, would be quietly extinguished, a dead-end.
And that, of course, was the other side of the coin: what people do to their children.
Wittingly or not.
He stood there in the crowded classroom, half listening to Mrs Willmot, and thought of the inexorable process going on  all round him — the lives whose courses were being decided at this moment, behind the innocent-seeming chatter, the smiles, the faintly carnival atmosphere of families having a day out.
He knew that those who are not parents only glimpse the awful forces at work.
Equally, he was never sure if he had missed something or escaped it.
He thought, inevitably, of his mother.
At the same moment he became aware that Mrs Willmot was talking about Helen.
‘I know your sister, of course.
I see her in the library.
Such a nice unassuming person.’
Don't, thought Edward dangerously, patronise my sister.
‘And we waved to each other last week at the opera.
She was with Giles Carnaby, wasn't she?’
‘I believe so.’
‘Charming man,’ said Mrs Willmot.
‘Slightly elusive.
I've tried without success to recruit him for the CPRE and the Friends of Spaxton Theatre.
Anyway, it was nice to see your sister looking so relaxed.’
‘She enjoyed the opera,’ said Edward in frigid tones.
‘Oh, of course— it was super.’
Mrs Willmot smiled knowingly.
‘Well, I mustn't monopolise you.
Now don't forget about that film, will you?
Come along, darling — I want to see your art display.’
Edward, his nerves jangling, turned to his next client.
When, by Thursday, Helen had heard nothing from Giles the words that rang in her head began to turn from music to mockery.
‘I don't know you all that well as yet’; ‘We must talk very soon.’
She ceased to savour them and tried to drive them away.
Unsuccessfully.
Equally, half a dozen times a day she felt again his hand on her, and she burned.
She also raged.
She raged because she no longer controlled her thoughts or her body.
She felt humiliated.
It seemed perverse that love — if this was love — should be a state traditionally celebrated in literature.
She did not feel as though she had anything to celebrate.
She went to the library with some relief.
At least, there, one was busy and distracted.
During her lunch hour she shopped, deliberately avoiding the part of town in which Giles's office was situated.
When she returned Joyce Babcock sought her out at once.
‘A man came in, asking for you.’
Joyce's eyes glittered with prurient interest.
‘Oh?’
‘Fiftyish.
With that sort of greyish-silver hair.
Very friendly.
We had quite a chat about the Lakes.
He was asking for a fell-walking guide.
Our only one is out.’
‘That would have been my solicitor,’ said Helen crisply.
‘Giles Carnaby.’
‘He's very attractive, don't you think?’
‘That's not the sort of thing I notice about a solicitor.
Professional efficiency is what one is after.’
‘Well, I thought he was a real charmer.
Lucky Helen, I thought.’
Joyce eyed her closely.
‘He seemed very disappointed to have missed you.
I suppose there's a lot of to and fro over your mother's affairs?’
‘A fair amount,’ said Helen.
She began to sort through some reservation cards.
After a moment she added, ‘Was he going to look in later?
There is something we're supposed to discuss.’
‘He didn't say,’ replied Joyce.
She continued to observe Helen with attention.
‘You could always ring him up at his office, of course.’
‘It's nothing that can't wait,’ said Helen.
The afternoon progressed, but was moved now on to a different plane, lit by the glow of expectation.
Helen watched the door, through which Giles did not come.
She checked that the fell-walking guide was indeed out on loan.
Each time the phone rang she reached it before Joyce.
Eventually it was five-thirty.
She drove home to find Edward returned from the sports day.
‘How did it go?’
‘It was awful,’ said Edward morosely.
‘Worse than usual.’
‘Well, at least you've got it over with for another year.’
‘I suppose so.’
‘Cheer up.
It's the holidays now, at any rate.’
The six weeks of the summer school recess were the high spot  of Edward's year.
He would settle down to a contented programme of long walks, daily spells of observation in the Britches, and some leisurely reflection on work projects for his pupils next year.
He usually also went off somewhere under the auspices of some ecologically minded group.
This year he was not doing so, claiming that he had left it too late to make arrangements.
‘You should get away for a bit,’ Helen continued.
‘Surely there's still something you could fix up.’
Edward shrugged.
Helen felt a wash of irritation.
Come on now…
I have my own troubles.
Edward made himself a cup of tea and vanished to the Britches, where he stayed late into the dusk.
Helen listened to a concert on the radio, with the sound turned low lest she should miss the phone ringing.
It did not ring.
Neither then nor for the next four days.
All right, she said to her mother, who trailed Helen once more , watching her with an impassive stare, all right — you win.
Consider yourself vindicated.
Why, then, did he say those things?
Do what he did?
Perhaps he didn't, said her mother.
You always had a ridiculous imagination, as a child.
I am not a child now, said Helen.
On the Wednesday of the following week Joyce Babcock said, ‘That Lake District book's back, by the way — Wainwright.
I should think you'd want to give your friend a buzz.’
Helen put the book on one side.
It lay there, inescapable.
After lunch, she told herself — at three, at four.
Eventually, at four-thirty, she telephoned Giles's office.
‘Could I speak to Mr Carnaby?’
Her stomach churned.
‘Mr Carnaby's away this week.
Can I take a message?’
‘Oh.
It's not important.
It's the library here, just to say the book he asked for is in.
Wainwright on fell-walking.’
‘Oh, what a shame,’ said the girl.
‘I expect he wanted that for his holiday — he's up there now, in the Lake District.
Anyway, I'll tell him.’
‘Thank you,’ said Helen.
She put the receiver down and placed  the book on the pile due for shelving.
Where, later, Joyce would see it, with tedious inevitability, and ask questions.
Funny he didn't mention, said her mother.
That he was going on holiday.
You'd think he'd have said.
You'd think he'd have told you he wouldn't be around for the next week or two.
More, maybe.
‘We must talk very soon’; so much for that.
Wonder who he's with? said Dorothy.
He'd be with some woman, no doubt, a man like that.
That's all he came into the library for, of course— to get that book.
Not looking for you at all.
What's the matter, Helen?
I know that po-faced look.
It turned hot.
A sullen grey July gave way to sultry August.
Everything shot into growth, fortified by weeks of rain.
The Greystones garden was like a jungle, parts of it as impenetrable as the Britches.
When Gary Paget reappeared, offering his services again, Helen accepted with alacrity.
She had planted some runner beans in the patch of the old vegetable garden he had dug earlier; they were flowering energetically and seemed to have been worth the trouble.
She set him to work on a further area of deep neglect.
‘I'm afraid it's very weedy.
You'll have to dig it over more than once.’
Gary, a stoically silent boy, merely nodded.
He peeled off his T-shirt, revealing a chunky tanned torso that reeked of Lifebuoy soap.
Helen went into the kitchen and began to cut up onions.
She had bought a recipe book and was attempting a rather complex casserole, involving red wine and many ingredients.
When in low spirits, seek gainful employment.
The Lord helps those who help themselves.
The only cookery books at Greystones were yellowing volumes from the twenties and thirties, smelling of damp and telling you how to make spotted dick or pickle eggs in isinglass.
No wonder we have always eaten as we have, she thought; if nothing else comes out of my malaise I may at least learn how to cook in the spirit of the times.
She was struggling to cut the meat into what the book described as bite-size chunks when Edward appeared at the kitchen door.
‘Why has that boy come back?’
‘Oh, for goodness sake!’ exclaimed Helen, maddened by the recalcitrance of the meat as much as by her brother.
‘He's come back because I want him.
And he's called Gary.
You know that.’
‘I simply don't see the point.’
‘The point is to get things cleared up a bit.
The garden is a disgrace.’
‘We could do it ourselves.’
‘Yes.
But we aren't going to, are we?’
‘He's digging up all the groundsel.
There'll be no cinnabar moths next year.’
Helen flung down her knife.
‘Oh, Edward, don't be ridiculous!
The point of a garden is to grow things.
We'll have potatoes instead of moths, which makes a lot more sense.’
He was panting, she now saw, as though he had rushed from somewhere.
He clutched the door frame.
We're having a quarrel, Helen thought.
This hasn't happened in years.
Whatever is the matter?
Edward wiped a hand across his forehead.
He walked into the room and headed for the door, without looking at her.
She heard him cross the hall and go up the stairs.
A moment later a flop on the mat announced the arrival of the post.
Helen stood over her bleeding bite-size chunks of meat in a state of agitation; annoyance with Edward was fused with some nameless, indefinable anxiety.
She went into the hall.
She could hear Edward overhead, moving about in his room.
She hesitated.
No, she thought, he's being absurd.
She stooped and picked up the post.
There was an electricity bill and a postcard from Giles Carnaby.
He said: ‘I won't say wish you were here since it rains incessantly and I am not a sadist.
However, we contrive to have a very pleasant time.
But perhaps you too are kicking up your heels elsewhere by now.
If so, I hope all goes well.
Do you know this lovely spot?’
It was signed, merely, Giles.
She turned the card over.
Tarn Howe glowed beneath an unsuitably blue sky.
Helen returned to the kitchen.
She had forgotten Edward.
She put the card upright on the dresser and gazed at it.
We? said Dorothy.
Who's we, I wonder?
Funny he should  think you might be on holiday.
He never enquired, did he?
Take it or leave it sort of fellow, if you ask me.
Be quiet, said Helen.
She returned to her task.
She chopped herbs; she peeled mushrooms.
Every few minutes she glanced again at the postcard.
Upstairs, Edward sat on his bed.
He sat quite still, with his hands clenched in his lap.
Tam, excluded, scrabbled indignantly at the door.
Eventually Edward heard, and let him in.
‘What is this?’ said Edward.
He put his knife and fork down and stared at his plate.
‘It's called Boeuf something or other.
Don't you like it?’
‘It's very nice.’
‘Then aren't you going to finish it?’ she asked, a few minutes later.
‘I'm not particularly hungry.
Sorry.’
Helen cleared the plates.
‘Look — I'll tell Gary to leave part of the vegetable garden undug.
For the moths or whatever.
All right?’
‘It doesn't matter,’ he said.
‘It's not important.’
He looked at her — evasive, placating — and picked up the local paper.
He began to read a piece about the proposed transformation of a disused mill into a luxury hotel.
Helen started to say more, and then changed her mind.
Oh,Edward , she thought impatiently.
The days inched by.
Helen went to the library, did what had to be done, returned from the library.
She persisted in her relationship with the new recipe book; the kitchen at Greystones was filled with strange aromas.
She was experimenting with a risotto when Ron Paget appeared at the door.
He was so tanned that for a moment Helen failed to recognise him.
The whites of his eyes gleamed from a chestnut face.
He stepped into the kitchen and put something on the table.
‘Thought I'd bring round the little brown envelope — for the  guttering and that.’
He inspected the pan simmering on the stove, and sniffed.
‘Very nice.
Pauline used to be keen on that sort of thing, but she's gone off it since we gave up Italy as a holiday venue.
She's into seafood at the moment.
We tried the Seychelles this year.
You ever been out there, Miss Glover?’
‘No.’
‘Amazing skin-diving.
Quite something, let me tell you.
I should think your brother might fancy that, being as he's so keen on wildlife.’
‘I doubt it,’ said Helen.
‘Scotland's more Edward's line.’
Ron nodded sagely.
‘It's pricey, of course, but I said to Pauline — come on, we owe it to ourselves.’
‘I thought Gary was looking very sunburnt,’ said Helen.
Ron laughed.
‘Oh, Gary's been in Wales with the school camping trip.
I'm not for taking the kids on holiday.
Grown-up amusements, that's the idea.
Pauline likes some fun at the discos.
Fair enough — it's not exactly the bright lights living down here, is it?
I'm not fussed for myself, but Pauline's younger and she's been used to town life, see what I mean?’
‘Really?’
No, Helen thought — I will not ask where Pauline hails from because that would prolong the conversation and anyway I don't want to know.
‘East Croydon, Pauline grew up.
I daresay you're wondering how we ever came to meet — Club Mediterranée it was.
I'd gone along with some of the lads — my first wife was never that keen on travel — and there she was.
So abroad's always a bit nostalgic for us.
You going away this year?’
‘No, I'm not.’
A strained expression appeared on Ron's face which Helen eventually interpreted as being intended to convey concern, or sympathy, or both.
‘I've kept that bill as low as I possibly can, Miss Glover.
I think of you as a special customer.’
Helen turned to the stove; the risotto looked to be heaving over-enthusiastically.
She wished Ron would go.
‘Very kind of you.
I'm not doing without a holiday because I'm feeling hard up though, but because I don't particularly want one.’
‘Well, I suppose you don't miss what you've never had.
You've always been one for a quiet life, haven't you?’
This is impertinent, she thought.
My mother would have thrown you out by now.
If indeed you had ever got in.
‘Still — it's never too late to break loose, is it?’
Helen faced him.
Enough.
‘Look, Mr Paget, I don't think…’
‘And you've got the means right there at the bottom of your garden.’
He waved a hand in the direction of the Britches.
‘You should give yourselves a chance, you really should.
And I'll tell you something else.
in my opinion there's going to be funny things happen to the market in a year or so.
You might see prices fall.’
‘That's a risk we'll have to take, then.
I wish I could convince you, Mr Paget, that we're not interested in selling the wood.
Not now and quite probably never.
There really is no point in going on about it.’
Ron shrugged.
‘You're a mystery to me, Miss Glover, you really are.’
His glance strayed around the kitchen.
Assessing the extent of our poverty, thought Helen.
Wondering how long we can hold out.
He moved towards the door.
‘I'd say you could do with a touch more garlic in that, by the way — Pauline always used to go quite heavy on the garlic.
Cheers, then.’
Later that day, she went into the Britches.
Edward had gone to a meeting of the local ornithological society.
Looking from the sitting room window at the shaggy mass of the copse, she thought again of Ron, and, on an impulse, opened the french windows and walked across the garden to the gap that marked Edward's comings and goings.
She hadn't been in there for months.
It seemed a good idea to see what it was she was defending with such tenacity.
Edward's regular trail led to the nest-box area in the centre, where there were old trees and the open space with the big fallen mossy trunk on which he sat.
Helen, too, sat for a few minutes.
Less attuned than Edward to the internal noises of the Britches — the birdsong, the hum of insects — she was conscious of the insistent presence of the world beyond.
She heard distant traffic from the road that skirted the far side of the wood; she heard machinery and men shouting in Ron Paget's yard; she flinched as  an aircraft ripped the sky, miles above.
When she got up and walked again — struggling through the exuberant growths of high summer — she noted Edward's recent efforts at clearance and control.
Left alone, the place would rapidly choke itself to death, it seemed.
Edward's interference in fact made adjustments that favoured his own view of the direction nature ought to take; nature itself generated a free for all.
And in a free for all there are those who survive and those who perish.
Edward's attempts to manipulate seemed both touching and, eventually, fruitless.
The Britches will outlast us both, Helen thought, carrying on in its mindless way until scuppered at last by economic circumstances and the likes of Ron Paget.
She started back towards the house.
The telephone might ring, with no one there to pick it up.
She forged her way through the tangle of growth and decay, thinking of Giles Carnaby.
11
‘I saw your friend,’ announced Joyce Babcock, ‘that solicitor.’
She watched Helen, covertly.
‘Crossing Market Street.
Going to his office, I should imagine.
He had a briefcase.’
Helen continued to check through a publisher's catalogue.
Quite calmly.
‘Did you?
He must be back from his holiday then.’
I wonder when? said her mother.
Hasn't hurried to get in touch, has he?
It's Wednesday now.
He'd have come back at the weekend, most likely.
‘I thought you'd like to know, anyway.
Of course it's too late for that book.
But I suppose he might want it just to see what he's missed.
It's still on the shelf.
Shall I put it in Reserve?’
‘I shouldn't bother,’ said Helen.
She took her lunch an hour late.
There were some food items to be bought; she was persisting, doggedly, with the recipe book.
She made her purchases carefully, forcing herself to consider the quality of meat, to search out some stem ginger.
Then she set off back to the library.
There were two routes she could take.
One kept to the main streets; the second, marginally shorter way, passed through the side road in which Giles's office was situated.
She took this one.
They met, in fact, in the main shopping street, several minutes from his office.
She saw him from fifty yards away, coming towards her; then he spotted her and when they came together he was smiling and had a hand outstretched with which he took her elbow.
‘So there you are!
What a nice surprise!
You're not off gadding somewhere, then…
Did you get my card?’
‘Yes.
Thank you.’
‘And you rang about that book.
My secretary said.
Bless you.
Frankly, with the weather the way it was fell-walking lost its  charms.
We had to find other diversions.
I was about to get in touch with you — there are faint signs of life on the part of the Probate Office.
Which way are you going?’
She walked beside him past Boots, past Baxters, past Rumbelows.
Giles talked about Rydal Mount and Ruskin's house.
She listened to him intently — and not at all; I am not cured, she thought, indeed things are worse if anything.
He halted.
‘Well, I must leave you here.
So — I'll be writing you a boring letter about business matters, but can't we meet?
Saturday I am tied up, but Sunday…
How are you fixed on Sunday?’
Helen said that she was not fixed on Sunday.
Not at all.
‘Then let us do something nice together.’
He pressed her elbow.
‘I'll give you a ring.
Goodbye, Helen.’
That was a bit of luck for you, wasn't it? said Dorothy.
Running into him like that.
Good luck or good management.
But now you'll never know whether he'd have made a move or not, will you?
Edward started to make unusual entries in his diary.
All his life he had kept a diary; it was a detached record of matters like the arrivals of the first migrants, the occurrence of various plant species in the Britches, and the prevailing weather.
The years went by in a bundle of exercise books, seasons succeeding one another as flycatchers came and went, orchids were noted and then vanished, temperatures varied from the normal.
He himself featured not at all.
It would have been a sad disappointment to anyone ferreting in the top drawer of his desk.
He had at one time suspected his mother of doing precisely this.
Now, no one would pry.
Edward, alone in his room in the long wastes of those summer days, looked back into the exercise books and noted his own absence.
The first chiff-chaff had shown up exceptionally early in 1970, he saw; the last kingcup had been seen in 1967.
Neither of these facts seemed, now, of much interest.
He had been thirty-two in 1970; there had been certain  events that were crucial to his life.
Suddenly he wanted to recover his responses to these, not the arrival of the chiff-chaff.
He would have liked to be able to confront and examine his own previous self.
The diary was mockingly silent.
‘August 15th,’ he wrote.
‘Cleared bramble from area by the big beech.
Very few speckled wood butterflies this year.
Counted four young magpies.
Cool; thunderstorm p.m.’
He put the pen down.
And so on and so forth, he thought.
As though I did not exist; as though it were an automaton who cleared brambles and counted magpies.
He began to write once more.
‘Next year I shall be fifty years old.
I shall die when I am between seventy-five and eighty, in all likelihood; Helen will outlive me — women live longer, it seems.
Neither of us will leave progeny.
Less successful, in that way, than anything around.’
He looked out of the window, at the fecund garden.
‘If the purpose of life can be said to be replication, then we have both failed dismally.’
He sat motionless, staring out at the Britches, for five minutes.
He then wrote: ‘It is only so, of course, in a biological sense.’
‘Had you forgotten?’ said Giles.
‘You hadn't — oh good.
And the weather forecast is promising — now, what do you fancy?
A long walk?
Some gentle carriage exercise and a pub lunch?’
‘I could make a picnic,’ Helen said.
‘What a lovely idea!
Excellent!
Should I collect you at about eleven, then?
In that case…
Wouldn't your brother like to join us?’
She hesitated.
‘I doubt it.
But I'll ask.’
‘I'm making a picnic.
Giles Carnaby is coming.
Do you want to come?’
‘No,’ said Edward without hesitation.
Giles drove decisively, with a hint of aggression; the car was powerful, and more fully furnished than any Helen had experienced.
He put on a tape of Vivaldi and then switched it off  because he said they had too much to talk about.
It was he, in fact, who talked.
He was a considerable talker, Helen realised.
What he said was informative if a touch inconsequential; you didn't remember too much of it but the effect was cumulative.
It was a kind of verbal display; listening, she was disconcertingly reminded of a bird idly preening, limbering up with bursts of song, stretching a wing…
It came to her, in fact, with dry detachment, that Giles was a somewhat self-centred person.
Most of what he said pertained to himself.
Occasionally he asked a question or sought an opinion; you had the impression that the answer had glanced off his surface.
He appeared to listen with flattering attention; you also felt that possibly he had not heard.
Perceiving all this, she knew also that it made no difference.
None whatsoever.
They had decided to make for a small river valley in which there was an isolated church reached by a footpath across fields.
Helen had gone to some lengths over the picnic; the recipe book included a relevant section, she discovered.
Flaked tuna with mayonnaise was new to her but she had managed and was quite proud of the results.
Giles, when they had parked the car, dived into the back and produced a bottle of wine.
They set off across a water meadow rich with buttercups and decorated with Friesian cows, like a television advertisement for some environmentally dubious product: petrol or fast cars.
A heron rose from the river and flapped away into a clump of tall trees in the distance.
They inspected the church.
Giles was not, evidently, much interested in churches.
Helen, for a moment, came into her own; she pointed out salient features, found some medieval paving and a battered Norman font.
Giles listened — or not — and then put a hand on her arm to steer her towards the door.
‘Come on, I'm starving — time to find an idyllic spot in which to eat.’
The river seemed the obvious place.
They chose a point at which the bank reached steeply down to a pool, a slight bend in the course having eaten away a miniature beach on the far side.
It was thick with alder and willow; the water, green and shaded, flashed from time to time with coins of reflected sunlight.
‘Perfect!’ said Giles.
Helen unpacked the food.
He poured the wine (he had  remembered glasses, too).
They ate and drank, sitting tucked into long grass that screened them from the river; they could hear the flow of it, and the occasional plop of a fish.
I suppose, Helen thought, this is one of those moments in life that will live in the head.
Whatever comes of it.
Giles declared the sandwiches excellent.
He ate everything she had brought, and then lay back, glass in hand.
‘What heaven!’
Helen said, ‘We've got company.’
On the far side of the river a dog appeared — a collie, leaping in excitement.
Followed at once by a young man, dark-haired, sunburnt, wearing jeans and a T-shirt.
The man, if indeed he realised they were there, paid no attention to them.
He threw a stick into the river and the dog went after it in a flying leap, landing with a huge splash and paddling furiously, its black head sleek like a seal.
It came out, shaking so that water spun off in silver spray.
The man threw more sticks and it jumped again, ecstatic, diving and swimming, in and out.
And then he sat down and stripped off his shirt.
‘Now he's going in too,’ said Giles.
‘I wish he'd go away.
Our peace is wrecked.’
The man pulled off his jeans and stood up.
He was naked.
It seemed to Helen that he must surely be aware of them; if so, they were of no interest whatsoever.
She heard Giles say — embarrassed?—‘A proper child of nature, evidently…’
The young man stood for a moment on an overhanging ledge of the bank, looking down at the water; the dog swam round and round below; the man's body was flecked all over with light and the shadow patterns of leaves, so that he seemed some human extension of the place.
He was spare, muscular, young.
Then he threw up his arms and dived into the river.
He swam vigorously, ducking his head in the water and flinging back his wet hair.
The dog circled him, barking.
At last they both climbed out onto the little beach.
The man dressed, put on his shoes, stood up, and then bounded up the bank into the field, followed by the dog.
They were gone as suddenly as they had come.
The water of the pool was still muddy and heaving where they had swum.
‘I don't think I'd fancy it,’ said Giles.
‘Too much weed.’
It had been, while it lasted, electrifying; now, it was as though neither man nor dog had ever been.
The shape and texture of the man's body were still before Helen's eyes, but as an image, a picture once seen.
Giles reached for the wine and emptied the rest of it into their glasses.
She was intensely conscious of him.
When his leg brushed against her it seemed to burn her.
I'm not sure how much of this I can endure, she thought.
She glanced at Giles; she had no idea if he felt anything, or nothing.
He was sipping wine and talking about dogs.
He had seen a sheepdog trial in Cumbria: amazing creatures.
It seemed to Helen that they might sit there thus for ever.
All my life, she thought, I have let things pass me by.
They were sitting side by side.
She turned to face him.
He stopped talking and, presumably, saw.
Afterwards, she thought perhaps she had touched him, but could not remember.
Giles leaned forward; he took her face between his hands and kissed her on the mouth.
She felt his tongue.
Then he drew back and looked intently at her.
‘Helen, my dear…’ he said.
He sighed, ‘We mustn't…’
He stood up.
She heard herself say, ‘Why not?’ but if the words reached him he made no sign.
He began to pack things into the picnic basket.
He said, ‘Now what I have in mind is a stroll to the end of the valley just to see what goes on there, then back to the car and home for tea, how about that?’
‘I'm coming down for a night,’ said Louise.
‘Thursday.
O.K.?
I've got to get out of London.
The office can bloody do without me for a couple of days.
Everyone else is swanning around the South of France anyway.
The children are a pain, frankly, and Tim has sinus and won't give you the time of day.
So what's new with you?’
There was a spell of hot weather; mosquito larvae hatched in the stagnant pond on the far side of the Britches.
Some children broke in and trampled down the surviving patch of ramsons .
A cat killed one of the young magpies.
A decaying treestump sprouted a collar of saffron fungus of a kind Edward had never  seen before.
He observed all these happenings but wrote: ‘Dogs: four including the one that got run over when only six months.
Tam is fifth.
I have always wondered if mother left the front door open deliberately; he was a spaniel mixture, very nice.
Pickle was first — tan and white terrier, died of cancer at eight.
Best, too, in many ways.
Then Jess — collie from Canine Defence, had to be put down eventually.
Then the run-over puppy.
Then Minnie — terrier type again, very loving, strayed a lot, died suddenly, probably ate something.
Cats: the tabby next door, when I was a child — but of course that wasn't mine.
Then the ginger kitten I hid in the garden shed and mother found it and there was a monumental scene and Helen called her a beast; funny, I can hear it now, mother going on about the kitten and Helen suddenly exploding and mother's face.
It was Louise who said things like that, not Helen.
The kitten lived to be nine, so came out of the whole business best, I suppose.
Then Prince — black and white tom.
Then no more cats because of problems with birds.’
He paused.
He pushed his chair back and wandered around the room.
Everything in it was old and shabby; little had been chosen by Edward himself.
There were some World Wildlife Fund posters and a carving of a red-throated diver he had once bought in Orkney.
There was a small case of books.
The candlewick bedspread on his bed dated from his schooldays; an area at the end was worn completely bare by the five dogs.
The rug on the floor had once been in his father's study.
A Victorian jug on the mantelpiece had been given him by Louise one Christmas.
The dressing-gown on the back of the door had been bought by Helen to replace one twenty-five years old.
Edward returned to the desk.
He wrote: ‘I cannot sleep at night.
There is nothing to be done.
The boy came again last week.’
He could not remember now the precise moment at which he had realised, once, time out of mind ago, that he found male bodies inviting and female ones not.
He could remember a period of engagement with art — with Greek statuary and the young gods of Renaissance paintings, those bodies officially sanctified on the page or given sexual neutrality as museum displays.
Here, you were licensed to admire without discrimination: the body as  aesthetic object, pure and simple.
Edward had come to realise that he found some bodies more appealing than others, and that the contemplation of them aroused feelings that had nothing to do with artistic appreciation.
He made the connection between these bodies and those he saw all around him — clothed, partially clothed, or unclothed in the roaring maelstrom of the school changing rooms.
He had had to conceal his revulsion at the creased and thumbed photographs handed round from desk to desk at school — those grey girls with their balloon breasts and gaping hairy forks.
And presently revulsion gave way to indifference: he ceased to see the flaunted female bodies of advertisements and magazines because they had nothing to do with him, they were irrelevant.
It was other images, now, that disturbed, from which he turned in anxiety and in guilt.
And, over the years, he had learned to avert his face, to sidestep, to damp down the fires.
On the rare occasions when sharp eyes had penetrated his facade, when complicity had been invited, he had fled in panic.
When, once, he had thought himself on the brink of an alliance for which he yearned, he was suddenly and shatteringly rejected.
Thereafter, he turned inwards.
Five days after the picnic Helen received a postcard from Giles Carnaby.
The picture was of a well-known local church.
Giles said: ‘I can see I must brush up on my Perp and Dec if I am to keep up with you.
Thank you for a gorgeous outing.
Will be in touch very soon.’
No signature.
You don't know where you are with him, do you? said Dorothy.
From one week to the next.
Blowing hot and cold like that.
Time to put it to him, fair and square, I'd say.
Mind, you may not like what you hear.
She loomed large these days, as in the weeks after the funeral.
Her airy presence filled the house.
Above all, her comments rang in Helen's ears.
‘Is Edward all right?’ said Louise.
‘There's something distinctly odd about him lately, you know.
I mean, even odder than usual.
He never was much like other people.
And you're looking a bit off-colour, to be honest.
Seedy, as mother used to say.
Not that I can talk — I've got almost as many spots as Phil.
Maybe adolescence is contagious.
God — what's going on here?’
They were walking through the village.
Louise wished to visit Dorothy's grave, where the memorial stone was now in place.
A confusion of lorries and cement mixers defaced the area just past the green.
Helen explained that someone was converting the disused Baptist chapel into a house.
They entered the churchyard.
She said: ‘Is Phil still being…difficult?’
‘Of course he's being difficult.
And Suzanne.
Do you know, I am nostalgic for nappies and broken nights.
I look in prams, with a soppy smile on my face.
At the time, I thought one had hit rock bottom.
There's a bloody great silent conspiracy that goes on, and it's the conspiracy of those who've had children against those who haven't yet.
What you don't know, till you're in it, is that it's a life sentence.
The other thing of course is that you haven't got any choice anyway, because the yen to have children is about as basic as the yen to have sex.
It's all devilishly neat.
Contraception is merely cosmetic.
You breed, willy-nilly, and lo and behold! you find life isn't ever going to be the same again.
Even mother — even mother — I now realise, must have gone through some of this.
Even mother must have had the odd twinge, incredible as it seems.
And the whole process is made as simultaneously agonising and amazing as it could be — you labour to give birth, that's the right word all right, and it's about as ghastly as possible and then at the end there's this absolutely wonderful feeling, that the conspiracy has never hinted at, when you hold it and see it and you suddenly realise there's a whole new emotion you didn't know anything about.
Nobody's ever mentioned that.
And from then on you're done — they've got you by the short hairs.
You're going to spend the next few months hanging over them with your heart thumping in case they've stopped breathing and the next few years after that stopping them committing suicide because a perfectly ordinary house has turned into a minefield of electricity and stairs and windows and boiling kettles.
Every day the newspapers are telling you what happens to other people's children.
They're being run over and  raped and burnt; there's leukemia and meningitis and muscular dystrophy; it's all out there waiting to spring, if you're fool enough to relax.
But at the moments you wish you were shot of the whole thing you know perfectly well that it's precisely because you couldn't endure to be without it, now you know about it, that you've got to go through all this.
You've lost your innocence.
And then they get bigger and they start thinking and watching and you realise you're fouling them up yourself too and there's not much you can do about that either.
And you know that at the same time as you could clout them you'd actually die for them also if it came to the point.
It's a fiendishly clever system for making sure the human race continues and most people over twenty never have a tranquil moment.
God — what a spiel!
I don't blame you for looking edgy.’
‘Sorry,’ said Helen.
‘I didn't realise you were talking to me, in fact.’
They had arrived at the grave.
‘Do you think it's all right?’
Helen enquired, after a moment.
‘The stone?
Fine.
Nice lettering.
Simple and straightforward.’
‘It's considered a bit austere by some.’
‘Of course.
Look around.
It sticks out.
Offends against the prevailing taste.
Well, that would have given mother quiet satisfaction.’
They stood in contemplation.
‘You know something?’ said Louise.
‘She's changing.
In the head, that is.
I'm beginning to see her differently.
She's losing her edge, somehow.
Fading.
What about you?’
‘Fading?
I wouldn't say that, no.
I'm seeing her differently.
I wouldn't say that I'm seeing her faded.
Interesting.
And even more interesting is the way in which I see myself differently.
What I am and what I'm not, and why.
All of which slots in with what you've just been saying.
Did mother foul me up?
As you put it.
Or does one hammer the nails into one's own coffin?
As mother used to have it.
Sorry about the language.
Inept.
It slipped out.’
‘What do you mean — fouled up?
You're not…’
‘Of course I am.
As are we all.
To a greater or lesser extent.’
‘Oh, gawd…’ said Louise, turning from the grave.
She  dumped herself down on the low stone wall that skirted the churchyard.
Helen joined her.
‘Mother, I now discover, once scuppered my romantic prospects.
Do you remember Peter Datchett?
No — I daresay not — and in any case who's to say what would have come of it?
I might at this moment be living in anguish with Peter Datchett.
Perhaps I should thank mother.
But one would prefer to have made one's own mistakes.
And there's the question of the yellow muslin dress — not on the face of it a central matter but…but again there is this sense of one's fate having been manipulated by another.
By mother, to be precise.’
Louise was staring intently.
‘I do remember Peter Datchett.
I always wondered why he disappeared without trace.
What did she do?
And what yellow dress?
I simply can't see you…’
‘No, I'm sure you can't.
And you would have been about seven at the time.
What bothers me is not so much the loss of either Peter Datchett or the yellow dress, but the awful glimpse of my own acquiescence.’
‘I don't understand,’ said Louise after a moment.
‘Why should you?
Neither do I, in a sense.
I see, simply, that at some point I became pathologically compliant.
The habit of avoiding confrontation with mother became a habit of not confronting anything.
Of accepting without question.
You used to go on at me about getting out.
You were of course entirely right.’
‘Oh, goodness…
One said that sort of thing.
I didn't always mean…’
‘It's all right,’ said Helen.
‘I'm not bemoaning the past.
I'm merely casting a beady eye on it.
Hoping, perhaps, to learn something.’
Louise, dissecting a cushion of moss, laid green fronds upon her knee — and switched tactics.
‘What did mother do?’
‘Oh — failed to hand over a letter.
A sin of omission rather than of commission, quite possibly.
One will never know.
I'm more interested now in what I didn't do.
Put up a fight.
Rage against the universe.’
‘You aren't that kind of person,’ said Louise.
‘Ah, there you have it.
And why not?’
‘Nor is Edward…’ continued Louise, shredding the green fronds, sweeping them to the ground.
‘Precisely.
Whereas you are.
Odd, isn't it?
I can see you now — it's my earliest memory of you, incidentally — I can see you now biting mother.
Aged about one.’
Louise laughed.
‘What did she do?’
‘She put you in a cot and shut the door on you.
You yelled for an hour without stopping.’
‘No wonder.
It's surprising I'm as normal as I am.
That we all are.’
‘Hmn…’
Helen rose.
‘We'd better get back.
I haven't done anything about supper.
Edward will be getting restive.’
‘Where is he, anyway?
He was around for five minutes when I arrived and then he vanished.’
‘In the Britches, I expect.’
‘Edward's relationship with that place would keep half a dozen psychiatrists busy.
Oh, that sounds snide.
It's not meant.
You know.
When I was little I thought the light shone out of Edward's eyes.
Now I get frightened for him.
The world's a brutal place and he wanders around worrying about toads and orchids.
He wouldn't have enough sense of self-preservation to come in out of the rain.
In the dark ages people like Edward got crucified or burned as witches.
He lives in a jungle today and he doesn't know it.’
‘Hardly,’ said Helen.
‘Here.’
They were turning out into the village street again now, leaving behind them the stone ranks of the dead, with their propitiatory offerings of flowers and foliage.
A clutch of young mothers gossiped outside the shop, with children eddying around them.
Radio One leaked from the open windows of a house.
‘Of course.
Social violence is universal, and I don't mean mugging and burglary.
A place like this has fangs like anywhere else, given the circumstances.’
‘Edward's rather popular in the village.’
‘That's not what I'm getting at,’ said Louise.
She appeared to lose interest in the subject and began to talk about Suzanne.
Suzanne wished to leave school at sixteen and become a hairdresser.
Louise fulminated.
Helen heard Dorothy, twenty-three  years ago, screaming at Louise.
Louise, glancing at her sister, caught the silent comment and said, ‘There is absolutely no parallel.
Mother was obstructing, purely and simply.
I'm trying to stop Suzanne making an idiotic mistake.’
Then she started to laugh and added, ‘Do you always know what I'm thinking?
God — it's as bad as marriage!’
By the time they got back to the house it was past eight.
There was a rich and spicy smell; Helen had left the dinner in the oven.
‘Coriander…’ said Louise, sniffing.
‘You really are into contemporary cuisine, aren't you?
Mother would have a fit.
Here — I'll lay the table.’
Edward came down from his room.
Helen served the meal.
They began to eat.
After a few mouthfuls Edward put his knife and fork down and said, ‘Oh — the lawyer rang.
Half an hour or so ago.’
‘Funny time to ring up,’ said Louise.
‘Out of office hours.’
Edward started to eat again.
‘She goes to the opera with him.’
Louise turned sharply to Helen, who felt herself turn a treacherous red.
‘What's all this?’
‘And picnics,’ said Edward.
‘The probate thing will be sorted out in a month or so,’ said Helen in strangled tones.
‘Apparently.’
‘Picnics ?’ demanded Louise.
‘Picnics where?’
‘He uses after-shave stuff,’ said Edward.
‘I don't really like him.’
‘So what?’ snapped Helen.
Louise, wide-eyed, looked from one to the other.
‘What on earth is going on?’
‘Nothing,’ said Helen, ‘is going on.’
She got up.
‘Would anyone like some more of this?’
Louise turned to Edward.
‘What did he want?’
‘He didn't say,’ said Edward smugly.
‘He just chuntered on a bit and then rang off.’
Helen dumped a spoonful of stew on to each plate except her own and sat down again.
‘This is delicious,’ said Louise, in a social tone.
‘You must give me the recipe.’
After three days Helen dialled Giles Carnaby's number.
There was no answer.
The next evening, too, he was out.
She rang his office, and then panicked at the secretary's voice, and put the receiver down without speaking.
This, she thought, is how adolescents behave; to this is one reduced.
‘I hate August,’ said Joyce Babcock.
‘Nothing but overdue books and kids fooling around.
And the town jammed with coaches.
Nothing happens in August.
Everyone's away — even the people you never think you'd miss, like the neighbours.
I've not spoken to a soul in the last fortnight, except for you — sorry, no offence meant.
No, I tell a lie — I saw Kate Blackford outside Marks.
You know — from Oxford Central.
She's living up here now.
So we had a nice chat.
Oh — and this'll interest you — while we were talking who should go past but your solicitor friend.
Again.
I'm always seeing him, aren't I?
Anyway, he didn't see me but Kate recognised him too — her sister works in his office, apparently.
And the thing is he wasn't alone, he had someone with him that woman who runs the Choral Society, I can't remember her name, with black hair, youngish.
And Kate says her sister says he's quite a one for the ladies.
Apparently he led his wife an awful dance.
You know his wife's dead?
Apparently she was ever so nice.
Anyway, I thought you'd be interested.’
I know, said Helen to Dorothy.
Of course I know.
I've always known, probably.
It makes no difference.
Unfortunately.
No difference whatsoever.
And how do I know she's not just a friend?
Like I'm just a friend.
Why did he send another postcard?
Telephone?
He didn't have to.
And of what value is the testimony of Kate Blackford's sister?
Why does he not telephone again?
‘So…’ said Louise.
‘Back in the nest.
Where things have not changed.
Tim has seen a new specialist and is going in to have his tubes drained.
Phil disappeared for twenty-four hours and had me ringing up the local police station.
Who demonstrated what you might call a profound lack of interest.
So I took it out on Phil when he did show up which was natural enough I suppose but probably unhelpful.
Now he's off again.
God knows where.
It was lovely seeing you.
Listen — what is going on?
This bloke…
You haven't gone and fallen, have you?
I remember him now.
The Older Man type who came to the funeral.
I know you were getting pissed off with Edward needling you like that, but you can tell me, surely.
I worry about you.’
‘Continuing humid,’ Edward wrote.
‘Cuckoo-pint in the corner near the road has increased — eight specimens this year.
Wood spurge also doing better.
Green woodpecker fledglings have flown.
Neither spurge, cuckoo-pint nor woodpeckers will feel satisfaction at this, of course, nor indeed anything at all ; they exist, simply, and that is that.
Exist, replicate — if circumstances permit, and expire.
The entire wood does that and nothing else, year after year — the dominant emotion is fear.
When it sings and blossoms in the spring it is not happy; it merely does what its genes tell it to do.
Such subtleties as happiness and misery are contributed by me, along with satisfaction at increase of cuckoo-pint and survival of woodpeckers.
The point of all this being that…’
He put down his pen and stared out at the Britches, which shifted gently and continuously in the light wind.
Edward was not a great reader but he knew quite well that he was broaching the oldest and most central concern of literature; he felt appropriately diffident.
‘…I don't know if it is a comfort or a mockery.
The beauty of it.
The permanence.
Everything that is in my head, everything that I feel; the fact that the natural world thinks nothing and neither laughs nor cries.’
He pondered again.
‘Though that is true only up to a point — last year after the dog  fox was killed on the road the vixen called for three nights, the saddest sound I ever heard.’
He paused again.
On his bookshelves were the tattered copies of Tarka the Otter and the works of Cherry Kearton that he had read and re-read as a schoolboy, weeping the while.
‘But is the vixen sad or do I attribute sadness to her?
All that can be said for certain is that I respond to all of it — vixen, trees, plants, birds, the lot — but it does not respond to me.’
Tam, who had been sleeping on the bed, woke suddenly, scratched himself, jumped down and marched to the door, where he stood, whining imperiously.
‘All right,’ said Edward.
‘In a minute.’
He wrote: ‘And also that it sustains me, in ways that I can't explain.
Especially now.
Things still bad.
Not sleeping etc.
Was churlish to Helen.’
Tam, at the door, continued to whine.
12
I suppose, Helen thought, that the interesting thing about my condition is the loss of self-control.
Eventually one will see this as interesting rather than demoralising.
It will be possible to look back and observe that those in love become utterly self-destructive.
Oneself in love.
At the moment I can no longer act with common sense and deliberation, because there is only one course open, and that is determined by obsession.
I am obsessed by Giles; all I can think of is whether I shall see him again, and when.
What the outcome of seeing him might be is beside the point; I have become incapable of calculation.
Normally behaviour — or at least my behaviour — is governed by certain processes; weighing one course of action against another, thinking about consequences.
In this predicament, one does nothing of the kind.
One responds to some basic drive, like an animal.
In youth, I found this exhilarating, I remember.
She tried, as therapy, to recall previous experiences.
She was probably, she realised, shorter on this than most people.
Apart from that early sexual encounter, which did not count as love, there had been Peter Datchett and two others.
With Peter Datchett, it had been a question of ripening interest rather than obsession.
The others, in so far as she could recover her feelings of the time, seemed to have involved love — inflammation of the senses, certainly.
At eighteen — the period of the mousseline de soie dress — she had found herself hanging around a certain area of Twickenham, where they were then living, in the hopes of encountering the doctor's son, with whom she had had a strangled conversation at some social gathering.
He had subsequently taken her to the cinema, where she had been startled to feel his hand creep into hers.
Four weeks later she had seen him in the  cinema queue with another girl, and had perceived that her day was over; in between, she had known disorientation and obsession, diagnosed her trouble, and felt exhilarated.
Later, in her twenties, she had become quietly and patiently infatuated with a married colleague.
The man had never behaved towards her in other than a friendly and decorous way; nevertheless, she burned.
When after a year he moved away to another job, she felt acute distress and thought continuously of him for many months.
It was that experience, in recollection, which most closely reflected her present state.
Late one afternoon Giles came into the library.
Helen had taken over the ‘Returned Books’ counter temporarily from one of the juniors and looked up to find him standing in front of her, smiling.
He held up empty hands.
‘I'm not a customer.
Nothing to declare.
But I did have something in mind — a biography of Mahler.’
‘We have Donald Mitchell.
I'm not sure if it's on the shelf.
You'll find it in…’
‘I'd hoped for personal service,’ said Giles.
Helen glanced round.
‘When Janice comes back from her tea I can hand over here.’
‘Good.
I'll fend for myself till then.’
Five minutes later she joined him in the Biography alcove.
‘I'm sorry I was out when you phoned — Edward did remember to tell me this time.’
‘Did I phone?
Yes, so I did — this week has been hectic, though not in any interesting way.
Nothing to report on your mother's affairs, I'm afraid.
Now — what do you advise?
Mahler is out.
Shall I embark on two volumes of Henry James?’
They discussed books for a few minutes.
Giles made his selection.
He glanced at his watch.
‘I must be off.
Choir night, so I get myself an early supper.
Thank you for your invaluable help — what luck to find you.
I was afraid I might have struck one of the days you aren't here.’
There was to be no arrangement made, then.
Choir night.
Helen thought of the dark woman; in the mind's eye she saw her — laughing and talking with Giles.
She felt a gust of despair.
For  a moment she was quite faint; the library rocked around her — the browsing readers with shopping baskets set down beside them, the books in their bright rows, the humming strip lights.
She took a deep breath, gathered herself, the room settled; Giles was tucking his pile of books under his arm, picking up his briefcase.
She said, ‘Then what were you telephoning about?’
‘About?’
He looked at her in surprise.
And something else: something chilly, something that warned.
Stop, she told herself, stop.
And continued.
‘If there's nothing to report…’
‘Oh,’ said Giles.
‘Yes…
Let me see now, what did I have in mind?
Mahler, perhaps.
And to say thank you for that lovely picnic.
I was telling Edward about the heron we saw.’
He was about to go; he turned to her.
Well — goodbye, my dear, he was about to say, so glad I found you.
And would be gone, leaving her to stare into blank days ahead.
No, she thought, no.
‘I should like to see you,’ she said.
‘Helen…
Of course.’
He laid a hand on her arm, placating.
‘Very soon.
It's difficult to talk here, isn't it?
And I have the blessed choir.
We must organise something — very soon.’
‘And you've given me the impression you wanted to see me, too.’
Appalled, she heard herself forge on.
‘But my dear…’
A woman edged past them into the alcove, murmuring apologies.
Giles continued, his voice losing its solicitous intimacy.
‘We must talk again.
Soon.
Definitely.
And thank you again for your help.’
He smiled: a public, neutral smile.
The woman looked at them for a moment over the book she had pulled from the shelf.
He went.
‘I can never find R to Z,’ said the woman plaintively.
‘Something funny happens after P.’ Helen supplied assistance.
She could hardly hear the woman's queries; her stomach twisted; his bland little words ticked in her head — soon, very soon.
Well, said her mother, I should think you may have gone and done it now.
She was having dreams of unabashed sexuality.
It was not Giles, though, who featured in these dreams.
She consorted, these  nights, with strangers — men who were temporarily vivid when she awoke but who faded as the day progressed until, after a few hours, they vanished entirely.
Since the picnic, the young man by the river had joined her twice; she herself, interestingly, had not been the Helen of today but her own younger self and indeed not even that — some other girl who was both alien and deeply familiar, a doppelgänger , a mirror-Helen.
She had bathed naked from a deserted beach with this man, and lain with him afterwards among sand-dunes.
In the morning, while the dream remained with her, she felt searingly deprived, as though she had been abandoned, as though she had lost someone known and loved.
And the loss was in part the loss of some aspect of herself, as irretrievable as past happiness.
She remembered that somewhere Dorothy had kept old photograph albums and, on a whim, began to search for them.
They were not where she had expected to find them, in the big tallboy in the sitting room, in which lurked an unvisited confusion of old magazines, moth-eaten balls of knitting-wool, paper patterns, Edward's school reports, Louise's sketch pads, buttons, string.
She ran them to ground eventually in the bottom of Dorothy's wardrobe, an area she had not yet steeled herself to clear.
Pulling them from under some old blankets, she sat down on the bed and began to leaf through the pages: photographs fell out, battered, uncherished, not stuck-in — this was no lovingly tended relic.
Here was a curly-haired Louise, smirking in a sunsuit on a grey, shingly beach; here was Edward in knee-length shorts, hair clipped to his scalp and ears sticking out.
And here was Helen, a forgotten Helen with anxious chubby adolescent face, wearing a crumpled cotton dress and tilted sideways — her mother had been a careless photographer.
All these prints, indeed, were under- or over-exposed, with their subjects askew; heads were chopped off, feet and hands loomed giant in the foregrounds.
Nevertheless, photographs had been taken; there had been a deliberate attempt to record, to retain.
Helen, shuffling through them, remembered Louise in the churchyard: even mother must have had the odd twinge…
Here was her father, too.
Always on the edge of things.
He stood diffidently to the side of a group, or featured as a  background — the pair of legs clutched by baby Louise, a blurred figure in a field beyond Helen and Edward who sat on a rug eating sandwiches.
That particular snap prompted the memory, the afternoon returning as she stared at it — the sandwiches had been of marmite, Edward had found a hawk-moth caterpillar.
But what was their father doing, lurking indistinctly over there under a tree?
That Helen could not remember.
And nowhere did he appear alone: never, it seemed, had Dorothy turned the viewfinder of the old box Brownie deliberately upon her husband.
Equally, she was absent herself; naturally enough — she had been the photographer.
At the back of the album was a clutch of glossy professional pictures, and in these Dorothy could be found, glaring out from Louise's wedding group, standing rigid beside Edward on his graduation day.
For both occasions she had worn the same hat — an uncompromising chenille turban; Helen had disposed of it a month ago with the rest of her things and, as she looked at the photographs, felt again the curious dry but slimy touch of it.
And there also, in an earlier picture, was the brown bear fur coat: Dorothy, flanked by Helen and Edward as children, stood on a pavement against a background of London taxis and buses — they must have been caught by a street photographer on one of those pantomime or ballet outings.
Dorothy looked determined rather than festive; she would have been in her forties at the time but already stood as though planted, like an elderly woman.
She had never seemed young, Helen realised; not even in the haziest reaches of recollection.
But it was not for Dorothy that she searched, nor even for her father.
She hunted herself, putting aside all those pictures in which she appeared — not as child but as a grown woman.
There were not so many.
The sequence ended abruptly in the late fifties; the camera had packed up.
Helen could even remember the occasion; the shutter jamming, her mother's fit of temper, the thing flung into the dustbin.
And never, of course, replaced; such a purchase would have been an unjustifiable extravagance.
The last photograph of herself showed her at about twenty-five, here in the garden at Greystones, sorting apples into baskets.
Clearly Dorothy's principal intention had been to record the apple harvest — a prodigious one; Helen's presence was incidental, like one of those figures introduced for purposes of scale or composition.
But she had turned her face to the camera and it had caught a look that she could find nowhere else and indeed that seemed to belong to another girl; she barely recognised herself.
She saw a person who was young, yes, but — more than that — who wore an expression of arresting vivacity and expectancy.
And who looked thus at her mother — what had she seen?
Of what had she been thinking?
Helen turned the picture over and saw that Dorothy had pencilled on the back ‘18 lbs Laxtons; 27 lbs Coxes.’
One of those trees had blown over in a storm a few years later; the other survived as a diseased and sterile relic.
She sat on her mother's bed and studied her own distant and alien face.
The eyes, indeed, met hers — alive, expectant, vulnerable.
She felt as though confronted by a child: it'll be all right, she wanted to say, I'll see that it's all right.
A letter came from Giles: a typed, official letter concerning her mother's affairs.
But folded within it was a handwritten note ‘So good to see you at the library, albeit briefly.
Though I thought you seemed not quite yourself, and trust all is well now — do let me know if there is anything I can do.
Yours affec.
Giles.’
What am I supposed to make of this? she wondered.
And with the thought came a spurt of irritation.
I am supposed to make anything, or nothing, of it; obscurity and ambiguity are built in, whether deliberately or because that is his habit.
Just as he has behaved since we met in a manner that avoids interpretation.
She telephoned that evening, before she could change her mind.
She picked up the receiver without planning what she would say.
‘This is Helen.’
There was no hesitation, no coolness to his voice.
‘How nice and how are you?
You've had my letter?
As I explained — we should be able to get those shares transferred next month, and then you can go ahead and sell them, or re-invest or whatever you wish.
It might be as well to…’
‘I understand,’ she said.
‘And thank you for your note.’
‘Ah…’
‘There is, in a sense, something you can do.
Perhaps we could meet.’
Giles said at once, ‘Of course .
Let's see…
Tomorrow?
What about tomorrow — Saturday?
I am bespoke in the evening, but the daytime is free, once I've done my domestic chores.
Why don't we have a pub lunch and a breath of fresh air somewhere pleasant?’
He had suggested the landscaped grounds of an eighteenth-century house, noted for their expression of the picturesque: ‘I'm not a great one for stately homes, but you can have a good walk there.’
They had lunched in a crowded riverside pub, where Giles had talked smoothly and continuously on a general level.
He continued to talk thus now, as they walked down the grand vista, away from the formal gardens and into the woodland rides, where classical figures loomed from the undergrowth and the serpentine rill wound away towards a distant temple.
They stopped at the balustraded terrace overlooking the small lake, and leaned over; below, enormous golden fish lay around in the green water.
‘Carp?’ wondered Giles.
‘Or orfe, are they?
There's something called an orfe, isn't there?’
Helen said, ‘I think I should find myself another solicitor.’
She had not considered the words; they arrived, simply, and once said, seemed right.
He turned to her.
She saw him, for the first time ever, startled.
There was a sudden nakedness to his face.
Then the nakedness was covered: he had seen what lay ahead.
He said, with deliberate care, ‘But of course, my dear, if you feel we are not coming up to scratch.
You have a perfect right.’
‘It's nothing to do with professional things.
It's because I am in love with you.’
There was a silence.
‘Oh dear, oh dear,’ said Giles.
He sounded entirely artificial.
He looked down at the fish.
‘My dear Helen…’
‘Which is my fault,’ said Helen.
‘But it makes life difficult.
And I have to say that although what I feel is my fault, and my responsibility, you have, up to a point, encouraged me.
Or at least you have left me not knowing what to think.’
Giles sighed.
‘Then I am to blame.
Please let me say, Helen, that I have the very greatest affection and respect for you.
Please realise that.
I value your friendship enormously, and I'd hoped to continue to do so.’
She watched the fish.
Carp, or orfe.
They lay at angles to each other, drifting very slowly so that the gold-splintered pattern of the lake changed continuously.
She heard what he said and she thought, so that is how it is, and how it is going to be.
She felt nothing very much, except the sense of moving inexorably from one moment to the next, and accepting what each brought.
She followed the slow gyration of one very large, cream-coloured fish and said, ‘But you aren't in love with me, which would make it, I'm afraid, an awkward friendship.
Of course, my feelings may change — I'm well aware of that — in which case all this will seem rather silly.
I'll probably wish I'd never mentioned the matter, but it seems necessary to me at the moment, so there it is.
What isn't very important to you has become important to me — disturbingly important.
There is an imbalance, and I feel that I can't allow it to go on.
For my own sake, I suppose.’
It was surprising how easily the words came, now that she had allowed them.
She did not look at Giles at all as she spoke and the sentences piled one upon another, without restraint, like a flow of thought; there was even a low level of enjoyment in the sense of release.
‘Another woman would cope with this differently, I daresay.
You have appeared at a time when things are rather…odd.
For me, I mean.
Maybe that's partly why I've reacted like this.
I'm conscious of not abiding by rules, in saying all this.
You'd much prefer that I didn't.’
She caught, out of the corner of her eye, his gesture of disagreement.
He started to speak but she interrupted.
‘Don't think, though, that I am dishing out blame.
The problem is — has been — that what was one thing to you was quite another to me.
Probably I misinterpreted, from time to time.
Thought you meant things you didn't mean.’
She paused, and Giles leapt in at once.
‘I am at fault.
The  trouble is…my trouble is…
Oh dear.
I'm susceptible, I suppose.
Even now I'm finding your honesty charming.
Does this really have to end our friendship?
Surely not.
As you rightly say, your feelings may change.
Oh — will change, certainly.’
Was there an edge of doubt or complacency to his tone?
‘I don't really think,’ said Helen, ‘that either of us would feel very comfortable after this.’
Giles sighed.
‘You're so much nicer than I am, Helen.
You make me seem insincere.
But I'm not, you know.
I'm just…well, I meet someone like you with whom I feel instant affinity, to whom I'm instantly attracted and…
I get carried away, I suppose.
It isn't insincerity.
It's…susceptibility.
A weakness, I suppose, but there we are.’
He turned on her a rueful expression — rueful but placating, like a boy caught out in a misdemeanour.
She was to be wrong-footed, she saw: made to feel ponderous, portentous.
‘I never saw you as insincere.
Merely perplexing, at times.
At least perplexing to me, but that is probably to do with my own shortcomings.
In relationships, that is.
That's what I mean by things being different for you than for me.’
She was watching the fish again.
And now she caught him in another gesture, but a surreptitious one this time — the quick shooting of a cuff to glance at his watch.
At some other level of consciousness she registered amazement, a flick of anger, and the distant recognition of her own recovery: eventually, she would remember that movement.
A pair of collared doves were moaning in the trees overhead; the day was absolutely still — sunless and oppressive.
Giles laid his hand on her arm.
‘You know, I have this feeling that too much introspection will get us nowhere.
Shall we move?
I'm getting rather tired of these fish.’
They walked on into the thickening woodland.
Giles still had his hand under her elbow; she stopped to adjust the strap of her sandal as a pretext to shake it off.
I can get through all this, she thought, so long as he doesn't touch me.
I think I can.
They were following the concrete channel of the serpentine rill, which emptied itself into a pool of stygian blackness.
Giles paused to peer into it.
‘No fish.
Really, this place can be  extraordinarily melancholy on occasion.
Perhaps I shouldn't have brought you here.’
‘I would have said what I have if we'd gone to a fun-fair,’ said Helen.
He laughed.
‘There!
That's what's so engaging about you but of course you're the one person who can't see that.
I hope I am not to be cast absolutely into the outer darkness, Helen — I should find that very wretched.’
I see, she thought, he is to be the one who is rejected; that is how it is to be.
They came out into the open.
A little temple presided over a sloping hillside with a prospect of open fields and river lined with reeds and willows.
A pair of swans cruised, with cygnets, and swallows were zipping to and fro above the water.
Giles said, ‘Something's on fire.’
‘Stubble burning.’
Helen realised now that the sky was overcast not by cloud but by hanging palls of smoke.
The edges of the landscape fumed.
At the far end of the valley, beyond the river and the water-meadows, was a rim of red; they could hear crackling.
‘It's a disgrace,’ said Giles.
‘It's been allowed to get quite out of hand.
There should be new legislation.’
They walked on, past a classical arcade, past an Apollo and a sequence of nymphs.
Waterlilies swung at the edge of the river; willows rained down.
The air was now quite acrid; Helen saw that the sleeve of her shirt was covered with dark specks of ash.
Giles was talking of childhood holidays in Devon; hayfields filled with wild flowers, corn-sheaves, butterflies.
A vanished countryside.
And horse-drawn waggons and smocked farmworkers, I daresay, thought Helen: everything is embroidered by recollection.
Even today, no doubt.
Eventually.
They reached the car.
He drove her back to Greystones, still talking fluently of things that mattered not at all.
As he opened the door of the car for her to get out he smiled, a smile that appeared eloquent both of regret and appeal.
Then he laid his hand on her shoulder for an instant, got back into the driving-seat, and was gone.
She walked up the path towards the front door.
You could  smell burning here, too.
The sky above the Britches was sepia-coloured, as though a storm were imminent.
She registered all this, opened the front door and knew also, immediately, that there was something alien about the house.
She called ‘Edward?’, and then remembered that he had gone out with the ornithological group.
She walked into the kitchen and Phil was sitting at the table.
He got up.
His green crest, she saw, was now tinged with brown at the roots.
So it did grow out.
He looked extremely unhealthy; the anxious eyes of a child peered at her from a white mask.
He said ‘The front door was locked, so I got through the window at the back.
Edward wasn’ here either.’
Helen removed her coat and filled the kettle.
She felt an unusual surging lust for a cup of tea.
‘We weren't expecting you, Phil.’
‘I thought I'd come and stay here for a bit.
You and Edward don’ min', do you?
I mean, I thought since it's my house, sort of, it would be all right.
But if you don' wan' me I'll go somewhere else.
I mean, I don' care one way or the other.
Fact is, I'm a bit pissed off at home.’
He watched her, tensely; his eyes were those of a five-year-old.
She took two cups and saucers from the dresser and put them on the table; she got the milk from the fridge.
‘That's all right.
You can stay if you want to.
I'll find some sheets presently and you can make up a bed in the spare room.
But I do think you should tell your parents.
Ask your parents,’ she amended.
‘That's fine,’ said Phil.
‘I rung mum.
She said it sounds like a good idea, till I get myself together.’
‘She did, did she?’ said Helen in a different tone.
The kettle spurted.
She made the tea, poured two cups.
‘Thanks,’ said Phil.
Helen took a gulp of tea, and felt herself begin to rally.
She looked at Phil; he was encased from top to toe in black leather, as always.
‘Don't you want to take your jacket off — you must be awfully hot?’
Phil, vaguely, shrugged off the jacket which fell to the floor with a metallic clatter.
Beneath it he wore a T-shirt of quite astonishing filthiness.
‘The thing is, I'm not getting on with Mum and Dad.
I mean, we're all pissed off with each other.’
‘That can happen.’
‘I ‘spect,’ he continued magnanimously, ‘s'partly my fault too.’
‘I daresay,’ said Helen.
After a moment she added, with sudden hope ‘What about school?
Surely the term starts soon.’
‘I can't remember,’ said Phil evasively.
‘Anyway, that's not important.
The thing is to get myself together.
I got problems.’
Helen refilled both cups.
Phil slurped his with one gulp.
He seemed restored; his crest stood perkily again.
‘I got to sort myself out, see.’
‘Well,’ said Helen.
‘We've all got problems, but you're welcome to stay here for a bit.’
Phil looked at her over his cup with kindly reproach.
He ignored the first part of her statement.
‘Thanks, Helen.’
‘Actually,’ said Louise, ‘it's the perfect solution.
I don't know why I didn't think of it myself.
I mean, you and Edward aren't involved emotionally like we are, and he's not going to get up your nose in the same way and I'll know where he is and that he's all right.
It's the obvious arrangement.
At least he rang.
Though of course you would have done anyway.
Not that he was what you'd call forthcoming.
A series of grunts, which is mainly what I get these days.
There are points when I wonder if he actually hates me, or if he's not yet got beyond the level of contempt and indifference.
I look at him — when I can bear to and frankly if you can persuade him to use a clean T-shirt you'll be doing all of us a favour — I look at him and I remember dear little chubby hands clutching one, and the way their faces used to smell of soap and milk.
What happened to all that?
Anyway, at least he rang.
Maybe it indicates some normal human responses.
And I'll know where he is and roughly what he's up to.
Though…is there a drug scene in the village yet?
All right, I daresay you don't — but there's no need to snap, I have been pretty well at the end of my tether.
You don't know what it's like wondering what the hell he's up to now and where he's gone and when he'll be back.
And the grunts and the glares and the  slammed doors and that bloody T-shirt.
Do try and get him to eat some decent food.
And keep me informed.
Unless of course he deigns to ring again himself.
You might point out that one has feelings.
Anyway…
So how are things with you?’
‘How long for?’ said Edward.
It was Helen who made up the spare room bed, in the end.
Phil, it appeared, had spent his life under a duvet; the technical problem posed by sheets and blankets defeated him.
He dumped himself in the battered armchair and watched her, chatting cosily the while.
He seemed to have taken on a new lease of life.
‘I like it here.
S'a nice house.
S'not smart.
I don’ like smart houses.
Actually, that's what I like about you and Edward.
You're not smart either.
Not like Mum and Dad's friends.
They know some shocking people, really shocking.’
‘Mmn.
Could you pass me that pillow.’
‘All right if I put up some posters?
S'a bit boring the way it is, this room.’
‘I suppose so.
I can't think quite what you're going to find to do here, you know, Phil.’
‘You don’ need to worry about me,’said Phil reassuringly.
‘I'll probably be spending quite a lot of time writing poetry.’
‘Oh.
I see.
What sort of poetry do you write?’
‘Protest poetry, mos'ly,’ said Phil in a business-like tone.
‘Edward won’ min' if I borrow his typewriter, will he?’
She had given tea to Phil.
Had drunk tea herself, telephoned Louise, taken Edward aside and explained, made up the spare room bed.
And all through this she did not think of Giles.
She did not take those hours out and contemplate them; she simply let them lie somewhere in the head, to surface no doubt at some point of low resistance.
The small hours of the morning, conventionally.
From time to time that evening she was visited by the sight of the lake with its gold fretwork of fish; she wondered how  many years it would be before she could go to that place with equanimity.
And, thinking this, she knew that the thought itself was the first, faint, early signal of recovery.
It was as though, at the height of a fever, you experienced a fleeting moment of wellbeing.
Eventually, she thought, it will all be over.
I shan't care.
But before then there is a long way to go.
Now, tonight, there is nothing to look forward to, no reason to get up in the morning or move from one day into the next.
I have been someone else these last few months; now I have to learn to be myself again.
