4
The days following our visit to Johanna were full of frenetic busyness: Benjamin had to pack our belongings, I had to sell a cup (I'd stolen this from Wolsey) and draw what money I had deposited with the goldsmiths.
On 18 October, the Feast of St Luke, we assembled under the looming battlements of the Tower.
Servants, porters, farriers and fletchers bustled about.
Grooms, scullions and carters carried our baggage and loaded it on to the great wagon: hangings, feathered beds, yards of damask and costly cloth, towels and napkins, were piled into chests.
The furnishings of Queen Margaret's chapel candelabra, heavy missal books with their golden covers and carved stands, cushioned prayer stools — not to mention the pots and pitchers from the kitchen, were piled in great heaps on the cobbled yard.
Of course, I avoided so much work, going out to the bloody square on Tower Hill to gawk at the gore-drenched platform where the Great Ones of the land had their heads cut off.
At last we were ready.
We left the Tower by a postern gate and went along Hog Street, turning right to hear Mass at St Mary Grace's church.
The cavalcade stopped and orders were issued for us to rest in the fields around the church whilst Queen Margaret and her principal attendants went inside.
I was all agog with curiosity for I had glimpsed a cart, covered by a black damask cloth, arriving outside the main door of the church.
It was protected by yeomen of the guard wearing the royal red and gold livery.
The cloth was pulled back and a large casket was taken into the church.
Catesby ordered us to follow it.
I wondered what it was as we trailed up the dark nave behind Agrippa, Melford, and others of the Queen's party.
The casket was placed on trestles before the high altar.
Queen Margaret stood at the head, the rest of us on either side.
I craned forward.
Queen Margaret, white-faced and with dark-ringed eyes, nodded slightly and Catesby prised loose the lid to reveal white, gauze cloths which gave off a sweet fragrant perfume.
These were removed and — oh, sweet Lord, I nearly fainted!
The corpse of a man lay there: red-haired, red-bearded, face long and marble-white.
The body was clothed in a purple gown and a silver pectoral cross winked in the flickering candle light.
The man looked to be asleep though his eyelids were only half-closed.
I saw small wounds, red gashes, high on the cheek bones.
Immediately the group knelt.
‘Who is it?’
I whispered.
‘Her husband,’ Benjamin murmured.
‘The late James IV of Scotland, killed at Flodden!’
I stared at the skull-like face, the hollowed cheek bones, the red hair now combed smoothly back from the forehead.
I later learnt that the corpse had been badly mauled in battle, the face disfigured by a crashing axe blow.
The embalmers had used all their skills to repair the body.
Queen Margaret muttered something to Catesby.
‘Of your mercy,’ Sir Robert intoned, ‘pray for the soul of our late King James IV and take your leave.
Her Grace wishes to be alone.’
We all filed out of the church, leaving Queen Margaret with her shadows whilst we waited in the warm autumn sunshine.
‘Master Benjamin,’ I muttered, ‘the King's corpse has been above ground for four years.’
‘The English generals,’ he replied, ‘had the body dressed and embalmed after Flodden and sent it south for our King to view.’
He smiled and looked away.
‘You know our good Henry — he fears neither the living nor  the dead.
He kept the corpse shut away in a special chamber at Sheen Palace.’
‘And the Queen will take it back?’
‘No, no!’
Ruthven interrupted, sidling up behind us.
‘King Henry has decreed that it stays here until she is restored to Scotland.’
I turned and looked at the man's tear-stained face.
‘You loved King James?’
‘He had his failings, but he was a great prince.
Noble-hearted and generous to a fault.’
Ruthven looked up at the birds wheeling and twisting against the blue sky.
‘Such a noble prince,’ he whispered, ‘deserved a better end than that.’
Queen Margaret came out of the church, a veil covering her grief-stricken face.
Benjamin tugged Ruthven by the sleeve, indicating he wished to talk to him.
We walked further away from the group.
‘What was your master like?’
Benjamin indicated with his head towards the eerie church.
‘The late James IV?
I mean, as a man?’
‘A strange person,’ Ruthven replied, ‘tinged with the new learning from Italy.
King James was interested in medicine and was absorbed in all aspects of the study of physic and the human body.’
He rubbed his eyes with the back of his hand.
‘Do you know, he even founded a chair of medicine at one of the universities?’
Ruthven glanced away, now lost in the past.
‘The King's curiosity and hunger for knowledge led him down many strange paths.
On one occasion he hired a Satanist, a monk who dabbled in the Black Arts.
’ Ruthven looked at the party clustered round the church door.
‘In fact, Doctor Agrippa reminds me of him, but that was years ago.’
Ruthven looked at us sharply.
‘Do you know,’ he whispered, ‘Carey believes his grandfather met Doctor Agrippa in Antioch.
But surely it's not possible for a man to live so long?’
He sighed.
‘Anyway, this Satanist promised he could make things fly.
Whether he did or not I don't know, but James loved the good as well as the mysterious  things of life — fine wine, beautiful women.
He had bastards by at least two of his mistresses, Marion Boyd and Margaret Drummond.
He would have lived a long and full life had it not been for Flodden.’
Ruthven ground his teeth together.
‘He should have heeded the warnings.’
‘What warnings?’
‘A few days before he joined his army, King James was at prayer in the royal chapel at Linlithgow.
A ghostly figure appeared, dressed in flowing robes of blue and white.
The spectre carried a great staff and, with his high forehead and blond hair, bore an uncanny resemblance to a painting of St John.
In loud, sepulchral tones, this vision warned James to give up war and consorting with wanton women.
One of the King's companions tried to seize the apparition but it vanished.’
Ruthven gnawed at his lip.
‘A few days later the army assembled outside Edinburgh and a ghostly voice was heard shouting at midnight.
It seemed to come from the Market Cross.
This voice called on James and all his commanders to appear before Pluto, God of the Underworld, within thirty days.’
Ruthven shrugged.
‘The prophecy was fulfilled.
Within a month James and most of his commanders were dead, killed at Flodden.’
The steward turned and spat on the ground.
‘So, Master Daunbey, you know more about my master.
Any further questions?’
‘Yes,’ I interrupted, ‘when my master told you about Selkirk's mutterings, you seemed alarmed, even disturbed.’
Ruthven gazed gloomily at me.
Do you know, I really thought he was going to tell me something, but his protuberant eyes refused to meet mine.
‘I have said enough,’ he muttered as he saw Moodie approach.
‘The Queen mourns for her husband,’ the chaplain squeaked.
‘Does she?’
Ruthven quipped.
‘How can she?’
‘What do you mean?’
Benjamin turned as quick as a  top, his eyes sharp and questioning.
‘What do you mean, Ruthven?’
‘I have heard stories, Master Daunbey.’
Ruthven nodded towards the church.
‘They say King James was not killed at Flodden and that corpse belongs to someone who merely looks like him.’
‘Is that possible?’
I asked.
Ruthven pursed his lips.
‘It's possible,’ he whispered.
‘First, we always see what we expect to see.
Secondly, the royal corpse was mangled; it had been in the hands of embalmers and above ground for four years.
Thirdly, at Flodden James dressed at least sixteen of his knights in royal armour and coat of arms.
God knows for what reason — he didn't lack courage.
And, finally, there were several knights of James's court who looked like him.’
He glanced up and saw Agrippa approaching.
‘That is all,’ he concluded.
I watched him walk away.
Benjamin, his arms folded, seemed lost in his own thoughts.
He waited until the smiling doctor had passed by.
‘An interesting story, Roger.
Do you believe it?’
‘According to Fabyan's Chronicle,’ I replied, airing my knowledge, ‘when Henry IV fought at Shrewsbury against Hotspur, he dressed several of his knights in royal armour.’
[Oh, by the way, I also told William Shakespeare that and other details.
You will read them in his play Henry IV.
Will was so grateful he said he would base one of the characters of that drama on me.
I think it is the Prince, though malicious tongues say it is Falstaff.
God knows, I have nothing in common with him!]
We could talk no longer.
Catesby was rapping out orders for us to mount and within the hour we had left St Mary Grace's, striking east for Canterbury.
Queen Margaret and Lady Carey rode in front of the cavalcade, shimmering in their heavy brocade dresses.
Alongside them rode Carey, Agrippa and Catesby, then us followed by the creaking carts and household minions.
Melford  and a group of archers fanned out before the cavalcade; they cleared the way of the usual merchants, traders, pedlars, students and hosts of vagabonds and beggars who cluster on every road like flies round a horse's arse.
At Canterbury Queen Margaret said prayers before the tomb of Thomas à Becket.
Lord, such a sight: the casket which held Becket's body was encased in sheets of solid gold and, over the years, devout pilgrims had brought sapphires, diamonds, pearls and small rubies to be fastened into the goldwork as homage to the saint.
Some of these gems were as large as goose eggs but the most precious was an exquisite diamond called the Regal of France.
It had such fire and brilliance that even when the church was dark this diamond glowed like a flame in the sanctuary.
[Old Henry put an end to all that.
The tomb was wrecked, the gold and silver went to his mint, and the Regal of France on to his large fat hand.
Why do I tell you this?
Well, the Regal of France caused murder, bloody intrigue and violent death.
But that was for the future — you can read about it in one of my journals.]
After Canterbury we took the old Roman Road into Hertfordshire, planning to stop at a royal manor, but the weather turned cold; blustery rain clouds sped in from the sea and we were forced to break our journey at one of the great taverns just outside Canterbury.
Melford soon cleared the chambers, telling the irate landlord to shut his mouth and present to the Exchequer, before the Feast of St John the Baptist, whatever bills we incurred.
I remember that night well as the evil we had to face gathered and drew closer.
We were all sitting in the great taproom.
It was dark and blustery outside and the flames of the candles danced, filling the room with moving shadows.
The meal was over, Queen Margaret and Lady Carey had withdrawn and we men sat around the large oaken table, drinking deeply from the wine bowl.
Ruthven had his cat with him, stroking it and muttering something — I could not tell whether he was talking to himself or his pet.
I noticed his comrades distanced themselves from him.
Indeed, rumours about Ruthven were rife — how he was a warlock because he was left-handed and talked to his cat.
Ruthven just ignored them.
[In those days, if you were a witch you were safe as long as you kept away from the common people: once I saw a group of villagers spread-eagle a warlock, drive a stake through his heart and bury him beneath a crossroads gibbet.]
Anyway, back to my companions in that darkened taproom: Catesby looked bright-eyed and flushed.
Moodie, more like a mouse than ever, nibbled at a bit of cheese.
There was ever-smiling Doctor Agrippa, hawk-visaged Carey, the thick coarsened face of Melford and, of course, Scawsby, his face sour as ever as if he had just broken wind and hoped no one would notice.
The conversation swirled, passing from one topic to another.
Now Benjamin and I, recalling the Cardinal's secret instructions, had decided to reveal Selkirk's verses as soon as the opportunity presented itself.
Benjamin indicated with meaningful glances at me that this stark, sombre evening was such an appropriate time.
He skilfully guided the conversation back to the sinister events surrounding Selkirk's death for the murder had affected everybody.
Oh, there had been speculation that Scawsby was wrong and the Scotsman had died because of some strange seizure.
Or again, that his death was the result of the Black Arts, and many sombre looks were directed at Doctor Agrippa, Ruthven and even Benjamin.
My master bore all this with his usual tolerance and bonhomie.
He had apparently recovered from his visit to Johanna, hiding his feelings behind the usual veil of secrecy.
Indeed, he had hardly referred to her except once as we passed through a small hamlet and had seen children baiting a poor, crazed woman by the crossroads.
Benjamin glanced sideways at me and grimaced despairingly.
However, he  had not forgotten Selkirk's death and, when we were alone, constantly speculated on how the Scotsman had been murdered and what his enigmatic rhyme could mean.
In that taproom he decided to push the matter further and Catesby gave him his chance.
‘If Selkirk was murdered,’ Sir Robert declared, ‘what was the reason?’
‘Master Daunbey should have found that out,’ Scawsby replied spitefully.
‘He questioned the wretch long enough,’ Carey barked.
Moodie squeaked in support whilst Ruthven just dismissed them all with one scathing look.
‘Oh, but I did,’ Benjamin announced.
‘You did what?’
Carey snapped.
‘I may not know how Selkirk died but I think I know why.’
‘Nonsense!’
Carey retorted.
‘What do you mean?’
‘Selkirk wrote a poem,’ Benjamin continued quietly.
‘Mere brainless chatter!’
Carey answered.
‘Oh, no,’ Benjamin whispered.
Outside the wind blustered and beat against the wooden shutters and the huge sign, swinging on its iron pole, creaked and groaned as if calling out across the darkened, rain-soaked meadows.
Benjamin closed his eyes and chanted aloud:
‘Three less than twelve should it be,
Or the King, no prince engendered he.
The lamb did rest,
In the falcon's nest.
The Lion cried,
Even though it died.
The truth Now Stands,
In the Sacred Hands,
Of the place which owns
Dionysius’ bones.’
Now, the Lord be my witness, Benjamin's words created a pool of watchful silence.
Ruthven pushed his hair wildly back from his face.
‘Repeat it, man!’ he whispered hoarsely.
Benjamin did while I glanced around.
Catesby and Agrippa sat impassive.
Moodie's face was a white blur in the candlelight.
Scawsby looked frightened, his eyes two small piss-holes.
Carey looked dumbstruck, Ruthven strangely excited, whilst even Melford leaned forward and watched Benjamin with amber cat-like eyes.
‘Do the words mean anything to anyone?’
Benjamin asked.
Ruthven cradled his cat and stroked the back of its head, his hand moving faster and faster across the animal's fur until it stirred restlessly and mewed in protest.
‘What else?’
Catesby asked.
‘What else did Selkirk tell you?’
‘He did not give me the poem,’ Benjamin replied.
‘I found it.
But once I asked him why he was in prison, and he muttered about his days at Le Coq d'Or tavern in Paris and said he was a prisoner because he could ‘count the days’.’
Ruthven suddenly rose as if to suppress some excitement inside him.
‘Oh, no!’ he hissed, speaking his secret thoughts aloud.
‘Selkirk was not as mad as he appeared.
I suspect he was in the Tower not because he could count the days but was privy to secrets which could rock thrones and topple crowns!’
He stood staring at us.
‘What do you mean?’
Melford snarled.
Ruthven's face paled.
He shook his head and quietly left the room.
After his departure, we all sat silent and uneasy about what to do next until Catesby cracked a joke and the conversation turned to other matters.
The next morning we left for Leicester.
I wondered once again what was so important about Selkirk.
What did his words mean?
Why was he killed?
Was the assassin now amongst us?
Would he strike again?
What did Ruthven  know?
What mysteries surrounded us?
A king who may not have died?
A royal corpse not buried?
A queen who now sought to return from her self-imposed exile?
The intrigue around the White Rose and the mysterious Les Blancs Sangliers?
I asked Benjamin but he just shook his head and pointed across to the dark fringes of the forest.
‘In there, Roger, spirits, witches, dwarfs, Robin Goodfellow and the terrifying boneless creatures lurk.
Perhaps Satan himself.’
Benjamin nodded towards our companions, now silent after a hard night's drinking.
‘Such terrors,’ he whispered, ‘pale compared to the demons which lurk in the mind of man and feed on the human spirit.’
I still remained puzzled as we travelled north.
The journey was uneventful enough; nights spent in some local hostelry, priory or convent where Queen Margaret's influence and the Cardinal's letters obtained us free food and clean but hard beds.
We crossed the silent wilderness north of London, the grass withering under a warm sun, and passed eventually into Leicestershire.
The weather became cooler under the influences of cold breezes from the frozen north, observed my master.
I hadn't any idea what he was talking about but I listened attentively to his description of lands I had never imagined, with their dark green forests, snowy slopes and frozen lakes.
Sometimes Benjamin would play on the lute he always carried, whilst I accompanied him on the rebec.
(Oh, yes, I had learnt to play this whilst spending a few months in a rotting gaol due to one of the many misunderstandings which plagued my life.)
The rest of our party were still silent and withdrawn, openly mistrustful of each other.
Memories of Selkirk's death might have receded slightly but the mystery still remained.
Sometimes we met other travellers and conversation with them enlivened the boredom: merchants, wandering friars, the occasional hunting party, clerics or landless  men looking for labour.
They constantly warned us of the danger of the roads, about the thieves and vagabonds who dressed in green or brown buckram and played Robin Hood in the dark forests or wastelands we passed through.
At other times my master, tired by the reticence of Agrippa and the others, continued his absorption with alchemy.
Both of us did try to draw Ruthven further on his outburst in the taproom but he openly scorned us.
He became withdrawn, chatting only to Moodie.
At last we turned off the main high road and approached the city of Leicester.
The mayor and civic dignitaries met us in a blaze of colour at Bow Bridge with the usual greetings and pleasantries.
My master studied the bridge carefully.
‘Roger,’ he whispered, ‘you know Richard III, the Great Usurper, passed over here on his route to Bosworth?
As he passed, his leg struck the side of the bridge and an old witch prophesied that when he returned his head would strike the same spot.’
Benjamin leaned closer.
‘Richard's naked corpse was brought back slung across a donkey.
Tonight we are to lodge at the Blue Boar inn near High Cross, the same tavern the Usurper rested at before Bosworth.
Now I suspect some villainy so when we get there, slip away.
Go to the Greyfriars Church, conceal yourself somewhere so you can watch a spot, a place in the Lady Chapel on the left side of the sanctuary.
Stay there as long as you can.
Only when it is dark should you leave — and be careful!
Whatever happens, just observe.’
That's what I liked about Benjamin, always kind and considerate, and of course he needn't have advised old Shallot to stay out of danger!
We wound our way through the cobbled streets of Leicester past the great, four-storeyed houses of the merchants, jutting out above us, and into the Newarks.
The great Blue Boar inn was a half-stone tavern mansion, its glazed horned windows stared out over the market place.
My master pulled me back, watching the riders mill around, paying particular  attention to the green-slimed horse trough in front of the Blue Boar.
[You know, of course, the Blue Boar was once called the White Boar but after Bosworth, they changed the colour from white to blue.
I once talked to an old retainer of the Usurper who claimed Richard hid five hundred pounds in gold in the great bed there.
I have been back to the tavern but have never found this treasure.]
Ah, well!
I took a wineskin and went through the alleys and byeways of Leicester to Greyfriars Church.
Inside it was cool and sombre, the pillars stretching up into the blackness, the nave and aisles silent except for the birds which nested under the eaves outside.
I genuflected before the winking sanctuary lamp and concealed myself in one of the side chapels.
From there I had a good view of a beautiful statue of the Madonna and Child lit by the flickering flames of candlelight, as well as of a small raised plinth of stone which I supposed marked the tomb of some notable.
I sat, dozed, slurped from the wineskin, said a few prayers and kept my eyes fastened on the Lady Chapel.
Some of the devout did come in; a mother and child, an old woman, and a dusty cloaked Franciscan.
I watched the light fade outside the windows as the church grew cold, sombre and eerie.
‘Hic est terriblis locus — this is a terrible place.’
The words were scrawled on the frontal of the marble high altar.
A terrible place indeed!
Night fell, the candle flames flickered out and the ghosts of the dead came back to their resting place (or so the old wives say), somewhere sacred, a fitting protection against the assaults of the demons.
The church door remained closed.
I shivered and cursed my master.
A lay brother came by, keys clanking.
He wanted to close the church so I made myself known, claiming I was making a pilgrimage in atonement for my sins.
He looked strangely at me, muttered something about coming back within the hour, and sauntered off.
I went back to my hiding place.
At last the door opened.
A dark, cowled figure came in and went up to stand in  the Lady Chapel.
I crouched down to hide behind a pillar, and watched.
The mysterious figure stared down at the tomb and then turned.
‘Roger Shallot!’
The voice was low and hollow.
‘Roger Shallot, I know you are there!’
Oh, Lord, my heart beat quicker and a sudden sweat drenched my body.
‘Shallot!’ the ghostly figure bellowed.
‘Come out!’
The voice echoed in the high arches of the church.
I came out, shaking with fright, and watched the cowled figure sweep towards me.
I saw a white hand draw back the hood and my master's innocent face grinned at me.
‘Benjamin Daunbey!’
I snarled.
‘My arse and thighs are sore from a day's hard riding.
I have lurked like some ghost in this cold, dank church, and now you appear, making a merry jest of it all!’
He laughed and clasped my hand.
‘Roger,’ he quipped, ‘you look as frightened as a gargoyle!
I'm sorry I scared you.’
He beckoned me closer.
‘Did you see anyone come in?
I mean, go to the tomb over there?
Pay their respects or place a white rose?’
I shook my head angrily.
‘Nothing, Master.
Why should they?’
He linked his arm through mine and we walked over to the tomb.
Benjamin tapped it gently with his boot.
‘Here, Roger, lie the mortal remains of King Richard III.
His body was brought back to Leicester after the battle of Bosworth Field and thrown into the horse trough at the Blue Boar.
The present King's father, his conscience pricked, had the corpse buried here and later erected this tomb.’
[Oh, by the way, when Bluff King Hal broke with Rome because he wanted to get amongst Boleyn's petticoats, the tomb was wrecked and Richard's corpse dumped into the River Stour.]
‘So, Master,’ I blurted out, ‘King Richard lies here?
What did you expect?’
Benjamin chewed on his lip and stared up into the darkness.
‘What did I expect?
Well, here we are in Leicester at the final resting place of the White Boar himself.
Members of Les Blancs Sangliers, the Guardians of the White Rose, are supposed to be amongst our party.
Yet no one comes here to pay their respects…’
He rubbed the side of his face.
‘I find that strange.’
He put an arm round my shoulder and walked me back towards the church door.
‘See, what do we have here, Roger?
A Scottish doctor murdered in the Tower.
Why?
Because he spoke riddles in verse, or because he didn't believe the story of Flodden?
What really happened at that battle?
Why did Queen Margaret re-marry so quickly?
Why does my good uncle send us to plead for her?’
He waved his hand.
‘There's a mystery here, Roger, something quite terrible.
I don't trust my uncle, and I certainly don't trust Queen Margaret!’
‘And Doctor Agrippa?’
I asked.
Benjamin let his arm fall away.
‘I'm not sure,’ he murmured.
‘Who is spying on whom?
Agrippa is reputedly the agent of the Cardinal, as Carey, Moodie and Catesby are of Queen Margaret.
But whom do they really work for?
Is it in truth the Cardinal, or our gracious sovereign, or the Earl of Angus?
Or even some other foreign potentate…?
After all, the present Regent of Scotland is by education a Frenchman.
He, too, might be involved in this macabre, mysterious dance.’
We left Leicester and reached Royston Manor late the next afternoon.
As a weak sun died and the shadows closed in around us, we saw the high pointed gables and turreted walls of the fortified manor house beckoning darkly to us over the treetops.
Royston was a cold, sombre place which blighted our spirits as soon as we glimpsed it.
Benjamin and I had been entertaining the group with a French madrigal, my deep bass a smooth foil to my master's well-modulated tenor: a stupid little song about a maid who lost her wealth and her virtue in the great city.
Queen Margaret declared the sound was sweet and despatched a small purse of silver in token of her thanks.
As we entered the main causeway which snaked through the trees to the manor's main door, the sight of Royston killed the song on our lips and the joy in our hearts.
My master deepened my unease with a story about the stark, square building's previous owners, the Templars; the monks of war who, two centuries previously, had been brutally crushed by the papacy and the French crown because of their alleged involvement in witchcraft, dabbling in the Black Arts as well as such unnatural vices as sodomy and the worship of a huge black cat.
As we dismounted and the grooms hurried about gathering the reins of our horses, Benjamin continued his low-voiced description of the fallen order.
(Sometimes, I think, my master liked to frighten me.)
‘Do you know, Roger, the Templars worshipped a mysterious image, a dreadful face printed on a cloth.’
At the time I smiled wanly and wished Benjamin would leave me alone.
[I only mention this because he was in fact wrong.
The Templars were crushed but some of them remained as a secret coven and I have crossed swords with them over the years.
I have seen their dreadful face and the stories are true — strong men have lost their reason and wits once they have looked upon it.
My chaplain begs me to say more but I shan't satisfy him!]
The inside of Royston Manor was equally grim: it usually stood empty, being used by the court as a place to rest during royal progresses and then left in the tender care of an old steward and a bustling, aged retainer.
The steward answered Agrippa's insistent knocking and took us into the main hallway.
The house was built in a square, with a broad staircase sweeping up into the darkness.
At the top were two galleries, one to the left, the other to the right, which turned again to form a perfect square.
On each gallery were chambers and our group was directed into these, servants being left to sleep in the hall, buttery or stables behind the manor house.
Sconce torches were fixed in the wall but only a few of these were lit.
Now and again we came across the signs and secret  symbols of the Templar Order: huge black crosses, thinly covered with whitewash, whilst the arms and escutcheons of long dead knights still hung high on the walls.
The chambers themselves were bleak, containing truckle beds, a few pieces of furniture, a table and a bowl and jug for washing.
The windows were mere arrow-slits now blocked by wooden shutters; the air was so damp with a pervasive chill that Queen Margaret insisted fires be lit in her rooms before she retired for the night.
A cold meal was hastily served, a few words exchanged, and everyone speedily retired as Catesby insisted that on the morrow we would rise early as there was a great deal of business to be done.
Now it is important for me to tell the story correctly.
At first there was a period of confusion as porters, cursing and sweating, brought up bags, chests and coffers.
Ruthven was placed in the chamber next to ours and came upstairs just after us.
I heard him lock the chamber door and, a few minutes later, the mewing of his cat scratching at the wood for admittance.
I went out into the gallery, Ruthven's door opened, the Scotsman came out, picked up the cat, smiled at me and went inside.
I heard the key turn.
I was going to knock for I was still intrigued by him but Benjamin called me so I let the matter rest.
We retired to bed but I couldn't sleep.
I felt restless, uneasy in that haunted, creaking manor house.
My terrors would have increased if I had known how once again Murder was stalking us, in that Godforsaken place.
5
We were up early next morning.
A heavy mist had fallen, drowning the countryside in its white vapour and making Royston Manor even more sinister.
We breakfasted in the dingy Great Hall.
Queen Margaret came in, leaning heavily on Catesby's arm.
The desultory conversation faded.
Catesby looked around.
‘Where's Ruthven?
I ordered everyone to rise early.’
He glanced across at me.
‘Shallot, be so courteous as to tell Master Ruthven we await him here.’
Carey heard this as he marched in, his bad temper apparent.
‘Yes, go and tell him.
Hurry up!’ he snapped.
Now I would have stood my ground, I wasn't a dog to be sent running hither and thither, but Benjamin added his plea with his eyes.
‘Melford, go with him,’ Catesby added.
We went back up the staircase and I hammered on the door.
There was no answer though I heard the faint mewing of the cat.
We tried the door but it was locked.
‘Is anything wrong?’
Carey called from the hall below.
‘No answer,’ Melford shouted back.
‘Was Ruthven seen this morning?’
Carey hurried up, then Catesby, followed by Moodie and a worried servant.
‘Try the door again,’ Carey ordered.
Benjamin joined us.
We knocked, shouted and pushed.
Catesby instructed us to take a bench leaning against the far wall and, though the space was narrow, we began to  pound at the door like besiegers breaking into a castle.
The old steward came hurrying up, huffing and puffing, but Carey snarled at him so he slunk away.
One final shove and the buckled door flew back on its leather hinges.
I'll describe things as they were: Ruthven was slumped across the desk, his head on his arm, his face a whitish-blue, mouth open, eyes staring but sightless.
In the far corner, the cat cowered as if it knew it was in the presence of death.
On the table near Ruthven stood an empty pewter goblet.
Carey lifted the body carefully.
‘Dead,’ he muttered.
‘Dead as a stone!
Place him on the bed.’
We carried him across, arranging the cold, lifeless form, trying to impose some dignity for already rigor mortis had set in.
The look on the dead man's face was ghastly, as if some phantom of the night had stopped his heart.
I wondered where the soul had gone.
Was it still with us?
Do the souls of the dead stand behind some invisible mirror, watching us who cannot see them?
‘Look!’
Moodie suddenly yelled.
He pointed to the bolster at the top of the bed where a small, white rose lay like some gift waiting to be presented.
We all stood staring at the flower as if it were responsible for Ruthven's death.
‘What's the matter?’
Agrippa, accompanied by Scawsby, stood in the doorway.
Melford pointed to the corpse on the bed and the flower still lying there.
Scawsby hurried over, full of his own importance.
The fool failed to realise the significance of the white rose, but instead peered down at Ruthven.
‘A seizure!’ he announced.
‘Quite common in a man of choleric humour.’
Melford snorted, mocking him.
Agrippa smiled, going up beside the doctor and picking up the white rose.
‘I think not, good physician,’ he whispered.
‘Master Ruthven was murdered and the assassin left his token.’
He twirled the rose between his fingers as he looked  around.
‘The murderer is here in Royston.
The question is, who?’
We just stared back.
The last time I had seen a white rose had been in that filthy room in the Tower.
My master stared at the flower curiously before bending over Ruthven's corpse.
He examined the eyes, tongue and nails of the dead man minutely, taking deep sniffs at the gaping mouth.
‘Master Ruthven was poisoned,’ he declared.
‘But how?’
He walked over and picked up the pewter goblet, sniffing at it carefully.
‘Nothing,’ he murmured, ‘but the faint tinge of claret.
Who brought this up?’
Agrippa shrugged.
‘Ruthven did so himself.
I saw him as he left the table last night.’
‘I smell no potion,’ Benjamin replied.
He turned to Scawsby.
‘Master Physician,’ he asked tactfully, ‘you would agree?’
Scawsby took the wine cup and held it under his long, arrogant nose.
‘Nothing,’ he answered.
Agrippa took the cup from him, rubbed his finger around it to collect the dregs and, despite the gasps of Moodie and Carey, licked it noisily.
‘Correct, Master Daunbey, no poison.’
‘Are you an authority on poisons, Master Daunbey?’
Melford asked sharply.
‘No,’ Benjamin replied tartly.
‘But as Physician Scawsby will testify, as Clerk to the Justices I have viewed enough corpses and have some knowledge of…’
His voice trailed away as Doctor Agrippa spread his hands.
‘Yet,’ Agrippa interrupted briskly, ‘Ruthven was poisoned, even though he ate and drank only what we all did yesterday evening.
So, did anyone else visit him in his room?’
A chorus of denials greeted his question and, because of my sleepless night, I could confirm these.
I had heard no human footfalls in the corridor.
Carey stepped forward.
‘So Ruthven locks himself in his chamber, he visits no one and no one visits him, but the next morning he is found poisoned and a white rose discovered lying on the bed.’
‘Just like Selkirk,’ Agrippa added flatly.
‘Are there any secret passages?’
Moodie squeaked.
Catesby glanced despairingly at the ceiling; still, the old steward was summoned and questioned.
The man was frightened, unable to tear his eyes away from Ruthven's corpse, but he shook his head.
‘No tunnels,’ he declared roundly.
‘No passageways or trap doors, but there are ghosts,’ he said defiantly.
‘The monk knights still walk the corridors.’
Melford sneered in derision.
‘Did Master Ruthven go down to the kitchen or buttery or ask for any victuals to be sent up?’ asked Catesby.
The old man shook his head and was dismissed.
‘Is there anything else?’ my master asked.
‘What do you mean?’ snapped Carey.
‘Something in the room perhaps?’
A brief search was made but nothing untoward was found.
Ruthven's ink-stained quill was lying on the floor.
My master picked it up, scrutinised it carefully then threw it on the table.
‘A mystery,’ Agrippa announced.
He glared round at all of us.
‘But someone here is a murderer who knows how Ruthven died!’
He sighed and looked at Carey.
‘Enough of this, Queen Margaret must be informed.’
We all trooped downstairs, my master staying behind to scrutinise the room once more then joining me outside, shaking his head.
‘Doctor Agrippa is right,’ he whispered.
‘A true mystery.
How can a man, hale and hearty before he retired, be found poisoned the next morning, when no one visited him and he remained locked in his room?’
He looked at me sharply.
‘You saw him?’
I nodded.
‘You heard me,’ I replied.
‘He opened his chamber door, smiled at me and picked up his cat.’
‘So how was he poisoned?’
The question dominated our discussions as we gathered in what used to be the long Chapter Room of the Knights Templar.
Queen Margaret sat at the head of the cracked, dangerously shaky table whilst Catesby ordered benches to be brought in for the rest.
The King's sister was white-faced and tight-lipped, obviously finding it difficult to control her anger.
‘Someone here,’ she snapped, her eyes darting round us, ‘murdered Ruthven!
Someone here is also a traitor, guilty of the blackest treason.
Why does the House of York plague us with their romantic dreams and stupid ambitions?
The assassins, in their temerity, even left a white rose to mock us!
Doctor Agrippa…’ her voice trailed off.
The good doctor beamed around.
‘We must account for our movements,’ he said.
‘Each and every one of us.’
His prompting was summarily answered.
No one had approached Ruthven.
Both Master Benjamin and myself had heard nothing amiss and Moodie, who had been in the chamber adjoining Ruthven's on the other side, could also confirm this.
‘How was Ruthven?’
Catesby asked.
‘I mean, in the days before his death?
Did he say or do anything untoward?’
He looked around.
‘To whom did he talk?’
‘He talked to Moodie,’ Melford observed.
‘Well?’
Agrippa asked.
The mouse-faced chaplain became even more agitated than usual.
‘Ruthven kept to himself,’ he stammered.
‘He was distant, lost in his own thoughts.’
‘What did he talk about?’
‘About Selkirk's murder.
He found the fellow's mutterings strange.’
‘Anything else?’
Moodie licked his lips and looked nervously at Queen  Margaret.
Then, placing his hands on the table, he looked down, refusing to meet anyone's eyes.
‘We also talked about the days before Flodden — the doings of the late King and the gossip of the court.’
‘What gossip?’
Queen Margaret asked smoothly.
‘Nothing, My Lady.
Just memories…recollections of happier days.
I assure you, that was all.’
‘The rose?’
Benjamin asked abruptly.
‘What about it?’
Agrippa retorted.
‘Well, there are no roses here!’
‘There were in Canterbury,’ Scawsby pointed out.
‘Small, white rosebuds, the type which come late in the year.’
‘So,’ Benjamin continued, ‘the murderer planned Ruthven's death, then…’
He let his comment hang like a rope in the air.
‘There is no doubt,’ Agrippa intervened silkily, ‘that Ruthven died by the same hand and in the same way as Selkirk in the Tower.’
He took us all in with one sombre glance.
‘How Ruthven was murdered, and why, is a mystery.’
He looked at Scawsby.
‘There was no food or wine in the room?’
The old quack shook his head.
‘And you, Shallot, were the last person to see him alive?’
‘And I heard no one come up!’
I snapped.
Agrippa took a deep breath, placing both hands on the table before him.
‘Is it possible, Master Physician, for poison to be administered in slow drops?’
Scawsby grimaced.
‘I suppose so, but that would be dangerous.
The poisoner would have to infuse the potions many times and, if he was caught…’
‘Is it possible,’ Catesby grated, ‘for a poison to be slow acting?’
Scawsby smiled peevishly.
‘I have never heard of such a potion.
And, even if one existed, Ruthven would surely have felt the effects before he retired.’
‘Master Scawsby is correct,’ Benjamin added.
‘Ruthven was meant to die in that room, behind a locked and barred door.’
He waved a bony finger in the air.
‘Remember, the door was locked and bolted from the inside.
The assassin is subtle and clever.
No one heard him come up but he must have got in for Ruthven to die and the white rose to be found.’
‘And you, Master Daunbey, were in the chamber next to him,’ Lady Carey retorted.
She glanced balefully at me.
‘Your servant was the last man to see him alive.
Isn't it strange that you, Benjamin, were the last person to see Selkirk alive!’
‘I am sure,’ Queen Margaret intervened smoothly, ‘no suspicion of foul play can fall on the Cardinal's nephew.’
She glanced angrily at Lady Carey, then smiled falsely at us.
But, oh, that was a clever move by Carey!
The damage had been done because when you fling dirt, some sticks.
The rest of the group stared at us like a hanging jury before sentence is passed.
Benjamin smiled as if savouring a secret joke.
‘Lady Carey is correct in some of what she says but her logic is faulty,’ he commented.
‘Ruthven died because he knew something.
He was probably the only one, besides the murderer, to understand all or some of Selkirk's verses.’
He leaned forward.
‘The murderer is definitely here.
I wonder which of us has Yorkist sympathies.
Melford?’
The mercenary stirred like a cat alerted to danger.
‘What is it, Daunbey?’
‘Didn't your family fight for the White Rose once?’
The mercenary smirked.
‘Yes, but that's true of everyone here.
Isn't it, Carey?’
The old soldier fidgeted as memories stirred.
Accusations grew heated, voices were raised.
The sum total of charge and counter charge was that every person in the room, besides myself and Benjamin, had some affinity or link with the House of York and the cause of  the White Rose.
Queen Margaret sat back in her chair watching disdainfully.
Catesby looked furious whilst Doctor Agrippa, eyes closed, arms folded, sat like some benevolent friar after a hearty meal.
At last he stirred.
Drawing a long, thin stiletto from his belt, he rapped the top of the table.
‘Come, come!’ he shouted.
‘You are like children playing a game.
These angry words prove nothing.
Ruthven could have been killed by magic.’
He grinned down at me.
‘But we are here on other business.’
‘Master Daunbey, we have lost enough time over Ruthven's death.’
Catesby interrupted.
‘Have your bags packed.
You are to leave within the hour.
The steward will provide you with a local guide.’
Benjamin tugged at my sleeve.
We rose, bowed to the head of the table and left our companions to their baleful conjecturing.
Benjamin skipped lightly up the stairs but, instead of going to our own chamber, took me into Ruthven's.
The corpse still lay sheeted on the bed.
Benjamin scrutinised the room, especially the objects on the desk, picking up the quill, the ink and paper.
He sniffed at each, shook his head and put them back.
‘What are you looking for, Master?’
‘I don't really know,’ he replied.
He went across to the bed and pulled back the sheet.
He scrutinised Ruthven's corpse, paying particular attention to the hands and closely examining the callous on Ruthven's third finger.
Again he sniffed carefully.
‘No poison there,’ he whispered.
He prised open Ruthven's mouth.
I stood behind him, trying to conceal my fear and distaste.
Surely the dead man's ghost would object to this?
Was his soul still earthbound?
Would it stay here forever or be freed only when his murderer was brought to justice?
Benjamin examined the yellowing teeth.
He took a small pin from the sleeve of his doublet and began to scrape between the yellow stumps until he extracted small, grey fragments still wet with mucus.
Benjamin held the pin up to the light, staring at these scrapings.
‘What is it, master?’
I whispered.
Benjamin shook his head.
‘I don't know.
It could be food, perhaps some bread.’
‘What are you doing, Benjamin?’
Both my master and I turned quickly.
Doctor Agrippa and Sir Robert Catesby stood in the doorway.
Benjamin beamed.
‘Nothing, good doctor.
Lady Carey insinuated I might be involved in Ruthven's death.
I thought I might find something to show I was not.’
‘And have you?’
Catesby asked.
Unobserved, Benjamin let the pin drop to the floor.
‘No, not at all.’
Catesby waved us forward.
‘Then come!’
We went into our own chamber.
Catesby, closing the door behind him, told us to sit.
‘Forget Ruthven's death,’ he began.
‘The Scottish envoys will soon land at Yarmouth.
They have safe conducts and passes to travel to Nottingham where you will meet them.
Queen Margaret's second husband, the Earl of Angus, will be present but the delegation is led by Lord d'Aubigny, one of the Regent's lieutenants.
You will treat with him about Queen Margaret's return to Scotland.
You will offer nothing, but listen most carefully to what is said.
We have arranged for you to be there on the Feast of St Cecilia, the twenty-second of November.
However, before that, in two days’ time, on the Feast of St Leo the Great, you will meet Irvine, My Lord Cardinal's spy, at Coldstream Priory which lies about thirty miles from here.
Irvine's information may well be given in cipher.
You will memorise the message and bring it back to me and Doctor Agrippa.’
‘Why the secrecy?’
I asked.
‘Why can't Irvine come here?
Why are the Scottish envoys coming by sea?
And why Nottingham?
Moreover,’ I glanced sideways at my master, ‘surely the Scottish nobles will want to treat with  someone more important than the Cardinal's nephew and,’I added bitterly, ‘his manservant.’
Agrippa smirked.
‘Shallot!’ he murmured.
‘Use your head.
Irvine cannot come here — there is a traitor and a murderer in the Queen's party.
Despite Lady Carey's accusations, you and Benjamin,’ he glanced slyly at Catesby, ‘are the only ones above suspicion.
Moreover, if the Lord Cardinal trusts you implicitly, so will Irvine.
As for the Scottish envoys…first, a journey by land is too dangerous; secondly, our good King Henry believes this is a Scottish matter and does not wish to intervene officially; finally, Queen Margaret and her household, on the other hand, do not wish to be seen to have anything to do with the men who drove her from Scotland.’
Agrippa leaned closer and I smelt that strange perfume he always wore.
‘So, Shallot, the pieces of the puzzle fall into place.
The Scots will talk with Master Benjamin.
They know he acts on the personal authority of the Cardinal.’
‘And the rest?’
Benjamin spoke up.
‘You all stay at Royston?’
Catesby grinned sheepishly.
‘Unfortunately, yes, though Melford and I will leave for Nottingham within the hour to ensure the castle is ready for the Scottish envoys.’
Catesby smiled.
‘You have three days to reach Coldstream Priory.
As for Ruthven…’ he turned and lifted the latch of our chamber door, ‘as Scripture says: ‘…
Leave the dead to bury the dead…’
Eh, good doctor?’
And without further ado they slipped out of the chamber.
We took our leave of a sombre-visaged Queen Margaret and within the hour the steward's guide was leading us out of Royston Manor and into the mist-shrouded countryside.
Catesby and Melford had already departed, riding hard for Nottingham, leaving Agrippa, the Careys, Moodie and the old quack Scawsby at Royston.
Our guide was a dour-faced, taciturn, little man who had as much chatter and wit as a dumb-struck oaf though  he knew the bridle paths and trackways of Leicestershire like the back of his hand.
It was a strange journey.
The heavy mist rarely lifted but closed in like a cold, clinging cloud around us.
We had the eerie impression that we were the only people alive and the clip-clop of our horses' hooves was the last remaining sound under heaven.
Naturally, my master and I reflected on what had happened at Royston.
‘I'm puzzled, Roger,’ Benjamin kept repeating.
‘Two most ingenious murders: both Selkirk and Ruthven poisoned in chambers locked from the inside.
’ He sighed, his breath hanging like a cloud in the icy air.
‘Yet no trace of poison, no one enters their chamber…most subtle, most subtle!’
I could only agree and wondered if Agrippa's joke about magic might have some truth in it.
I also guiltily recollected Lady Carey's insidious remarks: somehow or other Benjamin was always close to the murdered person.
Was he the assassin?
I wondered.
Did Benjamin carry secret orders from his uncle that Selkirk and Ruthven were to die for the common good?
If so, who would be next?
I dismissed the thoughts as too disturbing and concentrated instead on Selkirk's poem.
The first and last lines especially puzzled me.
Benjamin could give no enlightenment but speculated on what news Irvine might bring.
‘Perhaps he will provide privy information which will explain it all,’ he observed.
I shook my head.
I had the uneasy feeling it would not be so simple.
Moreover, since leaving Royston I was becoming concerned that we were being followed.
Oh, I had no real evidence but a certain wariness, a feeling of unease.
Perhaps it was only the effect of the cold, clinging mist but now and again I would catch a sound as if another rider were covertly following our route.
We stopped and sheltered in a farmer's barn for the night and the following morning, misty as ever, did little to assuage my suspicions.
‘What's the matter, Roger?’
Benjamin asked, peering closely at me, his head deep in its woollen cowl.
In front of us, the guide also stopped.
I listened to the echoes of our horses' hoofbeats fade away, my ears straining.
‘Master, we are being followed!’
‘Are you sure, Roger?’
‘As certain as I am that Queen Margaret has two tits!
’ I observed crossly.
Benjamin grinned wryly and listened with me.
I thought I heard something but then the oaf of a guide urged his horse back, shouting out questions which would have roused the dead.
Benjamin shook his head.
‘Nothing, Roger,’ he commented.
‘Perhaps the ghosts of Royston?’
We continued on our way and reached Coldstream Priory just after dark, only being admitted within the convent walls after a great deal of shouting and argument.
We waited in the yard until the lady prioress herself came out, a strange woman and rather young for such high office.
She was not clad in the garb of her order but attired in a pale blue dress trimmed with the copper hue of squirrel fur.
Her head-dress was old-fashioned, two veils of pleated lawn falling down either side of her heart-shaped face and fastened under the chin by a bejewelled gorget.
Her skin was as white as milk, her eyes were green flecked with amber, and rather slanted.
She looked slyly at my master, just like Queen Margaret had, though she greeted us civilly enough, ordering servants to take our guide and the baggage off to the guest house while she entertained us with cups of wine, fresh-baked bread and huge bowls of hot spicy broth.
The prioress read the Cardinal's letters of introduction and listened to my master's questions about the arrangements for our meeting with Irvine.
She just shook her pretty head and looked coyly at us.
‘No such man has come here yet.
Nor have we any warning of his arrival.’
‘But My Lord Cardinal said the man would be here  today, the Feast of St Leo the Great,’ replied Benjamin.
The prioress pursed her lips.
‘No other man has approached our convent walls, nor have travellers or pedlars reported anyone on the roads.
’ She smiled.
‘Perhaps he has been delayed.
Perhaps he will arrive tomorrow.’
Tomorrow came and went, ‘creeping by’ as Master Shakespeare would put it, but no Irvine arrived.
We whiled away our time in the convent's comfortable guest house.
Our clothes were laundered and, morning, noon and eve, we were invited to partake of fresh-cooked meals and wines even a king would have envied.
A strange place, Coldstream Priory: no bells for divine office, just a rather hasty Mass said before noon.
The nuns themselves gossiped freely in and out of church.
Indeed, as my poet friend would put it, any regulations regarding their life seemed to be honoured more in the breach than in the observance.
My master said they had a splendid library, as well they might, but the only work I saw the nuns do was clever and intricate embroidery of curtains, cloths and napkins.
The prioress seemed to regard my master as her chief concern.
She solicitously asked if all was well, sending constant messages to enquire if there was anything lacking, or inviting him to walk with her in the sweet-smelling orchard outside the convent church.
My master's main concern was Irvine's non-appearance and when darkness fell on our third day at Coldstream, we both walked out on to the convent wall, peering into the darkness as if willing him to appear.
The lady prioress joined us.
She pressed close to my master, stroking his hand gently with one of her fingers.
‘Master Benjamin,’ she said, ‘Irvine will arrive tomorrow perhaps.
Come — a glass of wine laced with nutmeg?’
My master refused but I cheerfully accepted.
The lady prioress glowered at me, shrugged, and with ill grace took me back to her own chamber across the cloister garden  where she poured me the smallest goblet of wine I had ever seen.
She then busied herself around the room, the implication quite clear: I was to drink up and get out as quickly as I could.
I enjoyed making her wait but, just before I left, she called over to me, a false smile on her pretty, hypocritical face.
‘Roger, your master — he is a true man?’
‘Yes, My Lady,’ I replied.
The prioress caught the tip of her tongue between her sharp, white teeth, her eyes sparkling with anticipation.
‘A true stallion,’ I continued.
‘A great romancer where the damsels are concerned but…’
‘But what?’ she asked sharply.
‘At times he can be shy and perhaps…’
‘Perhaps what?’ she snapped impatiently.
I nodded towards the bedchamber which I could glimpse through a half open door.
‘My Lady, I think he is as taken with you as you are with him.
Perhaps if My Lady were to wait for him tonight, there in the dark, he might recite some love poetry…a sonnet he has composed?’
The prioress smiled, turned away and opened a small coffer.
She threw a clinking bag at me.
‘If you can arrange this, Shallot, there will be another purse in the morning.’
‘Oh, all My Lady has to do,’ I replied with a bow, ‘is leave a candle here burning in the window.
’ I pointed to the high sill which ran just beneath the horn-glazed covering.
‘My master will take it as a sign, a beacon to lead him the way you wish.’
I scampered out of the door.
Master Benjamin was still on the convent wall, peering into the darkness.
I ran up to the guest room, stripped naked and washed myself with a wet rag.
I rubbed some of the fragrant perfume my master used into my neck and cheeks, borrowed his best cambric shirt, cloak and hood, and slunk back to the courtyard.
I waited a while, hidden in the shadows, watching the convent settle for the night.
Ah, yes, the  lady prioress was also preparing herself.
A candle appeared at her window, its flickering flame a beacon of welcome.
I slipped quietly across the courtyard, pushed open the door and stepped into the darkness.
I quenched the candle flame with my fingers and slid into the bed chamber.
Praise be, the lady prioress had no light or candle there.
My eyes grew accustomed to the darkness and I glimpsed her dark shape on the bed, her long hair falling down to her shoulders.
I slipped into the great four-poster bed, whispered a few French endearments I had learnt from a wench and set to with a will.
The prioress may have been a lady but she welcomed my rough embraces with groans and shrieks of pleasure.
Her body was succulent, slender and smooth.
I confess she was one of the merriest tumbles I have ever had.
[Oh, dear, there goes my chaplain again, tut-tutting and shaking his noddle!
The little hypocrite!
Does he have to be reminded about his long meetings with apple-cheeked Maude the milkmaid at the back of my stables?
She certainly came out more red-faced than she went in!
He says I lie; the prioress would know the difference between me and Benjamin.
He's wrong.
Lust, like love, blinds the eyes, otherwise red-cheeked Maude would never let him within a mile of her!
Ah, good, he has stopped shaking his head.
So, back to the prioress…]
‘Oh, sweet heaven!
Oh, sweet heaven!’ she cried as I entered her, my weapon as hard as any spear.
Oh, what a night!
Two, three times, I had my pleasure of her before kissing her roundly on the cheeks, slapping her on the bottom and whispering a fond adieu.
Next morning a heavy mist had blown in, covering the land with a blanket of gloomy silence.
It swirled amongst the convent buildings, dulling the spirit — even mine after such a riotous night.
I rose early, pleasantly tired.
My master was still asleep, as he had been the previous evening when I returned from my love tryst.
I dressed quickly and hurried across the courtyard to the refectory.
This was  reached by outside stairs and some of the nuns, ever hungry, were already filing in.
I heard one comment tossed back.
‘Such a gargoyle!
A veritable troll of a man!’
I wondered who this unbecoming fellow was and hung my head in embarrassment when another replied.
‘Yes, his name is Roger.
Isn't it strange such a handsome master employs such an ugly servant!’
Of course, nuns have no finesse, no real appreciation of the true beauty which can lie beneath the surface.
I took my place in the refectory at a separate table near the dais and watched the lady prioress sweep in.
Ha face was pale, her eyes dark-rimmed, and this assuaged some of my pain at the nun's silly chatter.
Master Benjamin joined me, gaily prophesying that the mist would soon lift and it would be another splendid day.
Out of the corner of my eye I noticed how the prioress kept sending him frowning glances at being ignored, interspersed with coy smiles in an attempt to provoke him into some loving conspiracy about the events of the previous night.
Her love sighs were suddenly interrupted by a commotion outside, the screams of women mingling with the deep gruff shouts of some of the convent's labourers and porters.
The prioress, lips pursed tight, hurried out and we followed.
In the courtyard below, surrounded by nuns and other members of the convent, sat a strange-looking man on horseback.
His hair was dyed orange and his white face made ghostly by his dyed russet beard.
He wore a cap of rabbit skin and a dirty moleskin jerkin to which small bells had been sewn.
The prioress muttered he was a pedlar, but the real source of the commotion was the corpse slumped across the fellow's sumpter pony.
As Benjamin and I followed the prioress down, the pedlar shouted in a tongue I could not understand.
‘What's he saying?’
Benjamin asked.
‘He found the corpse,’ she replied archly over her shoulder, ‘a few hours’journey from the convent.’
Benjamin went across and pulled back the dead man's  head.
I glimpsed sandy hair, a white-grey face, glazed open eyes and slack jaw.
What really drew my attention, however, was the ugly, purple-red gash which ran from ear to ear.
The prioress chatted to the pedlar in a strange tongue.
‘It may be the man you've been waiting for, Master Benjamin,’ she called across.
‘John Irvine.’
The prioress instructed the porter to take the body into the nearby infirmary, ordered the crowd to disperse and asked one of the sisters to extend hospitality to the pedlar.
Inside the low ceilinged, lime-washed sick room the corpse was laid on a straw-covered bed.
He had been a young man, quite personable until someone slashed his throat.
Benjamin stared as if the victim had been well known to him.
We noticed the man's wallet had been cut away from the belt round his waist.
‘Robbers!’ the lady prioress murmured.
‘The roads are plagued with them.
The pedlar found the corpse hidden under some bushes.’
I knelt down and went through the dead man's clothing.
Sure enough I found what I was looking for: a concealed pocket inside the quilted jerkin.
This contained cunningly inlaid pouches holding a little gold and some silver (which I pocketed to have Masses said for the poor man's soul), and a small roll of parchment.
On top of this was scrawled the man's name ‘John Irvine’ and a list of victuals and wine bought from his own pocket at a tavern called the Sea Barque near the Town Wall in Leicester.
I walked back to Master Benjamin.
‘It is Irvine,’ I said.
‘Then God rest his soul!’ he answered.
‘Roger, we have no need to delay here further.
We must hasten back to Royston.’
Behind us, the lady prioress gasped.
‘Don't you wish to stay, Master Benjamin?’
She came closer, her skirts swaying and rustling.
‘You are not happy with our hospitality?’ she asked archly.
‘My Lady,’ he replied, ‘the food and wine were  excellent.’
And, spinning on his heel, he left the woman standing open-mouthed behind him.
We summoned our guide, packed our saddle bags and, within the hour, had our horses saddled and ready to leave.
The lady prioress, a pure wool cloak wrapped around her, came down to bid us adieu.
Benjamin just smiled, raised her white fingers to his lips, kissed them daintily and, like some chivalrous knight, kicked his horse into a canter, almost knocking his would-be-love to the ground.
I was less gallant.
Ignoring the expression of shock on the woman's face, I stretched out my hand.
‘My Lady,’ I said, ‘you promised me another purse!’
She glared at me, dug beneath her cloak and pushed a purse (much leaner than the one she had given me the night before) into my hand.
‘Pimp!’ she hissed.
‘Oh, sweet heaven!
Oh, sweet heaven!’
I mimicked in a falsetto voice.
The woman's face became pale, her eyes ever widening pools of anger.
I laughed and set spurs to my horse and thundered through the convent gates as fast as a deer.
I was surprised to see Benjamin keep to a swift gallop, not reining in until a good mile separated us from the convent.
Eventually we stopped to walk the horses, the guide going ahead.
‘Why the haste, Master?’
I asked.
He shook his head and stared up at the sun now breaking through the blanket of mist.
‘An evil place, that convent,’ he murmured.
My stomach lurched.
Did my master know?
‘An evil place,’ he repeated.
He stared at me.
‘Irvine was probably murdered there.
The lady prioress had a hand in it!’
I gazed back at him, dumbfounded.
‘First,’ Benjamin continued, ‘When we arrived at Coldstream, the prioress said she had not seen Irvine.’
‘But the pedlar could have told her.’
‘How would he know?
His wallet had been taken and it was you who found his concealed pocket.
Before you  did, the prioress called him: ‘John Irvine’.
So she seemed to have recognised the corpse and knew his christian name.
I didn't tell her that, did you?’
I shook my head.
‘But what makes you think he was murdered in the convent?’
I asked.
‘Ah, that's my second point.
When I was on the parapet of the convent wall I saw fresh horse dung lying near the main gate; it was not from our mounts, but the lady prioress said no one had approached the convent.’
Benjamin brought his hand up to emphasise his point.
‘Did you notice the cloister garden?’ he continued.
‘The ground was covered with a fine white sand.
There were traces of that on Irvine's boots.
Finally, the points on his leggings had been tied up wrongly as if done by someone else in a hurry.’
Benjamin squinted at me.
‘I suspect poor Irvine was murdered in that convent when he loosed his trews, either to relieve himself or…’
His voice faded away.
I felt a spasm of fear and rubbed my own throat, plucking greedily at the skin.
Benjamin was probably right.
Irvine had been killed, not preparing for a piss but to carry out the same amorous duties I had.
I silently vowed I would not be returning to Coldstream.
‘We could go back,’ Benjamin muttered, as if he read my thoughts.
‘But, of course,’ he continued, ‘that would prove nothing.
The lady prioress would deny the charge, and call in the sheriff or some local justice she has in her power.
Anyway,’ he sighed, peering away into the mist, ‘we have very little evidence.’
‘And now, Master,’ I answered, ‘once again we go back with our tails between our legs!
Selkirk was killed before he could reveal anything.
Ruthven's dead, and now Irvine.’
I had a wild thought but dismissed it: Had Benjamin killed Irvine?
Had he gone out one dark night and ambushed the fellow?
‘What are you thinking, Roger?’
‘I am thinking,’ I lied, ‘about Irvine staying at the Sea Barque in Leicester.’
I took out the piece of parchment I had found on the corpse.
‘Strange,’ Benjamin commented, watching me closely, ‘the murderers did not find that.’
I shrugged.
‘The poor fellow had to die quickly.
They took his wallet and, after that, he was crows’ meat.
You do realise,’ I added, ‘that the lady prioress may have connived at Irvine's death but the murderer must be one of our party from Royston?
Only they, as well as the Lord Cardinal, knew Irvine was coming here.’
‘But who could it be?
Catesby and Melford have gone to Nottingham and we can always establish what day they arrived there.
I suppose someone could have come from Royston, perhaps leaving after us but passing us in the mist to plan their ambush…’
The guide came over, shouting at us in his strange dialect.
Benjamin politely asked him to wait.
‘So, Roger, you think we should go to the Sea Barque at Leicester?’
‘Yes, Master.
We may find something there which could explain Irvine's death and Selkirk's death-bearing verses.’
6
We bribed the guide with silver and a promise of more to take us to Leicester.
A day later, we were struggling through the runnels and alleyways of that city.
The good Lord knows what a dirty, loathsome task it was: the crowded houses, and the stinking sewers which smelt like a boiling cauldron in the heat of the city.
At last we discovered the Sea Barque in a rundown market square just under the city walls.
The houses on each side of this gloomy square were dirty and ramshackle; an old dog lay panting under the small market cross.
Now and again it would rise and lick the feet of a sore-infested beggar fastened tight in the stocks.
It was eventide, the market was finished and both the hucksters and their customers were sheltering under the striped canvas awnings of the small ale booths.
Benjamin pointed to the Sea Barque, a narrow tenement three storeys high with a great ale stake tucked under its eaves and a gaudily painted sign hanging tipsily over the battered door.
Around this entrance were a small group of tinkers and pedlars selling brightly coloured ribbons, gloves, plums and green apples.
We pushed through these into the tavern whilst our guide stayed outside to hold the horses.
The taproom of the Sea Barque was cool although musty, its tables nothing but barrels, with a few rickety stools and benches round the walls.
We had been warned by a merchant on the road not to drink either the water or the muddy-coloured ales because the plague had recently been raging in the city and the streams might still be infected.
My master ordered a jug of wine and  questioned the slattern, a pretty, fresh-cheeked wench, who would have been quite comely if she had kept her teeth.
Benjamin, courteous as ever, let her sip from his cup and thrust a penny into her small but calloused hand.
‘Child,’ he remarked, ‘do you remember a man called Irvine — fresh-faced, sandy-haired, perhaps secretive and sly?
He talked like a Scotsman?’
The girl looked puzzled so I repeated the description and recognition dawned in her bright blue eyes.
She nodded her head vigorously and chattered gaily though I could only understand half of what she said.
Apparently Irvine had been a constant patron of the place.
‘At first he came alone,’ the slattern announced.
‘He ate and drank generously and was well liked by the other customers, even though he was a Scotsman.’
She stopped speaking and winked at my master, taking another sip from his goblet and grabbing the second penny he offered.
‘But then,’ she continued like a child reciting a story, ‘he became secretive and withdrawn and took to meeting in a corner with a sinister-looking fellow.’
She screwed up her eyes to remember.
‘This stranger had dark brown hair, a patch over one eye and a large purple birth mark which stretched across his cheek.’
‘Was he English?’
I asked.
She laughed and shook her head.
‘A true Scotsman.
He could drink like a fish and I couldn't understand his coarse speech.’
‘And did Irvine leave anything?’ my master asked.
‘Oh, no.
I cleaned his room.
’ She looked slyly at me.
‘Or, at least, I tried to.’
‘Why do you say that?’
Benjamin snapped.
‘Because he left a drawing on the wall.
The landlord was furious and told me to wash it off.’
‘What was it?’
I asked.
‘A large bird,’ she answered.
‘He drew it with a piece of charcoal.
A large bird with a cruel beak and a crown on its head.’
‘Like an eagle?’
I queried.
‘Yes, yes,’ the girl replied.
‘And Irvine's strange companion?’
Benjamin asked.
‘What did he do?’
‘Nothing but chatter to Irvine, then he left, and Irvine shortly afterwards.’
We thanked the wench who could tell us nothing else.
We spent some more time moving around Leicester, going from tavern to tavern trying to discover if anyone else had seen Irvine's strange companion.
We met with nothing but failure.
The end of the second day in the city found us faded, dirty and eager to leave.
We spent two days travelling back to Royston with a guide who was as tired of us as we were sick of him.
The manor house, despite a change in the weather, still looked grim: a gloomy, squat huddle of buildings hiding behind a cracked, moss-covered curtain wall.
Melford and a group of bowmen greeted us at the gate.
Above them, his feet kicking, his hose stained, face black and tongue protruding, danced one of the kitchen minions.
‘Hanged!’
Melford cheerily announced.
‘For stealing household goods and trying to sell them in the surrounding villages.’
The bastard smiled evilly at me as if he would have loved to have put a noose round my neck and had me swinging on a branch of the overhanging elm tree.
We hid our disgust and made our way up to the main door where the ever-benevolent Doctor Agrippa was waiting for us.
Whilst grooms took our horses away, we were led into the dreary Chapter House, now made a little more comfortable with hangings and arras, cushions and chairs, from Queen Margaret's stores.
‘Irvine's news?’
Agrippa demanded at once as Catesby bolted the door behind us and scrutinised the long, low-ceilinged chamber as if eavesdroppers lurked in its very shadows.
He came and stood over us.
‘Irvine?’ he repeated hoarsely.
‘What news do you bring?’
My master flicked the dust from his cloak.
‘Sir Robert, I am dirty, tired, saddle-sore and thirsty.
I would like some wine.’
Two goblets slopping with wine were hastily served.
My master drank deeply while I studied Agrippa's cherubic face and the anxious, worried frown on Catesby's.
‘Irvine is dead,’ Benjamin announced flatly.
Catesby moaned and turned away.
Agrippa fidgeted excitedly in his chair.
‘How?’ he asked softly.
‘How was Irvine killed?’
‘He never reached the convent,’ my master lied.
‘Oh, we waited for him but then a pedlar brought in his corpse.
His throat had been cut from ear to ear and his wallet had been filched.’
Benjamin shrugged.
‘We failed.’
‘We were meant to fail!’
I interrupted hoarsely.
‘Irvine was ambushed.
Somebody knew he was coming, and the only people who did are here in Royston Manor!’
‘What are you saying?’
Catesby demanded.
‘That someone from Royston ambushed Irvine and murdered him,’ I replied coolly, ignoring the rage which changed Catesby's open-faced, ploughboy looks into a mask of fury.
‘How do we know you two did not kill him?’
‘Ask our guide,’ Benjamin answered.
‘Ask the ladies of the convent — we were never out of their sight.’
I remembered the long, graceful legs of the prioress wrapped firmly around me and hid my smile.
‘So,’ Benjamin continued, ‘where was everybody when we were visiting Coldstream?’
‘I was at Nottingham!’
Catesby snapped.
‘We left here the same day you did, November the eighth.
Melford and I were in Nottingham on the morning of the ninth.
The Constable there will vouch for our movements.’
‘And here at Royston?’
Agrippa never took his eyes off mine.
‘A good point, Master Shallot.’
He spread his hands.
‘None of us can account for our movements precisely.
Carey was scouring the countryside for provisions.
Indeed, he was away three days.
Moodie was sent to Yarmouth by Her Grace the Queen.’
‘And you yourself?’
Agrippa grinned.
‘Like the good doctor Scawsby, I was completing certain errands — Scawsby was buying medicines for the Queen,’ he yawned, ‘I, of course, for the Lord Cardinal.’
I stared into those dark, enigmatic eyes.
Was he mocking me?
Had he been on the Cardinal's business or lying in ambush for Irvine?
I remembered the mist-shrouded countryside and shivered.
Or had he been immersed in his Black Arts, calling up a demon from hell in some lonely wood or deserted copse?
But why should I suspect him?
His answer was very clever: no one could really account for their movements but once again Benjamin and I had drunk deeply from the cup of failure.
Catesby pulled a stool across and slumped down, burying his face in his hands.
‘Selkirk's dead!’ he intoned, like a priest beginning the prayers for the dying.
‘Ruthven's murdered and now Irvine!’
He glanced sideways at Agrippa.
‘In time, perhaps, these deaths will be avenged, but the Queen is insistent that we should meet the Scottish envoys.’
He glanced at the hour candle burning on the table.
‘The situation is this: the Queen fled from Scotland leaving her infant sons, James and Alexander.’
He paused.
‘Alexander sickened and died.
The Queen has no great love for her second husband but she does for Scotland.
The Scottish envoys will be led by Lord d'Aubigny, the Regent's right-hand man.
The Queen's husband, Douglas, Earl of Angus, has also insisted on coming.
You are to demand of them Queen Margaret's return.
They should arrive at Nottingham this evening.
Tomorrow you must travel there, Master Benjamin and Shallot, and this time the good doctor Agrippa will accompany you.
’ Catesby stared at us from red-rimmed eyes.
‘This time do not fail!’ he snapped.
‘Now I must tell the Queen.’
He rose and left, slamming the door behind him.
‘Did you murder Irvine?’
I flung the accusation at the smiling Agrippa.
The good doctor threw back his head and laughed merrily, the sound echoing strangely in that dark, forbidding hall.
He got up, wiping the tears from his eyes with the back of his hand, and came to stand over me.
He cupped my face in small, soft hands.
‘One day, Roger,’ he whispered, ‘you will detect the solution to great mysteries.
I have looked into the shadows which are not yet realities.
But, oh dear, you still have so much to learn.’
He withdrew his hands, smiled at Benjamin and slipped quietly out of the room.
We spent the rest of the day recovering from our journey and doing our best to avoid the other members of the household, who soon learnt of our failure and hid their satisfaction behind smug looks or sour smiles.
Dinner that evening was not a happy affair.
Queen Margaret and Catesby glowered at us from the head of the table.
Melford, now he had tasted blood, seemed to be revelling in some private joke.
Moodie looked sanctimonious whilst Scawsby could hardly hide his crows of triumph.
Carey looked worried and Doctor Agrippa sat as if a spectator at some masque or mummer's play.
We sat there toying with our food.
Perhaps I drank too deeply because one of old Shallot's mottos is, and always has been: ‘When you are frightened and there's wine about, drink as much as you can.’
At last my master, tired of the ominous silence, tugged at my sleeve.
We rose, bowed to Queen Margaret, mumbled our apologies and crept out of the hall.
‘Master Daunbey!’
Doctor Agrippa's voice called us back.
‘We are to leave for Nottingham at first light.’
Benjamin pursed his lips and shook his head.
‘No need to summon us, good doctor.
You will find us waiting for you outside Royston.
The sooner we leave here the better!’
When we returned to our own chamber, I turned drunkenly on Benjamin.
‘What did you mean?’
‘About what?’
‘When Agrippa summoned us back?’
Benjamin chewed on his lip and shook his head.
‘You are tired and half drunk, Roger.
Go to bed.’
And, without a word more, Benjamin turned his back on me.
I staggered off to sleep and was awakened by my master, his face bathed in a pool of candle light.
‘Roger!’ he whispered.
‘Get up — now!’
‘What's the matter?’
I replied crossly.
Benjamin kept shaking me and half-dragged me out of bed.
He pointed to a tray bearing some loaves and watered wine.
‘Break your fast!’ he hissed.
‘The food is not tainted.
We may be in danger here!’
I cursed but did as he requested and afterwards we slipped down the darkened stairway out of the main door where Benjamin had ordered a sleepy-eyed groom to bring round the horses.
We mounted and rode across the darkened causeway, past the sentry, half-sleeping at the open gates and on to the trackway.
The corpse of the household servant still swung from the branch of an elm tree.
Good Lord, I remember the scene well to this day.
Terror seemed to permeate the very air.
It was bitterly cold, at that moment just before dawn when the demons and evil sprites which live under heaven make their final assault against the human soul.
I looked round to glimpse the dark mass of Royston Manor and the swaying corpse of the hanged man caught my glance.
Panic throbbed through my body and, if I hadn't been made of sterner stuff, I would have dug spurs into my horse and galloped as fast as I could back to Ipswich.
The guard did not challenge us and we followed the faint trackway till Benjamin reined in and offered me a bulging wineskin.
‘Drink as much as you want, Roger,’ he whispered.
‘I understand.
I found this on our table when I woke.’
He stretched out his hand and I saw the small, faded, white rose lying there.
I shivered at the warning.
Benjamin threw the rose down.
‘Now, Roger,’ he continued briskly, ‘I apologise for  my rudeness yesterday evening but you do realise we are in great danger?
There's something about this matter which could lead us to the gallows or on to the knife of some hired assassin.
A dark, sinister masque is being played out and we do not know whom to trust.
My uncle?
The King?
Queen Margaret?
Doctor Agrippa?
Something does not ring true…but what can we do?
If we return to London empty-handed, we are finished.
If we pursue this, we could very well be placing our heads in a noose.
We do not know who are our friends and who our enemies.
Two things may protect us: first, the Lord Cardinal treats me as his favourite nephew and that will afford us some protection; secondly, our investigations safeguard us.
There are those who skulk behind and let us run hither and thither while they watch what we find out.’
His cool eyes holding mine, he leaned closer.
‘We are in a dance of death.
As long as the dance continues we are safe, but if we try to step out we will either be pushed back or killed.
By whom I do not know but I intend to find out.
For what else is there, Roger?
Who is waiting for you or me?’
He blinked and looked away.
‘Who would miss us?’ he added softly.
‘Who loves you, Roger?
Who loves me?
Where is our home, where our loved ones?
Look at us now, on this wild heathland with only the grass and the sky to keep us company.
And our defence?
Our health, the weapons we carry and the money we share.
That's all there is, Roger.’
For once in my life I admit my master truly terrified me because he was right.
My belly rolled in terror.
I could have vomited with fear and had difficulty controlling my breathing at the silent horrors my master described.
Benjamin took me firmly by the wrist and my horse whickered softly.
‘Yet I have you, Roger, your friendship, and you have mine.’
He threw back his head and laughed at the grey, lonely skies.
‘What more could a man want?’
He laughed till the tears ran down his cheeks.
‘I mean, Roger, how  many friends does the Lord Cardinal have?
Not the King!
’ He suddenly sobered.
‘Sometimes,’ he whispered, as if the very bushes concealed royal agents or spies, ‘I fear for my uncle.’
‘What do you mean, Master?’
‘Although he has the King's friendship…’
Benjamin was on the point of replying when we heard the clip-clop of horses' hooves and saw Doctor Agrippa making his way slowly towards us; his mount, a gentle cob, ambling along as if it was a balmy summer's day.
‘Good morning, Benjamin, Roger.’
The doctor drew back his dark cowl.
‘You were in a hurry to leave Royston.’
Benjamin grunted.
‘Why?’
Agrippa continues.
‘What dangers threaten you?’
‘You know very well,’ Benjamin snapped back.
‘Murder lurks there.
Selkirk, Ruthven, Irvine…sooner or later it will be our turn.
I am right, am I not?’
Agrippa's candid eyes rounded in mock amazement.
‘But you are the Cardinal's nephew and Roger is your good friend.
Your deaths,’ he emphasised, ‘would have to be explained, if not avenged.’
‘Don't play games, Doctor.
We all stand on the edge of a darkened ring.
There is a great mystery here.’
Agrippa turned to me.
His eyes seemed to glow in the darkness.
‘And you, Roger, if your remarks in the Chapter House mean anything, believe I am at the centre of this darkened ring?’
My long-suffering patience broke.
‘Who are you?’
I accused.
‘What magic arts do you dabble in?’
Agrippa shrugged.
‘What is magic, Roger?’
He pointed down to his stirrup.
‘Many centuries ago, a Roman Army was wiped out by the Goths at Adrianopolis.
Do you know why?’
I shook my head.
‘The Goths wore stirrups and, because they did, could  fight more efficiently on horseback.
To many Romans at the time, the Goths were demons who used magical arts to gain victory.’
He shook his head.
‘And what was their magic?
Something we don't even think about today.’
‘You weave spells,’ I challenged.
‘Carey says his father saw you in Antioch years ago!
How can a man live so long?’
Agrippa laughed softly.
‘You are right, Shallot.
Nothing is what it seems to be.’
He leaned forward, his face serious.
‘Who I am and what I do does not concern you.
I am the Lord Cardinal's man!’
‘Does the Cardinal need such protection?’
Benjamin queried.
Agrippa chewed his lip.
‘Your uncle is hated.
He needs to protect himself: men say he has a magic ring which he uses to raise demons to control the King.
They also claim that the Lord Cardinal has hired a famous witch, a murderess named Mabel Brigge, who has King Henry in thrall through the St Trinian's fast, a three-day period of abstinence from food and drink which leaves the strongest subjects under her control.’
Agrippa stopped and looked at a lonely bird shrieking above us as if it was a devil let loose to wander this lonely wilderness.
I shivered as more silent terrors gripped my soul.
‘I don't believe that,’ my master replied.
‘Oh, yes, you do,’ Agrippa murmured.
‘The only man your uncle should fear is the King himself.
You have heard the prophecies?’
Now fascinated by Agrippa's sepulchral tones, I shook my head and wondered what powers he really had.
The good doctor looked at us sharply.
‘I trust both of you, so I shall tell you.
They say King Henry is the Dark One, he is the Mouldwarp, the Prince of Darkness foretold by Merlin, the great wizard of King Arthur's court.
According to his prophecies, the king of the twelfth generation after John will be the Mouldwarp, a hairy man whose skin will be as thick as a goat's.
At first he will be greatly praised by his people, before sinking  down into the dark pit of sin and pride.
He is condemned by God to end his reign in gore and destruction.
We are the twelfth generation after John and Henry is our King.
We see him now as a golden sun but what will happen to him as the day dies and the sun begins to set?
Then how long will he tolerate your uncle?
And if the Lord Cardinal goes, falling from the heavens like Lucifer, you, the little ones, will be dragged down in his wake!’
He spurred his horse.
‘That is why we must succeed, not just for ourselves but for the Lord Cardinal.
Who knows whether our success or failure might bring the prophecies about?’
He glanced over his shoulder.
‘We must go on, lest the shadows catch up with us.’
We urged our horses forward.
I forget the details of the journey.
Both Benjamin and I were lost in our own thoughts and I was mystified by Agrippa's revelations.
A strange man whose like you will not meet again in my memoirs.
[Do you know, I lately financed a trip under one of Raleigh's captains to the Americas.
When the fellow returned I entertained him here in the manor house.
He told me strange stories of red-skinned men who wore eagle feathers, and their wise man fitted Doctor Agrippa's description.
A strange world isn't it?
My chaplain snorts in derision but what does he know?
He lusts after Fat Margot's tits and is jealous because tonight I'll cup them in my hands.
Oh, yes, the juices still run hot and I, past ninety, can do what many a thirty year old finds impossible!
Do you think I am lying?
Read my memoirs.
When I was locked hidden away in Suleiman the Magnificent's harem, I satisfied every one of his houris but, as I keep saying, that's another story.]
Eventually, Agrippa, Benjamin and I entered Nottingham, going through the main archway into a dirty maze of streets.
After the fresh airs of the countryside, we gagged at the smell of stale urine, stinking cats and rotting vegetables.
The open sewer in the high street looked as if it had never been cleaned and at times we  squelched ankle deep in human excrement.
Our horses had more sense and refused to go further so we stabled them at a local inn where we satisfied our hunger on a dish of fish cooked over charcoal before making our way up to the castle.
We crossed the huge market square where a great throng had gathered to witness the execution of two brothers found guilty by the Judges of Assizes of plotting against the King.
The press was too great and we found ourselves trapped by the crowd just in front a massive, black-timbered scaffold.
The headsman was already waiting.
He stood before the rusty, blood-stained block, his face covered by a black hood as he leaned on a great two-edged axe.
He was two-thirds drunk but, there again, I suppose any man ordered to discharge such a duty would need some wine to gladden the heart and dull the brain.
The two brothers were conducted in a cart to the macabre beat of a single drum.
They were dressed simply in hose and open-necked shirts.
The captain of the guard led them on to the scaffold, a scrawny-faced clerk gabbled out the sentence of the court.
The younger man pressed forward, his hands tied behind his back.
He looked grievingly at his elder brother who muttered something.
The man became calmer, sank to his knees and allowed the executioner to bend him so his neck fitted over the block.
Again the drum beat, the great axe swirling in the sunlight.
There was a crunch, the hot spatter of blood and a deep sigh from the crowd.
The eldest brother refused to have his hands tied but coolly watched as his brother's carcase was rolled away.
He then knelt at the block like a priest before his prie dieu.
He positioned his head, made a gesture with his hand, the axe swirled again, his body jerked, the head bounced on to the scaffold in a great spurt of scarlet.
A guard kicked away a dog who tried to run under the scaffold to lick the dripping blood.
My master, pale-faced, his forehead covered with a sheen of sweat, groaned and turned away.
Agrippa beckoned me to follow.
A cook, sitting in the shade of  a market stall, cackled with laughter and performed his own minor execution of a hapless chicken, slicing the neck and allowing the headless corpse to totter for a while before it collapsed in a heap of bloody feathers.
My master hurried away to vomit in a corner.
Agrippa waited for him to regain his composure.
‘I told you,’ he murmured, ‘the blood letting by our King is just beginning.
The Kingdom will be covered by dark pools of blood.’
Agrippa urged us on and we climbed the hill towards the main gates of the castle where the Red Lion Rampant banner of Scotland fluttered in the wind.
A wild thought occurred to me and, for the first time, one of the threads in the mystery of Selkirk's poem began to unravel.
We crossed the lowered drawbridge and went under an arched entrance depicting the wonderfully carved scene of the Annunciation.
A burly captain of the guard arranged for our horses to be stabled and immediately took us upstairs into what Agrippa called the Lion Chamber, a long, wooden-panelled room with black and white floor tiles which shimmered in the torch light.
These were lozenge-shaped and I remembered them particularly because they were decorated with golden love knots.
At the south end of the hall was a huge canopied fireplace and, above it, a blue and gold tapestry bearing the royal arms of Scotland.
Beneath this was a large, oaken table and two high-backed chairs, also of oak, cushioned with cloth of gold and fringed with silver silk.
‘The Scottish lords have made themselves at home,’ Agrippa muttered.
The captain invited us brusquely to sit on a bench before the table and hurried out of a side door.
We must have waited half an hour.
A serving wench brought us flagons of watered beer.
Both my master and myself took in our surroundings, whilst Agrippa, perched on the edge of the bench, hummed softly to himself, rocking to and fro like some cheerful sparrow.
At last the captain re-entered, accompanied by three  soldiers.
Behind them were two men.
One was dressed in a dark blue jerkin and hose.
He was an elegant fellow with steel-grey hair and bronzed face, his sensuous mouth fringed by a neatly trimmed beard and moustache.
His companion, swathed in a dark tawny robe as if he felt the cold, was a different kettle of fish: jet black hair framed a white face.
He would have been handsome had it not been for the close-set eyes and the petulant cast to his mouth.
‘My Lord d'Aubigny and Gavin Douglas, Earl of Angus!’
Agrippa hissed as we rose to greet them.
I must say this openly: d'Aubigny I liked immediately, a gentleman born and bred, a true courtier like myself.
All Angus did was pull his robe tighter around him and slump in one of the high-backed chairs to glower at us.
D'Aubigny, however, came down from the dais and shook Agrippa's hand vigorously before allowing the doctor to introduce both my master and myself.
He talked to us kindly, his grey eyes dancing with amusement as he questioned us about our journey.
Had it been safe?
What troubles had we encountered?
His English was very good, though tinged with a pronounced French accent.
I looked at him curiously for Master Benjamin and Doctor Agrippa had told me about him on our journey to the castle.
He was a distant cousin to James IV but his father had been exiled to France so he had been reared and educated in the French fashion.
D'Aubigny waved aside our letter of introduction and called for more refreshments before joining Angus on the other side of the table.
‘Well, Master Daunbey,’ d'Aubigny began, ‘a representative of the English King is always welcome but doubly so when he is the nephew of the great Lord Cardinal.’
He leaned forward with his hands clasped together on the table.
‘So, Master Envoy, what messages do you bring?’
My master looked nervously at the Earl of Angus who had hardly moved except to gulp noisily from a goblet  of wine.
D'Aubigny himself acted as if Angus was scarcely there.
‘Queen Margaret,’ my master began bluntly, ‘wishes to return to Scotland.’
D'Aubigny spread his hands.
‘There is no obstacle,’ he replied.
‘The Queen is always welcome back.
I have said this many times, Doctor Agrippa, have I not?’
The good doctor nodded his head vigorously.
When I glanced sideways I noticed how his face had changed; the air of bonhomie and lazy good humour had disappeared.
His eyes were hard now, glaring at d'Aubigny with the occasional sideways knowing glance at the sulky Angus.
‘I repeat,’ d'Aubigny continued, ‘the Queen is welcome back.
I will take an oath over a casket of the most sacred relics on this.
I have explained to King Henry many times that his worthy sister left Scotland of her own accord or, should I say, fled?
We did not separate her from her children, but the Council cannot allow our infant King to wander where he will.’
D'Aubigny shifted in his seat.
Perhaps he was disturbed by Agrippa's hard glance.
He began to emphasise his points with one hand.
‘The Lady Margaret was appointed Regent by no less a person than her late husband in his will.
However, she infringed that mandate by marrying My Lord of Angus within a year of her husband's death!’
D'Aubigny turned to his companion.
‘My Lord, you would corroborate that?’
Angus slouched like a spoiled brat, nodded and began to tap noisily on the table top with his fingers.
Again d'Aubigny repeated the question, this time a little more harshly.
‘My Lord Douglas, you will corroborate that?’
This time d'Aubigny waited and would have done till the Second Coming.
Angus stirred.
‘Och, aye!’ the fellow replied sourly.
‘I will confirm that.
Perhaps we were too hasty.
The marriage brought  neither of us happiness, especially when my lady wife insisted on hiding in one castle or the other so I could not follow her.’
He smiled sardonically at Agrippa.
‘You know the Douglas motto —‘Better to hear the lark sing in the woods and fields than the mouse squeak in the corridors and chambers of the castle.’’
‘What My Lord Douglas is saying,’ d'Aubigny said meaningfully, ‘is that the Queen hid herself away, first in Stirling, then in other castles.
There was an attempt,’ he added, ‘aided and abetted by other nobles, to rescue the Queen's children from the rightful custody of the Council.
But this came to naught and so Queen Margaret slipped over the border into England.’
‘Your Grace,’ Agrippa interrupted harshly, ‘a mother's place is with her children.
In your custody her second babe, Alexander, Duke of Ross, died!’
‘A Queen's rightful place,’ d'Aubigny tartly replied, ‘is in her kingdom with her children, one of whom, although still a bairn, is the appointed King.’
D'Aubigny's eyes softened.
‘C'est vrai, Alexander did die, but he was a sickly boy, born two months early.
Anyway, I do not think we should discuss the young Duke of Ross, should we?’
I looked sideways.
Do you know, the little bugger Agrippa actually blushed whilst Douglas lost his solemn look.
Indeed, the fellow became agitated.
I saw my master stiffen, those mild, blinking blue eyes had caught something, though God knows what.
D'Aubigny sensed he had triumphed in this repartee and stood up, smiling kindly at us.
‘You see, your mission is ended.
Master Benjamin, Her Grace is most welcome back.
Indeed, I could invite the Archangel Gabriel from Heaven — but it would be up to him whether he came or not!’
My master rose and bowed.
‘Your Grace, I thank you for your time.’
‘Tush, man,’ d'Aubigny replied, ‘it was nothing.
In the morning we will meet again.’
He looked at Angus and his smile faded.
‘This time alone.’
I tried to question my master on what he had learnt from d'Aubigny, once we were shown up to our chamber, but Master Benjamin was in one of his more withdrawn moods.
He wandered off then came back to lie on his bed, staring up at the ceiling.
Now and again he would glance at me.
‘There is a mystery here,’ is all he would murmur.
When I looked again, he had fallen fast asleep.
Thankfully, the good Doctor Agrippa did not share our chamber.
I padded round the room and quietly filched any precious object there: a small set of silver candlesticks, two finely chased pewter goblets and a cunningly wrought steel crucifix which hung on the wall.
Satisfied with the day's proceedings, I went to bed and slept like a child until awoken, long after dawn, by my master.
He smilingly proffered me a cup of watered wine in one of the goblets I had hidden away the previous evening.
I gazed quickly around the room and sighed bitterly.
Benjamin had replaced everything.
As usual, he paid no thought to the future and the prospect of where our next mouthful of bread might come from.
He went across and began washing himself at the lavarium.
‘Come, come, Roger!’ he said in reply to my glare.
‘We cannot take from our hosts.
D'Aubigny is the perfect gentle knight.
We have enough silver.
Remember the scripture —‘Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.’’
I felt tempted to tell him that I had begun to glimpse some of the mystery behind Selkirk's verses but my anger kept me silent.
Benjamin smiled at me.
‘I think,’ he continued as if he could read my thoughts, ‘logic has shown me a way to solve the murders of Selkirk and Ruthven.’
I started up.
‘And Irvine?’
Benjamin shook his head.
‘No, but Catesby must be innocent of that at least.
Last night, I went to see the Constable: Catesby and his manservant arrived here on the morning of October the ninth.
In no manner could they have delayed to ambush poor Irvine.’
‘And the other deaths?’
I asked crossly.
Benjamin put his fingers to his lips.
‘Not now,’ he replied, ‘as yet I detect only faint glimmerings.’
He sighed.
‘As I said, ‘sufficient for the day…’.’
I felt like murmuring the verses about Judas going out and hanging himself, and that he should go and do likewise, but Benjamin looked so quietly pleased with himself that I bit my tongue.
I threw some of the water from the bowl over my own face and drank the rest for I was thirsty, then followed him down to the Great Hall.
Thankfully, Doctor Agrippa had made himself scarce, realising that d'Aubigny's invitation did not extend to him.
He was probably closeted with that sullen turd, Angus.
Good riddance, I thought.
A steward wearing d'Aubigny's livery, blue with silver fleur de lys, announced His Lordship was waiting for us outside.
I thought the fellow meant the bailey but he took us out into a garden which ran down towards a small river.
The Scottish envoy was waiting for us, sitting on a fallen tree trunk, talking to one of his clerks who tactfully withdrew as we approached.
D'Aubigny was dressed simply in a dark brown tunic like a forester and I gathered he was about to go hunting.
He seemed vulnerable but then I heard the chink of armour and, looking carefully through the trees which swept up from the river, caught a glimpse of colour and steel and knew that help, if he needed it, was never far away.
Nottingham Castle may have been put at his disposal but d'Aubigny did not trust our Henry.
A wise man!
D'Aubigny rose, greeted us civilly and indicated we should sit with him.
He looked round, first towards the trees where his bodyguards were grouped and then, tilting his head back, listened carefully.
There were no sounds except the soft cooing of wood pigeons, the gurgle of the water and the strident cry of the snow white peacocks rising above the castle walls.
He came swiftly to the point.
Opening a small casket, he took out copies of letters sent by Queen Margaret in the year following her husband's  death.
If they had come from any other man or woman in the kingdom of Scotland, they would have been considered treasonable; writing to her brother Henry, Margaret made constant pleas for the English to send troops into Scotland to restore her as Regent and crush any opposition to her and the Earl of Angus.
Henry's replies were equally blunt; he offered help but said it would take time and, if matters should prove too difficult, she was to return immediately to England.
My master read these through carefully like a clerk marking up a ledger.
‘Why are you showing me these documents?’ he asked when he had finished reading them and passed them to me.
D'Aubigny shrugged.
‘I am tired of Queen Margaret's constant stream of invective.
We did not drive her from Scotland, and her infant son died because he was born too early — her eldest boy is hale and hearty.
Queen Margaret is most welcome to return but she must not bring an army of twenty thousand English ‘advisers’ with her.
Scotland is an independent sovereign nation.
Queen Margaret's brother, the great Harry himself, has no authority there.’
He bit his lip.
‘We begged the Queen to return.
Even when she crossed the border and stayed at Hexham, messengers carried importunate pleas to her, all of which were ignored.’
He sighed.
‘You may wonder why Queen Margaret does not return.’
He blew out his cheeks in exasperation.
‘The Council and I are continually speculating on that.’
He pointed to the letters.
‘Perhaps she knew we had proof of her treachery, but there is no need for her to fear our vengeance.’
He screwed up his eyes and stared into the middle distance.
‘No, there is something else…
Why will she not return?
What is she so frightened of?’
‘Who could threaten her?’ my master queried innocently.
‘The Earl of Angus for one!’
‘He seemed most amenable last night.’
D'Aubigny grinned.
‘His Grace now knows how to behave.
He will not try and seize her son again.’
‘My Lord,’ I blurted out.
D'Aubigny looked at me quizzically.
‘What is it, fellow?’
‘Last night, when you mentioned the Queen's second son, the child who died, Alexander, Duke of Ross…
His Grace and Doctor Agrippa appeared…’
‘Discomfited?’
D'Aubigny added.
I nodded.
He grinned at Benjamin.
‘Your servant is no fool.
There is a great deal of mystery about that child.’
‘Such as what, Your Grace?’
D'Aubigny just grimaced, rose and dusted the grass from his hose.
‘James died at Flodden in September 1513.
Alexander, Duke of Ross, was born before his time on the thirtieth April 1514!’
On that abrupt note, d'Aubigny extended his hand for my master to kiss as a sign that the audience was finished.
He added that we must be his guests at the great banquet he was holding that night for other Scottish lords who had come south with him.
My master watched him go.
‘A strange man,’ he murmured, and looked at me.
‘There is something terrible happening here,’ he added.
‘Something very dangerous.
All is not what it seems to be;’
‘Like what, master?’
I asked.
Benjamin shook his head.
‘I don't know,’ he muttered.
‘But I think the darkness is about to lift.’
7
We returned to our chamber and spent the rest of the day preparing for the banquet or listening to Doctor Agrippa.
He joined us full of his customary bonhomie and scurrilous jokes about the French and Scottish courts.
My master listened to him half-heartedly, more engrossed in studying a piece of parchment on which he was writing cryptic notes in a cipher even I did not understand.
At last the sun began to set and Agrippa took us down to the courtyard to watch the other great Scottish lords arrive.
Each was accompanied by a fearsome retinue of men armed to the teeth with sword, mace, dagger and small shields or targets.
Most of the latter were Scottish but a few were mercenaries from Denmark, Ireland, and as far afield even as Genoa.
The Great Hall had been specially prepared for the festive occasion.
Huge cresset torches were placed high on the walls, the tables had been covered with white linen and the only plate used was of the best thick silver.
D'Aubigny held court from his chair on the great dais.
He was dressed in a rich robe of gold, fringed with black velvet, over a doublet of blood-red silk and black and white hose.
On his head was a rakishly set bonnet, pinned to his hair by a silver brooch fashioned in a shape of a fleur de lys.
When he took his seat, the trumpets blew and the dinner was served by a long line of servants who carried in plates of steaming hot boar's meat, brawn, beef, sturgeon, fish, bowls of cream containing sugared strawberries, and jug after jug of different wines.
We were placed near the dais on d'Aubigny's right; the  conversation, the strange accents and oaths washed around us like water.
Agrippa did the talking for us, I ate as if there was no tomorrow whilst Benjamin seemed fascinated by someone further down the hall.
After the banquet an Italian performed a subtle and cunning rope trick, then a troupe of girls danced a vigorous whirling jig which left the faces of the spectators, as well as theirs, red with excitement as they kicked their legs high and let their skirts go up, revealing to all and sundry what lay beneath.
I noticed there were no other women present and later learnt this was the Scottish custom.
Not that they treat their women badly — rather both sexes go their own way, the ladies of the nobility preferring to take their refreshment by themselves in another chamber.
Once the festivities were over and d'Aubigny rose to withdraw, so did my master, refusing Agrippa's invitation to stay and talk awhile.
I wanted to tarry.
One of the dancing girls with flame-red hair, skin as soft and white as silk and large dark eyes, had caught my fancy.
She smiled at me and I wondered if she would be interested in another type of jig!
Benjamin, however, squeezed me by the wrist and I followed him, taking some consolation in the fact that I had hidden two knives, three spoons and a small silver plate used for sweetmeats inside my jerkin.
We had turned off the main passageway into a narrow corridor leading to the stairs of our room, when our way was suddenly blocked by two savage creatures who seemed to step out of the darkness.
Both looked very similar, faces and hair as white as snow whilst their eyes were strangely blue though red-rimmed.
They were dressed in leather jerkins and thick, woollen green and black skirts which the Scots call kilts.
On their feet were sandals very similar to those worn by a friar, but there was nothing peace-loving about this pair of demons.
They were armed to the teeth with dagger, sword, dirk and a small array of throwing knives strapped in broad leather belts across their chests.
One of them approached my master and  tapped him gently on the chest, speaking in a high sing-song fashion.
My master smiled, looked at them and shrugged.
‘No thank you,’ he said, trying to step aside.
‘We have eaten enough and now we wish to retire.’
The man smiled and shook his head.
I felt queasy with fright for his teeth had been filed down as sharp as dagger points.
He had no need of knives — his teeth alone could have ripped out my throat.
Benjamin stepped to one side as if to pass and both men stood back, their hands going to their swords.
The second one shook his head and gestured we should follow.
‘Agreed,’ my master said softly.
‘In the circumstances, I think we will follow you, but let me remind you that we are envoys of His Gracious Majesty King Henry VIII of England.’
The second of our unwanted guests must have understood for he turned, raised a leg and farted like a dog.
They took us back into the main passageway, past the hall and into a small chamber where Gavin Douglas, Earl of Angus, whom I had glimpsed during the banquet, now lounged in a chair.
He had a brimming goblet of wine in one hand, the other up the skirt of the dancing girl who had caught my eye earlier.
Angus was stroking her, caressing her thighs and making her squirm and moan with pleasure.
Of course, he was as drunk as any sot on May Day, his scarlet damask robe, green jacket and purple hose stained with gross globules of meat and large drops of wine.
‘Ah, the envoys of my dear wife,’ he announced thickly.
Unable to use his hands, he raised a leather-booted foot towards us.
I would have fled if the Earl's retainers had not been standing right behind me.
I stood still.
I did not know where to look; at the girl now moaning with pleasure or Angus's slack-mouthed face.
Benjamin, however, smiled coolly at the Earl as if the Scottish bastard was his long-lost brother.
‘My Lord, what can we do for you?’ he asked.
Angus pursed his lips.
‘Oh, what can I do for you?’ he mimicked in reply.
‘First, if you or your misbegotten entity there,’ he gestured towards me, ‘plot any design against me, then the two gentlemen standing behind you have orders to slash your throats!’
He smiled falsely.
‘You have met them?
They are Corin and Alleyn, two killers from the clan Chattan: they do not give a donkey's arse whether you have been sent by the Pope himself!’
He drank the wine in the goblet in one noisy gulp and threw down the cup.
My master bowed.
‘Your Grace,’ he said softly, ‘I thank you for your courtesy and your…’
Angus, his face now red and glistening with sweat, got up and stood before us.
‘I have news for you!’ he grated.
‘Tell my beloved wife I know her secrets!’
He clicked his fingers and the two Highlanders stepped forward.
‘Whether you like it or not,’ Angus rasped, ‘I have instructed Doctor Agrippa that Corin and Alleyn will go south with you.
They have their orders.
I hate my wife but we are bound by a bond which these two will defend.’
He turned to the Highlanders and stretched out a hand.
Immediately the two brutes knelt, licking his fingers as if they were pet dogs.
Angus talked to them in a strange tongue.
The two rogues, their blue eyes gleaming with pleasure, nodded and repeated some secret oath.
Benjamin, however, refused to be abashed.
When the two Highlanders stood, he sauntered up and touched each gently on the chest.
‘You must be Corin and you must be Alleyn?’
The two assassins, a curious look in their eyes, stared back and did not resist even when my master shook them vigorously by the hand.
‘Good night, gentlemen!’ he called out merrily, and humming a hymn, led me out of the room.
Once the door was closed, I remonstrated angrily but Benjamin just shook his head.
‘Forget Angus!’ he said.
‘Come with me.
I saw  something in that hall tonight which I have kept secret.
Let us wait in the shadows.’
He refused to answer my persistent questions.
We went out and stood in the bailey, taking advantage of the bothies and the huddled tenements built against the castle wall which provided shadows deep enough to hide Satan's Army.
We lurked for hours as different revellers left, Benjamin diligently watching each go.
At last a lone figure staggered out, singing raucously as he swaggered in a drunken stupor.
Benjamin turned and nudged me alert.
‘The quarry's in sight, Roger.
Now let's follow!’
I didn't know what he was talking about but I dutifully obeyed and we trailed the shambling figure as he made his way drunkenly out through a postern gate and down the steep, narrow alleyways of Nottingham.
We crossed the market square, passing the makeshift scaffold where the bloody corpses of the men executed earlier still lay bound in dirty canvas sheets.
Our quarry stopped in front of a tavern, light and noise pouring stridently through its open windows.
The fellow swayed on his feet and staggered through the doorway.
Benjamin and I followed a few minutes later.
Inside the din was terrible.
Revellers, their tankards frothing to the brim, shouted and sang.
Our quarry secured a table in the far corner and, as soon as I glimpsed him, I could have laughed for sheer joy.
He was one-eyed with a great purple birthmark across his face; he must be the same fellow who had been closeted so secretly with Irvine at the Sea Barque in Leicester.
Benjamin turned and smiled at me.
‘Now you see, Roger.
When the Scots came south, this fellow was probably in their retinue and must have searched Irvine out.’
He nudged me like an urchin planning a prank.
‘Let's see if he can babble to us as much as he did to Irvine.’
We pushed our way through the throng and stood before the fellow as he slouched over the grease-stained table.
‘May we join you, sir?’
The man looked up.
In the flickering candle light, his twisted face looked as ghastly as a gargoyle's.
‘Who are you?’ he slurred.
‘Benjamin Daunbey and Roger Shallot, two English gentlemen, close friends and acquaintances of the Lord d'Aubigny.’
‘And what do you wish with me?’
‘A few words and the offer of deep cups of claret.’
The fellow's good eye gleamed.
‘And what else?’
‘Oh,’ Benjamin replied, ‘we can commiserate over past glories and dead friends.’
‘Such as?’
‘The glories of Flodden and the murder of John Irvine.’
The fellow became more watchful.
‘What do you mean?’ he rasped.
Benjamin leaned over the table.
'’ Three less than twelve should it be,’'he chanted, '’Or the King, no prince engendered he.’’
Well, the fellow's face paled!
‘Sit down,’ he hissed.
‘What's your name?’
Benjamin asked.
The drunkard grinned, displaying rows of blackened stumps of teeth.
‘You can call me Oswald, a mosstrooper now serving the Lord d'Aubigny.’
Benjamin turned and shouted for more wine.
Once the slattern had served us, Benjamin toasted our newfound friend.
‘Now, Oswald, tell us what you told Irvine.’
‘Why should I?’
‘If you do,’ Benjamin replied quietly, ‘you will leave Nottingham a rich man.’
‘And if I don't?’
Benjamin's smile widened.
‘Then, Oswald, you will leave Nottingham a dead man!’
My master leaned across the table.
‘For God's sake!’ he whispered.
‘We are friends.
We wish you well but Irvine is dead.
What do you know?’
The villain studied Benjamin carefully, his one eye shining gimlet hard.
At last he dropped his gaze.
‘You look an honest man,’ he mumbled blearily.
He stared quickly at me.
‘Which is more than I can say for your companion.
Anyway, you said I would be rich?’
Benjamin drew three gold coins from his purse and placed them in the centre of the table.
‘Begin your story, Oswald.
You were at Flodden, were you not?’
‘Aye, I was,’ Oswald replied, a distant look in his eye.
‘Somehow or other I had been placed near the King.
It was a massacre,’ he whispered.
‘A bloody massacre!
Forget the stories about chivalrous knights and the clash of arms — it was one gory, blood-spattered mess.
Men falling everywhere, writhing on the ground, huge gashes in their faces and stomachs.’
He drank deeply from his cup.
‘I glimpsed the King in his brilliant surcoat standing before the royal banners, the Lion and the Falcon.
He fell, and so did they.’
Oswald sat up, shaking his head as if freeing himself from a trance.
‘I was knocked unconscious.
In the morning I awoke, thick-headed and a prisoner.
Surrey, the English general, forced me and other Scots to comb the battlefield for King James's body.’
‘Did you find it immediately?’
‘No, it took some hours before we dragged the body from beneath a mound of soggy corpses.
There was an arrow still lodged in the throat.
The face and right hand had been badly mauled.’
‘What then?’ my master asked.
‘What happened to the corpse?’
‘Surrey had it stripped.
The bloody jacket was sent south as a trophy and the mangled remains turned over to the embalmers.
The stomach and entrails were removed and the corpse stuffed with herbs and spices.’
‘You are sure it was the King's corpse?’
Oswald smiled evilly.
‘Ah, that's the mystery.
You see, James used to wear a chain round his waist as an act of mortification.’
‘And?’
‘The corpse bore no chain.’
‘Was it the King's body?’
‘Well, it could have been…’
‘But you say it did not have the chain on it?’
‘Ah!’
Oswald wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
‘Just before the battle, James is supposed to have made love to Lady Heron.
During his lovemaking, the damsel complained bitterly about how the chain round the King's waist chafed her skin, so James removed it.
’ Oswald's hand crept out to seize the gold.
Benjamin fended him off.
‘Oh, there's more than that, surely?
Don't play games!
What happened to the corpse?’
‘It was sent south.’
‘And then what?’
‘Then nothing.’
Benjamin scooped the gold back into his hand.
‘Well, Master Oswald, nothing comes of nothing.’
[I remembered this phrase and gave it to William Shakespeare.
You watch, you'll see it in one of his plays.]
Benjamin made to rise.
‘So, Oswald, you are no richer but we are wiser.
What profit now?’
The fellow gazed suspiciously round the crowded tavern.
‘What do you mean?’ he slurred.
'’ Three less than twelve should it be,’'I chanted, '’Or the King, no prince engendered he!’’
‘Not here!’ the fellow muttered.
‘Come!’
He rose and staggered out and we followed him into a stinking alleyway a short distance from the tavern.
‘Well, Oswald, what do these verses mean?’
‘At Kelso…’ the fellow slurred, then suddenly he went rigid, chest out, face forward, and I watched fascinated as the blood gurgled out of his mouth like water from an overflowing sewer: his eyes rolled in their sockets, his tongue came out as if he wished to talk, then he collapsed, choking on his own blood, on to the shit-strewn cobbles.
Benjamin and I turned, daggers drawn, staring  into the shadows, but only silence greeted us as if assassination and murder were common events.
Indeed, the dagger could have come from anywhere: a darkened window, a shadowed door or from the top of any of the low squat buildings which stood on either side of the alleyway.
‘Do not be frightened, Roger,’ Benjamin whispered.
‘They have killed their quarry.’
He bent over and prised out the dagger embedded deep between Oswald's shoulder blades.
It came out with a sickening plop and a gushing gout of blood.
I turned the man over.
He was not dead; his lips bubbled with a bloody froth and his eyelids fluttered.
‘A priest!’ he murmured.
Benjamin leant closer.
‘A priest!’
Oswald whispered again.
His eyes opened, staring up into the dark night sky.
‘Absolution,’ Benjamin whispered, ‘depends on the truth.
Tell us what you know.’
‘At Flodden,’ the fellow murmured, ‘at Kelso…
Selkirk knew the truth.’
Oswald opened his mouth again as if to continue but he coughed, choking on his own blood and his head fell to one side, his solitary eye fixed in a glassy trance.
Benjamin felt his neck for a pulse or any sign of life and shook his head.
I crouched down, trying to ease the spasms of fear in my own body.
‘Come, Roger,’ Benjamin whispered.
‘He's dead.
Let us walk back to the tavern as if there is nothing wrong.’
Of course, I agreed.
There is nothing like the sight of death and blood to make old Shallot want a cup of sack or a goblet of wine!
We pushed our way back into the tavern and ordered fresh cups.
Benjamin leaned across the table, ticking the points off on his long fingers.
‘First, let us forget the murders — Selkirk, Ruthven, Irvine and now Oswald.
They are merely bubbles on a dark pool.
What else do we know?’
I decided to show my hand.
‘Some of the meaning of Selkirk's verses is now apparent,’ I replied.
‘The first line is still a mystery but the falcon is James.
That's why Irvine sketched the rough drawing on the tavern wall — a huge bird, the wench said, with a crown.
James IV's personal emblem was a crowned hawk or falcon.’
Benjamin smiled.
‘And the lamb?’
‘The Earl of Angus,’ I replied.
‘Play with the letters of his title and Angus becomes Agnus, the Latin for lamb.’
Benjamin nodded.
‘Of course,’ he whispered.
‘That explains the lines, ‘And the lamb did rest in the falcon's nest’.’
‘In other words,’ I answered, ‘the Earl of Angus bedded where once the falcon had, between the sheets with Queen Margaret.’
Benjamin's eyes narrowed as if , for the first time, he was judging me at my real worth.
‘Go on, Roger!’
‘The Lion,’ I whispered, ‘is also James.
The royal banner of Scotland is the Red Lion Rampant.’
Benjamin pursed his lips.
‘Agreed,’ he replied, ‘but how could this Lion cry even though it died?’
‘I think Oswald was about to tell us,’ I replied, ‘before someone's dagger took him firmly in the back.
Who do you think his killers were?’
Benjamin swilled the wine around in his goblet.
‘God knows,’ he replied.
‘It could be anyone.
Agrippa, Angus, his hired assassins, or someone under orders from the arch murderer at Royston.’
He leaned back against the wall, oblivious to the raucous din around us.
‘Recite the verses again,’ he said.
I began to chant quietly:
‘Three less than twelve should it be,
Or the King, no prince engendered he.
The lamb did rest,
In the falcon's nest.
The Lion cried,
Even though it died.
The truth Now Stands,
In the Sacred Hands,
Of the place which owns
Dionysius’ bones.’
Benjamin sat forward.
‘We know James is, or was, the falcon and the Lion; the Earl of Angus is the lamb.
But the rest?’
He paused and shook his head.
‘I wonder,’ he continued, ‘what Selkirk meant by the phrase he could ‘count the days’?’
He stared round the noisy tavern.
‘And why are we envoys?’
He looked anxiously at me.
‘You heard d'Aubigny — Queen Margaret is welcome back in Scotland so why this farce of a meeting with the Scottish envoys?
The Queen must be frightened of something.
What secrets does she share with her second husband, the Earl of Angus?’
‘The dead child,’ I answered.
‘Alexander, Duke of Ross.
There's a mystery there.’
Benjamin tapped the table top with his fingers.
‘Aye,’ he said, ‘I wonder…’
‘What, Master?’
‘Nothing,’ he replied.
‘Just a wild thought.’
He rested his head between his hands and stared at me.
‘But,’ he continued, ‘I think I know how Selkirk and Ruthven died.
Still, I must reflect further, look around, marshal my facts.’
He straightened up.
‘One thing is certain — we cannot stay with Queen Margaret's party.
We have already been warned by the white rose left in our chamber.
It's time we left!’
‘We cannot run back to Uncle!’
I mocked.
Benjamin grinned.
‘Oh, no, not that, Roger!
We must separate.
Agrippa has blank warrants and letters from the Cardinal.
We will return to Royston for a while but then it's Scotland for me and France for you.
Paris, in fact!’
‘France!
Paris!’
I yelled.
‘Master, surely not?’
Benjamin grabbed my hand.
‘Roger, we are finished here.
What more can we discover?
So far we have gone where other people have sent us, being told to go here, go there, like children in a maze.
It's time to take some control of events and do what is not expected.’
‘But why Scotland?’
I queried.
‘And why me to Paris?’
‘Our dead friend Oswald mentioned something about Kelso.
Some Scots fled to the abbey there after Flodden.’
‘And Paris?’
‘Selkirk lived there.
Remember, he talked about Le Coq d'Or tavern?
You know some French?’ he challenged.
‘A little,’ I replied, ‘culled from a horn book.
But let's go together.’
Benjamin's face grew serious.
‘We cannot waste the time, and you'll be safer in Paris than Scotland.
The Earl of Angus would not interfere with the Cardinal's nephew, and the French have no interest in this.
So, you will be secure, provided you keep your own counsel and stay well away from any English envoys there.’
He smiled.
‘Not that any would have anything to do with you!
Look,’ he said, ‘you are to be in France by the beginning of December.
I shall join you at Le Coq d'Or by the fourth Sunday in Advent.’
His dark eyes beseeched me.
‘You will go?’
‘Yes,’ I replied, ‘I will.’
And added my own selfish after-thought that the whores in Paris were the most skilled in the world, whilst cups of claret were as cheap as water there!
We returned without incident to the castle and slept safely in our own chamber.
The next morning Benjamin rose early and said he wished to watch the clerks at work in the scriptorium.
He came back an hour later, looking as smug as a cat who'd stolen the cream.
I asked him why but he just smiled, shook his head and said he would tell me in his own good time.
The castle was now a hive of activity.
The Scots, their mission completed, packed coffers and chests and prepared to leave, intending to go under safe conduct to Yarmouth where their ships would take them back to the Port of Leith in Edinburgh.
Doctor  Agrippa, who surprisingly had kept well out of our way, now came to dance attendance on us.
We made no mention of Oswald or his murder; he seemed totally oblivious of that, being more concerned to hear about our private conversation with Lord d'Aubigny.
The Earl of Angus, too, had not forgotten us.
His two silent assassins, Corin and Alleyn, attached themselves to Agrippa like dogs to a new master and where he went, they followed.
The magician didn't seem to mind, especially as the two clansmen seemed very much in awe of him although they studied Benjamin and myself like two hawks would chickens, as if savouring the thought of a meal to come.
The following day Agrippa announced we would leave and we slipped quietly out of Nottingham and took the road south.
Behind us, loping along like two white wolves, trotted Corin and Alleyn, seemingly oblivious to the miles we covered, padding silently behind our horses without murmur or protest.
At night, when we slept in taverns, they stayed in the outhouses, fending for themselves like two animals.
If Agrippa gave an order they obeyed with alacrity, but sometimes I caught them watching me and shuddered at the amusement in their icy, pale-blue eyes.
We found Royston much as we had left it.
Of course, Queen Margaret and Catesby questioned us, paying particular attention to how d'Aubigny looked, what he said and how he treated us, until my head reeled with their constant petty questions.
Strangely, never once did they mention the mysteries of Selkirk's and Ruthven's deaths; I got the distinct impression that both of them were relieved by what they heard.
Indeed, Catesby seemed quite excited and both he and his Queen openly announced they would return to Scotland as soon as possible.
‘We shall go back to London!’
Catesby grandly proclaimed.
‘Re-order the household, gather our possessions and, when the Council of Scottish lords sends us safe conduct, travel north to the border.’
Now Agrippa looked withdrawn and quietly anxious.
‘But Les Blancs Sangliers!’ he protested.
‘The deaths of Selkirk and Ruthven, not to mention Irvine — these must be investigated and avenged!’
‘Nonsense!’
Catesby replied.
He pointed to the two killers the Earl of Angus had sent south.
‘We have protection enough.
Let the Yorkist traitors plot in their secret covens.
Such matters do not concern us now.’
I was as bemused as anyone by the sudden resurgence of optimism in Catesby.
I also noticed how Corin and Alleyn, once we had reached Royston, switched their allegiance to him.
If they obeyed Agrippa, they openly fawned on Catesby and Queen Margaret, with a subservience which belied their previously threatening attitude and hostile intentions towards myself and Benjamin.
Agrippa, of course, protested again.
‘There are still matters which need to be resolved,’ he stormed angrily.
Catesby ridiculed his suggestion and Queen Margaret jubilantly derided it.
‘The Council wish me back!’;she announced pompously.
‘My young son the King wants to see his mother.
Surely,’ she added slyly, ‘my good brother would not put obstacles between a queen and her throne or a mother and her son?’
She turned to us, her fat bottom moving smoothly over the polished seat of her chair.
‘Master Benjamin,’ she cried, her voice echoing through the Chapter House, ‘your uncle the Lord Cardinal cannot object!
After all,’ she added slyly, ‘I shall report how your mission to Nottingham was a great success.’
‘Your Grace,’ Benjamin replied coolly, ‘I thank you for that but I must agree with Doctor Agrippa — there are matters still unresolved.’
‘Such as?’
‘Selkirk's verse and his death.
Ruthven's murder, and the violent destruction of John Irvine, the Cardinal's special envoy to Scotland.’
‘And how,’ she asked sweetly, ‘can these matters be resolved?’
Benjamin's gaze held hers.
‘I shall go to Scotland alone,’ he quietly announced, ‘whilst Shallot will travel to Paris.
In Scotland I may find some answers.
In France Shallot may find the truth behind Selkirk's obtuse warnings.’
He smiled.
‘Your Grace cannot object?
We may be in your household but we work under the direct orders of the Lord Cardinal.’
Of course, the royal bitch agreed.
Catesby just smirked.
Agrippa, although he objected at first, reluctantly consented to write out the warrants and disburse the necessary silver for our journeys.
The rest of Queen Margaret's household ignored us, taken up with preparations for their own journey back to London.
The Careys glared at me, Scawsby sneered and enquired sarcastically after my health whilst Melford, whenever his gaze caught mine, let his hand fall to the dagger at his belt.
Moodie was different.
He was withdrawn and seemed rather frightened.
Just before Benjamin and I left, he searched me out, a small package in his hand.
‘You go to Paris?’ he asked.
I nodded.
‘To Le Coq d'Or tavern?’
‘Yes,’ I replied.
‘Why?’
Moodie shamefacedly extended the package he held.
‘In a street nearby,’ he mumbled, ‘at the Sign of the Pestle in the Rue des Moines, would you leave this?
It's for…’
He looked away, embarrassed.
‘It's for a Madame Eglantine who calls there.
I knew her once,’ he stuttered, ‘it's a gift.’
I looked at the little priest and grinned at Benjamin.
‘Of course,’ I replied.
‘Even priests have friends, be they male or female.’
[Now there goes my clerk again, protesting as if he was as chaste as the driven snow.
He squirms his little bum on the stool.
‘I suppose Moodie's going to be the murderer!’ he yelps: I tell the little bastard to shut up.
There are more terrors to come, more mysteries and  secrets than he could ever know.
Something which, if I lived to be two hundred years old then went and announced it at St Paul's Cross, would rock the very throne of England and scandalise the courts of Europe!
Good, that's shut the little bastard up.
Now I can get back to my story.’
Benjamin and I left Royston in the last week of November, when the days grew dark early and the sun disappeared a few hours after noon.
The mist had lifted from a countryside now hard and black under an iron frost.
We reached the crossroads.
I looked mournfully at Benjamin.
‘We part here, Master?’
He looked around as if to make sure Agrippa or any other spy was not lurking in the hedgerow, and shook his head in contradiction.
My heart quickened.
‘So I'm not off to France?’
‘In due course, Roger, but surely you realise where we must go first?’
‘Master, I am in no mood for riddles.
I am cold and getting more frightened by the hour.
I wish to God this business was done and we were back in Ipswich!’
Benjamin patted me on the shoulder.
‘Listen, Roger,’ he explained, ‘at Sheen Palace lies the corpse of James IV of Scotland.
Now, we saw Queen Margaret mourning her husband; we have Selkirk's riddle about a Lion that cried even though it died; Oswald the moss trooper's tale about more than one royal corpse being discovered at Flodden…’
Benjamin shook his head.
‘I know he didn't actually say that but it was implicit in his words.
Above all, we have his strange reference to Kelso.
Roger, I believe all these mysteries are rooted in King James's death at Flodden.
Accordingly, we must examine the corpse at Sheen.’
‘Hell's teeth!’
I exclaimed.
‘We just can't march up to Sheen Palace and demand to see a royal corpse!’
Benjamin pulled Wolsey's warrants out of his wallet.
‘Oh, yes, we can, Roger.
These warrants allow us to go  wherever we wish.
They order every servant of the Crown, on their loyalty to the King, to give us aid and assistance.’
‘Ah, well, Master,’ I smiled, ‘if you put it like that, of course, it makes sense!’
[Now there's my little clerk sniggering away just because I was frightened.
He forgets I can lean forward in this great chair and give him a good whack across the shoulders.
On second thoughts, I won't.
He's right.
I was terrified and my fear was born of shadowy terrors yet to come.]
We struck south-west for the old Roman Road which runs from Newark to London.
Benjamin had another reason for our sudden change of plan.
‘You see, Roger,’ he commented, ‘you were expected to take the road to Dover whilst I was bound for Scotland.
If anyone is preparing an ambush or some stealthy assassin lies lurking in a tavern, their wait will be both long and fruitless.’
Poor Benjamin, he could be so innocent.
He forgot we had to travel back!
8
Our journey was rather eerie — I mean, travelling south to meet a dead man — nor was it a comfortable one.
The weather was deathly cold, the frost nipping at every part of our exposed flesh.
I was soon made to feel even more uncomfortable.
We stopped at a tavern and, before we ate our evening meal, Benjamin took me up to our flea-infested chamber.
‘Take off your doublet and shirt, Roger.’
I stared aghast.
‘Don't worry, Roger, I have no designs on your lithe, young body.
I merely want you to perform an experiment.
Trust me.’
He delved into a saddlebag and drew out a long, black chain.
‘Don't ask me where I got this from.’
He grinned.
‘Actually, I found it at Royston.
It's a priest's penitential chain to be worn around the waist against the skin.
I would like you to wear it for a while.’
‘Why me?’
I yelled.
‘You wear the bloody thing!’
Benjamin opened his cloak.
‘I'm far too thin and angular.
You're the proper build.
Wear it as comfortably as possible.’
I put the Godforsaken thing on.
Strange, at first I didn't notice any difference but that the chain was cold and slipped against my stomach.
I only remembered it when I leaned forward or when I tried to sleep at night.
(Do remember, these chains were not really a penance, more a sharp rebuke to the pleasure-loving flesh and a curt reminder of vows taken.)
‘You cannot take it off, Roger,’ my master ordered.
‘I insist on that.
You must wear it as James IV of Scotland did.’
‘Why did he?’
I asked.
Benjamin explained: ‘The King's father was murdered when James was but a boy.
However, the King always believed he was partly responsible for his father's death.
The chain was a sharp reminder of his guilt.’
‘According to Oswald, the corpse at Flodden had no chain about it.
So why this mummery and play-acting?’
‘James could have taken it off,’ Benjamin answered.
‘Either at the request of some lady because it disturbed their bouncing on the royal bed.
Or, more probably, because he went into battle in full armour.
That would fit snugly round his body and make the chain nigh on impossible to wear.
Moreover, if James received any blow, it would drive the chain deep into the flesh and inflict a mortal wound.’
I accepted Benjamin's words but, when I questioned him on why I should wear it, he just smiled, waved a bony hand and told me to be patient.
We reached London two days later.
I advised my master it would be dangerous to go through the city as the Cardinal's spies were everywhere and they might question our journey to Sheen.
Instead, I led him in by secret ways, going round the Hospital of St Katherine, past the Tower, to Custom House on the corner of Thames Street near the Woolquay.
Oh, I felt tempted to wander, to spend one day, one night in my old haunts or slip across the river to the stews and brothels of Southwark but Benjamin insisted I follow my own advice.
We kept our faces deep in our cowls, gave false names at taverns and refused to talk or discuss any matter while we were within a bow shot of anyone else.
We went along the river bank: two smugglers were being hanged near Billingsgate and this had attracted a large crowd to watch their last dance.
We slipped by these and hired a wherry from Botolph's Wharf.
Despite the cold, I remember, it was a clear, sunny day.
I kept silent, sitting back in the wherry to gaze forlornly  across at the spires, towers and turrets of the city.
We shot under London Bridge.
I glimpsed the spiked heads of decapitated traitors, their shredded necks, gaping mouths and straggly hair.
All were eyeless for the crows and ravens pluck the succulent pieces first.
Once under the bridge the boatmen pulled out to mid-stream.
They paused a while to let a fleet of barges, packed with city dignitaries, sweep by as stately as swans.
Oh, the splendour of the rich!
Minstrels played; the music wafted sweetly across the water from poops and sterns hidden under a dazzle of bright banners and flags.
Silver bells tinkled and gold-embossed oars flashed rhythmically up and down.
The splendour and pomp seemed to mock our secretive, eerie journey.
We passed Queenshithe, St Paul's Wharf, White Friars and the Temple.
Benjamin nudged me as Westminster Abbey came into view.
My master knew about my past: the abbey, you see, before fat Henry intervened, had a sanctuary where fugitives from the law sheltered from bailiffs and sheriffs' men.
These outlaws pitched their tents in the abbey precincts, fought over stolen goods and, like Jack Hogg and I, stole out at night to rob and pillage the houses of the rich.
The great bells of the abbey were booming and I idly wondered what would have happened to my life if Jack Hogg and I had not been taken.
(Now let that be a lesson to you!
Never protest at fortune: as one door closes, another opens.
All you've got to do is make sure there's no trap beyond it.)
At last we reached the Palace of Sheen.
The wherry pulled in and we disembarked at the great garden gate.
The palace stands far back from the river, its only access being through fields and orchards which protect it against the vagaries of the Thames.
Now Benjamin and I were most subtle.
Before our journey we had discussed whether the court and its hangers-on would be there.
We decided they would not.
In autumn, Bluff Hal preferred Windsor and the hunting lodges in the great forest there.
We were pleased to find the palace deserted (or so we thought) except for the usual steward and bailiffs who stayed throughout the year to clean the rooms, wash the hangings and sweep out the dirt once the court moved on.
Benjamin acted with all the authority he could muster: displaying Wolsey's warrants and issuing orders in such harsh tones that everyone we met was soon running about as if the great Cardinal himself had arrived.
We met the steward in his small chamber off the buttery near the Great Hall, a nervous, beanpole of a man with greasy, grey hair and a hare-lip which fascinated me.
‘Master,’ he whined, ‘how can I help you?’
‘You can keep secret counsel?’
Benjamin asked sharply.
The fellow nodded, round-eyed.
‘Of course, Master.
My lips are sealed.’
He clenched his mouth shut, making his face even more grotesque.
‘You are to tell no one of our arrival here.
We wish to see the corpse of the late James IV of Scotland.’
The fellow's mouth opened slackly and fear flared in his eyes.
He licked his lips.
‘That is forbidden,’ he whispered.
‘I am here on the Lord Cardinal's express orders,’ Benjamin repeated.
‘You have seen the warrants.
Shall I go and tell my uncle you ignored them?’
The fellow's resistance collapsed like a house of cards; bowing and mumbling apologies, he led us out of the main palace building, across a deserted cobbled yard to a small tower built in the far wall of the palace.
Two sentries armed with sword and halberd stood on guard.
Once again there was discussion but Benjamin had his way.
The door was unlocked, we climbed a flight of cold, damp, mildewed steps, another door opened and we stepped into an oval-shaped chamber.
It was stripped of all decoration: no furniture, no rushes, no hangings on the wall.
The shutters on the windows were firmly closed and padlocked.
A perfect mausoleum for the desolate coffin which lay on trestles in the centre of the room.
‘Light the torches,’ Benjamin ordered.
‘After that, sir, you will withdraw.’
The steward was about to protest but my master's gimlet stare forced him to obey.
A tinder was struck and the cressets pushed into niches in the wall flared into life.
Now, I openly confess, I was terrified.
Oh, I have seen corpses enough.
Old Shallot's a brawling man: a born street fighter and a soldier who has seen more battles than many of you have had hot dinners.
Yet that chamber chilled me.
I felt as if we were in the presence of a ghoul, the living dead.
The steward closed the door behind him and our shadows danced against the wall as we stood transfixed looking at the coffin lid, half-expecting it to be pushed aside and the corpse to rise and step out.
Benjamin must have caught my mood though of course, as always, he drew strength from my presence.
‘Remove the lid, Roger.’
I took a deep breath and ran my dagger under the rim of the casket, freeing the wooden pegs from their sockets around the edge of the coffin.
We lifted the lid and placed it gently on the floor.
The embalmers' perfume filled the room, tinged with a slight sourness which smelt repellent.
We then removed the funeral cloths, lifted the gauze veils and stared down at the royal corpse.
The heavy-lidded eyes were still half-open, the lips slightly parted; in the flickering torchlight the figure seemed to be asleep.
I half-expected to catch a pulse in the throat, see the chest rise and fall and watch those long, white fingers creep towards me…
‘Come, Roger,’ Benjamin whispered.
‘Oh, Lord, Master!
What?’
‘Lift the body out.’
I closed my eyes and grasped the legs as my master picked up the corpse by the shoulders.
We gently lowered it to the floor.
‘Now, Roger, let us remove the clothes.’
My stomach lurched and my heart began to pound.
Now, when I was a prisoner of the French (and, yes, that's another story) I had to clear corpses from the battle field.
I was so bloody delighted to be alive I moved corpses  minus their heads, legs and arms, and didn't turn a hair.
But when you lift a corpse that looks anything but a corpse, it's terrifying.
You never really know what to expect.
[I see my chaplain's face has a greenish tinge around those high cheek bones he's so proud of.
Good, perhaps he won't be so quick to stuff his fat, little stomach with delicacies from my kitchen!]
Anyway, in that desolate chamber at Sheen I removed soft buskins from the corpse's feet, carefully pushing back the blue robe and the white cotton shift beneath.
Benjamin loosened the loin cloth.
I could not bear to touch that part of the body.
Now, the embalmers had carefully replaced the face but the torso of the corpse was a mass of wounds and grossly disfigured by a black line which stretched from the crotch to the neck.
‘You see, Roger,’ Benjamin explained, ‘the embalmers first slit the corpse open and remove the heart, stomach and entrails.
They drain off as much blood as possible and wash the body with sour wine.
After that, spices are packed in and the skin resewn.’
‘Thank you, Master,’ I replied courteously, feeling quite faint.
I tried desperately to keep my gorge from rising and my stomach from emptying the contents of its last meal.
‘Master,’ I pleaded, ‘what does all this prove?’
‘Well, the body was badly mauled in battle.’
Benjamin pointed with the tip of his finger at the purple-red crosses on the corpse's chest.
‘These are arrow wounds.
Here,’ he gestured to the side of the chest, ‘is a lance wound.’
He stretched out his hand and tapped the corpse just above the knees.
‘These are sword wounds.
I suspect the King was surrounded and was lightly wounded by arrows.
A spearman tried to bring him down with a lance thrust under the cuirass whilst another took a swing with a sword at the joints in the greaves on his legs.
Not enough to kill.’
‘Not enough to kill?’
I questioned.
‘Oh, no,’ Benjamin whispered, ‘the death wound is elsewhere.’
He turned the corpse over on its stomach and pointed to a great ugly bruise at the base of the spine.
‘He was killed from behind.
Someone crept up and thrust a sword under the back plate of his armour, slicing his spine.’
Benjamin gestured to the back of the corpse's head.
‘I suspect these wounds were due to the body being trampled in the fury of battle.’
‘But is it the King?’
I asked.
‘Is it James?’
Benjamin turned the corpse on its back.
‘Look at the hip bones, Roger.
Can you detect any mark?’
I plucked one of the torches from the wall and crouched down, wrinkling my nose at the mild sour odour.
‘No graze,’ I muttered.
I rose and walked to the other side.
‘As white and as whole as the skin of a baby!’
Benjamin smiled and took the torch from me.
‘Now, Roger, stand up.
Push up your shirt and take off the iron chain.’
I did so, feeling rather strange to stand half-undressed in the presence of a mummified corpse.
Benjamin pressed the cold steel of his dagger against my stomach.
‘The chain has left slight welt marks, yet these will disappear.
But,’ he asked, ‘where is the soreness?’
I pointed to my hip bones, especially the right which had taken the weight of the chain.
Already an ugly welt had appeared.
Benjamin re-sheathed his dagger.
‘Now, Roger, it's obvious — you have worn that chain for a few days and it has left a mark.
King James was supposed to have worn it for at least twenty years.
The result of such constant chafing would definitely be left on the skin.’
I jumped as one of the shutters suddenly rattled.
‘Come on, Master,’ I whispered.
‘Let's be gone from here.
We have seen enough!’
I tied the points of my hose, pushing down my shirt, glad to protect myself against the unearthly chill in that ghastly chamber.
I tapped the corpse gently with my feet.
‘No need for further proof, Master.
This man may have  fought at Flodden but he is not King James.
The corpse does not bear the chafing marks of a chain.’
Benjamin sat down on one of the trestles, his hand over the coffin, and rubbed the heel of his hand against his chin.
‘Master,’ I insisted, ‘we should go.’
We re-arranged the funeral cloths and decently restored the corpse to its coffin, pressing the lid firmly down.
Benjamin carefully extinguished the torches and I almost shoved him through the door, glad to escape from the miasma of the unburied dead.
The steward was waiting for us at the foot of the steps.
‘You have seen all you wanted, Master?’
Benjamin slipped two silver pieces into his hand.
‘Yes, and remember, keep quiet about this, though I suppose there's no one here.
The court is at Windsor?’
The fellow swallowed nervously.
‘Yes and no, Master.
The King has gone but…’
‘Who is here?’
Benjamin rasped.
‘Her Grace the Queen and her young daughter, the Princess Mary.’
‘They must not know!’
I whispered.
‘Master…’
Benjamin understood my warning glance.
We pushed past the steward, re-crossed the cobbled yard and entered the main palace building.
We were almost past the entrance to the main hall when a woman's voice called out: ‘Signor Daunbey!
Signor Daunbey!’
Benjamin stopped so suddenly, I almost collided with him.
A woman stood just within the hall.
She wore a gold-fringed dress of red murrey with a white silk head-veil; around her throat was a golden necklace of bejewelled pomegranates.
Beside her stood a small, red-haired girl, white-faced and dark-eyed.
The woman lifted her veil and came forward.
‘Your Grace!’
Benjamin went down on one knee, tugging at my sleeve for me to follow suit.
‘Roger,’ he whispered, ‘it is the Queen!’
The woman approached.
I stared up into the kind-eyed, sallow face of Catherine of Aragon.
She looked at me and I caught the amusement in her eyes.
‘Signor Daunbey, please stand.
And your friend?’
Benjamin stood up, looking a little flustered, peering over his shoulder and hoping the steward would not make an appearance.
‘Your Grace,’ he stammered, ‘you know my name?’
She smiled though her eyes became hard.
‘I have a memory for faces and names, Signor Daunbey.
You are the Cardinal's nephew.
I have seen you at court.
I am used to…’ now she stammered, ‘to studying what new faces appear.’
She pushed the little girl gently before her.
‘Though you have never met my daughter, the Princess Mary.’
We bowed and kissed the small white hand.
‘Your Grace, I thought you would be at Windsor?’
Now the Queen looked away.
‘I cannot,’ she answered, her voice guttural, revealing her Spanish background.
‘I cannot share the same rooms.’
She licked her lips.
‘I am the Infanta of Spain and Queen of England.
I cannot share a room never mind my husband, with a whore!’
I looked at her dark face, filled with a mixture of anger and hurt, then at little Mary beside her who, over the years, solemnly drank in the insults offered to her beloved mother.
[Do you know, Henry often did that!
Dumped poor Catherine and Mary in some deserted palace whilst he went whoring.
When he finally divorced Catherine, he sent her to a damp, draughty cottage in the hope that she would die of pleurisy.
Of course she didn't!
The fat bastard poisoned her.
Very few people knew that yet I was there when they opened poor Catherine's dumpy body and took out her heart.
Believe me, it was black and blown up like a rotting pig's bladder.
Mary, of course, never forgot!
Don't you believe the stories about King Henry being buried at Westminster.
I was there the night she exhumed her father's body and had his rotting  remains tossed into the Thames.
God rest them both, two good women viciously treated by a cruel man!
However, that was in the future.]
At Sheen Catherine just seemed pleased to see a friendly face.
We chattered a while and Benjamin was on the point of leaving when the Queen stepped forward.
‘Signor Daunbey, why are you here?
Do you bring messages?’
The Queen looked at me and glimpsed the iron chain in my hand.
‘You have been to see the corpse?’ she asked.
‘Yes, Your Grace, on my uncle's orders.’
Catherine nodded.
‘I was Regent, you know,’ she half-whispered.
‘It was I who sent old Surrey north to crush James at Flodden.’
‘Your Grace,’ I blurted out, ‘we have seen the corpse.
Would Your Grace be kind enough to answer certain questions?’
Benjamin looked at me in surprise but, I'll be honest, I was tired of this subterfuge and Catherine seemed the friendliest person we had met since this horrible business had begun.
The queen smiled and tweaked me gently by the cheek.
‘I have heard of you, Shallot,’ she murmured.
‘The Lord Cardinal has described your escapades until the tears have soaked his cheeks.’
‘I am glad to be of service.’
I answered sarcastically.
[Believe me, old Wolsey had occasion to cry about me before he shuffled off his mortal coil.]
Catherine waved us into the hall and we sat in the window seat.
Benjamin stammered out an apologetic request — how he would appreciate it if no one else was told about our visit.
Catherine smiled warmly.
Little Mary sat beside her like a doll, her thumb stuck solemnly in her mouth.
‘Your questions, Signor Shallot?’
‘Your Grace, how was the corpse when it was brought south?’
‘A bloody mess,’ she replied.
‘One side of the face was badly mauled.
The embalmers worked skilfully, even as they brought it here.
The royal tabard was soaked in blood.
I sent it to Hen—the King in France as a token of our great victory.’
She peered through the mullioned glass window.
‘I should not have done that,’ she whispered.
‘Your Grace,’ I asked, ‘are you sure it was the corpse of the King of Scotland?’
Catherine shrugged.
‘I had never met James alive, so how could I recognise him in death?
He wore a ring on his right hand; the tabard and armour were royal.’
She made a face.
‘The corpse was shaved but the beard and moustache were red.
Surrey said it was James, though I have heard otherwise!’
‘But no chain?’
I persisted.
‘Ah, the chain,’ she murmured.
‘No, there was no chain.
But I tell you this — even if the corpse is not James's, Surrey himself assured me that no royal personage could escape from that battle.
However, James might have fought in plain armour.
It is a common practice.’
She smiled at us.
I noticed how her teeth were still white, not rotting black like those of the courtiers who constantly stuffed sweets and comfits into their mouth.
‘What is your interest in the corpse?’ she asked.
‘Though perhaps you would be wise not to answer that!’
Benjamin smiled and we rose.
We bowed and were about to leave when the Queen suddenly murmured, ‘Signor Daunbey, Signor Shallot.’
Now she looked solemn-faced.
I caught a glimpse of the dark beauty which had once captivated Henry.
‘Be most careful,’ she warned.
‘And be assured, my husband the King has a close interest in these matters.’
We took Catherine's warnings to heart.
I dropped the chain in the moat and we fled like the wind from Sheen.
It was late afternoon by the time the wherry brought us back to Botolph's Wharf.
Benjamin and I had hardly  exchanged a word, even when the boat glided by Syon Convent.
We collected our horses from the tavern and decided to skirt the city.
We crossed Holywell Road, Deep Ditch, and travelled as fast as we could around Charterhouse and Clerkenwell, keeping well clear of the city before taking the road south to New Cross.
We stayed at a splendid hostel there.
Of course, I drank deeply from a mixture of relief at the Queen's open support as well as the need to forget the horrors of that grisly chamber.
After the evening meal (sweet salmon cooked in white wine), Benjamin and I stayed up long after the taproom emptied.
In the main our conversation was about the Queen, and the King's penchant for ever younger mistresses.
At last Benjamin stared round the deserted room.
‘What do you think, Roger?
Did we see the corpse of James IV of Scotland?’
‘I don't know,’ I replied.
He leaned across the table, ticking off the points on his long, bony fingers.
‘Why did we go to Sheen?’
Benjamin didn't wait for my reply.
‘We were to view the corpse because we suspected it was the body of an imposter.
The only proof of our suspicions is the lack of any chain or evidence of one on the body.
We discovered that the man in the coffin at Sheen probably never wore a chain round his waist.’
Benjamin paused and pushed his platter away.
‘I deduce the corpse we have just seen does not belong to James IV.
So what did happen to the King?’
I remember trimming the wax from the fat tallow candle in the centre of the table.
‘We are faced with a number of choices, Master,’ I replied.
‘First, King James may have fought in ordinary armour, been killed, and Surrey chose the wrong body.
Secondly, James may have been killed either before the battle or at its beginning.
Perhaps by assassins sent by Les Blancs Sangliers.’
I shrugged.
‘That could explain the  confusion and the poor leadership of the Scottish Army at Flodden.’
‘Or,’ Benjamin intervened, ‘James could have fled, perhaps to the abbey at Kelso.’
‘But,’ I replied, ‘if any of what we have said is true, why does Queen Margaret grieve over the corpse of an imposter?
She, of all people, would know the body of her husband!’
Benjamin just stared down at the table, shaking his head.
I laughed sourly.
‘Can't you see the weakness of our argument, Master?
If the corpse at Sheen is that of an imposter, surely it would be safer for Margaret just to get rid of it?’
‘Perhaps she hopes people will see what they want to,’ Benjamin replied, ‘any change detected being dismissed as fanciful or due to the work of the embalmers.’
He leaned back in his chair and breathed heavily.
‘Yes, Roger, we must remember that.
In my days as a Justice's Clerk I saw enough corpses to know that death can grossly disfigure even the comeliest of faces.’
He grimaced.
‘Indeed, the Queen might not be guilty of deception.
Perhaps Margaret just wants that corpse to be her husband's, to give her something to grieve over.
She might prefer to accept that rather than face the horror of the idea of her husband, the King of Scotland, being thrown into a pit among commoners.’
He looked up.
‘What's the matter, Roger?’
‘Well, Master, we are building our arguments on the fact that there were men who looked like King James.’
Benjamin rubbed his face.
He suddenly looked tired and drawn.
‘We have discussed that, Roger.
Remember, James belonged to a Scottish clan.
It's more than possible that there were a number of courtiers with the same build and looks as he.’
He smiled wanly.
‘Never forget, nobles love to ape the fashions and styles of their masters.
I can think of at least half a dozen of Henry's courtiers who could be mistaken for the King.’
He leaned heavily against the table.
‘The possibilities are endless,’ he muttered.
‘How do we know James wasn't taken prisoner by Surrey and hustled down to some secret prison in England?’
He toyed with his goblet, watching the lees of wine dance and jump.
‘All I do know, Roger, is that all the deaths we have witnessed, all the mysteries we have faced, have their origin in what happened at Flodden.’
‘We know a lot of things,’ I retorted, ‘but we can't prove anything.’
Benjamin fell silent and we sat watching the guttering flame of the candle.
‘Perhaps there are other keys which might fit the lock of this mystery?’
My master stared at me.
‘Well,’ I stammered, ‘if we could resolve the White Rose murders…?’
Benjamin stirred and shouted at the slattern to bring a toothpick.
The sleepy-eyed girl brought one across and Benjamin began to clean his teeth.
I watched him in disbelief for my master was usually keen to observe the finest etiquette at table.
Benjamin, however, cleaned his teeth, cupping his hand occasionally as he studied the end of the toothpick.
‘Master, are you well?
Do you find that toothpick more enigmatic than the mysteries we face?’
He grinned.
‘Aristotle, my dear Roger, always claimed that careful observation, coupled with logic, would solve any problem under the sun.
Do you remember Ruthven, and the morsels we found between his teeth?’
I swallowed hard.
‘Master, I have just eaten!’
‘Yes, Roger, so have I. Indeed, over the last few weeks since Ruthven's death, I have been careful, wherever possible, to eat the same foods he did.
Do you know, I have never yet found anything which closely resembled what we discovered in his mouth.
An interesting thought, eh, Roger?’
‘Do you have any solution?’
‘As I said at Nottingham, faint glimmerings — all shadow and no substance.
But, come, tomorrow I travel  north and you go to Dover.
Who knows what truth a tavern in Paris and a monastery in Scotland may hold.’
We rose early the next morning.
I carefully packed my saddle bags, making sure I had a copy of Selkirk's verse and Moodie's gift.
Benjamin travelled with me through the misty, frost-bitten countryside.
We chattered about Ipswich and I found the business of Scawsby's treatment of my mother still rankled in my heart.
At the crossroads to the south of Norwood we parted company.
Benjamin clasped my hand warmly.
‘Enough of Scawsby, Roger.
Be of good cheer.
We shall meet in Paris and be home by Yuletide.
’ He grinned and I caught the mockery in his voice.
‘Whatever happens, Roger, we have been successful.
Queen Margaret herself has congratulated us.
Such praise,’ he added drily, ‘cannot be dismissed lightly.’
I pictured the bitch's fat, doughy face and drew small comfort from the memory.
‘Remember, Roger, I will be at Le Coq d'Or before Christmas.
Be there!’
He clasped me once more by the wrist and, turning his horse, cantered quickly out of sight.
I had no choice but to travel south.
I did think of making a call at Ipswich to present my warmest compliments to Mistress Scawsby but that would have been too dangerous.
Scawsby had killed my mother, nearly had me hanged, and I thought a more subtle revenge would prove a finer dish to serve.
So I continued south, making my way along the great chalk road which snaked across the Downs to Dover.
Looking back, I suppose I was contented enough, though sad to be parted from Benjamin.
Oh, the follies of youth!
9
I entered Dover at nightfall just as the sky darkened and rain began to beat down on my plumed cap.
I stayed in a flea-ridden inn whilst outside the sea began to seethe and boil under a sudden black storm.
By dawn the weather had abated though the sea was still angry, its surface broken into dark ridges and furrows by a treacherously high wind.
A sloop took me out to the ship which dipped and rose wildly in the harbour.
Oh, God, it looked pitifully small and flimsy!
I spent the day riding, or rather bucking, at anchor, the only time in my life I really wanted to die.
The next day the idiot of a captain decided to make a run for the open sea.
I gave up.
I stayed in the darkness vomiting as the ship veered wildly through the troughs of high waves.
I prayed to every saint I knew and, when I reached Harfleur, spent a great deal of my time resting in a seaside tavern.
After a few days my condition improved, the weather changed dramatically, and I made my way across the cultivated, fertile fields of Normandy.
A week's journey to the Porte of St Denis and into Paris.
At first the city entranced me: the spacious meadows and dark green woods near the walls; the windmills, châteaux and palaces being swiftly built in the new Italianate style with their façades of grey stone, high arched windows and elegant columns.
My knowledge of French was rather better than Benjamin knew.
I soon found my way around both the broad boulevards and reeking, rat-infested alleyways.
Now Paris is a city which seethes like a hissing snake.
It is full of intrigue, subtle plots, and traders who could cheat a beggar out of his skin.
My store of money began to dwindle but at last I found Le Coq d'Or, a dingy, two-storey building which stood at the mouth of one of the runnels on the far side of the Grand Pont opposite the elaborately carved Notre Dame Cathedral.
The landlord was a snot-nosed, weak-eyed character with greasy, spiked hair and a face as pitted as the track which ran past his dingy tavern.
I took a garret there, posing as an English student from the halls of Cambridge.
It was the sort of place where you are accepted for what you claim to be, your worth depending on how much gold or silver you have in your purse.
After two or three days I bought the landlord a carafe of his own wine — the mean-mouthed varlet picked a costly, unsealed jar, not the usual watery vinegar he served most of his customers — and asked him about Selkirk.
The fellow gave me a world-weary look and shook his head.
‘I cannot remember everybody, Monsieur.’
A piece of silver jogged his memory.
‘Ah, yes,’ he answered, breathing wine fumes into my face.
‘The Scottish doctor — thin as a beanpole with untidy red hair.
He and his stupid verses!’
The fellow shrugged.
‘He was here for a while.
But then other Goddams [This is what the French used to call us English]came and took him away.’
‘What did Selkirk do?’
I asked.
‘I mean, before his arrest.’
The landlord made a face.
‘He stayed in his room, he went out…’
I fidgeted angrily and the fellow licked his lips.
‘I think he went to St Denis,’ he continued.
‘To the abbey there.
Or to Notre Dame.’
He brought a dirty finger up to his lips.
‘He was always carrying a casket, a battered, tattered thing which he guarded with his life.’
‘What was it?’
‘I don't know.’
‘The English who came for him, did they find the casket?’
‘No, I don't think so.
They ransacked his room and were angry because they couldn't find anything.
Selkirk laughed at them, jumping up and down here in the taproom.
Some of the things he said made no sense so they gave him a crack across the head and took him away.
That was the last I saw of him.’
I could make no further headway with the landlord so I made enquiries amongst the other customers: a beggar who whined for alms inside the doorway and a greasy-haired knave, but they only repeated what the landlord had said.
The only clue (and one I ignored at the time), was Selkirk's interest in the Abbey of St Denis to the north of the city.
I was planning to go there when my descent into the horrors began.
Now, Moodie had given me a package.
Of course, I had opened it and found nothing more than a piece of costly silk, blood-red and fringed at each end.
A sort of sash for some lady to wear round her smooth, soft-skinned waist.
It gave off a fragrant smell which stirred my memory though I could not place it.
Anyway, bored by my stay at Le Coq d'Or I decided to go to the shop under the Sign of the Pestle in the Rue des Moines and leave Moodie's present there.
[Yes, yes, my little chaplain is correct.
He has pursed his sour lips and guessed my true intentions: if I had not been so bored, I would have sold it.
I wish to God I had!]
I found the Rue des Moines and entered the small apothecary's shop, but I was disappointed.
There was no Madame Eglantine, only a garrulous old man who chattered like a magpie, took the package and said he would hand it over to the lady next time she visited the place.
I told him who I was and where I was staying and then forgot the whole incident.
Two days later I was in the taproom of Le Coq d'Or, the slattern beside me half drunk.
She pressed up against me, her fingers tickling my codpiece though I knew she was after my purse.
My hand was teasing her juicy shoulders and succulent breasts thrust out from a dirty, though very low-cut bodice.
A  call of nature interrupted my pleasure and I went out to the necessary house behind the tavern, nothing more than a hole in the ground enclosed by a shabby wooden palisade and a door which bolted from the inside.
I was squatting there, contemplating my future, when suddenly the door burst open.
Three figures, their faces muffled by cloaks and broad-brimmed hats, seized me and began to beat me as if I was some dog.
Now in life there is nothing more defenceless or ridiculous than a man with his pantaloons about his ankles, his shirt tail raised and his mind on other matters.
The three ruffians pummelled me, banging my head against the wooden slats.
Of course, I fought back like a veritable lion but my sword and dagger were in the garret and who in the tavern would listen to my screams?
Within a few minutes my body was one mass of bruises from head to toe.
Two of the ruffians seized me, pushing me against the fence, and I could only gabble in horror as their leader drew a long, thin stiletto and pulled back my shirt to expose my throat.
He said something in French about the shop and the Sign of the Pestle.
I saw the evil light in his eyes and knew that so far they had only been playing with me: their real intent was to kill.
I gave one more scream, I don't know for whom.
Benjamin!
My mother!
My nurse!
Wolsey!
Anyone!
The dagger moved closer, nicking part of my neck just under my left ear.
‘I'm too young to die!’
I screamed.
[I can see that little bastard of a chaplain laughing again.
Does he think it's funny?
Look, I'm no hero and, if you had your pants down and three ruffians bent on killing you, you'd bloody scream!]
I closed my eyes and suddenly the jakes door was thrust back and a veritable mountain of a man stood there.
He roared in French at my three assailants, brandishing a huge club.
They took one look at him and scampered over the fence as quickly as rats over the timbers of a sinking ship.
I just slumped and sat down in the mud and dirt.
The Colossus squatted down next to me.
I glimpsed a broad, cheery face, a bristling beard and moustache.
‘Who are you?’
I whispered.
The fellow stood up and I saw the long, brown gown of a Franciscan monk, the rough cord round his waist and the wooden crucifix slung on a piece of string round his neck.
‘I am Brother Joachim,’ he announced in a voice like thunder.
‘You are a priest?’
‘I am a Franciscan and a Maillotin.’
‘A Franciscan I know.
What's a Maillotin?’
I mumbled through bloodied lips.
‘Never you mind!’
He scooped me up in his great arms, barking at me to make myself presentable and half-carried me back into the taproom.
On his orders the tapster broached a good cask of wine and brought across a bowl of water.
Joachim cleaned my face, wiping dirt from the bruises whilst I greedily gulped the thick red claret.
Perhaps I should have known there was something wrong; the taproom was strangely quiet, the slattern had disappeared and the landlord seemed too busy to care.
‘Do you need any more help?’
Joachim asked.
‘No,’ I muttered.
‘Then I'll be off!’ the friar boomed.
‘I have to visit the shrine of the Blessed Dionysius.’
Despite my injuries, I gaped up at him.
‘Dionysius?’
I queried.
‘Who is he?’
‘St Denis, of course!’ the friar joked back.
‘I use the Latin name.
You know the monastery?’
He shook my hand and strode out of the tavern.
I never saw him again, the man who saved my life.
(Do you know, until fat Henry crushed the monasteries, I always had a soft spot for Franciscans.
Not just because of Joachim's kindness but that chance encounter put me on the road to solving Selkirk's riddles and the horrible murders they caused.)
Once Joachim had gone, the landlord showed  renewed interest in me.
He came and stood over me, a mock-tragic expression on his face.
‘Monsieur, you were attacked?’
‘Oh, no,’ I sarcastically retorted, ‘just some French bravos welcoming me to this Godforsaken city!
’ I got up.
‘I must go to my chamber.’
‘Monsieur!’
The villain stepped in front of me, two of the thugs he always kept in the tavern to crack the heads of noisy revellers now standing behind him.
‘Monsieur, your room has been ransacked.
By whom I do not know.
Your baggage and silver, they have gone!’
‘Hell's teeth!
’ I snarled but the landlord, the two thugs close to his shoulder, screamed his innocence.
He peered closer at me and asked what an Englishman was doing in Paris.
‘This Selkirk,’ he jibed, ‘were you his bum boy?’
[At the time I didn't know what he was talking about.
I always was, and have been ever, a devoted admirer of the fairer sex, but after you have made the acquaintance of men like Christopher Marlowe, you really can't trust anyone.
Oh, yes, I knew Marlowe the playwright and helped him stage his play Edward II.
Poor Kit!
A good poet but a bad spy.
I was with him, you know, when he died.
Stabbed to death in a tavern brawl over a pretty boy.]
Ah, well, I had to leave Le Coq d'Or and found myself penniless, freezing in a Paris alleyway without baggage or silver.
I thought of going to St Denis, but to what use?
More pressing was the need to find shelter, food and extra clothing.
I thought of following Joachim but I felt tired, exhausted after my beating.
Somehow, my visit to the Sign of the Pestle had caused the attack on me so I dared not go back there.
I crouched in that alleyway and prayed for Benjamin to come.
Poor old Shallot!
Alone in Paris, in a foreign city on the brink of winter, penniless, hungry, with not an item I could call my own except the clothes I stood up in.
At first, I lived on my wits.
I became a story-teller: painting  my face, filching a gaudily embroidered robe and, not being versed in the French tongue, pretending I was a traveller lately returned from seeing the fables of India and Persia.
I took a position on the edge of one of the bridges across the Seine and told, in halting fashion, stories about forests so high they pierced the clouds.
‘These,’ I cried, ‘are inhabited by horned pygmies who move in herds, and who are old by the time they are seven!’
I earned a few sous so I became more fantastical, maintaining I had met Brahmins who killed themselves on funeral pyres; men with monkeys’ heads and leopards' bodies; giants with only one eye and one foot who could run so fast they could only be caught if they fell asleep in the lap of a virgin.
As the days passed, my wits sharpened and my command of the tongue improved, as did my stories.
I had met Amazons who cried tears of gold, panthers which could fly, trees whose leaves were made of wood, snakes three hundred feet long with eyes of blazing sapphire.
At last both the sous and the stories ran out so I sold the cloak and gathered a few objects: bones, shards of pottery and the occasional rag.
I became a professional relic-seller.
The proud possessor of a fragment of the Infant Jesus's vest, a toy he had once played with (Benjamin would have been proud of that), and a hair from St Peter's beard which could cure the ague or a sore throat.
I had the arm of Aaron and, when someone burnt that as a joke, changed my tale and said the ashes were from a fire over which the martyr of St Lawrence died.
I earned a few sous but not enough.
Paris was full of rogues, card-sharps, brigands, footpads, dice-coggers, pimps, ponces, horse-stealers, bruisers, coin-clippers — the true children of wing-heeled Mercury, the lying patron of thieves and politicians.
In a word, the competition became too intense and, in the reeking runnels and smelly alleyways of Paris, I began to starve.
Now Paris may well be the inspiration of poets and  troubadours but I don't remember it as the fabled Athens of the West.
All I recollect is a grey, sombre sky and the dark Seine rushing under the bridges; tall, sharp-gabled houses which sprang up from the cobbles and leaned crazily together, storey thrust out above storey; the narrow, winding streets of the Latin Quarter; the pell-mell of ascending gables and tinted roof tiles, the gables of their lower storeys sculpted into fantastic shapes of warriors or exotic animals.
Oh, yes, I got to know these well as I slunk past like a hungry fox in a deserted kitchen yard.
Above me, the gaily painted signs of the taverns and food shops creaked in the wind and mocked my hunger.
At each crossroads the stone fountains with their precious supply of water were guarded by men-at-arms.
On one occasion I stopped to pray before the statue of a saint at a street corner and noticed the lamp burning before it.
I stole the candle from its socket and sold it for a crust of bread and a stoup of water from an ale wife.
The fourth Sunday in Advent came and went.
Benjamin had told me he would return to Le Coq d'Or; every morning and each evening I went there but no Benjamin.
I cursed him for a fool.
I tried to speak with the landlord but was driven off for what I seemed — a ragged, evil-smelling beggar.
My mind, once sound as a bell, became muddled and confused.
I thought I saw Selkirk and his damned doggerel tripped through my brain:
Three less than twelve should it be,
Or the King, no prince engendered he!
[The vicar wipes away a tear.
The bastard had better not be laughing!]
I slept in graveyards or along the steps of the churches and woke hollow-eyed and sick with hunger to the oaths of the men-at-arms, the mocking jeers of cheapjacks and mountebanks, the clatter of hooves and the crazy jangle and flurry of hundreds of city bells.
London reeks but Paris is much worse.
The stench there is terrible; the alleys  and streets caked with mud and shit, and made more pungent by other offal which smelt as if barrels of sulphur had been spilt along every alleyway.
I lived as a beggar, scrounging what I could, but then winter came, not only early but cruelly, one of the sharpest, coldest winters for decades.
The roads became clogged and food in Paris began to run out.
Even the fat ones, the lords of the soil, the truculent men-at-arms and the tight-waisted, square-bodied wives of the bourgeois, began to starve.
The markets became empty and what food was left in Paris was prized more highly than gold.
The old died first, the beggars and the maimed; they just froze as they leaned gasping against urine-stained walls.
Then the babies, the young and the weak.
Snow fell in constant sharp, white flurries.
The Seine froze over and the nearby forests, usually a source of food, now gave birth to a new nightmare.
Great, shaggy-haired, grey wolves banded together, left the frozen darkness of the trees and crossed the Seine in packs, to hunt in the suburbs.
They attacked dogs and cats and savaged and maimed the crippled beggars.
They even dug up graveyards, dragging out the freshly interred bodies.
A curfew was imposed, archers armed with loaded arbalests patrolled the streets and thick webs of chains were dragged across the entrances to the main thoroughfares.
I thought I was safe.
I was weak with hunger but I had a knife and I could still move round the city.
Naturally, I heard the stories and one morning saw a bloody trail of gore where the wolves had attacked and dragged away an old beggar woman who used to squat on the corner of the Rue St Jacques.
One night I was in an alleyway, nothing more than a narrow, darkened trackway.
The night sky was brilliant and the stars seemed to wink like precious stones against the velvet darkness; the streets, carpeted by ice and hard snow, shimmered and glowed under the pale moonlight.
I had fallen asleep, squatting behind a buttress of the church of St Nicholas long after curfew, my lips blue, my teeth chattering with the cold.
I cried out with the pain which seemed to turn my body from head to toe into one raw, open wound.
For the hundredth time I cursed Benjamin and wondered desperately what had happened to him.
I walked in a daze trying to keep warm as strange fantasies plagued my mind: Selkirk chanting in a field of white roses all stained by blood; my mother crouching on a step as she used to when I would play and run to her — but, when I drew closer, she was an old cripple, eyes open, face frozen blue.
She just toppled over as I touched her.
I walked on, trying to keep warm.
The streets were black, the cobbles rough beneath their carpet of ice and a bitter, cruel wind whipped the snow into sudden flurries.
I saw a group walking towards me through the ashen darkness.
They were leper women, unfortunates from the hospital of St Lazaire, a dozen withered, hideous creatures, embodying foulness and decay.
They gathered their filthy, scant rags about them and screamed at me to go away, their putrid breath freezing on their blue lips.
I wandered down the Rue de la Carbière then I heard the first soul-searing howl: the wolves were back in Paris, hunting for whatever they could find.
The hairs on the nape of my neck tingled and my tired heart lurched with fear.
I hurried on, slipping on the black ice, cursing and praying, hammering at the doors I passed but I was so cold I could hardly cry out.
Again the howl, nearer, more drawn out, chilling the heart as well as the blood.
I turned, like you do in a nightmare, and down the years the vision of terror I glimpsed still springs fresh in my mind.
The long track wound behind me, past dark, high-gabled houses, the hard-packed snow winking in the ivory moonlight.
At the far entrance of the street emerged one huge, horrible shape, dog-like, massive and sinister.
It just stood there, then others came, massing in the darkness, ears pointed, high-tailed, the fur on their backs raised in awesome ruffs.
Lord, I screamed and ran, heart thudding, my throat so dry it constricted.
I wanted to vomit and would have  if my belly had not been so empty.
I screamed: ‘Aidez-moi!
Aidez-moi!’
I prayed, promising to give up wine, warm tits and marble white buttocks.
(You can see how desperate I was!)
Behind me the wolves howled as if sure of their prey and calling others to join them for their banquet of good English beef.
I flew past barred doors and shuttered windows.
Nothing but silence greeted my cries.
As I hurried I heard the scrabbling patter of the wolves closing in.
Another chilling howl and I could have sworn I smelt their hot, sour breath.
[Oh, by the way, I have been chased by wolves on two occasions.
A few years later in the ice-packed snow outside Moscovy, but nothing was as chilling as that short, desperate run in Paris.]
I glimpsed the creaking sign of a tavern with two red apples.
I screamed again.
Suddenly the door beneath the sign opened, a hand stretched out and pulled me in.
I heard the crash of a body against the door, and angry snarling.
Gasping for breath I looked round, noticing the low black beams, tawdry tables and thick, fat tallow candles, their rancid smell cloying my frozen nose and face.
A stocky, red-faced fellow with hairy warts round his mouth grinned a gap-toothed smile, pulled open a shutter and let fly with a huge arbalest.
I heard curses, the screaming yelps of the animals, then I fainted.
When I revived, Wart-Face (who introduced himself as Jean Capote) and his companion Claude Broussac, rat-faced with a pointed nose, greasy hair and the cheekiest eyes I have seen this side of Hell, were bending over me, forcing a cup of scalding posset between my lips.
They introduced themselves as self-confessed leaders of the Maillotins, the French word for ‘clubs’, a secret society of the Parisian poor who attacked the rich and earned their name from the huge cudgels they carried.
Brother Joachim, like many of the Franciscans, must have been one of these.
‘You're not going to die,’ Broussac said, his eyes  dancing with mischief.
‘We thought we'd denied the wolves a good meal.
If we hadn't, we'd have tossed you back and perhaps saved some other unfortunate!’
I struggled up to show I wasn't wolf meat.
Capote brought me a deep-bowled cup of heavy claret, heated it with a burning poker, and a dish of scalding meat, heavily spiced.
I later learnt it was cat.
They asked me a few questions and withdrew to grunt amongst themselves, then came back and welcomed me as one of them.
God knows why they saved me.
When I asked, they just laughed.
‘We don't like wolves,’ Broussac sneered, ‘whether they be four- or two-legged.
You're not French, are you?’ he added.
‘I'm English,’ I replied.
‘But I starve like any Frenchman!’
They laughed and clapped me on the shoulder.
If I had lied, I'm sure they would have cut my throat.
I swear this now [never mind the chaplain who is sitting there sneering at me], I saw more of Christ's love amongst the Maillotins than anywhere else on this earth.
Their organisation was loose knit but they accepted anyone who swore the oath of secrecy and agreed to share things in common, which I promptly did.
What we owned we stole and filched, not from the poor but the merchants, the lawyers, the fat and the rich.
What we didn't eat ourselves, we shared; the most needy receiving the most, then a descending scale for everybody else.
I also began to plot my departure from Paris.
Benjamin, I reasoned, must either have died of an illness or been killed.
Now I would need silver to reach the coast and get across the Narrow Seas.
Broussac once asked what I was doing in Paris, so I told him.
He was fascinated by Selkirk's murder.
‘There is a secret society,’ he murmured, ‘Englishmen who fled after your Richard III was killed at Bosworth.
They have an emblem.’
He screwed up his face so it seemed to hide behind his huge nose.
‘Their emblem is  an animal, a leopard?
No, no, a white boar.
Les Blancs Sangliers!’
At the time I didn't give a damn.
In the winter of 1518 all I cared about was surviving and life was hard in Paris.
Yuletide and Twelfth Night passed with only the occasional carols in church, for no one dared to go out at night.
Mind you, every cloud had a silver lining.
The brothels were free, the ladies of the night well rested and more than prepared to accept sustenance, a loaf or a jug of wine, instead of silver.
I suppose I was happy enough.
I never planned.
(I always follow the Scriptures: ‘Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.’)
I just wish I had practised what I preached!
I was full to the gills of roasted cat, which is one of the reasons I can't stand the animals now.
Whenever I see one I remember the rancid smell of Broussac's stew pot and the gall rises in my throat.
[The silly chaplain is shaking his noddle.
‘I would not eat cat,’ he murmurs.
Yes, the little sod would.
Believe me, when you are hungry, really hungry, so that your stomach clings to your backbone, nothing is more tasty than a succulent rat or a well-roasted leg of cat!]
I stayed with the Maillotins until spring came.
The river thawed and barges of food began to reach the capital.
The city provost and his marshals became more organised, clamping down more ruthlessly on the legion of thieves which flourished in the slums around the Rue Saint Antoine.
Broussac and Capote refused to read the signs and so made their most dreadful mistake.
One night, early in February 1518, the three of us were in a tavern called the Chariot, a cosy little ale house which stands on the corner of the Rue des Mineurs near the church of Saint Sulpice.
We had eaten and drunk well, our gallows faces flushed with wine, our stupid mouths bawling out some raucous song and planning our next escapade.
Now Broussac had an enemy — a Master François Ferrebourg, a priest, bachelor of arts, and pontifical  notary.
He occupied a house at the Sign of the Keg, a little further down the street opposite the convent church of the Order of Saint Cecily.
Broussac, on our way home, stopped to jeer in at the lighted windows of Master Ferrebourg's office.
Oh, God, I remember the scene well: the black street with its overhanging eaves and gables, the broad splash of light pouring across the cobbles from Ferrebourg's open window.
Inside, his clerks sat toiling into the night over some urgent piece of business and Broussac, half-tipsy, taunted them, making rude gestures and spitting through the window.
Now, we should have left it at that, but we were too drunk to run, whilst the clerks were sober and quick-witted.
They left their writing desks and poured into the streets, led by Master Ferrebourg himself.
The notary gave Broussac a vigorous shove which sent my companion sprawling into the open sewer.
He picked himself up, roaring with rage, and, before I could stop him, whipped out his dagger and gave Master Ferrebourg a nasty gash across his chest whilst lifting the purse from his belt.
‘Run, Shallot!’ he screamed.
I was too drunk and, as Broussac disappeared into the darkness, Capote and myself were seized and held until the night watch arrived.
Our thumbs were tied together and, in a clatter of arms and a tramp of archers, we were hustled into the dark archways of the Chatelet prison and thrown into a deep dungeon beneath the tower.
We were tried before the Provost of Paris the next morning.
Capote, still drunk, farted and belched when the sentence was read out.
I tried to reason with them but, in doing so, confessed I was English.
My fate was sealed.
We were condemned as two of the most troublesome blackguards within the liberties of Paris; rioters, burglars and assassins, hand in glove with some of the most desperate characters of the underworld.
We were sentenced to hang the next morning at the gallows of Montfaucon.
I tried to plead and argue but was only beaten for my pains and thrown down the steps back into  my cell; the dungeon door, grating shut, was locked securely behind us.
Capote immediately fell asleep on the straw.
I just sat staring into the darkness, hugging my knees.
All I could see was Death, beckoning and grinning before me.
In the thick, musty air of the dungeon I felt a creeping graveyard chill.
Who would help me this time?
The Parisians would scarcely spare a second thought for an Englishman and be only too pleased to see me twitch and shake at the end of a rope.
I thought of Benjamin and Wolsey and cursed them.
Couldn't they have done something?
Made enquiries?
Searched me out?
['Put not your trust in princes, Shallot!’ my chaplain often quips.
I rap the little hypocrite across the knuckles and tell him to keep writing.]
I spent the night before my intended execution listening to Capote's raucous songs.
The fellow said he didn't give a fig about life so why should he fear death?
He was still brazening it out the next morning when the Provost and his bodyguard of twelve mounted serjeants and ten archers came to collect us.
We were roped, hustled up the steps of the dungeon and into the freezing courtyard.
The scarlet execution cart was waiting for us, the skulls of hanged men decorating each side.
The Provost barked an order and the red-hooded executioner turned, wished us good morning, flicked his whip and urged the cart through the gates of the prison and on to the winding track down to Montfaucon.
We made a brief stop at the Convent of Les Filles de Dieu near the port of St Severin.
Here the good sisters comforted us on our last journey with a manchet of bread and a cup of wine.
I chewed the bread and took the wine in one long gulp to control my trembling for I did not wish to disgrace myself.
Capote was as raucous as ever, eyeing the sisters, cracking jokes with the executioner, telling the good prioress to have a second cup ready for the journey back.
The provost then ordered us forward, the serjeants going  ahead, spurring a lane through the mob gathering to watch us die.
I glimpsed Broussac, one hand down the bodice of some whore, the other holding a wine cup.
He grinned and toasted me silently.
I glared back at the bastard.
If he had kept his mouth shut I would still be eating rancid meat and plotting my own way out of Paris.
At last we reached the gibbet and, if you should wish to see a vision of Hell before death, go to Montfaucon.
A hideous place!
A flat, oblong mound fifteen feet high, about thirty feet wide and forty feet long, it stands like some horrible pimple outside Paris on the road to Saint Denis.
On three sides of this mound there is a colonnade on a raised platform comprising sixteen evenly spaced square pillars of unhewn stone, each thirty-two feet high, linked together at the top by heavy beams with ropes and chains hanging from them at short intervals.
You could hang a small village there.
In the centre of the platform gapes an immense lime pit covered by a grating which is used for the disposal of the hanged after they have been gibbeted.
(Did you know in summer the gallants take their doxies out there for a picnic?
Imagine, wine and pastries under the swinging corpses of the damned!)
When I arrived, Montfaucon seemed to have been busy.
At least fifteen crow-pecked corpses, slimed by their own decay, swung from the end of creaking ropes.
By now my courage had failed and I had to be helped up the steep, wooden steps, the executioner's assistants whispering that if I made a good show they would make sure I would choke for no more than ten minutes.
Behind me the cart creaked away and the executioners busied themselves with the ropes.
I glimpsed Capote beside me, now quiet.
The thick hempen cords were slung round our necks; a dusty-robed priest appeared as if from nowhere to recite in a precise voice the last prayer for the dying.
The provost came to the edge of the scaffold, unrolled a parchment and read the sentences of death.
The noose was tightened and I was pushed up a ladder.
‘Don't be nervous,’ the executioner grinned.
‘At least you don't have to go down it again!’
I gazed out wildly over the crowds.
‘Not now,’ I whispered.
‘Surely, not now!’
The ladder was turned, I heard a voice cry out: ‘Not that one!’
But I was already choking as the noose tightened around my throat.
I heard a terrible pounding in my ears, my heart thudding like a drum, my stomach lurching as I swung on the end of the rope.
I turned and twisted.
Capote was also dancing in the air.
I couldn't breathe, the pain in the back of my head was so intense, then suddenly blackness.
I revived as I felt myself go hurtling through the air and crashed down on to the wooden planks of the scaffold.
The noose round my neck was loosened, I retched and vomited.
Beside me crouched the provost, looking concerned.
‘You are still with us, Master Shallot?’
I retched again, on to his robe, a suitable thanks to the hard-faced bastard.
He squirmed in distaste.
‘A pardon, Shallot.’
He thrust the small scroll under my nose.
‘Someone still loves you!’
The provost made a sign.
Two of the archers picked me up under the armpits and hustled me down the steps of the scaffold.
I glanced at Capote, still dangling, choking out his life.
I saw a sea of faces and heard the boos and catcalls of the crowd, cheated of their sport.
A serjeant-at-arms, wearing the royal arms of France on his tabard, gestured to the archers to hoist me into the saddle of a horse whose reins he held.
Hell's teeth, I can hardly remember the rest!
A bumpy, shaky ride back across Paris.
I thought I was being taken to the prison but instead found myself outside the door of Le Coq d'Or.
The serjeant-at-arms, hidden behind the guard of his conical helmet, dragged me down and pushed me into a chamber where a candle glowed in the darkness.
I smelt the sour odour of sweaty robes and noticed a  brazier of gleaming charcoal had been rolled in.
I was shoved down on the bed, the soldier left and the slattern bustled in with a small manchet loaf and a goblet of wine.
She watched me eat for a while, mumbled something and left.
I nearly choked on the bread; my neck and throat seemed to be ringed by a cruel vice.
Stars danced before my eyes and I kept shaking with fear at my latest brush with death.
Surely you understand?
One minute dangling on the end of a rope; the next a reprieve, a bumpy ride through Paris, followed by the sweetest bread and most fragrant wine I had tasted for months.
[Ever since Montfaucon I have always dreaded executions.
I mean, sometimes, as Lord of the Manor, I have to order one but my court is well known for its leniency.
Of course, I pay the price.
At night my fields are more alive with poachers than rabbits.
I will grant the most hardened criminal a reprieve rather than see him hang.
The chaplain is nodding his little, bald head.
Of course, the idiot now understands the reason for my mercy.
He probably thought I had a soft heart.
Well, he learns something every day, including why I can never bear anything tight round my throat.
Even the touch of smoothest silk reawakens the horrors of my journey to Montfaucon.]
Anyway, back to Le Coq d'Or where I lay on the truckle bed and drifted off to sleep.
When I awoke Benjamin was leaning over me, his eyes bright in a face more pallid than usual.
‘Roger, I have returned.’
‘Of course, you have, you bloody idiot!
Just in time!’
I snarled.
‘Where in Hell's name have you been?’
10
Benjamin sat on the stool next to my bed and wiped the sweat from his face.
He looked paler and thinner.
‘I'm sorry, Roger,’ he mumbled.
‘It's a long story.
I went to Kelso in Scotland.’
He looked away, lost in his memories.
‘A lonely monastery surrounded by a sea of dark purple heather and deserted, haunted moors.
A grey-slated, dark-stoned building.’
He smiled thinly.
‘Oh, I was safe enough.
Agrippa gave me a safe conduct and the Lord d'Aubigny arranged for moss troopers to guard my every step.’
‘What did you find?’
I asked crossly.
Benjamin rubbed his eyes on the back of his hand.
‘Nothing,’ he replied.
‘Nothing at all.
Many Scots fled to Kelso after Flodden, but you know something, Roger?
No one could remember a single event from those stormy days.’
He furrowed his brow.
‘Even stranger, the prior, the sub-prior, all the officials of that monastery, had been changed.
Some had died in rather mysterious circumstances, others been sent abroad on this task or the other.
The rest,’ he shrugged, ‘were as silent as the grave.
Only one old lay brother, a hoary old man, mumbled about the abbey being the dark pit for the evil deeds of the Great Ones of the land.’
He sighed.
‘Then I came south to Royston but Queen Margaret and her party had already returned to London to collect all their possessions so I followed in hot pursuit.
I visited the Lord Cardinal at the Palace of Sheen.
He already knew about our mission to Nottingham being successful and welcomed my visit to Kelso and your  journey to Paris.’
Benjamin took a deep breath.
‘Then I fell ill.
At first I thought it was some ague but it proved to the Sweating Sickness.
Uncle sent me to St Bartholomew's and Agrippa brought an old lady who fed me on a concoction of crushed moss mixed with the leavings of sour milk.
The fever broke but I was weak.’
He patted me gently on the shoulder.
‘The Lord Cardinal sent an envoy but the fellow was ambushed, apparently killed by robbers outside Dover.’
‘I don't think so,’ I tartly retorted.
‘He was killed by assassins just like the bastards nearly murdered me at Le Coq d'Or!’
‘What do you mean?’
Benjamin asked.
I told him my story in sharp, succinct phrases.
Benjamin listened carefully.
‘I'm sorry,’ he apologised.
‘I have been in Paris a week.
The landlord here swears he knew nothing of you.’
‘He's a liar!’
I interrupted.
‘He may well be.
Anyway, I went to the Provost of Paris.
I invoked all the Lord Cardinal's power to organise a search for you.
Actually, the pardon was issued last night.’
He grimaced.
‘But you know officials.’
‘Yes, I do!’
I snarled.
‘Only too well.
The bastards had me hanged!’
Benjamin bit his lip.
‘I agree with you, Roger, but your troubles began with that piece of red silk.
It was the signal for your murder.
Undoubtedly the demon who dogs our footsteps has agents in Paris.’
‘That may well be so,’ I answered, ‘but Moodie gave me the cloth, so he must be the assassin.’
[Ah, there goes my chaplain again, jumping up and down on his stool.
‘I told you!
I told you!’ he cries.
I just tell him to shut up and give him a sharp rap across the knuckles.
The little turd doesn't know what he's talking about.]
‘Tell me,’ Benjamin continued, ‘you say the silk had a fragrance.
Did you recognise it?
Was it like this?’
He undid the neck of a small pouch and held it under  my nose.
I sniffed.
It was the same fragrance I had noticed around Madame Eglantine's gift.
‘Yes.
What is it?’
Benjamin smiled and spilled the faded white rose petals which fell soft as snowflakes to the floor.
‘Les Blancs Sangliers!
’ I murmured.
‘Moodie must be one of them.
He killed Selkirk, Ruthven and Irvine, though God knows why or how.’
Benjamin shook his head.
‘No, it's more subtle than that.’
He looked at me quizzically.
‘What are you smiling at, Roger?’
The anxiety drained from his face.
‘You know something, don't you?’
I grinned.
'’ The truth Now Stands In the Sacred Hands of the place which owns Dionysius' bones!’’
‘You know what it means?’
Benjamin whispered.
‘Oh, yes, and it's not far from where we're sitting.
Dionysius is not some Greek god!’
I cried, forgetting the bruise which racked my neck and the heavy fatigue which still held my limbs in a vice-like grip.
‘He's St Denis, the Roman martyr beheaded on Montmartre Hill, who carried his head, so legend says, to where the Abbey of St Denis now stands.’
Benjamin got up, kicking over the stool behind him in his excitement.
‘Of course!’ he breathed.
‘Dionysius is Latin for Denis.
The monks there must have Selkirk's secret!’
I swung my legs off the bed.
‘Yes, we'll find it there in a battered casket.’
Benjamin looked at me suspiciously.
‘Why didn't you go to St Denis yourself?’
I rubbed the weal where the rope had chafed my neck.
‘Oh, yes,’ I replied sarcastically.
‘An English beggar dressed in tatters swaggers up to the abbey gates, asks for a casket to be handed over, and the monks cheerfully comply.’
Benjamin grinned.
‘They will now!’
He tossed a bundle of clean clothes at me.
‘These will not make you a courtier, Roger, but at least you won't be a beggar!’
‘I'm tired,’ I moaned.
‘My neck still hurts.
I want food, wine, proof that I'm still alive.’
Benjamin crouched down beside me, his long, dark face drawn with anxiety.
‘Roger,’ he insisted, ‘we must hurry.
Time is important.
No doubt the murderer already tracks our footsteps, and we must resolve this mystery before Queen Margaret leaves for Scotland.
We have to go to St Denis, find Selkirk's secret and return to England as soon as possible.’
I nodded glumly.
Benjamin brought a fresh cup of wine and a bowl of greasy soup.
I ate, gulping like a dog, and then changed my clothes.
The evil turd of a landlord, a vacuous smile on his slack face, came up to enquire after my health.
I grinned wickedly back and told Benjamin to wait for me in the street outside.
I made my preparations and joined him as quickly as I could.
We walked up the beaten trackway, slipping and cursing on the icy ground underfoot.
Behind me, the candle I had so carefully placed in the dry straw in the garret of Le Coq d'Or kindled into life and the flames turned the evil tavern into a blazing inferno.
Oh, yes, revenge is never so sweet as when it's deserved.
Although I had escaped from Montfaucon, the ice cold day soon curbed my elation.
The city was still held fast by winter and the journey was cruel and hard.
I ached from head to toe and the wound in my throat, inflamed by the cold, created a circle of pain around my neck and shoulders.
We passed the gallows, the corpses of the less fortunate now freezing hard at the end of their ropes, then through the gateway of the city and towards the Abbey of St Denis.
God knows, it's an awesome, inspiring place; soaring gables of stone, grinning gargoyles, huge windows full of coloured glass, towers which pierce the sky and fretted stonework with a carving on every cornice, turret and pillar.
St Denis is the royal mausoleum of France where the white alabaster tombs of the kings lie in quiet hope  of Christ's Second Coming.
A strange place, cold and sombre.
The abbey is a veritable city in itself; its granges, buildings and outhouses sprawl across the countryside, circled by a huge curtain wall which is guarded by soldiers wearing the livery of the royal household.
Of course, alone I would have been turned away.
Benjamin, however, with his fluent grasp of French and armed with the personal recommendation of the Lord Cardinal of England, soon gained admittance.
An austere prior welcomed us into his chamber and listened carefully to Benjamin's request.
‘Many people come here,’ he replied quietly in perfect English.
‘They bring gifts and treasures which they commit to our care.
Some return, some do not.’
He spread his hands.
‘They place their trust in us.’
He looked sharply at Benjamin.
‘You swear that Selkirk is dead?’
‘I do, Father Prior.’
‘And his secret is one which may threaten the English throne?’
‘Perhaps,’ Benjamin replied.
‘But it has been responsible for the deaths of at least three good men and may cause the deaths of others, including our own.’
The prior moved uneasily behind his dak.
He pointed to the Bible chained to a great lectern beside him.
‘Swear that!’ he rasped.
‘Swear what you say is true, with your hand on the Gospels!’
Benjamin obeyed.
One hand placed on the great, jewel embossed cover and the other held high, he proclaimed in solemn tones that God be his witness, what he said was the truth.
Once he had finished the prior nodded and his granite face broke into a thin smile.
He rang a small hand bell.
A young monk entered to whom the prior whispered hoarse instructions.
I heard the name ‘Selkirk’ and a possible date.
The young monk nodded and padded softly away, returning soon afterwards with a small, battered leather coffer sealed with the waxen crest of the Abbey of St Denis.
The prior broke this and lifted the lid.
He felt around inside, his long fingers picking up scraps of parchment.
He looked despairingly at Benjamin.
‘You say Selkirk was mad?’
‘Yes, Father Prior.’
‘Then this may be his last insane joke.
There's nothing here but innumerable scraps of parchment.
Now my conscience is settled, you may take it.’
We left St Denis as darkness fell and made our way to a tavern outside one of the gateways of Paris on the main road to Calais, a warm comfortable place which had escaped the ravages of famine which still afflicted the city.
Benjamin hired a chamber as well as fresh horses for the morning.
He also ordered a meal of succulent roast capon cooked in rich sauces and freshly baked loaves of pure wheat rather than the coarse rye bread I had eaten the previous months.
I gorged myself to the gills although Benjamin ordered me to be temperate with the wine.
Afterwards, we sat in the ingle-nook of the great fireplace watching the roaring flames turn the pine logs to a white smouldering ash.
Benjamin opened Selkirk's casket and for a while sifted amongst the pieces of parchment.
One was singular: a dirty yellow piece, jagged at the top and bottom; only the heading was discernible, a quotation in Latin from one of St Paul's epistles.
It simply said: ‘Through a glass darkly’.
The rest were a jumble of hieroglyphics and strange signs.
There were some complete manuscripts but there were nothing more than a collection of royal warrants written personally by King James and sealed under his signet ring, granting tasks or favours to his ‘beloved physician, Andrew Selkirk’.
Benjamin studied some of these and so did I but we could discover nothing amiss.
My master placed the documents back in the casket.
‘Let us refresh our memories,’ he said.
‘Selkirk was King James's physician.
He went with the King to Flodden where James was defeated and killed.
Selkirk fled to Paris, left his so called secret at St Denis and went to Le Coq d'Or where he was arrested and taken to England.’
He stared at me.
‘You would agree with that?’
‘Yes, Master.’
‘Now, in Scotland, James's widow Margaret, the mother of one infant, is pregnant again when she hears the news of her husband's defeat and death.
By King James's will, she is made Regent but forfeits that position by marrying the Earl of Angus.
She also loses the confidence of her nobles and is forced to flee to England, leaving her two boys behind.
The Scottish nobles set up a Regency Council with control of Margaret's baby sons, one of whom, Alexander, Duke of Ross, dies soon after his mother's sudden departure for England.
Am I correct Roger?’
‘A number of matters,’ I replied, ‘must also be remembered.
First, before James went to Flodden, he had so called visions which warned him against his loose morals and of the dangers of invading England.
Secondly, why should Margaret suddenly marry the Earl of Angus and then, within such a short time, desert him; indeed, even hate him?
Thirdly, why did she shelter in England away from her kingdom and her sons?
We heard from the Lord d'Aubigny that the Scottish Council is more than prepared to welcome Queen Margaret back with open arms.’
‘Which,’ Benjamin continued, ‘leads us to this sudden change in the Queen's mood.
It seems that she cannot return to Scotland fast enough.
I'm sorry.
Go on, Roger.’
‘I wonder what Margaret was so frightened of?
And what secrets she and the Earl of Angus share?
Don't forget, Master, there are other mysteries which may be contained in the documents in that casket.
What did Selkirk mean by the phrase he could ‘count the days’?
And why has King James's body not been returned to Scotland for burial?’
Benjamin nodded and stared at the dying flames of the fire.
‘Which brings us to Selkirk's verses,’ he said.
‘We know the falcon is James, the lamb is Angus, the Lion also is the King of Scotland.
Is Selkirk saying that somehow King James survived Flodden?
Something we suspected when we viewed the corpse at Sheen.’
‘Perhaps,’ I interrupted.
‘The verses do say the Lion cried even though it died.
Finally, we have discovered who Dionysius was but not the real secret left with him.’
Benjamin picked up the casket and carefully examined the lining, searching for any secret compartment or hidden drawer.
‘Nothing,’ he murmured.
‘Which brings us, Master,’ I said, ‘to the murders once more.
Both Selkirk and Ruthven were found poisoned in chambers locked from the inside.
No poisoned cup or dish was found there.’
Benjamin agreed.
‘Whilst Irvine,’ he remarked, ‘could have had his throat cut by any member of Queen Margaret's household except for four; you and I who were at the convent, and Catesby and Melford who were in Nottingham.
We also know that the Queen herself did not leave the manor house.’
‘Which means,’ I concluded wearily, ‘that we do not know who the murderer really is, although we suspect Moodie.
We do not know Selkirk's secret, even though we hold it in our hands.
Above all, we do not know the meaning of the first two lines of his damnable poem,
‘Three less than twelve should it be, Or the King, no prince engendered he!’’
On that merry note we both retired for the night.
Benjamin spent most of the time sitting in a chair staring at the guttering candle flame, whilst my sleep was racked by terrible nightmares of my visit to Montfaucon.
The next morning Benjamin dressed my wounds and we began our journey back to Calais.
The weather improved and, although the roads were clogged with icy mud, we soon reached the Channel port where Benjamin used his warrants and his status to secure our passage home on a man-o'-war.
A terrible journey, believe me!
If Hell exists, it must consist of being eternally sick on a ship which crosses the Narrow Seas but never reaches shore.
I disembarked at Dover, cursing Benjamin, the King, the Lord Cardinal, and heartily wishing I was back in Ipswich, free from the baleful influence of the Great Ones of the soil.
Matters were not helped when we found Doctor Agrippa waiting for us in a seaside tavern, cheerful and full of life as a well-fed sparrow.
The fellow never seemed to age, nothing changed him; no lines of worry on his cherubic face, while those hard, glassy eyes shimmered with a quiet amusement.
He greeted us effusively, clasping Benjamin warmly by the hand.
He insisted we join him for dinner where he regaled us with tidbits of gossip from the court and city.
‘How did you know we were coming?’
I asked crossly.
He smiled as if savouring some secret joke.
‘I have my sources,’ he quipped.
‘The Lord Cardinal told me to come here.
Your return was only a matter of time.’
His face grew hard.
‘You have news?’
‘Yes and no!’
Benjamin joked back.
‘However, the game is not yet over and, if you'll accept my apologies, we still cannot discern friend from foe.’
That enigmatic little magician ignored this possible insult and deftly turned the conversation to other matters.
We stayed one night in Dover, then travelled across a frost-hardened countryside back to London.
Only God knows how he knew but Agrippa insisted we arm ourselves.
He also warned us that, once we were back in London, we were to be careful where we went, to whom we talked and what we ate and drank.
His warnings proved prophetic.
We were on a lonely stretch of road just outside London: it was late in the afternoon, darkness was about to fall and we were arguing about whether we should hurry on to the city or stay at some roadside tavern for the night.
Our assailants, muffled and cloaked, seemed to rise out of the ground, running swiftly towards us, armed with dagger and sword.
Now, in the ladies' romances, such encounters are full of brave oaths and heroic stances.
However, I consider myself an expert in the art of assassination and murder and, I tell you this, violent death always comes quietly.
One minute we were riding our horses, the next we were surrounded by five villains intent on murder.
Benjamin and Agrippa drew their hangers and set to with a will, the eerie silence of that lonely road shattered by grunts, muttered oaths and the scraping clash of steel.
I drew my own sword, shouting defiance and encouragement to the rest.
But, oh, Lord, I was frightened!
These were not your ordinary footpads, they would never attack three well-armed, mounted travellers.
Oh, no, these were assassins, despatched by the arch murderer we were hunting.
‘Roger!’
Benjamin shouted.
‘For God's sake, man!’
Now I had been hanging back, attempting to develop some strategy.
[No, that's a lie!
My chaplain's right, I was petrified.
Now you talk to any coward, a real coward like myself, and he'll tell you there's a point where fear becomes so great it actually turns into courage, not out of anger or fury but that marvellous innate desire to save your own skin.
On that London road I reached such a point.]
Two assailants were pressing Agrippa whilst the other three had apparently forgotten me and were intent on bringing my master down.
I closed my eyes and spurred my horse forward, my huge sword rising and falling as if I was the Grim Reaper himself.
It's a wonder I didn't kill Benjamin but, when I opened my eyes, two of the rogues were dead of huge gashes between shoulder and neck whilst Benjamin was on the point of driving his sword straight through the breast of a third.
Agrippa, his fat face covered in sweat, had already despatched one but now had lost his sword and kept turning his horse sharply to counter his final opponent.
I waited until the fellow turned his back, charged and felt my sword sink deep into his exposed shoulder.
The fellow whirled and, as he did so, Agrippa finished him off, plunging his dagger firmly into the man's back.
Death is so strange: one minute noise, blood, screaming and retching; the next, a terrible silence.
You old soldiers who read my memoirs will realise I speak the truth.
So  it was on that fog-bound, lonely London road.
Benjamin and Agrippa, chests heaving, cleaned their weapons.
I sat like a Hector until I suddenly remembered my stomach and began noisily to vomit.
Nevertheless, both my master and Agrippa were loud in their praise of my martial prowess.
Naturally, I can resist anything but flattery and lapped it up like a hungry cat does milk.
Of course, I glimpsed the wry amusement in Agrippa's eyes but Benjamin looked at me oddly.
‘You're a strange one, Shallot,’ he murmured.
‘I'll never understand you.’
I dismounted and searched the corpses.
I found nothing noteworthy except on one, possibly the leader, who had a considerable amount of silver which I pocketed for distribution to the poor.
We then continued our journey, pushing on until we reached the city walls and lodged at one of the fine taverns on the Southwark side of the river.
Oh, it was good to be back in London!
To see and smell the greasy rags of the poor; the silk-slashed, perfumed doublets, velvet hose and precious buckled shoes of the rich.
The pompous little beadles; dark-gowned priests; the lawyers from Westminster Hall with their fur tippets; and, of course, my favourites, the ladies of the night, with their hair piled high, low-cut dresses and heels which clicked along the cobbles.
A bear had broken loose amongst the stews; a whore was being whipped outside the gates of St Thomas's Hospital; two butchers who had sold putrid meat were riding back to back on some old nag, their hands tied behind them, the rotten offal they had sold fastened tightly under their noses.
[Ben Jonson is right, London is a wondrous city!
Within its walls you can see the whole spectrum of human behaviour: the splendour of the rich moving through the streets on damask-caparisoned palfreys and the bare-arsed poor who would slit your throat for a crust of bread.]
Strangely, Benjamin did not wish to visit his uncle who was wintering at the Bishop of Ely's inn just north of Holborn.
He insisted we went direct to the Tower.
We  took the route through Cheapside because the Thames was frozen from bank to bank, past the mansions of the rich, the stalls full of fripperies, the mouldering Eleanor Cross and the great Conduit which was supposed to bring fresh water into the city.
I say ‘supposed to’ for it had been frozen over and, beneath the ice, I glimpsed the scrawny corpse of a dead dog.
The city was just recovering from one of the usual bouts of plague which come in late winter; its citizens, however, sensed the worst was over and the streets buzzed like an overturned hive.
We reached the Tower through Poor Jewry, passing the house of the Crutched Friars and then through a postern gate which stands near Hog Street.
Benjamin and Agrippa had fallen strangely silent.
Only as we entered the Tower did Benjamin lean over and whisper, ‘Roger, pretend we discovered nothing.
Keep your thoughts hidden and your counsel concealed until we find the truth about this party of knaves.’
Benjamin's ‘party of knaves’ had re-established themselves in the Tower waiting for spring to dry out the roads so they could travel north.
Sir Robert Catesby greeted Agrippa warmly, taking him aside for secret consultations whilst ignoring Benjamin and me.
At last I grew tired of such rudeness.
The grooms had taken away our horses and I did not wish to stand like a servant on the freezing forecourt of the tower.
‘Doctor Agrippa!’
I called out.
‘What is the matter?’
He apologised and walked back to us arm-in-arm with Catesby, who now gracefully bowed to both of us.
‘Welcome back, Master Benjamin, Shallot.
I apologise for any offence given but there has been another death, though one which may resolve the mysteries which have plagued us.’
‘Moodie's dead!’
Agrippa flatly announced.
‘Not murder this time,’ he added quickly.
‘He died the Roman way.’
Benjamin cocked his head quizzically.
‘He killed himself,’ Catesby declared.
‘Asked for a  bowl of warm water from the kitchen, locked his chamber and slashed his wrist.’
‘When was this?’
I asked.
‘Yester evening.
His body was not found until late at night.’
I stared up at the grey sky and the black ravens which circled above the battlements like the souls of men condemned to wander the earth forever.
‘You said his death may resolve the mysteries?’
Benjamin abruptly asked.
I stamped my feet on the cobbles as a sign that I was freezing.
Catesby took my point, smiled, and led us up to his own warm, spacious chamber in the Lion Tower.
He served us mulled wine sprinkled with cinnamon and heated with a red hot poker and then emptied the contents of a saddle bag on to the table; it contained a few faded white rose petals and pieces of parchment.
The latter were passed around for us to examine.
Most were notes, drafts of letters or memoranda concerning secret Yorkist plans as well as proclamations written anonymously to be nailed on the doors of churches up and down the kingdom.
They were full of the usual childish nonsense about the Tudors being usurpers and that the crown, by right and divine favour, should go to the House of York — in reality a pathetic bundle of faded dreams and failed aspirations.
Agrippa studied them with a smile.
Benjamin just dismissed them, tossing the documents back on to the table.
‘So Moodie was a supporter of the White Rose,’ he said quietly.
‘A member of Les Blancs Sangliers.
But why should he kill Selkirk and Ruthven?’
Catesby shrugged.
‘God knows!
Perhaps he saw them as a threat.
Perhaps Selkirk's verses contained information which he wished destroyed.’
‘Do you really believe that?’
I asked.
Catesby shook his head.
‘No,’ he answered slowly.
‘No, I don't.
Perhaps it was just an act of revenge.’
He sighed.
‘There's neither rhyme nor reason to Moodie's suicide.’
He sat down heavily.
‘I don't know how Selkirk and Ruthven died,’ he murmured, and looked up.
‘Do you?’
Benjamin shook his head.
‘Moodie could have killed Irvine,’ Catesby continued.
‘He did leave Royston for a while at the same time as you, and a priest would be acceptable within the convent walls at Coldstream.’
‘What does Queen Margaret say?’ asked Benjamin.
Catesby shrugged.
‘She mourns Moodie's death and has her own explanation of it.’
He paused to gather his thoughts.
‘Her late husband, James IV, at one time supported the cause of the White Rose and then deserted it.
She believes James was not killed at Flodden.’
He coughed, the sound shattering the eerie silence of the chamber.
‘Queen Margaret believes,’ he continued, ‘that her husband was murdered at Flodden by a member of Les Blancs Sangliers who have since waged continuous war against those who advised her late husband, such as Selkirk and Ruthven.’
I sat back, surprised because what Catesby said made sense.
Agrippa toyed with the tassels on his robes whilst Benjamin just stared into the middle distance, lost in his own thoughts.
‘But why,’ he asked eventually, ‘would Moodie now kill himself?’
‘Because,’ Doctor Agrippa intervened, ‘he probably thought that you or Shallot would have discovered something during your travels in Scotland and France to trap him.’
Again, Agrippa's conclusions were logical; after all, Moodie had arranged the deadly attack on me in Paris.
‘How was your mission?’
Catesby queried.
I shrugged.
Benjamin just laughed.
‘Let me put it this way, Sir Robert, if Moodie dreaded our return then he had very little to fear.’
Agrippa sighed noisily, I don't know whether from relief or disappointment.
‘Ah, well!’
Catesby rose.
‘Soon this matter will be  finished and Her Grace will leave for Scotland.
She is very busy.’
His boyish face lit with a smile.
‘But I know she wishes to see you.’
Agrippa excused himself whilst Catesby took Benjamin and me across to the Queen's spacious chamber on the second floor of the Tower just next to St Stephen's Chapel.
[Or was it St John's?
I forget now.]
Well, the fat bitch had made herself comfortable!
She had a beautiful room, painted red and decorated with golden moons and silver stars.
Tapestries hung on the walls and Turkey rugs covered the polished floor.
Margaret herself was dressed in a tight-fitting, damson-coloured gown which emphasised her full, rounded figure whilst her golden hair was unbraided and hung down to her shoulders.
She looked warm and comely but her eyes were still black as night and her face spoilt by that false, simpering smile.
The Careys were also in attendance: Lady Carey glowered whilst her husband busied himself at the far end of the room, totally ignoring our existence.
Melford the killer was there, lounging like an alley cat on a bench against the wall, whilst the bastard Scawsby was mulling a glass of wine for his mistress.
He turned away as we entered, shoulders shaking as if relishing some private joke.
Queen Margaret took us both by the hand, welcoming us back and handing Benjamin a small purse of silver coins.
‘Your work on my behalf is much appreciated, Master Daunbey,’ she simpered.
‘I would ask you to stay longer, but His Majesty the King has invited me to a masque at Richmond.’
She waved a hand to indicate the dresses scattered around the room; some of taffeta, others of damask or cloth of gold.
The false smile spread.
‘Time is passing and I must go.’
We bowed and left, Catesby showing us to the door.
We wandered back into the freezing bailey.
Benjamin leaned against a wall watching a butcher at the far end of the yard hack a haunch of beef into huge, steaming slabs, the blood pouring like red streams over the rough-hewn carving block.
‘Roger, Roger,’ he murmured, ‘what is going on here?
One minute we are involved in matters of state, murder, Yorkist conspiracies, and the next we are dismissed because Her Grace wishes to attend a masque!’
Catesby had told us we had our old chamber in one of the towers but Benjamin insisted that, before we retire, we should examine Moodie's corpse which had been placed in the death house, no more than a wooden shed built against the walls of the Tower Church, St Peter ad Vincula.
Well, believe me, I have seen corpses enough, bodies piled six, seven feet high, left to steam and rot on battle fields as far flung as France and North Africa.
I have seen heads hacked off and stacked high in baskets, and more bodies hanging from the branches of trees than I have apples in an orchard.
Nothing, however, is more pathetic than a solitary corpse lying on a cold slab in a disused shed.
Moodie may have been a priest but in death his body had been laid out like some broken toy to lie on a shelf, the grimacing features half-hidden by a dirty cloth; the eyes still open, sightless and empty.
Some attempt had been made to straighten the limbs and that was all.
Apparently, he was to be interred in the clothes he died in, wrapped in some canvas sheet and either buried in the cemetery of a nearby church or the small graveyard on the other side of the Tower church.
Two days dead, the body was beginning to putrefy and the stench made both Benjamin and myself gag.
Benjamin muttered the Requiem, stared at the mottled-hued face and carefully examined the wrists of the dead man.
The left was unmarked but the right bore a huge, deep gash which must have drained the blood.
‘A painful way to die, Master.’
Benjamin shook his head.
‘Not really, Roger,’ he said, his voice muffled by the hem of his cloak which he held up to cover his nose.
‘The wrist is cut and placed in warm water.
They say death comes like sleep, a painless way  oblivion.
The senators of ancient Rome often used it.’
I took his word for it and we left, glad to be free of the ghastly place.
Outside Benjamin stared up at the darkening sky.
‘The game is not over yet, Roger,’ he murmured.
‘Believe me, Moodie did not die in vain.’
He would say no more.
We retired to our chamber, made ourselves as comfortable as our bleak quarters would allow, and later joined the rest of the household when they gathered to dine in the small hall.
Queen Margaret had already left in a blaze of colour, escorted by Catesby and Agrippa, riding along Ropery, then Vintry Street into Thames Street, where she would meet a troop of her brother's royal serjeants at Castle Baynard.
Catesby, if he had stayed, might have put a restraining hand upon the petty malice of his comrades.
Previously they had ignored us: now they let their malice show.
Carey (his wife had gone with Queen Margaret), Melford, Scawsby and the two killers from Clan Chattan, Corin and Alleyn, swaggered into the hall.
To be truthful, I had forgotten about Earl Angus's gift to his estranged wife but the two Highlanders still remembered us.
They smiled, displaying wicked-edged teeth, and once again I was reminded of hunting dogs studying their intended quarry.
Benjamin and I sat at one end of the trestle board, they sat at the other, grouped together like stupid boys immersed in their own private jokes.
The garrison had already eaten so we were alone.
The servants brought platters of over-cooked, rather rancid meat, garnished with herbs, and once they withdrew and the wine circulated, Melford began talking at the top of his voice about sending boys to do men's work.
The two Highlanders grinned as if they understood every word, Carey smirked whilst Scawsby gave that neighing laugh which made the blood beat in my temples.
Coward or not, I could have plunged a dagger straight into his black treacherous heart.
Benjamin ignored them, lost in his own  thoughts, but at last Scawsby, his sallow face flushed with wine, rose and came to stand over me.
‘So glad to see you, Shallot,’ he purred.
‘Another errand, another failure, eh?’
Benjamin nudged me with his knee so I looked away.
Scawsby leaned closer and I wrinkled my nose at his sour breath.
‘You are a base-born rogue, Shallot!’ he hissed.
‘If I had my way you would be buried like your mother in a pauper's grave!’
Benjamin seized my wrist before I could grasp my knife.
‘Come, Roger!’ he murmured.
‘We have eaten our fill.’
He dragged me away for I could have killed Scawsby on the spot and anyone else who tried to interfere.
Outside the hall, I turned to Benjamin.
‘You should have let me kill him!’
I accused.
‘No, no, Roger, they are full of wine and their own importance.
They think the game is over and we are to be whipped off like hounds, back to Uncle.’
‘If you could prove Scawsby was the murderer!’
I hissed.
‘After all, he knows poisons.’
Benjamin looked away.
‘Scawsby,’ he murmured, ‘is he the murderer or just a spiteful man who rejoices in the humiliation of others?
But I tell you this, Roger, Moodie was innocent of any crime.
He no more committed suicide than Selkirk or Ruthven!’
