The 1993 Conference — Peebles, 4–6 June 1993
They say that the sun shines on the righteous, which explains why the BIE has a good track record for weather at the time of its conferences.
This year was no exception with the climate improving each day at Peebles.
The conference started a day earlier this time with the AGM commencing on the Friday and finishing on Saturday morning.
Tweedale District Council started the conference festivities with a Civic Reception in the hotel ballroom on the Thursday evening.
On Friday the traditional conference photograph was taken and the afternoon was spent by the ladies on a visit to Bowhill and then along to the Selkirk glass factory.
For members on Friday afternoon there was an educational session by  on ‘The Infected Body — Who Should Know’.
This subject, which was illustrated by slides, prompted questions and discussion which took proceedings up to the end of the afternoon.
In the evening delegates were treated to a Scottish Evening with dancing, a singer and Scottish dancing displays.
The Annual Banquet was on Saturday evening with 174 people enjoying a magnificent meal which included a sweet entitled ‘Border Beacons’ piped in with sparklers!
The speakers, apart from our own President and Vice President were,(NAFD),(Deputy Convenor, Tweedale Council),(President's Personal Steward) and  (Minister of the Old Parish Church, Peebles).
Just before the formal toasts and after the famous and highly informal ‘toast to the Divisions’ was a presentation to  by Vice President's lady,, on behalf of the ladies.
The toast to the Divisions has for some time been a ‘musical geography tour’ and this time people present were treated to an extra musical item being the toast to National Office, whereby  gave an immaculate rendition of The Hippopotamus Song.
The Installation of Officers took place on Sunday morning and  began his Presidency with the inaugural speech, printed elsewhere in this issue.
The First Vice President is  from the Southern Division and Second Vice President is  from the Scottish Division.
Sunday morning's agenda also included the installation of the new Master Fellow,.
Unfortunately the outgoing Master Fellow, could not be at conference because of the serious illness of her sister, so the installation was conducted by her predecessor,.
's first task was to present a certificate of membership into the Company of Fellows to , whose profile is published in this edition.
The conference ran extremely smoothly and tribute must be paid to  as Conference Secretary, as the President's Steward and the rest of the hard working team.
The information desk was manned throughout the weekend, the timetable was strictly adhered to and everyone benefited from the efficiency.
Presidential Address to Conference 1993
Immediate Past President, Fellows, Distinguished Guests, Members, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It is my great pleasure to be here this morning to express my sincere gratitude to you, my fellow members, for electing me as your National President for 1993/94.
I now realize what a great honour it is to have this Presidential Chain bestowed on me and I trust that I will be able to uphold and fulfil my obligations as President, particularly when I reflect upon the contributions made by my predecessors.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my personal thanks to the Members of the North East Division for their support but particularly to certain members of the Division who have provided me with tuition, advice and encouragement throughout my career in the funeral profession.
Firstly to our Current Master Fellow,, who gave me my initial tuition in embalming, but more than that has acted as a mentor throughout my career, for that I am forever grateful.
Also to my father-in-law, for his invaluable support, guidance and help and who I know will be with me every step of the way during my Presidential Year.
And to  and  who are supporting us so ably with Conference 1994 arrangements.
Finally, to the late , a long-standing member of the North East Division who would have been delighted to have seen me standing here today.
During my forthcoming Presidential Year it is my belief, as I know it is yours, that the Institute should and shall continue to look forward into the 90s and beyond and if there is to be a theme, it should quite simply be ‘The Institute’.
As Past President,, has said to me on more than one occasion, there is no finer Institute of which to be a member than the British Institute of Embalmers.
With the Institute as a theme I should like to refer to the Presidential Address of  in London in 1927 who said, and I quote:
‘We are a Society concerned solely with Education and the raising of our business to the rank of a respected profession’.
To perpetuate this aim forward towards national recognition, we must continue to Adopt, Adapt and Improve.
We have Adopted in the last few years, the Modular Education System.
We must Adapt this to the continuing changes in educational standards to meet the requirements of both Students, Educationalists and Governmental bodies.
With this in mind perhaps an emphasis needs to be placed on the more practical application of embalming and a greater value placed on course examinations and assessment.
To provide for any improvements in education or Institute affairs, close liaison and dialogue with the committees, tutors, general membership, educationalists and also kindred associations all of whom are committed towards advancing both the profession of embalming and funeral service.
As education is the core subject of the Institute, the welfare of its students and new members being of paramount importance, I would like during my year of office, when visiting Divisions, that a practical demonstration be arranged in order to give encouragement and fellowship to the students and newly qualified members.
It is essential for us to improve the funeral profession's awareness of the benefits of embalming and I would urge that the Members of this Institute, through the offices of public relations continue to provide platforms to promote the Science of Embalming.
In order to provide financial security through the 90s, clear fiscal policies at National and Divisional level are becoming necessary.
Coupled with the committed Management of National Office, I am sure we will create a secure base for progression.
I should like to commend to Members the text of the Inaugural meeting of the BIE in London in 1927 much of which is as relevant today as it was then and it will only be by the commitment of you the members that the Institute will improve and ultimately progress.
President  said, ‘Progress is generally a slow transition from one stage to another but the process can be hastened or retarded by the action of individuals.
To assist this progress of development in any and every possible way is the programme of this Society’.
In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, and I look forward to meeting as many of you as possible during our year to renew old friendships and to forge new ones and to welcome you to Conference in 1994 in the Land of the Prince Bishops.
I thank you all for your patience and attention.
Retiring Presidential Address to the AGM
Master Fellow, Fellows, Members…
Some twelve months ago I embarked on my year of Presidency, a daunting task some might say, and something that you cannot have a ‘trial run’ at.
Suddenly one has arrived and everything is for real!
However, the warmth of the reception and the encouragement  and I received as we travelled the length and breadth of this country, across to the ‘Emerald Isle’ and into Belgium was truly appreciated.
I have decided not to list my visits and explain where we have been or where we have not been.
My philosophy being that members who attended the meetings or functions which I attended will know I was there.
The absent members will not know whether I was there or not!
Having said that, I must apologise to members of the Midlands and Southern Divisions for not being able to ‘land on their patch’.
This was due to other commitments.
I do hope my apologies are acceptable.
When I began my year, my theme was ‘Go Forward Together and Progress’, with the emphasis on ‘togetherness’.
It is still my belief that we must continue to develop our liaison with all sectors of the funeral service, to further promote the importance of embalming.
The headings I used in my inaugural speech last year were…
Togetherness in our Institute
Togetherness within the fields of education
Togetherness in training
Togetherness in recruitment.
We must ask ourselves, ‘Have we made sufficient progress for one year's deliberations and hard work?’
During my travels I have come across many keen, enthusiastic members.
Some of them serving the Institute well, by holding office at local or national level and others by being (what I will become on Sunday)‘an ordinary grumbling member’.
We need our ordinary grumbling members to keep us on our toes.
The youngest ones are the Institute of the future and they only require a little encouragement (a twist of an arm) and they will become reliable, enthusiastic committee members, secretaries or chairmen.
At this juncture I would like to pay tribute to all Chairmen and Secretaries of our Divisions, various Boards and Committees, I am sure their work is greatly appreciated by all.
Now to return to ‘Togetherness and Progress’.
Togetherness in our Institute.
I am pleased to report that I believe the various committees are working in unison to further develop the understanding between them.
Togetherness within the field of education.
Educational sessions must be the key to successful, interesting divisional meetings and I am grateful to the National Educational Committee (I won't single out the Chairman,, that would be unfair) for being the stimulus which resulted in an increase in educational sessions at meetings during the past twelve months.
Well done and thanks to all.
I am sure with continued inspiration and a transmission of ideas from other divisions we will continue to move steadily forward.
Togetherness in training.
In the field of training we must always be prepared to look to the future and, if considered necessary, modify our teaching procedures.
The British Institute of Embalmers has never ‘stood still’ in the past, so we must not let this happen now.
In many other trades, crafts and professions, vocational qualifications have been part of their prosperous development and I therefore commend to you that we be attentive.
Togetherness in recruitment.
I am sure you are all aware that there is a continual flow of applications from interested candidates.
This must be not only encouraging but also perturbing as we are only able to accept a small number for tuition.
In certain parts of the country tuition and facilities are extremely good, but in other parts we require to develop.
We are doing a good job but we must not be complacent.
Public Relations
This is an area which I feel requires to be rejuvenated.
I have no wish to see the British Institute of Embalmers appearing in every other newspaper but this is an avenue which I believe requires a ‘little push’ to develop a presentation suitable for Rotary Clubs, church organisations, etc.
A few of our members have prepared very good speeches which they present locally and it would be my hope that we may be in a position in the not too distant future to have a professionally prepared audio/visual promotional aide.
As I near the end of my year in office, I am pleased to report there is no doubt in my mind that we have a very stable Institute which was built on a strong foundation by our predecessors.
With our feet firmly on the ground and our sights set in the right direction.
During the next few days, I hope you will all feel free to take part in our meetings and discussions which I am sure will assist us with our decision making.
In conclusion, may I take this opportunity of thanking the Chief Executive and Directors of Plantsbrook Group, the National Secretary, the Officers, Administration Secretary and the Staff at the National Office and, last but not least, my colleagues at work for all their support during the past twelve months.
Minutes of the 64th Annual General Meeting of the British Institute of Embalmers, held on 4th and 5th June 1993 at The Peebles Hotel Hydro, Peebles, Scotland.
The President,, welcomed everyone to the AGM.
ROLL CALL
The National President requested all members to announce their name, town, division and any National or Divisional Office held.
OFFICIAL OPENING
The President declared the 64th AGM open and the National General Secretary read the notice convening the meeting.
OBITUARIES
The meeting stood in silent tribute to the following deceased members and their families:
ADOPTION OF STANDING ORDERS
These were printed on page 6 of The Embalmer, Vol.36, No 2 and were unanimously adopted having been proposed by  and seconded by .
MINUTES
The minutes of the 63rd AGM, printed in The Embalmer, Vol.35, No 3, Autumn 1992 issue were approved, on the proposal of , seconded by .
MINUTES OF A SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING
The minutes of the Special General Meeting held immediately before the Annual General Meeting at , on the 30th May 1992 were printed on page 32 of The Embalmer, Vol.36, No 2, Spring 1993.
These were proposed by  and seconded by  and carried unanimously.
MINUTES OF A SPECIAL GENERAL MEETING
The minutes of the Special General Meeting held at Keele University on 12th September 1992 and printed on page 32 of The Embalmer, Vol.36, No 2, Spring 1993.
These were approved on the proposal of , seconded by .
APOLOGIES
Apologies were received from:
THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS
The First Vice President,, assumed control of the Meeting and called on the President to address the Meeting.
This was received with acclaim.
A copy of the Address is attached (Appendix A).
The President resumed control of the Meeting.
The First Vice President then thanked the President for all his efforts on behalf of the Institute during his year of office and wished him and his wife,, well in the future.
PUBLIC RELATIONS
proposed and  seconded the adoption of the Report which was carried unanimously.
BIE MEMORIAL TRUST
proposed and  seconded the adoption of the Report.
Discussion followed.
read a Report from a student after a recent visit to Belgium.
Now that Anubis House was paid for, the Trustees would look to help in education.
referred to the May Goudie Memorial Hairdressing Course.
A one-day course was available at Jennings in Wolverhampton, with theory at the Novotel.
The tutor was , who embalmed 2,500 cases per year and also ran a hairdressing business.
The course was promoted by the Trustees and the National Education Committee with some nominal cost, and a maximum of ten participants.
The NEC had suggested that the matter should be advised to Divisions, for each to nominate a person to attend and report back, with the possibility of the creation of a certificate of attendance.
welcomed the information which should improve embalmers and the service able to be offered.
He thanked the Trustees for their help and also for the completion of payment of the cost of Anubis House.
expressed the gratitude of the NEC for their interest in education.
It was sad that so few could participate.
There had been an American and Canadian scholarship and now training was available in Belgium.
This could only be done by the Trustees, as members could not afford to fund entirely.
(Overseas) emphasised that continuing education was vital to ensure developments and improvements in embalming.
stated, for information, that Belgian scholarship students' travel, to and from the training place, was paid for by the Trustees.
Students paid for their own accommodation.
stated that the course was in two parts of 12 days.
All got on well.
The course covered a number of matters including cosmetology.
If a body was in poor condition, family viewing was virtually impossible due, in some cases, to lack of expertise.
The course taught the correct techniques.
The second part of the course would take place in March 1994.
Following this discussion, the Annual Report was accepted unanimously.
On the proposition of , seconded by , the Memorial Trust Revenue Account and Balance Sheet, printed on page 15 of The Embalmer, Vol. 36, No 2, Spring 1993, were approved.
THE COUNCIL OF BRITISH FUNERAL SERVICES
The Annual Report of the Council of British Funeral Services printed on page 8 of The Embalmer, Vol. 36, No 2, Spring 1993, was proposed by , and seconded by  and approved.
THE BIE/NAFD/CFSMA/BIFD/LIAISON COMMITTEE
The Report of the above printed on pages 8 and 9 of The Embalmer, Vol. 36, No 2, Spring 1993, was proposed by  and seconded by  and approved.
THE NAFD INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE
This Report on page 9 of The Embalmer, Vol.36, No 2, Spring 1993, was proposed by , and seconded by  and approved.
THE EUROPEAN COUNCIL OF THANOTOPRACTICAL ASSOCIATIONS
This Report, printed on page 9 of The Embalmer, Vol. 36, No 2, Spring 1993 was proposed by  and seconded by .
pointed out that there was a movement in France for legal standards in embalming laid down by the state, defining courses, tests, times and standards.
Examinations were by a National committee.
This could prevent BIE members from embalming in France and was causing some concern.
stated that a National Diploma was likely to be set up and all embalmers would have to re-take the exam.
Nothing other than the Diploma would be needed.
It was hoped that the Institute qualification would be accepted.
stated that only three weeks without practical experience was all that was required for the diploma.
In Germany, students were of high quality, and he ran courses to full Institute standards.
pointed out that the Institute did not award a diploma or certificate in embalming, but a certificate of Membership.
The Report was then approved.
REPORT OF THE NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS BOARD OF EMBALMERS
This Report, printed on page 9 of The Embalmer, Vol. 36, No 2, Spring 1993, was proposed by , seconded by  and approved.
NATIONAL EDUCATION COMMITTEE
This Report, printed on page 10 of The Embalmer, Vol. 36, No 2 Spring 1993, was proposed by  and seconded by .
reported that the Committee worked very hard and much was achieved.
He especially thanked  for years of hard work, and this was received with strong acclamation.
Over a period some mistakes had been made and several members of the Committee were not in full agreement, but if ideas and plans were to be achieved there was bound to be hard talking at Meetings.
Some Divisions were concerned about the teaching system.
The Modular System had taken five to seven years to develop.
Some claimed that there was too much detail, and this was being worked on.
The Committee would have specific tasks to carry out and if these were not achieved, an unqualified body might emerge.
The position in the USA was not known.
Some Divisions and individual members criticised the NEC and what it did but were not prepared to do anything or offer constructive advice.
stated that he had read the Report, and was very familiar with the Modular System through constant use.
He proposed that the title should have the words added ‘by Sheila Dicks’ and should be known as the Dicks Textbook.
This was received with acclamation.
echoed the applause for , but was still convinced that there was too much detail and that the amount of theory outstripped the needs of students.
More practical and less theoretical was required.
The same criticism was also applied to the Scudamore Textbook in the past.
of USA stated that he was licensed in embalming in Ohio, and this had required two years in an academic college and one year's mortuary service.
A funeral director's licence needed a degree and two year's mortuary service following a one-year apprenticeship.
Embalmers were going to have to do the same.
A membership of 700 had evolved in Ohio requiring an embalmer's licence.
An educational programme had been done and 12 hours training every two years was required to keep the licence.
was also licensed in Florida, where a two hour course on AIDS was needed for the renewal of the licence.
If this course were not done, the licence was cancelled and a fine could be imposed.
felt that  was trying to lower the level of embalming in Europe, where it was being raised.
In Belgium, if the Modular System were to be reduced, it would no longer be suitable.
Good embalming needed to be promoted world-wide.
added that lowering of embalming standards should not be tolerated and that trade embalming was not good enough.
Too much theory did not improve practical embalming standards.
stated that it was nice to hear from the USA, and emphasised that there it took four years to qualify as an embalmer and wondered what students would think of that.
In reply to 's comments, stated that the Institute relied on registered tutors to teach practical embalming.
Whilst the NEC was responsible it could only be as good as the tutors.
In the USA if the required credits were not obtained, the licence would be withdrawn.
Funeral Directors in the UK were using unqualified persons simply to pump fluid.
They and others would not allow time for their staff to study and pass the Modular System.
A total of thirty practical cases was required of students.
and  had emphasised that the Institute could be left behind and would be compelled by others in Europe to do certain things, which was not desirable.
If the Institute really wanted to lead in Europe, the Modular System was essential.
If tutors were not doing their job as required they would be reported to National Council and their accredition would be withdrawn, and Institute students could only be taught by accredited tutors.
returned to add that both  and  were concerned about the amount of practical training.
He stated that in New York, regarding practical experience, the only bodies that trainee embalmers could obtain were unclaimed ones which had been refrigerated for months, and not just a few hours old, as is the popular myth in this country.
Students in the USA had to go out on placement to firms for training, and thus had a good grounding in practical embalming.
The Report was then approved.
THE COMPANY OF FELLOWS
This Report printed on page 10 of The Embalmer, Vol. 36, No 2, Spring 1993, was proposed by  and seconded by  and approved.
It was very much regretted that Master Fellow  was unable to be present due to family illness.
She had been very astute and successful, and everyone wished her well.
rose to thank  for all his work for the fellows.
INSTITUTE PUBLICATIONS
reported that the Health and Safety Handbook had been very successful.
He thanked the regular advertisers.
The biggest task had been the design and obtaining of the new Display Stand on show, at the rear of the Conference Hall.
The Stand had been taken to the recent Funeral Service Exhibition at Mottram Hall.
It would be booked out and in by National Office, and would be returned there for safe storage on each occasion after use.
proposed adoption of the Report, printed on pages 10 and 11 in the Embalmer, Vol. 36, No 2, Spring 1993, and in seconding the motion  thanked  for all his hard work.
This was approved.
THE BENEVOLENT FUND
proposed and  seconded adoption of the Balance Sheet and Revenue Account as printed on page 16 of The Embalmer, Vol. 36, No 2, Spring 1993 and of the Report printed on page 11.
This was carried unanimously.
FINANCE
went through the Revenue Account and the Balance Sheet for the year ended 31st December 1992, which were printed on pages 13 and 14 of The Embalmer, Vol.36, No 2, Spring 1993 and the Finance Report printed on page 11.  drew the attention of the Members to the growth in the number of registered students from 186 in June 1988 to 380 at present, and the consequent increase in registration fee income.
wished to know why certain of the figures showed differences and why the audit fee was up by 50 per cent.
replied that more precise analysis was now taking place and that more information had been needed for the audit.
He also pointed out that under item 25 Appointment of Auditors, a quotation at a much lower figure had been accepted from a new firm of Auditors.
This would be possible as  would be undertaking a much greater part of the year-end work and the preparation of the draft Annual Accounts for Audit.
went through the Finance Report in detail.
in his capacity as Treasurer of Southern Division reported that the Divisional Grant was too low as the cost of hiring meeting rooms was very high.
stated that he had the authority to give a supplementary grant of £100, but asked Southern Division to plan ahead for 1994 and to produce a budget showing anticipated expenditure, to be sent to National Office.
All Divisions were expected to do this, which would enable National Council to consider the level of Divisional grants.
then proposed and  seconded the adoption of the Directors Report (as amended by the proposal not to reappoint the present auditors) and the Revenue Account and Balance Sheet, and this was carried unanimously.
then stated that, based on likely costs which he and  had discussed, he wished to propose the following subscription rates from 1st January 1994.
Full Members £69; Overseas Unattached £60; Retired Members £44; 3 year Student Registration £78.
pointed out that the subscriptions had been kept as low as possible compatible with expected inflation and budgets.
seconded the proposition, which was carried unanimously.
The Presidential Grant for 1993/94 was proposed by  at an inflation-linked figure of £1,368.
He pointed out that costs formerly allocated to the President no longer applied and that in future years the grant would require to be reduced.
seconded the motion which was carried unanimously.
Outstanding subscriptions totalled approximately £13,400 and efforts were being made to reduce these.
The figure reported 12  months ago was grossly understated.
RESOLUTIONS TO THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
There were no resolutions to the Annual General Meeting.
DIVISIONAL REPORTS
The Reports were published on pages 18 to 21 inclusive in The Embalmer, Vol.36, No 2, Spring 1993.
They were proposed en-bloc by , seconded by  and approved.
reported that a representative from the Australian Division was not present, but that he had a message of greeting and good wishes from , with details of a meeting to be held in Australia.
ELECTION OF OFFICERS
The President stated that all nominations had been on display at the rear of the Hall since the beginning of the meeting.
There were two committees for which ballots were required, which were the National Examinations Board of Embalmers and the National Education Committee.
The President announced that with the exception of these two Committees, it was customary for all Offices to be voted for en-bloc by a show of hands.
pointed out that the meeting needed to grant an indulgence to waive the requirement that candidates for First and Second Vice Presidents should have served two years on a National Committee.
It was therefore proposed by , seconded by  and carried unanimously that notwithstanding the previous Conference resolution to that effect, the requirement should be waived on this occasion, and that the officers nominated and displayed on the sheet at the rear of the Hall should be elected en-bloc.
Members of the Company of Fellows, under the direction of  distributed ballot papers containing the nominations as follows:
(a)
National Examinations Authority:—
(b)
National Education Committee:—
APPOINTMENT OF AUDITORS
proposed that  of Droitwich be appointed Auditors at a fee of £850 plus VAT.
This was seconded by  and carried unanimously.
THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING 1994
stated that , the Conference Secretary for 1994, had not arrived.
The dates would be 19th-22nd May at .
He gave a short video presentation of the Hall and the facilities.
A budget was being prepared and it was hoped that a weekend inclusive of all meals would cost in the region of £425 per couple, subject to cost finalisation and price movement in the interim.
The likely cost of Thursday to Sunday was being investigated.
ANY OTHER BUSINESS
stated that it was a privilege to have several members present from North America, and consideration needed to be given to the possibility of forming a North American Division.
stated that Institute Rules required a minimum of ten members to combine to write to National Council via National Office requesting the authority to form a North American Division.
The inauguration had to be authorised by a Special General Meeting or at an Annual General Meeting.
In reply to an enquiry from  about the method of financing, pointed out that under existing regulations the new Division would be eligible for the Annual Divisional Grant, the current rate being £230.
The annual subscription would increase from overseas to the full membership rate.
referred to the capital needed to set it up.
He anticipated lunch or breakfast meetings.
A full publicity campaign would initially be essential.
There were 22,000 funeral homes in the USA, with a requirement of a minimum of one embalmer in each, so that there were probably at least 25,000 embalmers across the country.
It might be that an American Association of Embalmers would emerge, but one world-wide Institute would be better.
A North American Division of BIE would require enough money to fund its operations, and if there were only 1,000 members (one in 25 of the total number of embalmers) this would provide an extra £69,000 of Institute income at the 1994 level.
It was essential to make suitable arrangements about financing, especially in view of the vast distances involved.
Members of suitable quality were needed, but members must feel that they were getting value for money.
stated that he too was anxious to set up a North American Division.
felt that this was very encouraging, but after the matter was discussed some years ago, he wrote to the then seventy-five North American members to establish the degree of interest in forming a separate Division.
There were only eleven replies; seven were in favour, four were not, and as the minimum of ten was not achieved, the matter was dropped.
had always encouraged embalmers to become members.
Was it necessary to change the Institute name to, for example, the International Institute of Embalmers?
There were problems in Europe with several embalming organisations vying for control in Europe.
At present the BIE was the leading Institute in the world.
asked the members to retain the existing name.
agreed that finance would be needed to form and run a North American Division, but there was an Australian Division which had a local levy to raise its funds, which might be affected by any new arrangements for North America.
The same could be said for Belgium.
One possible solution might be different grades of membership, but an examination in depth was needed.
proposed an active pursuit of the matter by the proper authority, which was seconded by  and carried unanimously.
felt that the wider problem of possible changes in the Institute should be addressed to determine where it was going.
The funeral service and groupings within it had changed over the last five years.
The Institute was aware of the NVQ system and must adjust and re-examine the grades of membership as a result.
The NVQ system allowed learning at students' own speeds compared with the three-year registration period of the Institute, which might have to change to an annual registration period and fee as a consequence.
Europe and developments there might force change on the Institute.
He had to go to Germany in July to talk to students and others about embalming, and  was talking to Poland.
Was a separate ad-hoc Committee needed to examine and develop the whole matter, as otherwise the Institute could be pushed aside in its own profession.
Kindred associations in the funeral industry were feeling the same.
shared the concern and felt that the Institute could be pushed aside by the larger companies who were already carrying out their own teaching and might decide that they did not need the Institute or its standards.
The two tier system mentioned some time ago was needed now and a greater standard of excellence was  essential in practical embalming.
Much more information was needed to make the correct decision.
stated that NVQ was under constant review and that all the elements required had been sent, but no reply received, which the funeral service had also experienced.
It might take four or five years for the matter to be sorted out by the NVQ Committee.
What would happen if the Institute were not accepted on a new Register? was glad of the opportunity to speak on the matter and as the Institute representative on the Committee he was disturbed by the lack of progress by the appointed agent.
Following receipt of a Government letter he had written to express concern at the lack of information and support, to which there had been no reply.
There had been certain problems with the agency concerned due to political pressure.
Following the February letter the Group was now producing work and information needed.
The agents now had a bond with , and the Committee had met and the first draft of the workings of the Group had been brought out.
could obtain a copy although embalming was only a part of the NVQ.
The Government had decided that every occupation in the country should be ‘NVQ'd’ and that tests should be done in the work place.
By the middle of November the funeral service had to submit its findings and the Government would decide if these were acceptable.
The date was likely to be February 1994 for a reply.
There would be a big shake-up in the funeral industry.
One could register for NVQ studies at 18, but take the examinations at 80.
The passing of each element would result in a certificate.
The take-up of NVQ's would depend on what the industry wanted, and large companies might decide on NVQ's and not be interested in the Institute's training and examinations.
When the Government had agreed the appropriate NVQ, there would be a need for the tutors and assessors in the workplace.
The Institute would be in a strong position, and the NVQ Committee would decide how assessments were to be done with a City and Guilds involvement.
An assessor would be needed to be brought into the workplace at a cost, or it would be necessary to go to an assessor.
Once the Government had approved the NVQ it would only offer NVQ training assistance.
It was impossible to make decisions at present even if a special Committee were to be set up.
Even within twelve to eighteen months it was not likely that decisions could be made.
In the meantime National Council would have to decide whether NVQ was equivalent or would supersede Institute examinations or if some two-tier membership or other type of examination were needed.
expressed gratitude to  for his clear exposition of the facts.
His worry when NVQ's began was the question of who made the awards and could ‘NVQers’ practise as embalmers.  replied this would not be the case.
There was no system of licensing and anyone could embalm.  asked how NVQ's would effect membership of the Institute and  stated that in his opinion the number of members of the Institute would decline.
stated that at present the Institute could accept others as members, provided they were agreed by National Council, as in the case of certain overseas embalmers possessing acceptable certificates and proof of experience.
A change of Articles was not needed.
With NVQ's, there would be different assessments throughout life and the Institute could set assessments.
Southern Division had previously raised the question of a two-tier membership, and the NEC was still considering the matter.
It had to be established how such a system would work, and virtually all the present members had qualified by Institute examinations for practical and theoretical experience, and were unlikely to allow those to be admitted who had not passed these examinations.
Those responsible for NVQ development were listening to  and .
The Institute had only had three weeks to produce all documents and the plan for practical embalming for the NVQ Committee, and the three members concerned had completed the task within that three weeks.
The assessments would be expensive but if the Institute qualification were ‘NVQ'd’ there would be Government funding for part or all.
Other things, such as SCOTVEC were more worrying than NVQ's.
They had a joint display at the recent NAFD exhibition.
He () had contacted them, but had been refused information although he could hire a video.
Once again no details were available, and the Institute was again fragmenting with NVQ's and SCOTVEC.
A small Committee was urgently needed to examine the whole future of the Institute, which had its own teaching arrangements.
He urged members to go to their Divisions and put forward more prospective tutors.
At one time the Institute had intended to establish its own college for training, and this was still essential.
This would enable the Institute to produce better embalmers and to be listened to.
returned to the rostrum to remind members strongly that this committee had not been formed.
He therefore proposed a committee of three to investigate the Institute position and the future of embalming in the UK, with particular reference to NVQ's and other current developments.
This was seconded by  and carried unanimously.
reported that the Funeral Service Journal had hoped to attend the Conference, but  had been unable to be present owing to imminent magazine deadlines.
proposed that the Funeral Service Journal representation be made at the next Conference.
This was seconded by  and carried unanimously.
rose to thank those present at the Special General Meeting for restoring the vote to retired members.
INSTALLATION OF OFFICERS
The retiring President,, installed  as National President for 1993/94 and offered his best wishes to Mr and Mrs  during their year of office.
invested  with her Jewel.
then introduced the Officers to the new President as follows:—
The Immediate Past President,, called upon the President for his Address (Appendix B attached).
The First Vice President thanked the President and called upon the assembly to receive the Address with acclaim.
The National General Secretary read out the greetings and good wishes received, and this was followed by the Immediate Past President , who introduced representatives of Institute Committees, visiting Presidents and Divisional Representatives and  representing the Secretariat.
The President resumed control of the meeting and invested the Immediate Past President with his Jewel.
INSTALLATION OF MASTER FELLOW
In the unavoidable absence of the retiring Master Fellow,, the President, requested  to come forward to install the successor.
requested the Master Fellow elect,, to come forward, together with all Fellows present.
then installed the new Master fellow, who addressed the Meeting.
He then presented a certificate to the new Fellow,.
TUTOR'S CERTIFICATE
The President announced the winners of the George Wood Cup as Western Division and presented it to .
The President invited the Representative of the Trustees,, who announced  of Southern Division (tutor ) as the winner.
The presentation would be made at a Divisional Meeting in due course.
VOTES OF THANKS
proposed a vote of thanks to all retiring Officers and Committee Members and  thanked the Conference secretary, and the Conference Committee and the stewards and all who had helped.
Tribute was paid to the smooth, efficient and self-effacing manner in which all arrangements had been carried out — a model for all future Conferences.
The Conference Secretary thanked the Hotel Manager and Staff.
These proposals were all received with applause.
CLOSURE OF MEETING
The National President then declared the 64th Annual General Meeting closed.
Pictures from Peebles…
The new Vice-President  with his lady .
The new National President,, with his wife .
The principal Top Table guests at the Annual Banquet
The Immediate Past President's lady , installs the new President's lady,, with her jewel.
Banquet-goers were treated to a march past of pipers during the reception.
The 1992–93 Executive Committee was one of the smallest for years — the entire committee is pictured at the Annual Banquet.
Portrait of a Fellow
The National Council meeting in Spring unanimously elected  into the Company of Fellows and the presentation of his certificate took place at the Peebles conference.
started his career in 1953 as a Funeral Service Operative for the London Co-operative Society at their Southend-on-Sea depot.
In 1957 he was appointed relief manager for their branches throughout London and three years later he became their Holloway branch manager, moving to Ilford as the manager in 1963 and on to Southend-on-Sea as depot manager in 1973.
Finally in 1979 he was appointed department manager of the Colchester &East Essex Co-operative Society Ltd.
was first introduced to embalming by the late , the departmental manager of the London Cooperative Society's Funeral Service and qualified under his tutelage in 1961.
was one of the pioneers of embalming and did much to promote it within the Co-operative Funeral Service and was held in high esteem by colleagues for his long standing service to the Institute.
He encouraged  to take the examiner's examination and he qualified in the late 1960s.
's involvement in the Institute has been varied.
He was the Chairman of the Southern Division in 1979–80 and was the Divisional Secretary for a number of years.
He was the Technical Editor of The Embalmer from 1982 to 1986, he was Chairman of the National Education Committee in 1991–92 and is an Accredited Tutor.
Below are the views expressed by the late  to all his students at the beginning of an embalming course and  believes the advice given, which is still passed on to 's own students, is still relevant today:
’…
Now that you are completing the preliminary studies and will shortly be embarking on the more complicated part of the syllabus, I feel that, at this stage, it would be of benefit to give you the following lessons in an endeavour to press home to you the importance and value of your continued perseverance.
Modern Embalming
Public Approach and Personal Dignity
The attitude that you yourself hold towards your jobs in life will be reflected by those with whom you come into contact, either in business or in private life.
It is important, therefore, before attempting to build up a successful front for the furtherance of your career, first to ensure that the real attitude behind the front is one that will support it on all occasions.
What is your attitude towards funeral directing?
Whatever the actual part you play in the business, or indeed, if you have to play all the parts that go to make up a funeral directing business, what is your attitude towards the job as a whole?
Different people have different ideas about funeral directing.
To some, the parade before the public is a source of extreme satisfaction to their vanity, but all the preliminaries that go before the parade are so much drudgeries that irritate, and are completed as hastily as possible.
Others drift into the trade because the returns are moderately good, and the work steady.
it is just a job of so many hours for so much.
Calls outside the regular hours are resented.
To the vast majority, the basis of all funeral directing, the cadaver that has to be buried, is an object, at the least, of repugnance, and most engaged in the trade are not proud of the fact.
They are apologetic or resentful of it.
Not, be it noted, consciously but subconsciously, and this decides their attitude.
To the embalmer falls the vital task of altering that attitude of all those engaged on the work around him.
His skill, constantly employed, will gradually brighten the faces of his fellow workers, since every cadaver they have to remove becomes clean and wholesome to handle.
A new pride in their work springs up because a fear is wiped out from their subconsciousness, and the social inferiority it endangers goes.
Now comes to the Embalmer the realisation that his work is not only of the greatest importance to his client; to public health in the prevention of infection, but also to create a real attitude towards the job amongst his fellow workers that will mark his particular Funeral Service out from its competitors in the service it renders.
To him, his scientific training isolates every case with which he has to deal.
Each case has an interest all on its own, and each case treated successfully is a triumph to add to his confidence in his own ability, and an experience in the use of his ability that solidifies his own outlook upon the job he is doing.
The Embalmer therefore, acquires an attitude towards his job of complete satisfaction — satisfaction that he is doing a job and that job is well worth doing.
Faced with a client, his mental confidence and the alert efficiency it engenders must automatically be impressed upon the client, so that at once the client feels that he is in the hands of an expert, into whose capable hands all matters concerned with the funeral can be safely delivered.
With his skill as the basis, the Embalmer will not be content unless all other departments with which he has contact are brought up to the highest possible standard.
He will see to it that his office arrangements are parallel with the professional plane he has reached.
He will operate his office upon those lines known to be of greatest assistance to his client.
For example, it should be a rule that whosoever answers the phone should be quiet and convincing, thus ‘Good Morning, this is the Co-operative Funeral Service’, using, of course , the appropriate time of day.
Remembering always that it is far better to announce that you are the ‘Co-operative Funeral Service’ to a person who may seek  information regarding a memorial, than to announce that you are the ‘Co-operative Memorial Service’to a person who requires information regarding funeral arrangements.
A quiet clear voice should be used; false accents over the phone are a sign of inferiority and of inexperience.
Quiet sincerity should be the note struck.
Similarly, upon receiving a client, immediately introduce yourself by name, and preferably also by card, so that in two minutes the client is calling you by your own name and feels you have been handling his business all his life.
it may be flattering to be taken for the head of the firm if you are not, but it is not good business, and sound progress cannot be made with anyone on a false footing, in fact, it must be obvious that the greater the respect you hold and encourage towards any of your seniors, the better the position they will be in to assist you in any difficulties which may arise.
Set yourself a routine for taking particulars of an order.
Never vary from the routine, and always you have a subconscious life-line to pull you through when dealing with difficult clients.
Try to embed in your mind the wisdom of the forgone paragraphs, counteract frivolous gossip, instead spread goodwill, remembering always that a job worthwhile is your own making.
Personal Dignity
This subject crops up in funny places.
it is useless having the grand manner reserved for the few.
Personal dignity must pervade the whole of the outlook.
it is acquired by personal discipline of the mind.
Your education or training will have taken you far above the ordinary man although allowing for a proper pride in such an achievement, it does not require you to become intolerant of others not so fortunate.
It is offensive to professional dignity to use the specialised knowledge as some mysterious source of horrific callousness, by which nightmarish practices are conveyed by hint or by implication.
Equally a flaunting parade of your new knowledge is not a good advertisement, when contacting members of the medical profession, even trained nurses; do not seek to display your acquaintance with medical terms, although do not hesitate to put the case for Modern Embalming in technical language if the occasion warrants it.
Never discuss a case with an unqualified person, do not disclose information pertaining to the subject you have treated, that subject is the object of someone's affection, and whatever steps have to be taken to ensure preservation, that is your job.
Do not talk about your job.
Do the work and let others make the remarks afterwards; they should be complimentary to you and your profession.
The Funeral Director has to deal with every class of Society.
Maintain your dignity under all circumstances.
It is not dignified to approach a client with mock servility, just because this client has been fortunate in the matter of this world's goods.
Be polite, but a reserved dignity when dealing with those of good position will not lose you any face or business, and it will strengthen your professional status.
At the other end of the scale the ‘When in Rome do as the Romans’ is no excuse for dropping to the level of a curse between every other word that is met in some otherwise honest circles.
Your attitude of reserved dignity will not be resented; when all arrangements have been completed, the client's contact will leave them with the respectful regard for your integrity.
When at work, even in a house, do not tolerate interference.
Your work is professional work; it does not need apologies.
Always see to it that your appearance when working on a case is compatible with your status.’
Heard On My Rounds…
If the magazine ever publishes an article called, ‘What Embalmers Get Up To In Their Spare Time’ the following photograph would surely earn pride of place.
it shows (on the left), a member of the North Western Division, who is definitely not wearing white coat and rubber gloves!
joined the Institute in September 1991.
For some time she has been head dancer of a troupe and has travelled extensively abroad, taking part in cabaret on land and aboard cruise ships.
She hopes to continue dancing for some time before returning to a career in embalming.
‘I look rather different without my white coat’, she says, ‘but unfortunately a dancer's legs don't last forever’.
She sends good wishes to all her friends and colleagues.
I have purposely positioned this photograph away from the conference photographs to avoid readers confusing it with views of the Institute Officers.
Only one photograph of a newly installed chairman has been sent to me since January's Divisional AGMs.
Congratulations to  (above) who was installed Chairman of the Northern Ireland Division and is seen with National President .
As you know the magazine is edited in Leeds but it has always been a rule that there should be no Yorkshire influence.
Just to show that ‘God's Own County’ actually takes a back seat now and again I reproduce a photograph from the Divisional Dinner, which took place last autumn but was not published to allow other articles (from other Divisions) to be printed.
The picture at the top of the next column shows First Vice President,, his wife , and  (Divisional Chairman) and National President  and his wife .
Members reading Reports to Council and Conference recently will have noticed, in the Publications Report, that The Embalmer has been the subject of media interest.
has noticed an article in a publication entitled, ‘Be Your Own PR Man’, which confirms this interest.
It is reproduced below:
Be Your Own PR Man
Trade Press:
The remarkable thing about trade publications is that there are so many of them.
It is small wonder that the tree is an endangered species when you consider how many of them must be chopped down to provide one week's worth of trade press.
(Get a copy of the advertising pundits' magazine Campaign and you'll see what I mean).
They include the Fish Frier's Review, Hairdressers' Journal International, Horticultural Abstracts, Industrial Lubrication and Tribology, five different magazines for undertakers, 10 for fancy goods buyers and thousands of others.
In addition to all these magazines and newspapers there are trade newsletters.
These are, in effect, trade publications which provide ‘inside’ information on the particular business you are in.
Often the subscriptions are high, while the newsletters themselves are produced cheaply and require no pictures and few staff.
The biggest overhead is the Rolls Royce.
All these publications, from the glossiest magazine to the simplest newsletter, need material.
Indeed, with generally low staffing levels they are avid users of press releases, articles and any other old junk you can throw their way.
The sole requirement is that the material is relevant to the particular industry which the magazine covers and, preferably, that it is fairly new stuff.
If it is well written, so much the better.
Before the editors of trade magazines start sticking sub-editors' spikes in my effigy let me explain that their publications perform a valuable function and are extremely interesting to their readers.
They may take themselves rather too seriously and are full of ‘in’ jokes and references, but then they are not intended for general consumption.
So don't forget the trade press when publicising something.
If, say, fruit farming is your line it will be of interest to the Fruit Trades Journal when you discover a new strain of extra juicy apple.
But much more important is to think of other trade magazines which might use your information and bring in some customers at the same time.
For example, your press pack on the new juicy apple should without fail find its way to the offices of The Grocer.
Western Division wins the George Wood Cup
The annual conference competition to win the George Wood Cup this year took the format of target shooting (with tennis balls) and the Welsh dexterity of  earned him the honour of collecting the cup at the conference Installation Ceremony.
No-one should begrudge the win because, as holder of the cup, Western have not had the benefit of actually holding it!
The reason being that way back in 1990 the Leinster Division won the cup and its return to England was somewhat delayed, in fact, it didn't make it back in time for the 1991 competition when Western were the victors.
it didn't even make it back in time for 1992 when there was no competition so now it's back in the UK it is appropriate that Western can enjoy its company.
Even this year's runners-up, Yorkshire, didn't mind the outcome.
The President shows members which hand not to use during the George Wood Cup competition.
receives the George Wood Cup on behalf of the Western Division.
The ‘soon-to-be-installed’ Master Fellow (closely watched by some of his colleagues in The Company) shows how it should be done.
Thanks from  and 
Immediate Past National President and his lady, and  were showered with cards and letters of good wishes during their conference and take this opportunity to thank all their friends and colleagues for their support and friendship, not only at conference time but throughout their year of office.
‘Now this shouldn't take more than about an hour-and-a-half…’
The newly-installed Master Fellow,, threatens to give a lengthy inaugural speech.
Problem Time
Never volunteer to be a Reservation Secretary
Three BIE conference delegates walked into a hotel in Peebles looking for accommodation.
The hotel manager charged each of them £10 for three single rooms, totalling £30.
Later on the manager decided that, in recognition of the outstanding and unsung work that embalmers do, he had overcharged them and sent the porter upstairs with a £5 refund for them.
On the way upstairs, the porter remembered how he had struggled with all their luggage and had received no tip.
He therefore kept £2 for himself and, having £3 left, gave each delegate £1 refund.
Each delegate had, therefore, paid £9 for his room.
Now 3 × £9 is £27, if you add the £2 that the porter kept you have a total of £29 — so who's got the missing £1?
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Are colleges robbing the Institute of future embalmers?
After receiving a phone call from an anxious, distressed young lady, I felt the urgent need to put pen to paper, in order to expose what appears to be a problem caused by college education authorities.
The young lady in question (who I shall call Mrs X because I am afraid that I omitted to catch her name) began by asking me what the bad points were within the embalming profession.
After checking that I was not talking to the media, I asked what the nature of her enquiry was, and she proceeded to furnish me with the facts.
Mrs X is at present attending a college where she is studying science, and desperately wishes to take up embalming as a career, but unfortunately this is where the problem begins.
On asking the college authorities for a placement with a funeral service that promotes embalming, they turned her request down with both severe and strong objections.
They are as follows:— Due to the fact that Mrs X is married with young children, she was told that the embalming profession was an extremely dangerous job.
Not only was she putting herself at risk but also her family, by carrying home all sorts of germs.
This negative response created great distress to Mrs X as she has her heart set on becoming an embalmer.
I informed Mrs X that this was absolute rubbish and went on to explain about safety precautions, such as protective clothing and inoculations.
Also she would be taught how to work to the B.I.E. Code of Ethics.
In my opinion, if this is the sort of information that college authorities are feeding to students, not only is it putting the lid on a worthwhile career, but robbing our Institute of future embalmers.
How far behind we are in use of fluids
Reading an article in a trade journal reminded me of how far behind we are in the use of fluids in this country, by embalmers whose end product never varies and, therefore, their cases look the same and last the same, and funnily enough the noses and around the mouths grey off — the eternal question again!
Going on to the article itself which was probably a few years old, there was a part about jaundice and its treatment.
The writer had used 4 oz in 80 oz of 32 index fluid and, although I would have carried out a similar treatment as that ten years ago using saline, I consider this type of case nowadays has to be treated in a different manner, with up-to-date fluids and up-to-date knowledge — there are many first class fluids on the market today.
As a tutor I teach my students to steer well clear of what I call the 4 oz syndrome, i.e. the system we were all taught years ago.
It was 4 oz here, 3 oz there, 2 oz to the head — I am sure most embalmers will understand, but not all funeral directors.
The 4 oz in 80 oz is still the standard way most embalmers treat cases, but what if I tell you that the wheel has been re-invented!— that there are a lot(and I stress a lot) of good embalmers out there who use 10,16, 25 and even 40, yes, 40 oz and 60 oz per 80 oz.
We have heard of waterless embalming, well, who in the name of goodness has ever done it?— or is that a ploy for producers to sell more fluid or that in, for example, 16 oz they will use 3 or 4 types of fluid which interact and work as one.
The danger of over-embalming is not there because these fluids are designed to be mixed, not like old fashioned fluids with which nothing could be mixed except some Fairy Liquid for lanolin content.
There was a good article in the Dodge magazine last May and July, which showed waterless embalming on a difficult case.
There are always good articles in these American publications.
You would not believe the amount of fluid used, it was true waterless embalming — fascinating.
I have nothing against the article which prompted this letter, I just feel it is so out-of-date as far as fluids are concerned.
I treated a case in a practical class in our school, each bottle of 80 oz injected had 6 oz of Plastopake 25 index, 6 oz of Metasyn Jaundice fluid, 6 oz of Dispray, 2 oz of Rectifiant water conditioner plus a co-injection fluid of 2 oz — a saline flush was used first (about 160 oz) and then injection started.
The case took 8 × 80 oz bottles to treat and the last three bottles had dye added to them at a rate of .5 oz per 80 oz.
My students asked when the injection was going to stop?
I would reply that when the case is treated and not before.
They were used to seeing 3 × 80 oz. bottles put in with too much colour and a ‘hope for the best’ attitude.
So let's sum up, I treated a similar case with 5 times the amount of fluid than the article used, the case was solid the next day and was viewed for 3 days and had no greying off and the colour was really good.
As  said to me a long time ago, ‘You use too much water over there’, but what he really meant was, we do not use enough fluid, and the right types of fluid.
The Americans that I have spoken to tell me that the average amount of fluid they use in a case is 24 to 32 oz.
Now if that is divided by, say, 3 bottles that means between 8 and 10.5 minimum, because they do not consider the case treated below this level.
I know that some folk have had cases from America which have not been too well done, and, in fact, felt that they were over-embalmed and no make-up.
I would accept that since I saw a report only the other day about such a case (the funeral director involved had a son in my class who brought me the file) the embalmer had used 8 oz per 80 oz of a very good fluid, but had not put in any co or pre injection fluids and did not mix any other fluids, and he put in 4 × 80 oz bottles.
Why did this happen?
Because it was an insurance job and it was going to Scotland and they are all thick up there — too much haggis, you see.
So, let's bury this 4 oz syndrome, after all, the absolutely lowest amount you can inject and say the person is actually embalmed (after a fashion) is 3 oz and  in his book told us, ‘greying off is due to the phenol or ethyl alcohol in the fluids’, so take them out and no greying off-the eternal question is answered.
There are lots of fluids out there, they are there for the embalmer to increase his expertise and to help him make his cases better, the chemical companies give technical support and do a lot of research into their products.
The products are not made to make them more money, they are there to help embalmers give better results.
I counted my basic fluids before I wrote this letter, I had 10, all of which are used on a regular basis and about another 4 special fluids.
How many embalmers do you know who have 1 or 2 arterials, 1 cavity fluid and that's it.
In finishing I would say that starting to change fluids can be a daunting prospect and I can assure you our firm played about with fluids and got some ropey results, and even thought we had the chemical company taped and could use less fluid, it worked out at about 3 oz per 80 oz with dye added and boy, did we have colour, it was brilliant.
The cosmetic effect was wonderful.
Then the funeral was held up for a few days, and we soon realised that the effect was indeed cosmetic and nothing more.
After that we stuck rigidly to the manufacturer's mixture of fluids, and have never looked back.
Do not forget you also have a responsibility to treat the case properly, all I say is that the 4 oz syndrome is no longer the answer.
Ventilation Rates in Embalming Theatres
Part of the Institute's reply to an enquiry from an Environmental
Health Officer and reproduced for Member's information
Formaldehyde solution, as supplied to Embalmers from the major manufacturers, is usually of Index 26, 28 or, at most 32. (26 per cent, 28 per cent or perhaps 32 per cent solutions).
This is because the solution has numerous additives to make it suitable for restorative embalming.
The solution is then diluted to approximately 1–2 per cent solution for injection into the body.
This means that, in a well organised theatre, with professional embalmers, very little formaldehyde gas is likely to be released into the atmosphere.
This is especially so since it is introduced into the body via a closed container and through tubing connected to plastic catheters or stainless steel canulae which fit closely and tightly.
All drainage, which will contain some formaldehyde solution, is drained into closed vessels.
When embalming a case which has been the subject of a post-mortem examination, there is likely to be more opportunity for formaldehyde to enter the atmosphere but care is taken to minimise this.
On average, a body is injected with approximately 12–16 pints of the one and a half per cent or two per cent solution and this takes place over a time period of approximately one to two hours.
The above is intended to indicate the fairly small amounts of formaldehyde likely to gain access to the air in an embalming theatre, never-the-less we are very aware of the potential hazard of the gas and advise our members accordingly.
It has been the practice to suggest that the air in the theatre should be completely changed at least ten times per hour whilst working.
(12 in and 10 out).
This is effected by means of extractor fan system, the air entering close to the ceiling and leaving close to ground level.
The embalmer is advised to ensure that the movement of the air passes along the length of the table position from above downwards wherever possible.
In addition to the above, the air in the theatre must be monitored for formaldehyde gas on a regular basis and action taken if the amount exceeds 2 ppm in any two hour period.
Our embalming supplies companies have produced a ‘Dositube’ which is a glass tube containing a substance which samples the air and changes colour progressively according to the amount of formaldehyde gas present in the atmosphere of the theatre.
The seal is broken and the tube worn on the clothing of the operator for at least two hours and a simple calculation made to ascertain the ppm of the gas during that time.
It is advised that, if the gas should exceed the recommended maximum (2 ppm) level, action is required immediately before any further embalming takes place.
In well ventilated theatres it is unlikely that any colour change will occur unless accidental spillage should take place.
In this case ammonia solution is held in readiness to ‘neutralise’ the formaldehyde.
All embalmers are advised of the dangers of hypochlorite solutions mixing with formaldehyde solution.
Embalmers are advised of the protective clothing required both for handling the chemicals and the deceased persons themselves.
Skin protection for hands and arms is standard and of late protective goggles, visors, masks or other facial skin and eye protection are being adopted.
Embalmers are additionally advised to wear a basic suit of some material which can be boiled or disinfected by chemical means, a cotton surgeons-type gown and a plastic protective apron as well as wellington-type non-slip and chemical proof boots of sufficient length that the plastic apron overlaps them.
Much of the above advice is based on the ‘best available’ knowledge principle and is thus difficult to give and actual authority for, however, we do make every effort to remain as up-to-date as possible.
Notes on the Meeting of the N.A.F.D. International Committee held on 5th May 1993
At this meeting it was decided by the Committee to approve the Constitution of the European Federation of Funeral Services on behalf of the N.A.F.D. As we hold the Presidency of E.F.E.S. it was decided that we would not vote in favour of any one particular city for the location of the registered office for E.F.F.S., but would endorse the decision of the majority over this matter.
No response has been forthcoming over the N.A.F.D. comments relating to the Intra Community Transfer of Human Remains.
A follow up letter will be sent to the D.S.S. over this matter.
The International Transportation of Human Remains was discussed.
It would appear that the Americans are taking a greater interest in the matter, especially with the problems in Bosnia.
I am confident that this subject will now appear on a regular basis on the agenda of this committee.
If any members or students have any thoughts or concerns on this matter, please let me have these, so that I can voice the thoughts of the B.I.E. at future meetings of this committee.
Candidates successfully passing the Theoretical Examination — Spring 1993
Hepatitis B Virus
Editors Note: is a registered medical technologist employed by Butterworth Hospital as the Supervisor of Laboratory Support Services and Pediatric Laboratory Services.
Butterworth is a regional tertiary care hospital as well as a women's and children's centre in Grand Rapids, Michigan.
received her BS in biology from Aquinas College.
She and her husband , a sales representative for The Dodge Company, have two children, and .
Society in general and people in funeral service in particular have become obsessed with an overblown fear of AIDS.
And this has led to a relative lack of concern for other diseases which are much more infectious, which can also be fatal and which are much more widespread in the population.
HBV is perhaps the best example of such diseases, but it's surely not the only one.
Please read on.
A preoccupation with HIV during the last few years has diverted attention from another major bloodborne infection, hepatitis B, which exacts a much higher toll of disease on health care workers.
The reported incidence of acute hepatitis B virus in the general population increased by 37 per cent from 1979 to 1989.
The US now includes an estimated 1.25 million carriers of hepatitis B, whose blood and tissues represent a significant danger to all health care workers, probably more than does HIV.
Perhaps, ironically, the greatest contribution of the new OSHA regulations to worker safety will be not its strict mandate of universal precautions, but its provision for employers to encourage, provide, and subsidize hepatitis B immunization for all workers at risk.
Hepatitis is a generic term referring to an inflammation of the liver.
It can be caused by a number of agents including bacteria, drugs, and excess alcohol, but of serious concern is hepatitis caused by one of several hepatitis viruses.
There are at least five types of hepatitis caused by different hepatitis viruses.
Hepatitis A, formerly known as ‘infectious hepatitis’ is caused by the hepatitis A virus, which is excreted in faeces.
Hepatitis B, formerly called ‘serum hepatitis’ is found in virtually all body fluids and secretions.
Hepatitis C, formerly called ‘non-A, non-B hepatitis’ occurs as a result of blood transfusions.
Hepatitis D, also known as ‘delta hepatitis’ exists only in combination with the hepatitis B virus.
Hepatitis E, formerly known as ‘epidemic’ or ‘water-borne non-A, non-B hepatitis’is acquired when water or food contaminated with human faeces is ingested.
Hepatitis B is a major public health problem in most countries of the world.
It is estimated that more than 170 million people worldwide are currently infected with the hepatitis B virus.
The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) estimates that there are approximately 0.5 to 1.0 million chronic carriers of hepatitis B virus (HBV) in the US and that this pool of carriers grows by 2%-3% (12,000 to 20,000 individuals) annually.
CDC surveys estimate that 200,000 new cases of hepatitis B occur in the US each year.
About 10,000 people are hospitalized each year with hepatitis B infections.
Hepatitis B infection has a wide range of severity and is fatal in 1%-3% of patients.
The hepatitis B antigen is found in blood, saliva, urine, semen, vaginal secretions and possibly other body fluids.
Blood is the single most important source of HBV and other blood-borne pathogens in the occupational setting.
The hepatitis B virus may be stable in dried blood and blood products at room temperature for up to seven days.
Therefore, hepatitis B represents a significant occupational hazard to all workers who have contact with blood or body fluids.
The hepatitis B virus does not seem capable of penetrating the skin or mucous membranes; therefore, some break in these barriers is required for disease transmission.
Hepatitis B was formerly referred to as ‘serum hepatitis’ because percutaneous exposure to contaminated blood has long been recognized as a major mode of transmission; and cases of hepatitis B from blood transfusion, needlesticks, and sharing contaminated needles among drug abusers have been well documented.
HBV can also be transmitted through sexual intercourse with an infected individual and perinatally from infected mother to infant.
The many different modes of transmission of hepatitis B are due to the fact that almost all body secretions have been shown to contain the infectious viral surface antigen.
Following transmission, hepatitis B has an incubation period of 30 to 180 days.
The outcome of hepatitis B varies considerably, causing conditions ranging from mild or asymptomatic infection to fulminant, potentially fatal hepatitis, or chronic forms of hepatitis.
Only about 30/-40% of patients with hepatitis B develop clinically apparent acute hepatitis.
Many patients are asymptomatic or have mild flu-like symptoms.
The sign and symptoms of hepatitis B include anorexia, fatigue, abdominal discomfort, an enlarged liver, jaundice, and abnormal liver function tests.
The short-term consequences of a hepatitis B infection include an average 8 to 12 weeks off work and the risk of permanent liver damage.
Long-term consequences include chronic active hepatitis, cirrhosis and liver cancer.
Approximately 10% of those infected become chronic carriers who can infect their families and patients, and have 12 to 300 times greater than normal risk of developing liver cancer.
There is no specific treatment for this disease and complete recovery from any form of hepatitis may take four months or longer.
Laboratory testing for specific hepatitis B markers is performed in order to differentiate hepatitis B from other types of viral hepatitis, to monitor patients during the course of disease, to assess immunity to HBV, and to screen blood products.
The initial detectable marker found in blood during the incubation period of a hepatitis B infection is hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg).
The presence of HBsAg indicates an active acute or chronic HBV infection.
In addition to the detection of HBsAg, other laboratory tests are available to document current or past HBV infection.
Antibodies are produced by the body's immune system in an attempt to neutralize toxins or viruses.
Anti-HBs is the  antibody produced against the hepatitis B surface antigen.
Detection of this antibody indicates that the individual has successfully neutralized an HBV infection or has been immunized against HBV.
This antibody usually persists indefinitely.
The presence of an adequate amount of anti-HBs insures that the individual is incapable of acquiring HBV.
The modes of transmission for HIV and HBV are similar.
However, the potential for HBV transmission in the workplace is greater than that for HIV.
Both have been transmitted in the workplace only by percutaneous inoculation or contact with an open wound, or with non-intact (e.g. chapped, dermatitic) skin or mucous membranes, to blood, contaminated body fluids, or concentrated virus.
The risk of hepatitis B infection following a parenteral I (i.e. needlestick or cut) exposure to blood is directly proportional to the probability that the blood contains hepatitis B surface antigen, the immunity status of the recipient, and on the efficiency of transmission.
The probability of the source of the blood being HBsAg positive varies from 1 to 3 per thousand in the general population, up 5% to 15% in high risk groups.
Of persons who have not had prior hepatitis B vaccination or post exposure prophylaxis, 6% to 30% of persons who have received a needlestick exposure from an HBsAg positive individual will become infected.
The risk of infection with HIV following one needlestick exposure to blood from a patient known to be infected with HIV is approximately 0.5%, which is considerably lower than that for HBV.
Universal precautions
In 1985 the CDC developed the concept of ‘universal blood and body fluid precautions’ to address concerns regarding the transmission of HIV and HBV in the health care setting.
The concept, now referred to as ‘universal precautions,’ stresses that all patients should be assumed to be infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood-borne pathogens.
Universal precautions should be followed whenever workers are exposed to blood, certain body fluids, or any body fluids visibly contaminated with blood.
The application of the principles of universal precautions results in the development of guidelines for work practices and use of personal protective equipment, which minimize or eliminate the risk of exposure.
A major advance in the control of hepatitis B occurred in 1982, when a safe and effective hepatitis B vaccine, derived from human plasma, became available.
In July 1986, a genetically engineered hepatitis B vaccine was licensed by the US Food and Drug Administration.
Both vaccines are highly effective and safe.
Studies have shown that the recombinant vaccine, which is grown in a culture of baker's yeast, produces protective levels of antibody in greater than 90% of vaccinated individuals.
NO human or animal plasma or other blood derivative is used in the preparation of recombinant hepatitis B vaccine.
Early concerns about the safety of plasma-derived hepatitis B vaccine, especially the concern that infectious agents such as HIV present in donor plasma pools might contaminate the final product, have proven to be unfounded.
There is no data to indicate that recombinant vaccine is potentially or actually safer than the plasma-derived product.
The vaccines currently available stimulate active immunity against HBV infection and provide over 90% protection against hepatitis B for seven or more years.
Hepatitis B vaccines also are 70%-88% effective when given within one week after a hepatitis B exposure.
Hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) provides temporary protection following an exposure.
It should be noted, however, that the available vaccines will prevent hepatitis B and hepatitis due to the delta agent, but will not prevent hepatitis A or hepatitis C (non-A, Non-B).
All employees regularly exposed to blood and other body fluids to which universal precautions apply should be vaccinated with hepatitis B vaccine.
A common question is whether people should be tested before vaccination for existing immunity to HBV and/or after inoculation to determine whether the vaccination was successful.
The decision to test recipients for prior immunity depends on three variables: 1) the cost of the vaccination; 2) the cost of the screening tests; and 3) the expected prevalence of serologic markers in the target population.
Since more than 90% of vaccines produce anti-HBs, routine post-vaccination screening is appropriate only for those few persons in whom suboptimal response is likely and whose medical management or employment duties hinge upon knowledge of their immune status.
Whether people should be retested five or more years after the initial vaccination to determine the need for a booster is not well established.
Although levels of anti-HBs decline over time after vaccination, immunity apparently can outlast demonstrable antibody.
Under OSHA's new blood-borne pathogens standard, employers are required to implement and enforce the agency's strict HBV prevention programme to protect employees from future exposure.
While numerous professional and employee groups support the hepatitis B regulation, many employers have protested the financial burden they say it will impose.
In response, OSHA has cited compelling evidence from the CDC in which annual casualties resulting from HBV infection are estimated at 8,700 infected health care workers, 2,175 clinical illnesses, 435 hospitalisations and 194 deaths.
The American Medical Association stated that ‘the loss of health care workers to hepatitis B virus overshadows the risk of AIDS and is almost entirely preventable.’
Avoiding the consequences
The most important way to avoid the consequences of hepatitis is through prevention methods such as universal precautions and the hepatitis B vaccine.
If an exposure does occur, a blood sample should be obtained from the individual from whom exposure occurred and tested for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and HIV antibody.
Local laws regarding consent for testing source individuals should be followed.
For an exposure to a source found to be positive for HBsAg, the employee who has not previously been vaccinated should receive the hepatitis B vaccine series.
A single dose of hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) is also recommended, if this can be given within seven days of exposure.
For exposures from an HBsAg positive source to previously vaccinated employees, the exposed employee should be tested for antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen and given one dose of vaccine and one dose of HBIG if the antibody level in the employee's blood sample is inadequate (i.e. <SRU by RIA, negative by EIA).
If the  source is negative for HSsAg and the employee has not been vaccinated, this opportunity should be taken to provide hepatitis B vaccination.
An unvaccinated employee should receive the hepatitis B vaccine series if the source cannot be identified or tested.
HBIG should be given when the source is known or suspected to be at high risk of HBV infection.
Many issues related to hepatitis B are unresolved.
Still to be determined are the value of a low-dose booster vaccine, possibly intradermal; monitoring of quantitative anti-HBs at five or more years to assess the need for revaccination; and an automatic booster at five or more years without benefit of pre- or post-testing.
Compliance with universal precautions provides an extra margin of safety for health care workers at risk for exposure to HBV.
The most important factor in risk reduction is the prevention of needlesticks.
However, the value of gloves and other barriers to direct contact with potentially infected body fluids should not be underestimated, since unapparent inoculation through non-intact skin may be a source of infection in some settings.
Although the benefit from widespread adoption of universal precautions has not been proven, these common sense guidelines should have a positive impact on the risk of occupational infection with HBV and other blood-borne pathogens.
HEPATITIS B: 10 facts at a glance
1.
Hepatitis B is a disease affecting the liver which can lead to death through liver cancer or liver cirrhosis.
2.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is, like the AIDS virus HIV, blood-borne, but is considered to be over one hundred times more infectious than HIV.
Once a person is infected they may recover naturally or they may become a chronic carrier of the virus.
Unlike AIDS, vaccines are available to prevent acute infection and therefore the development of the carrier state.
3.
The hepatitis B virus is capable of surviving on surfaces such as surgical instruments, chairs and work benches for up to one week at room temperature.
4.
One person in 20 throughout the world, or over 350 million people, are chronically infected with the hepatitis B virus and remain infectious to others.
5.
A carrier of hepatitis B is infectious to other people even if he or she does not show symptoms .
All carriers are at risk of long-term chronic complications.
6.
Chronic hepatitis B infection is responsible for some 60 million cases of liver cirrhosis worldwide, more than the number of cases caused by alcohol.
It is also the major cause of primary liver cell carcinoma.
7.
Hepatitis B infection causes up to two million deaths a year worldwide.
Even in areas of low prevalence, which includes most countries in Europe, four to six per cent of the population has evidence of previous infection.
8.
The risk of hepatitis B infection for healthcare workers is five to 10 times that of the general population.
9.
12,000 healthcare workers are infected annually in the USA, of whom 1,000 will become carriers and 200 to 300 will die.
Such data are not yet available for Europe, but will be imminently presented for the first time.
10.
Although safe and effective vaccines have been available for 10 years, only around 40 per cent of healthcare workers in Europe are vaccinated.
Five Principles to prevent exposure to blood-borne infections
Safe working practices and procedures are the first line of defence against exposure to hepatitis B infection, but vaccination is essential to protect workers who are at risk.
Together, they are the two key elements of a comprehensive prevention strategy.
The Viral Hepatitis Prevention Board has identified five principles essential to any programme aimed at preventing exposure to blood-borne infections such as hepatitis B.
1.
Identify risk
Occupational risk activities are those involving exposure to blood and other potentially infectious body fluids.
The VHPB has issued a statement on risk (available on request); this says employers have a duty to assess the risk status of all workers.
it stresses that risk should not be based on job title or place of work but on the extent to which there is actual physical exposure to the following substances:
Blood, blood components (eg platelets, red blood cells) and blood products.
Semen
Cerebrospinal, vaginal, synovial, pleural, pericardial, peritoneal and amniotic fluids.
Fluids contaminated with blood.
2.
Improve working practices
Unsafe working practices may be due to ignorance, and providing education and training about safer methods can help reduce the risk of exposure to blood-borne pathogens.
Surgeons, for example, could change their techniques and some of their equipment or materials, and use surgical staples or adhesives instead of sharp and potentially hazardous needles and thread.
3.
Isolate potentially infected material
Potentially infected material — including clinical waste and soiled bedding — needs to be identified and then handled carefully and appropriately before removal and disposal.
An essential part of infection control is the isolation, safe transport and disposal of sharps and clinical wastes — these should always be treated as potentially contaminated.
4.
Protect the individual
Protective equipment and clothing — including gloves, gowns, faceshields or goggles, and boots — are an important means of safeguarding those at risk from hepatitis B and other blood-borne pathogens but should not be relied upon as the sole means of protection.
Just as important is education and training about the hazards of hepatitis B, its prevention and control measures.
These include the use of safe techniques and the correct use, wear, cleanliness and maintenance of protective clothing and equipment and should include periodic checks for their integrity and suitability for the task in hand.
Vaccination is essential to protect people exposed to hepatitis B infection during the course of their work.
5.
Monitor compliance
The most stringent policy document advocating the best practice is only as good as the level of compliance achieved.
It is important that a competent person is responsible for ensuring that policies on preventing exposure are put into practice and periodically reviewed.
Employers need to provide the necessary resources to allow for adequate surveillance and monitoring.
Access to a person with professional skills in the field of occupational health can be invaluable, and should ensure the maintenance of up-to-date policies and procedures and facilitate safe and effective follow-up of immunisation and of sharps injuries and other exposure incidents.
These five principles are in line with occupational health and safety recommendations and legislation in all EC and most European countries.
The VHPB considers that local policies to prevent infection from exposure to blood-borne pathogens should be developed in collaboration with those actually working in occupational health and infection control.
This should help ensure that any recommendations made are both practical and enforceable.
DID YOU KNOW?
Embalmers Exposure to Formaldehyde
Review by the technical editor
I am indebted to  who has drawn my attention to an article reprinted in the Journal of Applied Occupational Environmental Hygiene, August 1992, Vol 7 pp 532–40, to whom I am also indebted for permission to use extracts for the benefit of this article.
This was a well arranged study to generate information which would enable predictive models of analysis of exposure levels of (U.S.) embalmers to formaldehyde and other substances encountered in embalming procedures.
This should enable informed comment on the likely results of exposure to usual chemical hazards.
Concentrations were used that mimicked bygone practice, since, as most formulations then were stronger than current, a ‘worst likely scenario’ of health problems could be generated.
From an impressive survey of existing literature, evidence of excesses of non-Hodgkins lymphoma, cancer of the nasopharynx, leukaemia and brain cancer were highlighted.
Variable patterns of formaldehyde exposure may well account for this inconsistency in relation to other workers in formaldehyde-based industries.
Information regarding variable ventilation efficacy and levels of formaldehyde and micro-organism concentrations were sought.
Samples at regular intervals in the embalming of 25 subjects, designed to replicate varying levels of embalming operation, were taken and, coupled with sophisticated statistical tests, produced clear cut results.
Results
The geometric mean time weighted average concentration of formaldehyde was 1.9 PPM, with a relatively low variability of samples; levels of methanol ranged from .54 to 21.83 PPM.
Low levels of organisms were found.
There appeared to be no increase in the airborne micro-organism level from embalming autopsied cases, although the wipe samples from gloves (not surprisingly) showed much higher levels from autopsied subjects compared with intact subjects.
Decreases in the variability of exposure with increasing levels of ventilation were found.
Mixing of solutions contributed very little to the overall concentration, but once the procedure started, there was a gradual increase in formaldehyde concentration.
Discussion
Of particular interest (to me) was the use of stronger solutions (mimicking, perhaps, contemporary British practice) than those typically used in America today.
The results indicate ‘A profession needing attention by the industrial hygienist’.
Levels of 1 PPM were unlikely to be exceeded if only one embalment is performed daily, but many embalmers, of course, regularly perform more than one procedure per day, in which case the current (U.S.) standard could very well be exceeded.
Normal cleaning practices were found to not necessarily remove all contaminants, indicating a potential risk from blood-borne diseases.
While the numbers of airborne micro-organisms were related more to the number of people in the room, low levels of Aspergillus Fumigatus (proving a health risk only to immunocompromised individuals) gave cause for concern.
The findings suggested that ventilation and spills (and to a lesser extent) autopsy embalment and solution concentration, affect exposure levels.
Low to medium ventilation rates can result in formaldehyde concentration of more than 1 PPM.
This sort of study validates much already accepted BIE practice, the use of gloves, respirators and ‘normal’ ventilation to minimise contact with formaldehyde and a strict separation of instruments from the ungloved hand.
A timely reminder of the potential bio-hazards facing members, this study should remind us all that we deal on a daily basis with chemicals and micro-organisms which can cause much harm and ultimately lead to ill-health.
The results above suggest that relaxation of standards can only be effected at the embalmers peril and to the detriment of his health.
We await further news of quantitative surveys with interest.
Mummies Day comes late to Bournemouth
Mum was the word in Bournemouth as work proceeded at a feverish pitch on a stunning new exhibition at the ExpoCentre.
For Mummies Day came late to the seaside town.
In Bournemouth, Mummies Day this year was at Easter, for that's when a breathtaking new exhibition on the Royal Mummies of Ancient Egypt, opened its doors to the public.
From a wizened dried up body which was buried in the sand some 5000 years ago to the amazing unwrapped mummy of Ramses the Great, one of the most famous Egyptian pharaohs, Mummies and Magic has recreated and brought together for the first time in one exhibition, some of the most important Royal Mummies and funerary treasures.
This thrilling display includes both antiquities and facsimiles specially created for the exhibition.
The Royal Mummies on show include the unwrapped bodies of Seti I, and Princess Nesitanebasher.
These have been recreated using an amazing new British technique which makes it possible to produce accurate facsimiles of ancient bodies.
Mummies and Magic is organised and created by the same team which produced the Tutankhamun Exhibition in Dorchester, an exhibition which has received widespread acclaim.
Mummies and Magic opened in Bournemouth on April 9th at Level 2 of the ExpoCentre in Old Christchurch Lane,(at the top of Old Christchurch Road pedestrian zone).
It will remain open from 9.30 to 5.30, every day including Sundays, and will run to the end of the year.
New HSE campaign for safer manual handling of loads at work
A new publicity campaign aimed at lightening the load of those who have to manually handle goods at work — the biggest single group who suffer work-related accidents has been launched by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE).
The campaign comprises nationwide press advertising and the production of 100,000 copies of a free information pack.
Announcing the campaign,, HSE's deputy director of medical services, said, ‘Over a quarter of all accidents at work reported to the HSE and other enforcing authorities arise from manual lifting, handling and carrying.
‘Each reported manual handling injury results on average in 20 days off work — estimated at over three million working days per year in total.
This represents an enormous cost to industry in terms of lost production, compensation payments and recruitment and training of new staff.
‘This can affect almost every employee in virtually every type of business — not simply in factories and warehouses but in offices, shops and any working environment where handling a load presents a risk.
We are very aware that employers, particularly in small firms, need simple, accessible guidance on the relevant legal requirements and on how to avoid the costs which can arise from risky, and often inefficient, manual handling practices.’
added: ‘This new campaign therefore draws employers’ attention to their responsibility for assessing the potential problems, avoiding them where possible and making the workforce aware of how to approach manual handling tasks.
The employer that does this will be protecting both staff and the business.’
The information pack includes a free new booklet, ‘Getting to Grips with Manual Handling’, which briefly describes the main legal requirements and gives guidance on when risk assessments are needed, on simple and cost-effective steps that might be taken to reduce risk and on handling techniques.
The pack emphasises that, for most smaller employers, assessments need take only a few minutes' observation and the use of common sense.
An employer will have to write down the assessment as a record only if it is too complex to repeat when necessary.
The pack also includes general guidance for employers and employees on the prevention of work-related musculo-skeletal disorders, and an assessment checklist designed to help most employers who have to carry out an assessment of their manual handling operations to do so quickly and at minimum cost.
The campaign will cost about £250,000 and forms part of the HSE's wider three-year ‘Lighten the Load’ campaign,begun in September 1991, which aims to raise awareness of all work-related musculo-skeletal disorders and to encourage employers, employees, and health professionals to co-operate in minimising significant risks.
Market ‘wide open’ for fashion beyond the grave
British manufacturers looking for new product lines are being targeted by former US funeral company director .
Clothing designed for the deceased is big business in the US, and  believes the market is wide open for exploitation in the UK due to the lack of choice currently available.
Funeral clothing is offered as standard in every funeral parlour in the US, ranging from three-piece suits to dresses.
In the UK, shrouds are generally the only option available.
‘The funeral clothing industry is a very profitable business in the US, and is pretty recession-proof,’ said .
‘I am now looking for companies that want to add a new line to their range.’
The clothes can be manufactured cheaply due to the lack of finishing required — they do not need zips or lining, for example, although some items require stain-proof fabrics.
‘Relatives like to remember their loved ones looking nice,’ said .
‘If somebody were fashion conscious when alive, why should they want to be seen dead in something unflattering?’
Reproduced with acknowledgements to The Drapers Record, March 1993 (Kindly submitted by BIE Member,.)
The Institute's new exhibition stand, which made its debut at the Funeral Services Exhibition at Mottram Hall.
The stand is available for use by Committees and Divisions of the BIE; all enquiries to National Office or the Editor.
The ‘Modular’ System of Teaching and Examination
Following a meeting of the National Examinations Board of Embalmers on 19th October 1990, which was attended by representatives from the National Education Committee and Tutors Guild, a report was produced and was also published in The Embalmer.
As the system is now ‘up’ and mostly ‘running’it seems appropriate to report the current situation and, for the information of Tutors, Students and Members alike, to again outline the system.
The teaching and examination system was reviewed and the ‘modular’ system introduced because the Institute wanted it, and, on the whole, is working well.
From the examination and Board's point of view, the main changes are:
1.
Twenty-five per cent of the ‘final’ theoretical examination marks is composed of coursework.
2.
Students now register direct with the BIE. and not the Board.
3.
The Funeral Service Preliminary Examination was replaced by the Foundation Module.
4.
Applications for examination are only received from accredited BIE tutors, not the candidate.
(These tutors only being allowed to teach embalming to registered students of the Institute).
For tutors, the main changes are:
1.
The entire theoretical course was split into five ‘subject areas’, teaching notes being available, with no specific text books being recommended.
2.
Tutors are only allowed, by order of National Council, to teach students registered with the Institute.
However, some tutors seem to feel that they are unable to accept these modifications despite the syllabus remaining virtually unchanged, though more comprehensive, as befits the education and examination standards of a ‘professional’ body that hopes for national recognition.
This reluctance, by a few, to accept these small changes has resulted in them getting the system wrong.
At first it was felt that this was caused by their failure to understand what was required of them despite being notified by the Board, the NEC, through the pages of The Embalmer as well as at Divisional meetings, but it is apparent that there is an element of tutors who deliberately do not follow the guidelines and rules, ignore well publicised and individually notified closing dates for entry and submission of coursework results, presumably to try and ‘force’ the Institute to return to the ‘old’system.
These tutors then blame the Board when they discover that their failure to comply with the basic rules means that their students ’(through no fault of their own) do not have their examination results declared, a situation that has, unbelievably, happened twice in the past year!
(The results cannot possibly be declared if the applications and coursework have not even been submitted).
It is, therefore, for the information of tutors ‘old’ and ‘new’, as well as for students and members, that I now outline the education and examination system that the Institute wanted, not as it was, not as some may think it is,(or should be), but as it is today.
From the end of 1990 the Funeral Service Preliminary Examination ceased to exist.
From January 1991 all persons wishing to take the Embalming Examinations must enrol with a BIE Accredited Tutor.
They will then study the Foundation Module on which they are examined.
This examination must be passed before they can be accepted for the remainder of the course.
It is the responsibility of the Registered Tutor (NOT the student) to make application for his/her students to become registered with the NEBE for this Foundation Test, each student being issued with an NEBE Student number.
The applications should be made to the ‘Foundation Test Secretary’(currently ) for the required number of Test Papers to be provided to cater for all the students in their class.
The tutor can have the responsibility of arranging the date, time and venue of the examination, and acting as invigilator if s/he so wishes.
Alternatively the Board can provide an invigilator, at the request of the tutor, in which case the date of the examination will need to be confirmed by the Foundation Test Secretary.
The fee for this additional service has been currently fixed at £25 and will be payable by the tutor at the time of application.
In addition, at the time of application, the tutor will pay the required examination fee for ALL their students taking the test, currently £25 per student.
Applications are made on an official form provided by the Board, and supplied direct to Registered Tutors.
The completed application form and required fees must be forwarded to the Foundation Test Secretary at least three weeks prior to the test date.
The completed test papers are returned at the end of the examination by the tutor/invigilator direct to the Foundation Test Secretary who will arrange for them to be marked and communicate the results for each student direct to the tutor.
Those who have been successful may carry on with the course, and need to be registered with the BIE.
Both the BIE and the NEBE use the same registration number that is issued following acceptance of the student by the BIE as a Registered Student/Candidate.
The Board sets the final examination from a detailed syllabus available from the NEBE.
The syllabus is divided into five subject areas (which coincide with the modules A to E) and at the end of each of these subject areas, the tutor sets their students a test.
These tests are obtained from the Secretary of the NEC.
After marking by the tutor, the question and answer papers are returned to a moderator appointed by the Secretary of the NEC at the time of application who, in turn, returns them to the tutor.
These tests account for 25 per cent of the final marks, a combined mark of 60 per cent or more (grades A, B, C or D) securing success in the theoretical part of the final examination.
Each student will have their own coursework folder, and in it keep all of their work including the question paper set by the tutor, their answers and a copy of the tutor's assessment, for each of the five subject areas.
This folder must be available to be presented to the NEBE at the time of the final theoretical examination.
Notes covering the entire course are available from the BIE National Office.
The tutor makes application for all of their students to take the final theoretical examination in a similar way to their application for the Foundation Test, but forwarded to the Secretary of the NEBE showing the Registered Student/ Candidate numbers.
The results of this section are notified direct to each candidate as well as to the tutor.
‘Final’ theoretical examinations are, at present, held twice a year in Spring and Autumn, the closing dates for entry being:
1st January for ‘Foreign’ language examinations 
1st February for the Spring examination
1st September for the Autumn examination
A copy of the sheet from the students' folder showing the moderated ‘End of Module’ test results must be received by the Secretary of the NEBE with the applications or one month prior to the examination date at the latest.
The current fees for the theoretical part of the final examination are £60 per candidate (£120 per candidate for French students, £200 per candidate for German students).
On the successful completion of all module tests and the final theoretical examination, application can be made for the practical part of the examination.
The application may be submitted at any time (as long as the candidate is still registered with the Institute) and the examination is normally arranged within a few weeks.
The application must be accompanied by the candidates'’ skills checklist’.
The practical examinations are arranged individually and the fee is, at present, £70 per candidate (the fees for candidates taking the examination overseas are available on request).
A grade A, B, C or D secures success in the practical section of the final examination and then application may be made to the Institute for Full Membership.
Product news
Smells and odours digested and removed ‘natures way'
Unpleasant smells are a fact of life that the funeral industry spends thousands of pounds trying to hide.
As air fresheners and other chemicals deliver only temporary results, it is now the time to try a new product which doesn't just mask smells, but actually digests them, claim the manufacturers.
Developed by Spontex, AirX contains nearly a billion naturally occurring human friendly bacteria, to break down and eat organic matter, the main cause of smells.
The specially selected high activity micro-organisms have a voracious appetite for all types of organic matter — the cause of virtually all severe odour problems — such as vomit, urine, faeces, food stuffs, pet droppings, beer, etc.
On application they literally digest smells by producing enzymes which attack the source of the odour, breaking it down for the bacteria to absorb.
The bacteria reproduce every 20 minutes or so until the food source has expired and the smell gone.
The bacteria then die leaving a fresh smelling atmosphere and harmless molecules of carbon dioxide and water behind.
The time taken to digest the source of the odour varies according to the size of the problem, so to immediately ‘clear the air’ AirX features a unique ingredient called Airicide which converts the bad smell to a pleasant one immediately.
It is claimed that AirX can be safely used on all types of surfaces — carpets, fabrics, tiles, ceramics, wood — by sponge or spray.
It is used at full strength for immediate odour elimination, or in a 6 to 1 dilution for ongoing preventative maintenance.
AirX is non-toxic and completely biodegradable and contains no harmful ingredients.
It has been reviewed for use by the Health and Safety Executive bacteriological unit and the Material Safety Data Sheet was drawn up using their recommendations as guidelines.
Independent laboratory tests and a pilot sales campaign have confirmed that AirX works very successfully.
So much so that Spontex guarantees results.
Priced at £4.95 a bottle which when diluted equals 82p per usable litre, AirX is claimed to be good value, say the manufacturers, when compared to spending money on products that only mask smells.
However, you don't have to spend anything to prove AirX yourself.
Contact Spontex Professional on  and they will send you a free kit.
Funerals and Embalming in Grenada
On a recent visit to Grenada in the Caribbean, I saw a sign ‘Ottways’ Funeral Home on the carrenage just a few yards from the sea, I decided to enquire.
The owner was thrilled at my interest and gave me a guided tour of the premises, he gave his permission for these photographs to be taken and included in our magazine.
He explained that they embalm their bodies and he showed me their facilities which were surprisingly well organized, surprisingly because the Caribbean race are traditionally very laid back, everything is ‘No problem’.
The funeral home had an extensive array of coffins, from handmade ones produced locally and beautifully finished to ornate caskets shipped in from America, some had fur linings.
The floral tributes varied from fresh to wreaths of plastic flowers and most families request their relatives are dressed, the funeral home produces suits and dresses specifically for this purpose, bodies lie ‘in state’ to allow family and friends to pay their respects.
The funeral cars and hearse have blue flashing lights on the roof, very similar to a policecar, when I enquired as to the reason for this, apparently it's the only way they can get around the island for the traffic and the laid-back attitude of the locals.
A very interesting experience.
Product news
Bigger cadaver bag
To cater for the growth in average human frame sizes, Supreme Plastics has updated its Cadaver bag which is an essential for all the emergency services, hospitals and military applications.
The bag, in tough white heavy duty polythene is puncture resistant and features a large metal puller to its full-length zip type closure.
For ease of identification and protection of documents a resealable welded-on Minigrip pocket is integral to each bag.
With its larger 2515 × 915 mm capacity and 125 mircon material the Supreme Cadaver bag is designed to make transfer of the deceased easy, clean, efficient and secure.
Supreme Plastics Cadaver Bag in its new larger size to cope with the growth of the human frame.
Notes from National Office
Divisional Meetings
Will all Divisional Secretaries please ensure that National Office receive their Notice, Agenda and Minutes of Previous Meetings at least six weeks before the date of the next meeting.
This just gives time for production and dispatch to members giving them at least a clear month before the next event.
The record for late arrival of papers at present stands at eight days before the actual meeting!
Membership Certificates
Institute regulations require that certificates for new members are presented at Divisional Meetings (with the exception of members overseas), to enable them to meet socially and hopefully to take an active part in Divisional affairs.
Certificates have for some time been sent in postal tubes by recorded delivery to Divisional Secretaries.
It is recommended that names of intended recipients are shown on a separate heading on the agenda for the meeting concerned.
There have been a number of instances of members not receiving certificates promptly.
Subscriptions
Will all members with unpaid subscriptions please forward a remittance in the very near future.
Advertising in The Embalmer
Will all who have an advertisement or professional notice running in this year's magazine please forward a remittance for unpaid invoices.
Modular Text Books
These are available to all members and students at the very reasonable price of £24 (including posting and packing) and contain the latest precept and practice in embalming.
Send for your copy now.
Code of Practice
It is essential that you wear protective clothing and that this is kept clean and changed frequently.
Discard holed or ‘doubtful’ gloves.
Keep your place of work uncluttered and CLEAN.
Keep your kit scrupulously CLEAN.
Ensure that your place of work is properly ventilated, lit and when necessary, heated.
Ensure that waste materials are correctly and LEGALLY disposed of.
Ensure that you have valid vaccination and innoculation protection.
Ensure that manufacturers' recommendations about fluids are followed.
NEVER allow yourself or any other person to become exposed to excessive chemical fumes (see Warning Notice).
Avoid cutaneous contact with fluids or chemicals used in embalming.
It is vital to comply with legal requirements before embalming.
Employ lifting techniques as described in pamphlet ‘Lifting and Carrying’ published by the Health and Safety Executive, obtainable from H.M. Stationery Office.
Maintain all equipment in good order.
Follow recommendations as set out in booklet: ‘Safety in the Post Mortem Room’ available free of charge from 
Code of Ethics
1.
I BELIEVE the practice of embalming is in the interest of public health and promise to promote embalming to the best of my ability.
2.
I WILL treat with respect each dead human body.
3.
I PLEDGE a complete confidential relationship to those I am called upon to serve.
4.
I WILL endeavour to promote scientific research in the problems affecting embalming.
5.
I UNDERTAKE to abide by the regulations of the British Institute of Embalmers and to support, to the best of my ability, any meetings or gatherings arranged by them.
