PATIENTS
Altogether 32 children were studied.
Of these, 22 had challenge proven cow's milk allergy manifested with either skin (urticaria (four), ezcema (10) or gastrointestinal (loose stools)(six), diarrhoea (three), vomiting (two), abdominal pain (three)) symptoms.
They were rechallenged to study whether or not clinical tolerance had been acquired.
Five patients had experienced symptoms suggestive of cow's milk allergy (urticaria (one), loose stools (one), vomiting (two), diarrhoea (one)) and were admitted for diagnostic milk challenge after four weeks' milk elimination.
During the elimination period the patients consumed a tolerated formula (soy or protein hydrolysate) or were given calcium supplementation.
Five patients were on a diet devoid of gliadin and they were hence eliminated from the analysis.
Four of them had had adverse reactions and in one patient cereals had not yet been introduced to the diet.
The study population thus consisted of 27 patients aged from nine to 69 months.
Fourteen of these patients had dietary restrictions for egg (three), citrus fruits, peanuts, and fish (11) because of adverse reactions.
MILK CHALLENGE PROTOCOL
The challenge was started with a drop of cow's milk on the lips, whereafter milk was given in rising doses at two hour intervals.
On day 1 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, and 100 ml of milk were given and on day 2 the normal milk intake appropriate for age was started.
The challenge was stopped and the patients were examined, when any adverse reaction was noted.
The reaction onset time was defined as the duration from the last given dose eliciting the symptoms.
The patients were followed up over the one week period of the challenge and, for longterm tolerance; they were seen one month later.
BLOOD SAMPLES
Venous blood was drawn and heparinised for the ELIPSOT assay before the oral milk challenge (day 1) and one week later (day 8).
Day 8 was chosen as previous studies have shown that the number of primed lymphocytes in peripheral bood is maximal six to eight days after administration of the antigen on day 1.
We failed to get the day 1 samples from eight patients and the day 8 samples from one patient.
The radioallergosorbent test (RAST) was carried out to detect the circulating cow's milk specific IgE antibodies, and also the serum total IgE values were measured before starting the challenge.
ELISPOT ASSAY
The total number of immunoglobulin secreting cells and the number of specific antibody secreting cells against beta lactoglobulin, casein, and gliadin were measured by the ELISPOT (solid phase enzyme linked immunoassay) method, as described previously.
In brief, mononuclear cells containing mainly lymphocytes were obtained by Ficoll-Hypaque (Pharmacia, Sweden) centrifugation of the heparinised blood.
Isolated cells were washed three times in Hank's buffered salt solution (Flow Laboratories, Irvine, Scotland), then suspended in culture medium and adjusted to a final concentration of 2×10 cells/ml.
The cells were incubated in antigen coated, flat bottomed microtitre plates (Immunoplate RI, a/s Nunc, Roskilde, Denmark).
The antibodies were visualised by application of enzyme labelled antisera followed by a substrate agarose overlay.
The counting of coloured spots, each representing one cell, was done with a stereo microscope after various periods of storage at 4°C.
For determination of immunoglobulin secreting cells the wells were coated with antihuman IgA, IgG, and IgM, and to determine the number of specific antibody secreting cells, beta lactoglobulin, casein, and gliadin were used as coating antigens.
There was an immune response if >specific antibody secreting cells/10 cells.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Because of skewed distributions in immunoglobulin secreting cells and specific antibody secreting cells counts, logarithmic transformations (ln) were used.
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Student's two tailed t test were applied for comparing differences between groups in continuous variables, and the Mann-Whitney U test for comparing medians.
The repeated observations were studied using paired t test and NOVA for repeated measures.
The χ 2 test was used to determine differences in proportions.
Results
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS
The milk challenge was positive in 17/27 (63%) and negative in 10 patients.
The challenge elicited cutaneous symptoms in seven of 17 (41%) cases, consisting of urticaria (four) or eczema (three); gastrointestinal symptoms were found in 10/17 (59%) cases, including diarrhoea (one), loose stools (four), vomiting (three), and/ or abdominal pain (three).
Patients manifesting cow's milk allergy with skin symptoms reacted to lower volumes of milk than those with gastrointestinal symptoms (Table I).
In addition, they often reacted immediately, while gastrointestinal symptoms were commonly manifested later.
The mean (SD) ages of the patients positive, 20.1 (7.9) months, and negative, 29.4 (16.1) months, to oral challenge were comparable at the time of the provocation; the difference of 9.3 months with 95% confidence interval of (-0.2, 18.8) was statistically not significant.
The patients with skin symptoms had positive cow's milk-specific radioallergosorbent test values, which were less frequent in patients with gastrointestinal symptoms (Table II).
NON-ANTIGEN SPECIFIC IMMUNE RESPONSE (IMMUNOGLOBULIN SECRETING CELLS)
There was a statistically significant increase in the number of immunoglobulin secreting cells from day 1 to day 8 in patients with positive clinical reaction to challenge (Fig 1).
By contrast, in patients negative to challenge the mean number of immunoglobulin secreting cells decreased during the challenge period (Fig 2).
ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC IMMUNE RESPONSE (SPECIFIC ANTIBODY SECRETING CELLS) TO BETA LACTOGLOBULIN AND CASEIN
A distinct rise in the number of specific antibody secreting cells to beta lactoglobulin and casein was detected in patients reacting positively to challenge in the IgM class (Fig 3).
Conversely, the specific antibody secreting cells responses from day 1 to day 8 in the IgA and IgG classes were minimal: the IgA secreting cells against beta lactoglobulin increased from 0.2 (0.1, 0.7) to 1.2 (0.3, 4.8) specific antibody secreting cells/ 10 cells, and the IgG secreting cells against beta lactoglobulin from 0.1 (0.04, 0.4) to 0.3 (0.1, 0.9) specific antibody secreting cells/10 sells; the antibody secreting cells in the IgA class against casein increased from 0.1 (0.04, 0.4) to 0.6 (0.2, 2.1) specific antibody secreting cells/10 cells, and in the IgG class from 0.2 (0.1, 0.7) to 1.1 (0.4, 3.2) specific antibody secreting cells/10 cells.
In patients negative to challenge there was no increase in the number of specific antibody secreting cells against beta lactoglobulin and casein; Figure 4 depicts the concentrations of IgM specific antibody secreting cells to beta lactoglobulin and casein in these patients.
According to the ANOVA for repeated measures the interaction term between groups and periods was statistically significant; for IgM specific antibody secreting cells to beta lactoglobulin, p=0.007, and to casein, p=0.02.
This means that the group behaviour at successive specific antibody secreting cells measurement points was different: in patients with positive clinical response to the challenge the mean number of specific antibody secreting cells increases and in those negative to the clinical challenge it decreases.
ANTIGEN SPECIFIC IMMUNE RESPONSE (SPECIFIC ANTIBODY SECRETING CELLS) TO GLIADIN
The patients positive to cow's milk challenge also mounted a specific antibody secreting cells response against gliadin in the IgM class (Fig 3), which was not seen in patients negative to challenge (Fig 4).
The ANOVA for repeated measures showed significant interaction (p= 0.002) between groups and periods, indicating that the differences at successive measurements of IgM specific antibody secreting cells to gliadin between patients positive and negative to challenge were statistically significant.
Discussion
The results of the present investigation agree with those of previous studies indicating that immune mechanisms are activated in cow's milk allergy, and further extend these findings to unrelated dietary antigens encountered by the enteral route.
We used a new immunoassay, the ELISPOT, to measure immune response during cow's milk challenge.
The ELISPOT is a promising method for indirect study of the immunologic events in the gut.
The method is based on the maturation cycle of gut associated lymphoid tissue derived lymphocytes.
After contact with intraluminal antigens, the lymphocytes travel to mesenterial lymph nodes to mature and by way of peripheral blood back to the gut mucosa to secrete antibodies against the priming antigen.
The cell migration cycle is based on experimental work in animal studies as well as in human studies of oral vaccination.
Evidence in support of the concept has been provided by adoptive transfer experiments in which B-lymphocytes from mucosa associated lymphoid tissues have been shown to repopulate the mucosa.
The intensity of the immune response as measured by the ELISPOT correlates with the capability of the antigen of adhering to the epithelial cells.
In the present study a shpar rise in immunoglobulin secreting cells was measured during a clinically positive milk challenge, reflecting non-antigen specific immune response.
At the same time, the antigen specific immune response was small and inconsistent.
This indicates that immune system elimination of cow's milk antigens is defective in cow's milk allergy.
In a previous follow up study we found that patients who had challenge proven cow's milk allergy acquired clinical tolerance to cow's milk when the antigen specific immune response had developed.
Studies in sensitised experimental animals have shown that exposure of the gut mucosa to dietary antigens leads to intestinal injury.
The final result of the immune mediated tissue damage may include mucosal edema, commonly associated with type 1 hypersensitivity, or villus effacement and crypt hyperplasia associated with cell mediated reactions.
In patients who have cow's milk allergy, a clinically positive milk challenge induces the increased permeability of gut mucosa, irrespective of whether the symptoms arise from the gut or the skin.
This is in support of the notion that deranged intestinal barrier is not primary to the allergic state, but rather secondary to the hypersensitivity reaction.
Although the intestinal hypersensitivity reaction is highly specific to the priming antigen, the resulting enhancement of permeability is not necessarily antigen specific.
On account of that, there is enhanced absorption of unrelated intraluminal antigens during a positive cow's milk challenge.
The sharp rise in the number of specific antibody secreting cells against gliadin may hence reflect increased antigenic load caused by the immune-mediated lesion in the gut mucosa.
Repetition of such hypersensitivity reaction could result in broadening of allergic symptomatology.
The clincial implication of this study is that appropriate dietary elimination is crucial in the treatment of patients who have cow's milk allergy.
Furthermore, the question remains how frequently clinical challenges are needed to support the diagnosis and how often the challenges can be carried out without impairing the prognosis of the disease.
Outcome of surgical treatment of adenocarcinoma in Barrett's oesophagus
Abstract
A retrospective study was performed of an 11 year period (1978–88) to analyse the survival of 112 patients (85 men and 27 women, mean age 63 years) with adenocarcinoma in a columnar lined (Barrett's) oesophagus in respect of surgical treatment, tumour staging, and histological grading.
Presenting symptoms were dysphagia (60%) and pain (25%).
Only six patients were previously known to have a columnar lined oesophagus.
Eighty five patients (76%) underwent partial resection of the oesophagus and cardia.
Postoperative mortality was 6%.
After resection (n=85), the 5 year survival was 24%.
Survival was significantly better for patients without regional lymph node metastases (stage 0, I, IIA (n=61): 5 year survival 30%) and even better if the tumour was restricted to the submucosa (stage 0, I (n=12): 5 year survival 63%).
Survival was not influenced by the histological grade of the tumour.
Staging based on infiltration of the oesophageal wall and lymph node spread is valuable in determining the prognosis for patients with adenocarcinoma in Barrett's oesophagus.
Barrett's oesophagus represents a metaplastic transformation of the normal squamous cell epithelium of the lower tubular oesophagus into columnar epithelium.
The premalignant character of Barrett's oesophagus is shown by a progession from benign columnar epithelium into dysplasia and adenocarcinoma.
Although endoscopic surveillance and biopsy are performed to achieve an early diagnosis of malignant degeneration, many patients with Barrett's oesophagus present primarily with symptoms of an oesophageal carcinoma.
The survival of patients with an adenocarcinoma in Barrett's oesophagus is low, even after oesophagectomy.
The influence of infiltration of the oesophageal wall, lymph node metastases, and the histological grade of the tumour on the prognosis is not fully understood.
This retrospective study aimed to analyse the survival of patients with an adenocarcinoma in columnar lined oesophagus in relation to surgical treatment, staging, and the differentiation grade of the tumour.
Patients and methods
During the period 1978–88, 112 consecutive patients with an adenocarcinoma in a columnar lined lower oesophagus were referred to the Rotterdam Oesophageal Tumour Study Group for evaluation and treatment.
The patient population consisted of 85 men (76%) and 27 women (24%), with a mean age of 63 years (range 30–96 years).
Barrett's columnar lined oesophagus is defined as the condition in which columnar type epithelium is found at least 3 cm above the distal end of the oesophagus as endoscopically defined.
The demarkation between stomach and oesophagus is endoscopically determined by the change in diameter of the lumen, colour of the mucosa, and vascular pattern.
The upper level was diagnosed by the columnar-squamous epithelial border, which was always easily identified.
For the purpose of this investigation, we studied those patients with a biopsy proven adenocarcinoma of the distal tubular oesophagus, in whom columnar epithelium of the oesophagus above the carcinoma was visible macroscopically at endoscopy, meeting the above definition of Barrett's oesophagus.
Patients with a carcinoma of the cardia were excluded.
A careful medical history, covering the total lifespan, in respect of symptoms of reflux and antireflux treatment was obtained.
Before operation all patients underwent general physical examination and electrocardiographic and lung function studies to determine their general fitness for operation.
Chest x ray, barium swallow studies, endoscopy with biopsy, ultrasound examination of the liver and upper abdominal areas, and in cases of high or mid-oesophageal tumours, bronchoscopy, were performed.
Since 1980, computer tomography of the thorax and upper abdomen and ultrasouns examination of the neck have been carried out in order to identify abnormal lymph nodes, which are then subjected to cytological examination.
All patients considered inoperable on the grounds of general health or with distant metastases or extension of the tumour into the bronchus were not considered for resection.
During the period 1978–85 all patients who were considered for resection (n=72) received preoperative radiation therapy (40 Grays over four weeks).
In two randomised prospective studies, however, no advantage of preoperative radiation therapy could be shown.
Therefore, from 1986–8 preoperative radiation therapy was no longer given (n=27).
Hospital mortality was defined as the mortality during the postoperative stay in hospital.
Based on pathological analysis of the resection specimens, postoperative staging was performed according to the pTNM classification of the UICC (International Union Against Cancer) 1987 (Table I).
At least half of the tumour was examined histologically.
Areas in which deep invasive growth was suspected were selected.
Areas immediately above the tumour were also investigated for the presence of metaplastic epithelium.
Biopsy and resection specimens were reviewed for the differentiation grade of the tumour.
The follow up period ranged from 1 month to 9 years with a mean of 21 months.
Survival was assessed by computerised life table analysis according to Kaplan-Meier.
For all patients, survival after diagnosis was calculated.
For comparison of the survival of subgroups of patients, the Logrank test was used.
Other methods used are indicated in the text.
p(two sided) was considered the limit of statistical significance.
Results
SYMPTOMS AND SOCIAL HABITS
The most important presenting symptoms were dysphagia (60%) and pain (25%).
The patients' characteristics with respect to symptoms of gastro-oesophageal reflux and treatment are listed in Table II.
Twelve patients (11%) had undergone an antireflux operation in the past, with an interval between antireflux surgery and diagnosis of an oesophageal carcimona ranging from 2 months to 33 years (median 4.75 years, mean 10 years).
In three patients, a Nissen fundoplication had been performed, in three a Billroth II partial gastric resection, in one a high selective vagotomy, and in five patients the procedure performed for hiatal hernia was not precisely documented.
Daily alcohol consumption was reported by 67% of the patients, with more than 4 units a day taken by 4%.
Fifty one per cent of the patients were cigarette smokers.
ENDOSCOPIC FINDINGS
Of all 112 patients with an adenocarcinoma, only 6 (5%) had a previous biopsy proved history of columnar lined oesophagus.
The area of adenocarcinoma was circular in 41 patients (36%), and comprised more than half the circumference of the oesophagus in 19 (17%).
On average, the tumour covered a length of 5 cm of the distal tubular oesophagus (range 1–12 cm).
In the group of patients with a resectable tumour (n= 85) the mean (SD) length of the tumour was 4 (2) cm, and in the group with an irresectable tumour (n=27) it was 6 (2) cm (Mann-Whitney U test: p=0.003).
The columnar lined segment comprised 3–19 cm (mean 6 cm) of the oesophagus above the tumour.
Endoscopy showed a hiatal hernia in 72% of the patients.
TREATMENT
After preoperative screening, 99 patients (88%) with an adenocarcinoma in columnar lined oesophagus were considered for surgical treatment.
In 14 patients, a tumour that was not resectable or metastases were found at laparotomy.
Eighty five patients (76%) underwent a subtotal resection of the oesophagus and cardia.
Reconstruction was made by gastric tube (n=79) or colonic interposition (n=6), with an intrathoracic anastomosis at the level of the azygos vein or a cervical anastomosis.
Postoperative complications occurred in 29 patients (morbidity rate 34%), of which the most important were postoperative bleeding (n=6), recurrent laryngeal nerve paresis (n=6), and anastomotic leakage (n=8).
Cardiovascular complications in three, respiratory complications in two, and postoperative bleeding in one patient lead to death in six patients during the postoperative period in hospital (hospital mortality 6%).
None of the 14 patients whose tumour was found to be irresectable at laparotomy died in hospital after operation.
Over the first period of study (1978–83), hospital mortality was 9%, while over the second period (1984–8) it had fallen to 4% (Fisher's exact test: p=0.4).
Sixty six of the 85 (78%) resected patients had received radiation therapy (40 Grays over four weeks) before operation as a routine preoperative treatment until 1986.
The 27 inoperable or irresectable patients were given palliative non-surgical treatment.
PATHOLOGICAL FINDINGS AND STAGING
Slides were reviewed to determine the differentiation grade of the tumour.
In two cases the tumour was classified as well differentiated, in 52 as moderately differentiated, and in 58 cases as poorly differentiated.
In 95% of the cases, the margins of the resected specimens were free of tumour tissue on histological examination, b ut in four cases (5%) microscopical remnants were found.
Patients were classified according to the pTNM classification as shown in Table I.
SURVIVAL
At the end of the study, 26 patients were alive, 6–107 months (mean 36 months) after resection of the tumour.
Sixty two patients died from metastatic disease (72% of all deaths), 18 from causes unrelated to carcinoma, and in six cases the cause of death was unknown.
Life table analysis showed 1, 2, and 5 year survival rates of 57%, 31%, and 17% respectively for the whole group.
The 1, 2, and 5 year survival rates of the 85 patients who underwent oesophagectomy were 67%, 38%, and 24% respectively, and for the 27 inoperable or irresectable patients the figures were 26%, 11%, and 0% respectively (p)(Fig 1).
Within the group of resected patients (n=85), there were no significant differences in survival between patients treated by preoperative radiation (n=66) and those treated by resection alone (n=19).
Patients classified as stage 0, I, or IIA (no regional lymph node metastases) had a significant better survival (p=0.03) with 1, 2, and 5 year survival rates of 76%, 47%, and 30% respectively, compared with patients classified as stage IIB and III (regional lymph node metastases present), with 1, 2, and 5 year survival rates of 44%, 10%, and ≤10% respectively (Fig 2).
Patients with a Tis or T1 tumour without regional lymph node inveolvement (n=12) had significantly better survival than patients with a T2 or T3 tumour without regional lymph node involvement (n=49), p(Fig 3).
Patients with well (GI) or moderately (GII) differentiated tumours classified as stage 0, I, IIA and IIB, III respectively did not show a significant better survival than patients with poorly differentiated (GIII) tumours (Fig 4).
Discussion
In 1950, Barrett described the condition of columnar epithelium lining a mediastinal stomach, secondary to a congenital short oesophagus.
Allison and Johnstone suggested that columnar epithelium occurred in the lower oesophagus, secondary to gastro-oesophageal reflux.
Since Barrett's description of the condition in the early 1950s, many investigators have noted an association between columnar lined oesophagus and primary oesophageal carcinoma.
The reported mean age of patients with an adenocarcinoma associated with Barrett's oesophagus is about 57 years and the male to female ratio is 5.5:1.
In our series, the mean age was higher (63 years), and the male to female ratio was lower (3.1:1) than reported, but still indicated a male predominance.
In our patient group, a major presenting symptom was dysphagia, which is in agreement with the presenting symptoms in the published reports.
Controversy exists over the influence of medical or surgical treatment of gastro-oesophageal reflux on Barrett's oesophagus.
Medical treatment (antacids, H 2 receptor blocking agents, prokinetic drugs) has no influence on the extent of Barrett's mucosa, but surgical correction of gastro-oesophageal reflux possibly leads to partial regression of Barrett's epithelium.
Fourteen patients in our series, however, had undergone antireflux surgery in the past.
This suggests that an antireflux operation will not inevitably lead to regression or resolution of Barrett's epithelium, and may not reduce the risk of malignant degeneration.
The treatment of choice most often reported for adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus is surgery.
The reported postoperative mortality after oesophagectomy for carcinoma varies between 10 and 16%.
Most of these studies, however, comprised patient populations treated by varying surgical techniques, in the period before our study.
While most patients with an adenocarcinoma associated with Barrett's oesophagus are resectable, the long term survival is low.
In our series the 5 year overall survival was 17%, and after resection and reconstruction it was 24%, which agrees with the reported 5 year survival) 14.5–22%).
Seventy two per cent of the resected patients did not have lymph node involvement, and more than one third (36%) had neither node involvement nor full thickness penetration of the oesophageal wall, which has been reported as favourable.
A clear correlation between the pathological staging of oesophageal tumours and prognosis has been reported — infiltration through the muscular wall and regional lymph node metastases, in particular, have a negative influence on survival rates.
Within the group of resected patients in our series, those without regional lymph node metastases showed significantly better survival than patients with regional lymph node metastases.
Survival was significantly in patients whose tumour was restricted to the submucosa and had not invaded the muscle layer.
The influence of the histological differentiation grade of adenocarcinomas in Barrett's oesophagus has not been reported before.
For squamous cell carcinomas of the oesophagus, histological differentiation grade has no significant effect on survival.
However, in one large series, including all types of oesophageal carcinomas, patients' late outcome was influenced significantly by tumour staging and histological grading.
In our series the histological differentiation grade of the tumour had no significant influence on survival.
Conclusion
In most patients Barrett's oesophagus was not recognised before the diagnosis of an associated adenocarcinoma.
If an adenocarcinoma in Barrett's oesophagus is diagnosed, resection offers the only chance for cure.
In our series, 5 year survival after resection was 24%.
A correlation between pathological staging and survival was shown, with significantly better survival if the tumour was restricted to the submucosa and there was no regional lymph node metastases.
Survival was not influenced by the histological differentiation grade of the tumour.
Prevalence of anti-neutrophil antibody in primary sclerosing cholangitis and ulcerative coitis using an alkaline phosphatase technique
Abstract
The detection of a nuclear anti-neutrophil antibody in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), using an immunoperoxidase technique, was recently reported by us.
Subsequently, detection of a cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil antibody was reported by others, using a two stage procedure of enzyme linked immunosorbent assay followed by an immunofluorescent method.
Detection of cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil antibody in PSC, which, in contrast to that two stage procedure, uses a simple one step immuno-alkaline phosphatase method is now reported.
Normal human neutrophils were cytocentrifuged, ethanol fixed, and then incubated with coded patients' sera.
Rabbit anti-human immunoglobulin conjugated with alkaline phosphatase was used to detect the bound antibody.
Fast red was used to visualise the reaction.
Twenty three of 30 (77%) PSC patients showed positive granular cytoplasmic staining (with some perinuclear accentuation) with a network of cytoplasmic filaments.
Fifteen of 45 (33%) ulcerative colitis patients and 1 of 3 chronic active hepatitis patients showed similar staining.
Thirty five of 152 patients with ulcerative colitis, chronic active hepatitis, and a variety of other liver diseases showed a different pattern of cytoplasmic labelling, with no surrounding filaments.
Seventy nine patients, including seven PSC patients and 33 normal subjects were negative.
In comparison, 86% of PSC patients, 57% of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis, 50% of normal subjects, and well over 60% of patients with ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease, alcoholic liver disease, and chronic active hepatitis were positive using the one step immunofluorescent method.
This method is more specific for PSC than those described in recent reports and may be of diagnostic importance.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disease that is characterised by inflammation and fibrosis of both intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts.
This can progress to bile duct destruction, biliary cirrhosis, and sometimes cholangiocarcinoma.
Although the aetiology of PSC is unknown, recent evidence suggests that immune mechanisms may plan an important role in its pathogenesis.
This evidence includes an increased prevalence of HLA B8 DR3 haplotype. an aberrant expression of HLA DR antigen in intrahepatic bile ducts, and an increased CD4/CD8 ratio of circulating T cells and increased portal tract T lymphocytes.
Moreover, we have previously reported detection of a nuclear anti-neutrophil antibody in 80% of PSC patients, although it was also present in some other liver diseases.
A recent study which used the western blotting technique also showed an antibody against granulocytes in similar patients.
Furthermore, a cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil antibody has also been detected in PSC and ulcerative colitis using combined indirect immunofluorescent staining with or without ELISA.
However, the specificity of this antibody for PSC, as opposed to ulcerative colitis, is unclear and a recent study has shown that the immunofluorescent technique is less specific and less sensitive than previously demonstrated by Duerr et al .
Using a technique different to that used in our original report, we have now detected an antibody against the cytoplasm of neutrophils.
This antibody seems more specific for PSC than the other auto-antibodies previously reported.
Methods
PATIENTS
PSC
Serum samples from 30 PSC patients were studied.
The diagnosis of PSC was established by clinical, histological, and cholangiographic criteria.
The mean age of the group was 53.4 years with a range of 24–82 years.
Twenty patients were male.
Thirteen patients were graded as I and II on Ludwig's criteria, three patients were cirrhotic and four were normal.
Twenty five of the PSC patients had coexistent ulcerative colitis while three had Crohn's disease.
The mean duration of the disease was 6.1 years (range 8 months-14 years).
Fourteen of the 30 PSC patients had the HLA B8 DR3 haplotype on serotyping (NIH lymphocytotoxicity assay).
The clinical details are shown in Table I.
Inflammatory bowel disease
Seventy seven patients with inflammatory bowel disease were also included in the study.
Of these, 45 patients had ulcerative colitis (age range: 18–74 with a mean age of 48.7).
There were 22 men.
All but two patients were on some form of maintenance therapy (sulphasalazine/ mesalazine).
Nineteen were also on steroids with or without azathioprine.
Twenty two had active colitis at the time serum was obtained.
Thirty two patients had Crohn's disease (16 had colitis).
Their mean age was 46.6 years with a range of 21–82 years, and 10 were men.
All had normal liver function tests.
Other diseases
Serum samples were also obtained from other groups of patients; 18 with alcoholic liver disease, 14 with primary biliary cirrhosis, six with large duct obstructive jaundice, three with autoimmune chronic active hepatitis, two with haemochromatosis, and two with coeliac disease.
All the above diagnoses were based on standard criteria.
Thirty five healthy subjects with different blood groups were also included in the study.
A further eight patients with Wegener's granulomatosis who were known to have circulating anti-neutrophil circulating antibody (ANCA) as determined by the standard immunofluorescent method were also tested.
METHODS
Indirect immunohistological staining using alkaline phosphatase
Normal human neutrophils were harvested from peripheral blood using Mono-Poly Resolving Medium (Flow Laboratories).
The neutrophils were washed with TBS (50 mM Tris, 145 mM NaCl, pH 7.6) in 5% fetal calf serum (Tissue Culture Services, UK).
They were then washed by centrifugation (300 g for 10 minutes) and resuspended in the same buffer and fetal calf serum.
Aliquots of suspended cells were cytocentrifuged (Shandon Southern Cytocentrifuge, Cheshire, England) at 5000 rpm for 5 minutes onto slides.
Cells were air dried and then fixed with absolute alcohol for 5 minutes.
These cells were then incubated with coded patient's serum, diluted 1:10 in TBS for 30 minutes.
After washing with TBS for 1 minute, bound antibody was detected using indirect immunohistochemistry.
Rabbit antibody to human immunoglobulin heavy chains (IgA/G/M)(DAKO, High Wycombe, UK) conjugated with alkaline phosphatase was used as a secondary antibody diluted 1:30 in TBS.
Fast red TR salt (Sigma) was used as a substrate for alkaline phosphatase.
All procedures were carried out at room temperature.
Indirect immunohistological staining using peroxidase
Similar procedures were carried out as described above except that the secondary antibody was rabbit antibody to human immunoglobulin conjugated with peroxidase (DAKO, High Wycombe, UK) instead of alkaline phosphatase.
The substrate was 3,3'-diaminobenzidine hydrochloride (Sigma)(6 mg in 10 ml 0.05 M Tris buffer, pH 7.6) and hydrogen peroxide (3%).
This test was performed on sera from patients with PSC, ulcerative colitis, and Crohn's disease.
Indirect immunohistological staining using fluorescein conjugated antibody
Exactly the same procedure was carried out as described above.
The secondary antibody used was rabbit antibody to human immunoglobulin heavy chains conjugated with fluorescein isothiocynate isomer 1 (FITC)(DAKO, High Wycombe, UK).
Slides were examined by fluorescence microscope.
Sodium-dodecyl-sulfate (SDS) polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
Neutrophils were harvested as described earlier.
After washing with TBS, the cells were resuspended in 1.5 ml of 0.34 M sucrose containing 1 mM iodoacetamide, 0.1 M phenylmethylsulphonylfluoride, 1 µM leupeptin, and Pepstatin A (Sigma).
The suspension was sonicated for 1 minute at 0°C.
SDS electrophoresis was carried out with a 5.5% stacking and a 10% running gel according to Laemmli's method with some modification.
(The sample buffer contained 0.2 M Tris pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 8 M urea and dithiothreitol (Sigma)(6 mg/ml of sample buffer.)
Western blot
Proteins were transferred electrophoretically by western blotting on to Immobilon sheets (Millipore) using semi-dry apparatus.
After blocking free protein binding sites with 0.5% Tween 20 (Sigma) for 2 hours, the filter was incubated with patient's sera (diluted 1:10 in TBS with 0.5% Tween 20) for 30 minutes, washed in 0.5% Tween in TBS, and then incubated with the rabbit anti-human immunoglobulin conjugated with alkaline phosphatase for a further 30 minutes.
A final wash with 0.5% Tween 20 for 1 hour was carried out before developing the reaction using fast red.
Molecular weight standards (Sigma) transferred on to immobilon were stained with Coomassie blue.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The results were analysed using the χ 2 test.
Results
INDIRECT IMMUNOHISTOLOGICAL STAINING USING ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE METHOD
The following patterns of staining were observed:
(1)
Distinct, medium coarse granular cytoplasmic staining concentrated around the nuclear lobes, with filamentous granular staining, forming a network in and around the neutrophil cytoplasm (type 1 pattern)(Fig 1).
The staining frequently obscured the nucleus making assessment of the presence of nuclear staining difficult.
However, we interpreted this as being the result of cytoplasmic staining overlying the nucleus, rather than nuclear staining.
The cytoplasmic and filamentous granular stainings were always found concomitantly.
(2)
Diffuse cytoplasmic staining with no granules or filaments (type 2 pattern)(Fig 2).
(3)
A third group of subjects who showed no staining (Fig 3).
The results are shown in Table II.
Twenty three (77%) of the 30 PSC patients, showed the type 1 pattern of staining.
Twenty five of the PSC patients had coexisting ulcerative colitis, of these, 22 showed the type 1 pattern of staining.
Ten of the 14 PSC patients who have the HLA B8 DR3 haplotype showed this pattern of staining.
One of the three PSC patients who had associated Crohn's disease and hemicolectomy showed this pattern of staining.
The antibody titres within the group of PSC patients were as follows: nine patients had a titre of at least 1:10 and 14 patients had a titre of at least 1:100.
One patient had a positive titre as high as 1:5000.
This patient had the highest serum aspartate aminotransferase (940 IU/l) activity of the PSC patients.
Liver histology showed expansion of the portal tracts and severe bridging fibrosis (stage 3) but the liver was not cirrhotic.
He has the HLA B8 DR3 haplotype and an 18 year history of ulcerative colitis which has been quiescent for more than 12 months.
Within the PSC group as a whole, there was no relation between positive staining and the HLA B8 DR3 haplotype (p).
Furthermore, possession of HLA B8 DR3 did not correlate with a higher antibody titre (p).
The antibody titre did not bear any relation to the clinical activity, biochemistry (data not shown), or the liver histology (see Table III) of the patients.
Fifteen of 45 patients with ulcerative colitis also showed a type 1 pattern of staining.
Ten of these 15 patients had active disease but normal serum liver function tests.
Among these 15 patients, five had a titre of 1:10 and nine a titre of 1:100.
Only one patient had a titre of 1:1000.
This particular patient had normal liver function tests and was in remission on sulphasalazine therapy only.
She was found to have total colitis on barium enema study.
There was no relation between the disease activity of ulcerative colitis and the presence of anti-neutrophil antibody (0.1) or the level of anti-neutrophil antibody titre (p).
The immunoglobulin class of the anti-neutrophil antibody was almost exclusively IgG in both PSC and ulcerative colitis.
No IgM antibody was found.
In one case of each condition, IgA only was present.
Seven PSC and three ulcerative colitis patients had both IgG and IgA anti-neutrophil antibody.
One patient with chronic active hepatitis was also found to have the type 1 pattern of staining.
Otherwise, this type 1 pattern was not observed in any other condition tested.
Sera from eight patients with Wegener's granulomatosis were studied.
Of these, two were negative and the other six patients showed granular cytoplasmic staining with perinuclear accentuation, but not nuclear staining and no filamentous staining (Fig 4).
It is important to note that this differs from both type 1 (PSC) and type 2 patterns.
COMPARISON BETWEEN ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE AND PEROXIDASE METHODS ON PSC, ULCERATIVE COLITIS, AND CROHN'S DISEASE SERA (TABLE IV)
As can be seen from Table IV, the peroxidase method is sensitive in detecting the anti-neutrophil antibody but it is not specific.
Furthermore, we found that the results of the assay seem to depend on the volume of hydrogen peroxide used.
When 30 µl of 3% hydrogen peroxide were used, most sera were positive and the staining was nuclear.
If 100 µl were used instead, the staining became more cytoplasmic.
When the hydrogen peroxide volume reached 300 µl, both cytoplasmic and nuclear staining were virtually abolished.
For comparison with the alkaline phosphatase technique, we used 100 µl of hydrogen peroxide.
ANTI-NEUTROPHILE ANTIBODY DETECTION USING IMMUNOFLUORESCENT METHOD AND COMPARISON WITH ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE METHOD
Table V illustrates the results.
The immunouorescent method is again sensitive in detecting the anti-neutrophil antibody but is not specific.
The results are comparable with those obtained using peroxidase technique.
Eight patients with Wegener's granulomatosis were all positive, showing the characteristic granular, diffuse cytoplasmic immunofluorescence pattern.
NATURE OF THE PSC ANTIGEN
Preliminary analysis of the antigen has been performed.
This has shown that it is heat stable to at least 37°C.
Furthermore, pretreatment of neutrophils with pepsin before performing the immunohistological labelling removes the staining.
This suggests that the antigen is proteinaceous in nature.
Preincubation of neutrophils with a mouse monoclonal (IgG1 k ) anti myeloperoxidase (Dr D Y Mason, University of Oxford) did not affect the staining of PSC sera.
Similar treatment abolished positive staining using sera from patients with Wegener's granulomatosis.
Formalin fixation of neutrophils changed the pattern of PSC staining to a diffuse cytoplasmic speckled pattern with no nuclear staining.
The filamentous staining is not affected.
Colchinine is known to interfere with the microtubules of the neutrophils.
Preincubation of neutrophils for 30–60 minutes at 37°C with colchicine (2.5×10 -5 M to 2.5×10 -4 M)(Sigma) before carrying out the indirect immunohistological labelling did not affect the staining pattern.
RESULTS OF WESTERN BLOTTING
In contrast to the immunohistological staining technique, we could not obtain consistent results despite numerous attempts.
Positive bands were generated using PSC sera, but they were not significantly different from those found with non-PSC sera.
Discussion
To describe a disease as autoimmune requires the demonstration of autoreactive lymphocytes or autoantibodies, or both, which are specific to that disease.
It has been suspected that PSC is an autoimmune disease.
The present study has shown a cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil antibody, which seems to be more specific than our previously described nuclear anti-neutrophil antibody.
As can be seen from Table IV, the antibody is found in 77% of patients with PSC and 33% of patients with ulcerative colitis, and not found in Crohn's disease.
In contrast, the nuclear anti-neutrophil antibody is found not only in 90% of PSC patients, but also in more than 60% of patients with ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease.
Accordingly, the peroxidase technique was stopped.
The variability of patterns resulting from the use of different volumes of hydrogen peroxide also argued against further use of this technique.
It is interesting to note that Duerr et al have also reported a cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil antibody in PSC and ulcerative colitis patients using a different method, namely a fixed cell ELISA screening test followed by indirect immunofluorescent staining.
This showed perinuclear immunofluorescent staining in 69% of the ulcerative colitis sera, 67% of PSC sera, and 55% of PSC without ulcerative colitis sera.
They also found a significant percentage (12%) of patients with Crohn's disease positive by their method.
In contrast, none of our patients with Crohn's disease showed a type 1 pattern of staining and only 33% of ulcerative colitis patients were positive.
This suggests that the alkaline phosphatase technique is more specific for PSC than their indirect immunofluorescent method.
Indeed, the results obtained with the immunofluorescent method (without previous ELISA screening) showed that it was similar to the peroxidase method.
Accordingly, the type 1 pattern obtained with the alkaline phosphatase method seems to be more sensitive and specific for PSC than other available methods.
Furthermore, our method has the following advantages.
The technique requires only one step, a special (fluorescence) microscope is not required, the result is easy to interpret, and slides can be kept permanently for future reference.
We intend, therefore, to use this method for further investigation into its utility in diagnosis of PSC.
While the antigen(s) seems to be proteinaceous, the failure to identify a consistent band on western blotting suggests the antigen(s) may be very labile and therefore destroyed or denatured by the lysis or the western blot techniques.
Alternatively, it may be particularly insoluble and not effectively extracted from the cells.
Further work is in progress to clarify this problem.
Our results with western blotting contrast with those of Klein et al who identified a 65 kDa band which seemed to be specific for PSC.
The antigen associated with the perinuclear staining pattern (p-ANCA) in Wegener's granulomatosis has been shown to be myeloperoxidase, while the antigen associated with the cytoplasmic staining pattern (p-ANCA) in Wegener's granulomatosis has been shown to be myeloperoxidase, while the antigen associated with the cytoplasmic staining pattern (c-ANCA) is a serine proteinase.
We do not believe that the anti-neutrophil antibody in PSC is similar to that found in Wegener's granulomatosis for three reasons.
Firstly, the staining pattern was different (Figs 1 and 4).
Secondly, preincubation of neutrophils with anti-myeloperoxidase antibody did not affect the staining pattern of PSC sera.
Thirdly, formalin fixation changed the pattern from a perinuclear to a diffuse cytoplasmic speckled pattern with no nuclear staining.
This differed from the situation in Wegener's granulomatosis, where formalin fixation induced diffuse cytoplasmic staining.
Accordingly, we have deliberately not used the terms c-ANCA (anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody exhibiting cytoplasmic pattern) or p-ANCA (anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody exhibiting perinuclear pattern) in describing the antibody.
It is known that 70% of PSC patients have coexisting ulcerative colitis, and about 5% of ulcerative colitis patients develop PSC.
It is of interest, therefore, that ulcerative colitis is the only disease, other than PSC, that also has a significant proportion of patients with a type 1 anti-neutrophil antibody pattern.
Long term follow up of these patients is underway to see if any of them develop PSC.
It so, detection of anti-neutrophil antibody may provide a prognostic marker for PSC in ulcerative colitis.
Furthermore, this may suggest that these diseases share a pathogenic mechanism.
It seems likely that the anti-neutrophil antibody found in PSC is an epiphenomenon.
Whether this autoantibody has direct pathogenic importance, as in Wegener's granulomatosis, remains to be determined.
In summary, we have demonstrated the diagnostic importance of an anti-neutrophil antibody in PSC compared with other chronic liver diseases.
This may be of particular benefit in paediatric liver diseases where the diagnosis of PSC may be made without resorting to invasive techniques.
The prognostic importance of the anti-neutrophil antibody in both PSC and ulcerative colitis remains to be determined, as does the nature of the proteinaceous antigen(s).
Faecal unconjugated bile acids in patients with colorectal cancer or polyps
Abstract
The unconjugated faecal bile acid profiles of 14 patients with colorectal cancer, nine patients with polyps and 10 controls were compared using gas liquid chromatography, controlling for such confounding variables as cholecystectomy, gall stones and hepatic function.
Patients with abenomatous polyps had a higher concentration of faecal bile acids (5.23 µmol/ g, 2.16–13.67 (median, range)v 1.96, 0.91- 6.97; p=0.016) lithocholic acid (2.41, 0.88-3.22 v 1.07, 0.38–2.03; p=0.013) and total secondary bile acids (5.23, 2.16–13.4 v 1.96, 0.73–6.63; p=0.02) compared with control subjects.
Patients with colorectal cancer had an increased P=0.029) proportion of secondary faecal bile acids (mol%) compared with controls (100, 96.5–100 v 95.19, 81.73–100) and the ratios of the primary bile acids, cholic and chenodeoxycholic acid, to their respective derivatives (secondary bile acids) were significantly lower in cancer patients compared with control and patients with polyps (p=0.034 to 0.004).
This study lends further support to the theory that bile acids may play a role in the development of polyps and colorectal cancer.
Epidemiological studies have implicated dietary fat of animal origin as an important aetiological factor in the development of colorectal cancer which may be related to altered faecal bile acids.
Bile acids given either orally, or rectally, have been shown to have a tumour promoting effect in rat models for colorectal cancer.
The mechanisms by which bile acids may produce these effects are uncertain.
Bile acids may be mutagenic, but some of the techniques used have been questioned.
Bile acids may directly damage DNA, or chromatin.
Lithocholic acid has been shown to produce DNA strand breaks and both chenodeoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid induce mitotic aneuploidy in yeast cells.
Possible mechanisms which may explain an increase in colonic cell proliferation caused by bile acids, include effects on prostaglandin synthesis, arachidonic acid release, and protein kinase C activity.
Populations at greater risk of colorectal cancer have been found to excrete more faecal bile acids, but others have not shown this.
The correlation between dietary habits and faecal bile acid excretion, is also supported by differences found in the faecal bile acid profiles of certain population subgroups, or different socioeconomic groups.
Furthermore, dietary manipulation studies have shown that high fat intake can increase faecal bile acid excretion.
Two early studies showed an increased faecal bile acid excretion in patients with colonic cancer, but later studies have been unable to confirm this.
Only one of four studies in polyps has shown any increase in faecal bile acid excretion in this group.
Differences in patient selection, faecal collection, and conflicting results.
More recently Hill and Owen, unable to show their previous findings of a significant increase in faecal bile acid excretion, have proposed instead that the ratio of lithocholic acid: deoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid: deoxycholic acid×total faecal bile acid concentration may be important markers in patients with colorectal cancer.
The role of the colon in modifying biliary bile acid composition, has prompted several groups to examine the biliary bile acid profiles of patients with colorectal cancer or adenomatous polyps with conflicting results.
Again differences in analytical techniques, patient selection, and other variables makes the interpretation of some of these studies difficult.
In this study we report the results of detailed analysis of the faecal unconjugated bile acid profiles of patients with colorectal cancer or polyps in comparison with controls and in which a careful attempt at controlling for confounding factors has been made.
Methods
PATIENTS AND STUDY DESIGN
Patients with colorectal cancer, adenomatous polyps or controls were recruited from the general surgical outpatients' department of Dudley Road Hospital.
Patients with colorectal cancer (n=14) or adenomatous polyps (n=9) entered the study after diagnosis.
None of these patients were obstructed.
The control group (n=10) comprised patients with non-specific abdominal symptoms other than constipation.
Control subjects as well as patients with cancer or polyps underwent rigid sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy or double contrast barium enema.
All groups underwent abdominal ultrasound scan to determine the presence of gall stones and exclude liver metastases in the cancer group, as well as biochemical tests to assess hepatic and renal function.
Weight was measured and recorded for each patient.
All were white caucasians on an ad libitum omnivorous diet.
Patients with abnormal liver function tests, gall stones, previous cholecystectomy, or hepatic metastases were excluded.
No patient had a coexisting medical complaint likely to affect bile acid metabolism nor had any undergone previous bowel surgery other than appendicectomy.
Any patients who had taken antibiotics within the three months before entering the study, or other medication likely to affect bile acid metabolism, were also excluded.
The histological examination of carcinomas and polyps was carried out by the Pathology Department of the Dudley Road Hospital.
FAECAL COLLECTION
Complete five day faecal collections were obtained from patients, at home or place of work and taking their normal diet.
This was achieved by delivering small 48 l (Frigidaire, FV 602) freezers to the homes of the participants so that stools could be frozen immediately at -22°C.
At the same time patients carried out a mouth-to-anus transit time study using radioopague markers (Portex UK Ltd).
Subjects were asked to collect every stool for five days and record the time each was passed.
After five days the freezers were collected and returned to the laboratory.
Faecal samples were stored at -20°C before being radiographed (for transit time studies), homogenisation and freeze drying.
HOMOGENISATION
Each five day stool collection was rapidly thawed and stools were weighed before the whole collection was pooled.
The pooled samples were homogenised for 20 minutes in five times the faecal weight of cold water using a Stomacher 3500 (Seward, London, UK).
A portion of the homogenate was then transferred to a beaker containing a magnetic stirrer (to ensure continuous mixing) and 10 ml aliquots were transferred to 20 ml glass vials, freeze dried (Edwards Modulyo freeze drier with three shelf closing accessory) for four days (with heating after 24 hours) and sealed under vacuum.
The lyophylised samples were stored until required for analysis.
BILE ACID EXTRACTION
Bile acids were extracted according to methods previously described by Setchell et al , with a recent modification.
Duplicate samples of 10 mg freeze dried faeces were taken, 100 µl 3 H cholic acid (17 nCi=0.68 pmol) and 0.25 µmol nordeoxycholic acid were added as recovery standards.
The faecal sample was transferred to a 250 ml round bottomed flash with 10 ml 90% ethanol and sonicated for 15 minutes before addition of 20 ml hexane.
The flask was swirled and a bilayer allowed to form.
The hexane (upper layer) was then decanted into a clean flask.
The hexane step was repeated, the decanted hexane pooled, dried on a rotary evaporator and stored.
A further 35 ml 90% ethanol was added to the flask containing the ethanolic faecal suspension, which was then refluxed gently for two hours.
After reflux the sample was cooled on ice and centrifuged at 1500 g for 15 minutes.
The supernatant was removed and saved.
The faecal pellet was resuspended in 45 ml 80% ethanol and refluxed for a further two hours.
The sample was centrifuged and the supernatant retained.
The faecal pellet was then resuspended in 45 ml chloroform-methanol (1:1; vol:vol) and refluxed for a further one hour.
Again the sample was centrifuged and the supernatant saved.
Finally the pellet was resuspended in 45 ml chloroform:methanol and sonicated (to minimise any losses) before being centrifuged and the supernatant collected.
The extracted supernatants were pooled, in a clean round bottom flask and dried using a rotary evaporator.
The dried sample was resuspended in 5 ml acid water (pH 3–4) which was then sonicated for five minutes.
The suspension was then filtered through a 10×1 cm column of Lipidex 1000.
The column was converted to the aqueous form with 40 ml distilled water before use.
The eluate was collected in a conical flask together with a column wash of 40 ml water (aqueous extract).
Bile acids were recovered from the Lipidex 1000 by eluting the column with 40 ml 100% methanol into the original round bottomed flask.
The aqueous extract was then passed through a Sep Pak C18 cartridge (500 mg) prepared by previous washing with 5 ml 100% methanol followed by 10 ml water.
Bile acids were eluted from the cartridge with 5 ml 100% methanol.
The methanolic eluates were pooled in the original round bottomed flask and dried on a rotary evaporator.
The extracted bil acids were resuspended in 20 ml 72% ethanol.
The pooled ‘hexane’ fraction (stored earlier) was resuspended in 10 ml 72% ethanol.
The ethanolic suspensions were then filtered through a column of Amberlyst A-15 (2 cm×10 cm), the column then being washed with a further 20 ml of 72% ethanol and the samples pooled.
The column was prepared by suspending the Amberlyst A-15 in 72% ethanol for 24 hours before slurrying it into columns and allowing it to settle by gravity.
This was then treated with 50 ml 2 M NaOH in 72% ethanol and washed to neutrality with 200 ml 72% ethanol.
It was converted to the H + form by washing with 50 ml 2 M HCl in 72% ethanol, followed by 72% ethanol until the eluate was neutral.
After use, the Amberlyst was resuspended in 72% ethanol until required when it was reactivated as described.
The Amberlyst resin was changed after evey 10 extractions.
GROUP SEPARATION
Group separation was achieved by applying the effluent from the Amberlyst to a column of Lipidex DEAP (dietylaminohydroxypropyl Sephadex LH-20) as described by Almé et al .
This was prepared in the acetate form by washing 100 g Lipidex-DEAP on a sintered glass funnel with 500 ml potassium acetate-KOH 0.5 m in 72% ethanol and then with further volumes of 72% ethanol until the eluate was neutral.
It was then washed with 500 ml 0.1 M acetic acid in 72% ethanol and washed to neutrality again with 72% ethanol.
The gel was slurried into glass columns and allowed to settle by gravity (30 minutes) to give a column size of 0.5×14 cm.
After the addition of the sample, it was eluted under pressure using nitrogen (0.5- 1.0 Kg cm -2 ) to give a flow rate of 50–80 drops per minute.
The column was washed with 9 ml 72% ethanol (pH 7) to give a fraction comprising neutral compounds and any esterfied bile acids.
Unconjugated bile acids were obtained by elution with 7.5 ml 0.15 M acetate in 72% ethanol (apparent pH 3.8, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide) followed by 4.5 ml 72% ethanol.
The remaining glycine conjugated, taurine conjugated and sulphated bile acid fractions were obtained by continued stepwise elutions with acetate buffers, but are not further considered in this report.
The unconjugated fractions were dried on a rotary evaporator and taken up in methanol as required.
DERIVITISATION
The internal standard (62.5 nmol coprostanol) was added to the sample.
Diazomethane was freshly prepared using 0.54 g KOH dissolved in 14 ml 90% methanol and 2.86 g N-methy-n-nitroso-p-toluenesulphonamide in 40 ml diethyl ether in a round bottom flask.
After five minutes condensed diazomethane was collected in an ice cooled tube.
The bile acid mixture was transferred to a screw top reaction vial containing 0.5 ml methanol and 1 ml diazomethane.
Methylated bile acids were produced by reaction at room temperature for one hour and subsequently evaporated to dryness under nitrogen.
The trimethylsilyl ester derivatives were obtained by reacting the dried bile acid sample with 200 µl of the silanisation mixture (pyridine: hexamethyldisilazine:trimethylchlorosilane; 3:2:1; vol:vol:vol) at 55°C for one hour.
The drivative was dried and extracted with 3×200 µl hexane and centrifuged in a microtube at 13400 g for 10 minutes.
The supernatant was transferred to a glass gas liquid chromatography vial (Chromacol Ltd, London, UK) dried and resuspended in 200 µl hexane.
CHROMATOGRAPHY
A 1 µl volume was injected onto the 25 m DB1 capillary tube column with a 1 m retention gap (Jones Chromatography, Hengoed, Wales) of a PU4400 gas chromatography with a PU4700 auto injector (Phillips Scientific, Cambridge, UK).
The sample had a 170:1 split, at an initial temperature of 220°C, ramping at 2°C/minute to 280°C at which it was kept for 15 minutes, using helium as the carrier gas.
Detection was by flame ionisation using hydrogen and air at 290°C together with helium as a make up gas to improve the detection limit.
The integration system was a PU3202 computer utilising PU6000 software (Phillips Scientific).
Ultra pure gases were used and were further purified prior to entry into the chromatograph using the following filters; oxyfilter, moisture filter and charcoal filter ×2 (Chrompack, London, UK).
The lower detection limit for bile acids was 0.3 pmol.
Putative bile acids were identified by comparing peaks with the retention times of authentic standards and subsequently confirmed by gas liquid chromatography mass spectrometry at the Clinical Research Centre's Unit of Mass Spectrometry.
Relative retention times and response factors were calculated by comparison of authentic standards to coprostanol.
Concentrations of the individual bile acids were calculated by comparing their peak areas with that of the internal standard coprostanol.
The values from at least two chromatograms were used to obtain a mean; the percentage individual bile acid present was calculated from the micromolar concentrations.
Total bile acid concentration was calculated as the sum of all gas liquid chromatography detected individual bile acids.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All results are expressed as the median value with the range to indicate dispersion.
Comparisons between the three groups was undertaken using the Kruskall-Wallis test adjusted for ties; if significant (p) subsequent analysis between two groups was undertaken using the two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test.
A χ 2 test was used to evaluate differences in sex distribution and frequency of occurrence of individual bile acids.
Tests of correlation were undertaken using Spearman's rank correlation test (two-tailed).
Significance was taken as p.
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
All patients gave informed consent.
The study was approved by the Ethical Committee of the West Birmingham Health Authority.
MATERIALS
Reference bile acids were obtained from Steraloids Ltd (Croydon, UK) and Sigma UK Ltd (Poole, UK).
3 H cholic acid was obtained from Amersham International PLC (Aylesbury, UK).
All solvents were AR grade and were obtained from Fisons along with pyridine (Loughborough, UK).
All other reagents were purchased from Sigma UK Ltd.
Lipidex-DEAP was obtained from Packard United Technologies (Pangbourne, UK).
Sep-pak C-18 cartridges (500 mg) were purchased from Millipore-Waters (Watford, UK).
All water used was double distilled and deionised using the Milli-Q system (Millipore, Watford, UK).
Helium CP grade (>pure), Hydrogenhydrocarbon zero grade (>pure), and air BTCA 74 grade were supplied by BOC-Special Gases (Wolverhampton, UK).
Results
PATIENTS
There were no significant differences in the ages, weights, or stool frequency between the three groups.
Transit times and daily stool weights are shown in Table I.
All the cancer patients had adenocarcinomas: two had Dukes's stage A, eight had B, and six had C. The polyps varied in size from 0.5 cm to 1.0 cm and five showed dysplastic changes (one mild and four moderate dysplasia).
BILE ACIDS
The mean recovery of the radiolabelled standard was 92.9% (7.11)(SD).
A typical chromatogram is shown in the Figure, 16 unconjugated bile acids were identified during this study (Table II).
From our own observations (unpublished) and those of others, sulphated and conjugated bile acids represent less than 10% of the total bile acids excreted in faeces and are not further considered in this report.
The faecal bile acid concentration (µmol/g dry weight) was greater in the poly- group when compared with controls.
The daily faecal bile acid excretion was found to be significantly higher in the polyp group compared with cancer patients, while the difference between the polyp group and controls was of borderline significance (Table III).
Of the individual bile acids identified, a significantly lower concentration of the primary bile acid chenodeoxycholate was found in the faeces of cancer patients, indeed it was detected significantly less frequently in cancer patients (Table II).
The concentration of lithocholic acid was found to be higher in patients with polyps than controls as was the concentration of total secondary bile acids (Table II).
There were no significant differences in the proportions of total chenodeoxycholic acid or cholic acid derivatives between the three groups (Table IV).
The proportion of metabolites of chenodeoxycholic acid and cholate was however higher in the cancer group, as reflected by lower ratios of chenodeoxycholic acid and cholate to their total derivatives (Table IV).
The overall proportion of the secondary bile acids was highest among the cancer patients when compared with both polyp patients and controls (Table V).
No significant differences were found in lithocholic acid:deoxycholic acid ratio or the lithocholic acid:deoxycholic acid×total faecal bile acid index when the groups were compared (Table V).
The proportion of secondary bile acids in each group was found to correlate strongly with both transit time and stool weight (r s =0.717, pand r s =0.527, prespectively).
Discussion
One of the key elements of this study was the exercise of tight control over variables which may influence faecal bile acid profiles; age, transit time, gall stones, cholecystectomy, hepatic function, hepatic metastases, previous surgery, and antibiotics.
Not only is there a significant day to day variation in faecal bile acid excretion, but faecal bile acid concentrations may vary between different areas of the same stool.
A minimum complete three day stool collection with homogenisation has been shown to be necessary to minimise variation and most previous studies, with few exceptions, have not done this.
In the present study complete five day stool collections were examined.
Furthermore careful control was exercised over the collection of faeces, with immediate freezing of specimens to minimise the possibility of bacterial biotransformation of faecal bile acids.
Over a five day period patients with adenomatous polyps had a higher daily faecal bile acid excretion compared with cancers and higher total faecal bile acid and secondary bile acid concentrations, compared with controls.
Patients with established colorectal cancer showed increased proportions of secondary bile acids in their faeces.
Similar findings of an increased faecal bile acid concentration and increased secondary bile acid concentration in patients with adenomatous polyps were reported by Reddy and Wynder.
Although stool collection in their study was only carried out for 24–48 hours, it was done at home.
Breuer et al studied 12 patients with adenomatous polyps and found no differences in faecal bile acid excretion; the participants in this study were, however, hospitalised and a change in diet may be of relevance to their findings.
Furthermore, it is not clear whether or not the control group was screened for polyps.
Because polyps are a relatively common finding among a population of a similar age to their patients, this is a significant confounding factor.
No attention was paid to previous cholecystectomy not to the presence of gall stones.
Both factors have been shown by several groups to be associated with changes in biliary bile acid composition.
Similar difficulties arise in the interpretation of another study of polyp patients that showed no differences in faecal bile acid excretion.
Furthermore, this latter study was carried out on native Japanese, a population with a considerably lower incidence of colorectal cancer and probably not comparable with our population.
A significantly higher concentration of lithocholic acid was found in polyp patients compared with controls.
This may be important as lithocholic acid has been shown to be genotoxic in in vitro studies.
Patients with established colorectal cancer had a lower faecal concentration of the primary bile acid chenodeoxycholate and were found to excrete a higher proportion of secondary bile acids, compared with both controls and polyps.
This was reflected by the increased proportions of the biotransformation products of both cholate and chenodeoxycholic acid seen, and is in accordance with two previous studies.
Our own recent studies have shown an increased proportion of secondary biliary bile acids in patients with colorectal cancer.
The changes we observed may have occurred as a result of an increased absorption of secondary bile acids, previously shown in patients with large and severely dysplastic polyps.
This, together with feedback inhibition of primary bile acid synthesis, resulting from increased enterohepatic cycling of secondary bile acids, may explain the differences seen.
In our studies therefore, faecal and biliary bile acid findings have been consistent.
Although there were no differences in faecal bile acid concentration in those patients with colorectal cancer, total daily excretion was significantly lower than in patients with polyps, an increased colonic absorption of bile acids may in part account for this.
Further studies comparing the bile acid absorption in polyp patients with that in patients with established colorectal cancer, may help to clarify this issue.
A prolonged colonic transit time may be expected to result in increased bacterial metabolism of bile acids, and the observation that an increased proportion of secondary bile acids was strongly correlated with a prolonged bowel transit time is therefore of interest.
Yet the cancer patients, who had significantly longer mouth-to-anus transit times, were not obstructed clinically or radiologically and stool frequencies were similar in all groups.
Nagengast et al , using a similar radioopaque marker method to our own, could find no relationship between faecal bile acid concentration or pattern and transit time in healthy controls.
A recent study, however, showed an association between diets high in refined sugar and prolonged mouth-to-anus transit time (radioopaque markers), despite a reduced mouth-to-caecum transit time (H 2 breath test).
This was coupled with an increased faecal bile acid concentration and proportion of secondary faecal bile acids.
These findings would suggest that an interplay of various intraluminal factors, including bile acids themselves, may affect colonic function.
Clearly the nature of this relationship requires further investigation, particularly as no other case controlled studies have reported on transit time in relation to faecal bile acid concentration.
As little is known about the distribution of bile acids between the water or solid fractions of faeces and their possible cellular effects, the observed differences in faecal bile acids may not totally reflect their significance.
Indeed the presentation of bile acids to the colonic mucosa is likely to be dependant upon the concentration of bile acids in the water fraction of faeces.
The role played by dietary fibre is of importance to this compartmentalisation because it binds bile acids.
Moreover, the fermentation of fibre will have effects on colonic pH.
This may not only affect 7-alpha-dehydroxylase activity (responsible for secondary bile acid formation), but also the ionic composition and the solubility of bile acids in the water compartment of faeces.
These factors and their interrelationships require elucidationin these patients.
Nevertheless, we propose that the increased concentration of bile acids and increased daily excretion may predispose to the development of polyps.
This could result from bile acid mediated effects on cellular proliferation through several possible pathways as already discussed.
The differences observed in cancer patients are more difficult to explain, as the faecal bile acid profiles of cancer patients in our study were different from those of polyps and controls.
We would suggest that an altered metabolism (possibly related to gut transit time) may occur at the large polyp or cancer stage.
This, with or without an increased absorption of faecal secondary bile acids may account for the differences observed in both faecal and biliary bile acids.
Neither the ratio of lithocholic acid: deoxycholic acid, or lithocholic acid:deoxycholic acid×total faecal bile acid were significantly increased in patients with colorectal cancer or polyps.
This suggests that such indices are unlikely to provide useful markers for the identification of colorectal cancer risk as previously proposed.
In conclusion we have shown a significantly increased faecal bile acid concentration in patients with adenomatous polyps and an increased proportion of secondary bile acids in the faeces of patients with established colorectal cancer.
This study lends further support to the theory that these compounds may have some role in the pathogenesis of polyps and colorectal cancer.
Does nasal oxygen reduce the cardiorespiratory problems expreienced by elderly patients undergoing endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
Abstract
Elderly patients undergoing endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) have an increased risk of sedation related complications during the procedure.
To determine whether nasal oxygen supplementation (2 l/min) reduces these risks, half of 66 patients aged over 60 undergoing ERCP using minimal midazolam sedation alone were randomised to receive nasal oxygen.
The arterial oxygen saturation and pulse rate of all patients were monitored by pulse oximetry before and during the procedure.
Only three patients in the oxygen supplemented group (n=33) required any form of intervention for hypoxia compared with six in the control group (n=33).
Comparison of mean arterial oxygen saturation between the groups showed significantly higher levels in the nasal oxygen group throughout the procedure.
Pulse rate comparisons showed no significant difference from control group values, both groups had short periods of significant tachycardia.
We conclude that minimal sedation with midazolam alone still produces hypoxia during ERCP in a substantial number of elderly patients.
Nasal oxygen supplementation increases the level of patient oxygenation and reduces the need for intervention, but does not reduce tachycardia in the elderly patient.
Because hyoscine may be a significant factor contributing to the tachycardia, sparing rather than routine use of this agent is advisable.
Hypoxia, as reflected by reduced arterial oxygen saturation (SaO 2 ), is a common occurrence during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy using benzodiazepine sedation and is exacerbated by the coadministration of narcotic agents.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography is more likely to be associated with hypoxia as this procedure is often of longer duration; a combination of sedatives is often used and many patients have underlying cardiorespiratory disorders.
Those patients at most risk when undergoing ERCP are the elderly, and previous workers have shown that age is a predisposing factor to hypoxia during ERCP when narcotic agents are used in conjunction with benzodiazepine sedation.
The problem of hypoxia during endoscopy in the elderly has not been addressed since the work of Rozen almost a decade ago before reliable methods of non-invasive arterial oxygen saturation measurement were readily available.
Rozen reported hypoxia and recommended that narcotics should not be used for gastrintestinal endoscopy in the elderly.
More recent studies have recommended that nasal oxygen be used for elderly patients or for patients in general.
Cardiorespiratory problems, mostly sedation related, have been reported to be the most common complication of upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.
This prospective study was designed to investigate changes in SaO 2 and pulse rate in the minimally sedated elderly patient undergoing ERCP without narcotic premedication, and to assess the benefit if any of nasal oxygen administration.
Methods
PATIENTS
In a prospective trial, fully informed consent was obtained from 66 consecutive patients aged over 60 years who were then randomised to undergo ERCP with or without nasal oxygen (2 l/min).
All patients were sedated with a bolous dose of midazolam (2–5 mg) and received 40 mg hyoscine butylbromide (Buscopan) intravenously before the procedure.
No analgesic agents were administered.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was performed with an Olympus TJF duodenoscope and all examinations were done by one investigator (JRBG).
The SaO 2 and pulse rate of patients was monitored by pulse oximetry (Ohmeda Biox 3700e with reusable finger probe).
Continuous recordings were made before the procedure and throughout the examination to provide baseline values.
To ensure SaO 2 readings were valid in jaundiced patients, selected patients also has SaO 2 determined by arterial blood gas analysis.
SaO 2 and pulse rate data were analysed by two methods.
In the first method, data were analysed against set criteria for hypoxia and tachycardia.
The number of patients in each group who exceeded these criteria was recorded.
For hypoxia and tachycardia respectively, the criteria were summated SaO 2 readings 10% or more below baseline for at least one minute and summated pulse rate readings of 40 beats per minute (bpm) or more above baseline for at least five minutes.
In the second method, procedural SaO 2 and pulse rate values were related to presedation values to give relative changes for each patient.
The mean change in SaO 2 and pulse rate was then calculated for each patient at two minute intervals throughout the procedure and the readings obtained from each group compared.
Data from patients in the control group requiring oxygen during the procedure were excluded from the point where relative SaO 2 levels became positive.
A simple paired comparison of mean pulse rate data obtained immediately before and during the procedure was also carried out.
All data sets obtained were initially analysed to determine whether data were normally or abnormally distributed.
Normally distributed data were analysed by one way analysis of variance or paired t test and abnormally distributed data by Wilcoxon's rank-sum test.
Results
Both the control and oxygen treated groups were similar in age, gender, bilirubin level, type and length of procedure and dose of midazolam, and proved not to be significantly different when compared by Wilcoxon's rank-sum test (Table I).
The SaO 2 values of four patients (bilirubin range 18–457 µmol/l) were almost identical when determined by blood gas analysis (mean 94%, range 91.2–97.5%) or by pulse oximetry (mean 93%, range 91–95%).
Interventions of varying intensity were necessary in six patients of the control group and three patients in the nasal oxygen group, but the procedure was completed successfully in all cases except one.
Further information on patients whose SaO 2 levels fell below 90% is provided in Table II.
Analysis of SaO 2 data showed the number of patients exceeding the set criteria of hypoxia in the control and oxygen treated groups were eight and one respectively.
Comparison of relative changes in SaO 2 by Wilcoxon's rank-sum test showed the oxygen treated group to have significantly higher (p) SaO 2 readings at all times until the total number of patients fell to less than 10 because of procedure completion (Figure).
Analysis of the relative pulse rate data shoed no difference between the two groups.
Seven cases in the control group and eight cases in the oxygen treated group exceeded the tachycardia criteria.
Similarly the comparison of relative pulse rate values showed no significant differences between the two groups when compared by Wilcoxon's rank-sum test.
The simple comparison of mean pulse rate data from before sedation and during the procedure showed both groups experienced a similar degree of tachycardia during the procedure (Table III).
For reasons which were not readily apparent the oxygen treated group showed a significantly higher mean pulse rate value than the control group before the procedure.
Discussion
Pulse oximetry using the Ohmeda system was shown to produce valid SaO 2 readings even in highly jaundiced patients although SaO 2 readings obtained were approximately 1% below those of invasive arterial blood gas analysis.
The range of bilirubin levels in the patients studied in this way encompassed almost the entire range of the control and oxygen treated groups.
There was no indication that increasing jaundice increased the difference between the two methods of SaO 2 analysis.
In the control group, 18% of patients required intervention varying from verbal encouragement to breathe, to the administration of oxygen.
Although the requirement of intervention in the nasal oxygen group was halved, the most extreme example of hypoxia occurred in this group and led to the only termination of the procedure.
Periods of hypoxia were common in the control group, but greatly reduced in patients receiving oxygen.
SaO 2 was significantly higher throughout the procedure in patients given oxygen, but there was no difference in pulse rate between the two groups.
Some degree of tachycardia was experienced by all patients during the procedure and approximately 23% of patients in each group showed appreciable tachycardia during the procedure.
These findings are similar to those reported by previous workers examining hypoxia during ERCP in patients undergoing the procedure after benzodiazepine sedation with narcotic agents.
This tachycardia may be caused by the hyoscine butylbromide premedication as tachycardia was often apparent in patients after hyoscine administration before intubation.
This probably reflects the recognised antimuscarinic properties of this drug.
Hyoscine butylbromide is often necessary during ERCP, but should be used in as low a dose as possible and only when really needed rather than routinely.
In conclusion, hypoxia commonly occurs in elderly ERCP patients even with minimal sedation without narcotics.
Nasal oxygen supplementation significantly reduces this problem and should be routinely used in patients over the age of 60 undergoing ERCP as this reduces the sedation risks of the procedure.
It was disappointing that it had no significant effect on the tachycardia, but this may be helped by more sparing use of hyoscine butylbromide.
The results of this study support the guide lines recently published by the British Society of Gastroenterology.
Effect of cholera toxin on the human jejunum
Abstract
In order to develop a model for secretory diarrhoea and to confirm the in vitro effects of cholera toxin in man in vivo the effect of intrajejunally administered cholera toxin was investigated in healthy volunteers.
An intestinal perfusion technique with an occluding balloon proximal to the infusion site was used.
The jejunum was perfused under steady state conditions with a plasma like electrolyte solution containing polyethlene glycol as a non-absorbable volume marker.
After two control periods of one hour each, during which water was absorbed at a rate of 104 (14)(mean (SEM), n=15) and 94 (15) ml/30 cm/h, respectively, three different doses of cholera toxin (6.25 µg, 12.5 µg, 25 µg) were administered by bolus into the lumen of the jejunum.
Cholera toxin reduced absorption of water and electrolytes progressively over four hours and induced secretion in a dose dependent fashion.
In the fourth hour net secretion amounted to 22 (23), 36 (24), and 88 (40) ml/30 cm/h (each n=five) with doses of 6.25, 12.5, and 25 µg cholera toxin, respectively.
The movement of sodium, chloride, and bicarbonate paralleled water movement.
Our results suggest that cholera toxin may serve as a secretory model in the human jejunum which might allow testing of new antisecretory agents.
Secretory diarrhoea is an important health problem particularly in developing countries.
In order to test new antisecretory agents human models for intestinal secretion need to be established.
Because infection with Vibrio cholerae is an important cause of diarrhoea, we decided to use cholera toxin as intestinal secretagogue.
Cholera toxin is the enterotoxin of Vibrio cholerae and while causing secretion does not impair glucose dependent sodium absorption in the intestine and does not alter mucosal histology.
Earlier studies with cholera toxin in man revealed an increase in stool frequency and volume, and intestinal secretion after administration of various preparations of cholera toxin.
The results of these studies, however, were too variable to lead to the use of cholera toxin as a secretory model.
The aims of the present study were to characterise the dose response relationship for cholera toxin after intrajejunal administration, to develop a standardised model of intestinal secretion using an intestinal perfusion technique, and to expand our information on the action of cholera toxin on the human jejunum.
Methods
SUBJECTS
Fifteen healthy volunteers (nine men, six women, mean age 28 years, range 22–38) gave written informed consent to participate.
None of the subjects was taking any medication.
A medical history, electrocardiograph, blood pressure, and standard laboratory findings were obtained before the experiment and were found to be negative or normal Haematocrit was also obtained 24 hours after the experiment.
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Graz School of Medicine.
INTESTINAL PERFUSION
For intestinal perfusion a tube assembly with a proximal occluding balloon was used.
The assembly with an outer diameter of 6 mm and a mercury bag at the tip was placed in the jejunum (infusion site at the ligament of Treitz).
The correct position of the tube was confirmed by fluoroscopy.
Because in animal studies digestive juices may destroy cholera toxin an occluding balloon proximal to the infusion site was used in order to avoid degradation of cholera toxin by pancreatic enzymes (E Beubler, unpublished observation).
The sampling site was 30 cm distal to the infusion site.
A fourth lumen enabled removal of endogenous secretions proximal to the occluding balloon.
Perfusion was started in the morning after a 12–16 hour fast.
A plasma like electrolyte solution (composition in mmol/l: Na + 135, K + 5, Cl -110, HCO 3 -30, and 2 g/l polyethylene glycol, mean molecular weight 3350, as a non-absorbable volume marker) was perfused at 10 ml/minute using a peristaltic pump.
The solution was bubbled with a mixture of 95% O 2 and 5% CO 2 .
A 30 minute equilibration period, during which the samples were discarded was followed by six hours of collection.
Collection was performed by hand aspiration at a rate of 1.5 ml/minute using plastic syringes.
Collected samples were pooled for each hour.
After two control periods of one hour each, 6.25 µg, 12.5 µg, or 25 µg purified cholera toxin (Sigma, Deisenhofen, FRG) was administered intrajejunally as a bolus without interrupting the intestinal perfusion.
The perfusion was continued for another four hours.
The transmural potential difference was measured between a NaCl filled subcutaneous cannula on one forearm and the luminal contents by means of calomel electrodes, using agar bridges between the cannula and the perfusion tube.
During the entire study the subjects electrocardiograph was displayed on a monitor.
Pulse and blood pressure were measured every 20 minutes.
After the experiment subjects were asked to drink sufficient liquids and to record frequency of bowel movements and to collect all stools for 24 hours.
ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES AND CALCULATIONS
Intestinal samples were analysed for Na + , Cl -, K + , and HCO 3 -(as total CO 2 ) using an automatized analyser (Synchron Clinical System CX3, Beckman, USA).
Polyethylene glycol was determined according to the method of Hydén.
Absorption and secretion rates in the test segment were calculated from the perfusion rate and the changes in polyethylene glycol and electrolyte concentrations.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are expressed as means (SEM).
Statistical analysis was performed using either the parameter free Quade test or the Kruskal-Wallis H-test as was appropriate.
A p value of less than 0.05 was regarded as significant.
Results
EFFECTS OF CHOLERA TOXIN ON NET WATER AND ION TRANSPORT
During the two control periods absorption of water (104 (14) and 94 (15) ml/30 cm/h, n=15, respectively) and electrolytes was recorded in all subjects except in one who secreted.
Jejunal secretion is, however, known to occasionally occur in healthy subjects.
The secretory response to cholera toxin developed gradually.
The first changes of net water and ion transport were observed after the second or third hour after administration of cholera toxin.
The maximal effect during the four hour experiment occurred in the fourth hour after administration of cholera toxin (Tables I-V).
Cholera toxin caused dose dependent changes in net fluid and ion transport (Figure).
Measurements of water as well as of Na + and Cl -revealed significant changes toward secretion induced by all three doses of cholera toxin (Tables I-III).
Net movement of water was significantly different from zero (secretion) when the 25 µg dose of cholera toxin was administered.
Net K + transport was not changed by the lowest dose of cholera toxin (6.25 µg).
Net K + absorption was significantly decreased by 12.5 µgcholera toxin, and only the highest dose (25 µg) caused net secretion (Table IV).
HCO 3 -absorption was reduced by 6.25 µg cholera toxin and changed to secretion by the higher doses (Table V).
Cholera toxin caused no change in potential difference in any of the groups.
CLINICAL EFFECTS
Blood pressure and heart rate did not change during the course of the studies.
Cholera toxin did not cause nausea or vomiting.
Stool volume and frequency (Table VI) increased after all doses of cholera toxin to a higher degree than might be expectred after intestinal perfusion studies using balanced electrolyte solutions.
Only one subject who had received 6.25 µg cholera toxin observed no increase in stool frequency, however, in this case only decreased absorption and not secretion was observed in the test segment.
In two subjects receiving 25 µg cholera toxin and in one receiving 12.5 µg cholera toxin liquid bowel movements continued up to 48 hours but caused no serious inconvenience.
In the other subjects liquid bowel movements stopped after 24 hours.
After 24 hours haematocrit values were within the normal range (44 (1) %).
Discussion
In this study we developed a model for intestinal secretion in man using cholera toxin as a secretagogue and measured the changes in jejunal water and electrolyte movement in response bo cholera toxin.
Our experiments showed a significant dose dependent change from absorption toward secretion of water and electrolytes.
We found a maximum of fluid secretion of 88 ml/30 cm/h with a dose of 25 µg cholera toxin four hours after exposure to the toxin.
Jejunal perfusion studies in patients with acute cholera studied by others showed a wide range of net fluid secretion from 2 to 326 ml/30 cm/h with corresponding movements of Na + , K + , Cl -, and HCo 3 -into the lumen.
Thus, in the present study we induced secretion in the test segment which lies well within the range of secretion observed with naturally occurring cholera.
When ‘cholera’ is considered for experiments in healthy subjects the most important question to answer concerns safety.
As opposed to natural cholera we used a single dose of purified cholera toxin but did not administer Vibrio cholerae , which would produce cholera toxin for several days.
Thus, the expected time for intestinal secretion was limited.
Moreover, only a very small segment of jejunum was exposed to the full dose of cholera toxin and because of the rapid binding of the toxin to the mucosa it was presumed that cholera toxin was not available in the distal small bowel to induce secretion.
Some liquid bowel movements are expected after many types of intestinal perfusion studies and in most of the subjects in this study liquid bowel movements had stopped after 24 hours.
Only in three subjects liquid bowel movements comtinued up to 48 hours, but in no subject did these cause any serious inconvenience.
During the perfusion studies we observed no change in blood pressure or heart rate.
After the end of the study the volunteers were asked to drink 1.5–2 l of an oral rehydration solution over the next 24 hours, but most of the subjects preferred other liquids.
A normal haematocrit after 24 hours was present in all subjects and indicated either sufficient oral liquid intake or insignificant fluid loss.
We conclude that a bolus of cholera toxin of 6.25 to 25 µg can be used safely as an intestinal secretagogue when the described precautions are being taken.
In addition to the secretion of Na + and Cl -we found marked secretion of HCO 3 -into the jejunum, thus confirming previous in vivo studies in animals.
In experimental animals cholera toxin induces marked secretion of fluid and electrolytes.
Where HCO &3 was also measured net secretion was observed.
This is in contrast with in vitro studies in ileal mucosa using short circuit current conditions where no significant changes of HCO 3 -fluxes were found.
To our knowledge there are no in vitro studies using jejunal mucosa.
The different findings in vitro and in vivo underline the importance in vivo studies in man.
Normally HCO 3 -is absorbed by the jejunum.
The absorption is thought to result from a Na + /H + exchange mechanism whereby H + is secreted into the lumen in exchange for Na + .
Thus, in addition to the Cl -and Na + transport mechanisms the putative jejunal Na + /H + exchange many also be inhibited by cholera toxin.
The secretion of HCO 3 -is of clinical importance as the high amount of HCO 3 -in cholera stools may lead to metabolic acidosis when diarrhoea continues for several days.
Potential difference did not change during the observed effects in ion transport in our study.
Although a change to lumen negativity would be expected with active anion secretion our results are in accordance with those of Sachar, who found marked accumulation of water and electrolytes in the intestine of patients with cholera without alteration of the transmural potential difference in the small bowel.
We found no correlation between net secretion of water and electrolytes in the test segment and stool weight while liquid bowel movements were present after the experiment.
Such a lack of correlation was also observed by Levin after oral administration of 5 µg purified cholera toxin to healthy volunteers.
The amount of diarrhoea in acute cholera infection is also very variable.
Many cases are mild and cannot be distinguished from viral gastroenteritis.
When cholera toxin is used as secretagogue a variable response in stool volume should thus be expected.
In our experiments the secretory effect of cholera toxin began in the second hour after administration of the toxin.
The observed maximal effect was reached in the fourth hour although we do not know whether secretion would still have been higher in the fifth or sixth hour.
For reasons of compliance it was not possible to plan for longer experiments (our experiments lasted approximately eight hours from start to end).
This delayed effect of cholera toxin is well known from animal experiments.
It might be explained by the fact that the toxin is effective from the luminal side and binds irreversibly to a particular membrane receptor.
It probably takes time to enter the cell and to activate a cascade of intracellular mechanisms leading to secretion of water and electrolytes.
Carpenter assumed that increased fluid secretion began shortly after toxin administration but that net fluid production was not observed until the rate of secretion exceeded the rate of absorption.
The secretory effect of cholera toxin in our study probably continued for hours as evidenced by the stool output after the experiment.
Recovery occurs when the affected intestinal epithelial cells on the villi are replaced by new enterocytes moving up from the crypts.
The late onset and long duration of secretion and the induction of significant HCO 3 -secretion are the most important differences between the effect of cholera toxin and other secretagogues such as vasoactive intestinal polypeptide or prostaglandin.
Intravenously administered vasoactive intestinal polypeptide instantly changed absorption to secretion and the effect stopped after the end of the infusion.
No subject developed diarrhoea, and even at the highest dose tested of 400 pmol vasoactive intestinal polypeptide/kg/h only reduced absorption or a low rate of secretion of water and electrolytes was observed.
There was only a slight but statistically not significant decrease in HCO 3 -absorption caused by vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.
This is in contrast to our results where cholera toxin induced marked secretion of HCO 3 -.
Intrajejunally administered prostaglandin E 1 at a dose of 0.9 µg/kg/min induced marked secretion of water and electrolytes beginning after 30 minutes and ending within 60 minutes after prostaglandin infusion.
A dose of 5 µmol/l prostaglandin E 2 tested in our laboratory induced secretion of water, Na + and Cl -similar to 25 µg cholera toxin, but without affecting HCO 3 -absorption.
One might speculate that HCO 3 -secretion is mainly initiated by certain agents such as toxins from the luminal side, whereas hormones or prostaglandins, which normally act from the basolateral membrane of enterocytes, do not significantly affect HCO 3 -transport in man in vivo.
Another marked difference between the effects of cholera toxin and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide or prostaglandins is that secretion stopped promptly after prostaglandin or vasoactive intestinal polypeptide infusion.
The latency of the response to cholera toxin as well as its prolonged effect depend on its mode of action as mentioned above.
In contrast with cholera toxin, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and prostaglandins are bound reversibly, and act only as long as their levels in plasma or in the intestinal lumen are raised.
In conclusion, our study shows a significant, dose dependent change from absorption to secretion of water and electrolytes in the human jejunum induced by cholera toxin.
This model is expected to lend itself to study the effectiveness of antisecretory agents in the human intestine.
Intracerebroventricular neuropeptide Y stimulates bile secretion via a vagal mechanism
Abstract
The effect of intracerebroventricular injection of neuropeptide Y on biliary secretion was studied in conscious dogs, prepared with gastric and duodenal fistulas and cerebroventricular guides.
Bile secretion was increased in a dose-dependent fashion by intracerebroventricular neuropeptide Y. The peak increase was seen after 500 pM/kg of neuropeptide Y which resulted in a 30.2% increase in bile flow over the period 30–150 minutes after injection.
(Control: 23.2 (1.2) ml/ 2 hours; neuropeptide Y 500 pM/kg: 30.5 (1.1) ml/2 hours).
Biliary lipid composition was not altered significantly but bicarbonate output was increased at all doses tested.
Intravenous infusion of neuropeptide Y (1000 pM) for 1 hour had no significant effect.
Intracerebroventricular neuropeptide Y (1000 pM/250–300 mg body weight) also increased bile flow in urethane-anaesthetised rats.
This effect was abolished by cervical vagotomy.
The demonstration of a central stimulation of alkaline bile flow suggests that bile secretion may be subject to central modulation.
Neuropeptide Y is a 36 amino acid polypeptide that was first isolated from the porcine brain in 1982.
It has been shown to be the most abundant neuropeptide in the central nervous system and is also widely distributed throughout the peripheral nervous system.
Neuropeptide Y has also been isolated from the gastrointestinal tract with large concentrations found in the biliary tree.
Because of its extensive tissue localisation, its effects on a variety of biological systems has been assessed.
Central administration of neuropeptide Y has been shown to affect diverse physiological functions and behaviours including cardiorespiratory, neuroendocrine, and reproductive control, and regulation of circadian rhythms, memory, and feeding behaviour.
Indeed, neuropeptide Y is the most potent central stimulant of feeding known.
In addition, intracerebroventricular injection of neuropeptide Y increases gastric acid and pancreatic secretion in dogs, and it has been suggested that it may mediate the cephalic phase secretory response to feeding.
Despite the fact that the liver has an extensive neural network, the importance of nervous regulation of hepatic function is poorly understood.
In particular, the capacity of central nervous system centres to influence liver function has not been evaluated.
However, the alterations in biliary secretion and composition that result from ablation of the peripheral innervation of the liver suggest that central neural stimuli may indeed modulate biliary secretion.
The cephalic phase response to feeding is one of the best recognised examples of modulation of the gut secretory function by the central nervous system.
Secretion of bile is not usually considered to be of much importance in this response since the gall bladder procides a mechanism for rapid delivery of bile into the duodenum at mealtime.
Nonetheless, some studies have suggested that there is an increase in bile secretion as part of the cephalic phase.
Since neuropeptide Y has been proposed as a mediator of the cephalic phase response this study was undertaken to examine the effect of intracerebroventricular administration of neuropeptide Y on bile flow in dogs.
Additional studies of the effect of vagotomy on neuropeptide Y induced changes inbile flow were performed in urethane anaesthetised rats.
Methods
PREPARATION OF EXPERIMENTAL DOG MODEL
Four healthy adult female mongrel dogs weighing 18–20 kg were housed in thermoregulated (23°C) cages (8×8×5 ft) with 12 hour light-dark cycles.
The dogs were fed canned dog food and had regular access to laboratory canine chow and water.
Dogs were deprived of food and had regular access to laboratory canine chow and water.
Dogs were deprived of food but not water for 18 hours before surgery and experiments.
The approval of the Animal Welfare Committee at the Durham VA Medical Center was obtained before all studies and care of animals conformed to the guidelines set out in the Guide for the care and use of laboratory animals .
After the induction of anaesthesia with sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg), a cerebroventricular guide was placed on the superior aspect of the skull to allow injection into the lateral ventricle as previously described.
Through a midline abdominal incision, a cholecystectomy was performed and the lesser pancreatic duct was ligated.
Thomas cannulas were then inserted into the duodenum, opposite the biliary papilla, and in a dependent part of the stomach and brought out through the anterior abdominal wall.
The animals were allowed a two week recovery period after surgery before experiments began.
EFFECT OF INTRACEREBROVENTRICULAR NEUROPEPTIDE Y INJECTION ON BILE FLOW IN THE DOG
These experiments were performed on conscious dogs supported by Pavlov harnesses.
The duodenal cannula was opened and the common bile duct cannulated with a 6 FG ureteric catheter via the ampulla of Vater.
Bile was then collected continuously in 15 minute samples.
Gastric acid was diverted into a large bore collection tube via the opened gastric cannula.
A intravenous infusion of 0.9% saline was then begun and after one hour was changed to an infusion of sodium taurocholate, 500 mg/hour (Calbiochem, La Jolla, CA, USA), which was maintained for the duration of the experiment.
This replaced bile acid loss from the enterohepatic circulation.
Bile flow was allowed to stabilise for two hours before intracerebroventricular injection of neuropeptide Y or control was given.
Intracerebroventricular injection was performed by passing a 1.5 in spinal needle through the cerebroventricular guide.
The appearance of clear cerebrospinal fluid in the needle hub confirmed correct placement of the needle in the lateral cerebral ventricle.
All injections were given as a 200 µl bolus of neuropeptide Y (Peninsula, Belmont, CA, USA) dissolved in sterile 0.9% saline containing 0.1% dog albumin (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) or the carrier alone as control.
After injection, bile was collected for a further three house.
Each experiment was performed in duplicate on each dog.
In addition, the biliary response to peripheral neuropeptide Y was assessed by monitoring the effect of intravenous infusion of 1000 pM/kg/hour neuropeptide Y on bile flow for one hour.
The animals were studied only twice weekly with a minimum interval of 48 hours between experiments.
To eliminate a local stimulatory effect of gastric acid on bile flow, dogs were pretreated with omeprazole 20 mg twice daily (Prilosec, MSD, West Point PA, USA) on the day before study.
The effectiveness of gastric acid suppression was tested in an independent study on the same dogs.
Gastric acid was collected at 15 minute intervals for one hour before and one hour after an intravenous injection of 6 µg/kg of pentagastrin (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA).
EFFECT OF BAGOTOMY ON BILIARY RESPONSE TO INTRACEREBROVENTRICULAR INJECTION OF NEUROPEPTIDE Y IN THE RAT
Male rats (250–300 g) were obtained from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA, USA).
After the induction of anaesthesia (urethane: 1.25 g/kg given intraperitoneally), ligation of the pylorus was performed, and a cannula inserted into the stomach to divert gastric secretion.
A femoral vein and the common bile duct were cannulated with PE-50 tubing.
A cervical vagotomy was performed through a midline neck incision and a tracheostomy tube was inserted at the same time.
Bile was collected at 15 minute intervals.
Bile salt loss was replaced by an infusion of 0.1 mg/kg/minute of sodium taurocholate dissolved in 0.9% saline via the femoral line.
After collecting baseline samples for two hours, injection of neuropeptide Y (1000 pM in 10 µl 0.1% albumin in saline) or control (10 µl 0.1% albumin in saline) into the lateral ventricle was performed using a stereotactic instrument (David Kopf Instruments, Tijunga, CA, USA)(coordinates: AP, 1.5 mm; Lat, 2 mm; DV, 3.4 mm).
Bile flow was collected for two hours after intraventricular injection.
Four experimental groups were studied: neuropeptide Y alone, neuropeptide Y and vagotomy, control injection alone, and control injection and vagotomy.
The correct placement of the intracerebroventricular injection was confirmed by injection of dye at the same coordinates after completion of study and subsequent localisation of dye in the ventricle on brain sectioning.
BIOCHEMICAL ANALYSES
Bile acid concentrations were determined by an enzymatic assay using 3-alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase with sodium taurocholate as the standard.
Phospholipid concentrations were determined by enzymatic reaction with phospholipase D (Wako, Osaka, Japan) and subsequent determination of free choline using colorimetry.
Total cholesterol content of bile was determined by quantitative enzymatic analysis by the method of Allain et al , using cholesterol reagent supplied by Sigma.
Gastric acid and biliary bicarbonate concentration were determined by titration and back-titration respectively to pH 7.0 using 0.1 M NaOH.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical comparison was by one way analysis of variance followed by comparison between groups by Fisher's least significant difference in all experiments.
In experiments performed on dogs, each animal served as its own control.
All values are expressed as mean (SEM).
A p value of less than 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
INHIBITION OF GASTRIC ACID SECRETION BY OMEPRAZOLE
Omeprazole effectively suppressed the gastric acid response to pentagastrin.
The mean (SEM) gastric acid outputs the hour before and the hour after pentagastrin administration were 0.54 (0.14) mmol/15 minutes and 0.59 (0.09) mmol/ 15 minutes respectively.
EFFECT OF NEUROPEPTIDE Y ON BILE FLOW IN DOG
Intracerebroventricular neuropeptide Y caused a dose-dependent increase in hepatic bile secretion.
At the highest dose examined (500 pM/kg), it resulted in a 30.2% increase in bile output over the period 30–150 minutes after injection when compared with control (control: 23.2 (1.2) ml/2 hours; neuropeptide Y: 30.6 (1.1) ml/2 hours)(Fig 1).
Cholesterol, bile acids, and phospholipid output concentrations were not significantly altered.
The biliary bicarbonate concentration increased significantly in all doses examined but not in a dose-dependent fashion (Table).
Intravenous infusion of neuropeptide Y (1000 pM/kg) for one hour did not significantly affect bile flow (before infusion: 10.87 ml/hour, during neuropeptide Y infusion: 10.33 ml/hour).
No significant changes in biliary bicarbonate or lipid composition were observed during peripheral infusion of neuropeptide Y.
EFFECT OF VAGOTOMY ON NEUROPEPTIDE Y STIMULATED BILE FLOW IN THE RAT
In the rat, after injection of control, bile output was 1.36 (0.008) ml/90 minutes for the period 30 to 120 minutes after injection (Fig 2).
After injection of neuropeptide Y (1000 pmol/rat), bile output over the same time period was 1.54 (0.23) ml/90 minutes, which represents a 13.2% increase in bile flow (p).
Bilateral cervical vagotomy abolished this response (Fig 2).
Bile composition (bile acids, cholesterol, and phospholipids) was unaffected.
Discussion
This study shows a central stimulatory effect of neuropeptide Y on bile secretion that is mediated by the vagus nerve.
The observation of a less noticeable stimulatory response to neuropeptide Y in the rat than in the dog may be explained by the fact that these rats were anaesthetised with urethane which is known to cause release of somatostatin — a known universal inhibitor of gut secretions.
A further explanation could be that rats have a small ductular component of bile secretion which may have been the primary target of the observed response, as evidenced by the increase in biliary bicarbonate output observed in the canine studies.
Intravenous infusion of neuropeptide Y did not affect bile secretion suggesting that the choleretic effect of intracerebroventricular neuropeptide Y was not the result of peripheral leakage of the peptide across the blood brain barrier.
In addition, the effect was not secondary to secretin release caused by duodenal acidification as this was avoided by pretreatment with omeprazole and diversion of gastric secretions.
Despite the fact that there have been many reports describing the central effects of neuropeptides on gastric and pancreatic secretion, there has been only one previous report of the effects of a centrally acting peptide on biliary secretion.
In that study, Yao et al described the inhibitory effect of intracerebroventricular bombesin on biliary flow and bicarbonate secretion in the rat.
Several earlier studies had suggested the importance of vagal innervation in modulating bile formation.
Tanturi and Ivy provided the first convincing evidence for the choleretic action of the vagus by showing that stimulation of the distal end of the divided vagus caused increased secretion of bile.
In addition, if the contralateral vagus were also divided, stimulation of the proximal end of the divided vagus caused a decrease in bile flow.
These pioneering studies suggested that biliary secretion might be regulated by both vagal and non-vagal neural mechanisms.
More recent studies have shown that hepatic denervation causes significant changes in the biliary lipid composition.
Despite these and other reports the role of central neural regulation of hepatic secretory function remained poorly defined.
Centrally administered neuropeptide Y caused a dose-dependent increase in bile flow that was associated with an increase in biliary bicarbonate output.
Although, the increase in biliary bicarbonate was observed at all intracerebroventricular doses of neuropeptide Y, no dose-related response of bilary bicarbonate was shown, presumably because of the inherent variability in normal bile bicarbonate concentration.
Neuropeptide Y has also been reported to increase substantially gastric acid and pancreatic exocrine secretion.
In the case of pancreatic secretion, stimulation of bicarbonate but not protein output was observed.
This apparently selective effect on alkaline pancreatic secretion is similar to the specific effect of intracerebroventricular neuropeptide Y on the biliary bicarbonate observed in these studies.
Alkaline bile secretion is known to contribute significantly to duodenal protection against acid injury to a similar (if not greater) degree than pancreatic secretion and stimulation of biliary bicarbonate secretion during or before feeding would seem to be of physiological benefit.
The finding by Fritz and Brooks that vagotomy abolishes the choleretic response to feeding in cholecystectomised dogs suggests that, at least as regards the digestive function of bile, neural regulation of biliary secretion may be of greater functional importance than is generally acknowledged.
Powell demonstrated, in dogs with oesophageal fistulas, that sham feeding causes a hydrocholeresis, showing that there is a cephalic phase of bile secretion, albeit a relatively small one.
That the choleretic response to feeding is abolished by vagotomy suggests that this secretory event may possibly be mediated by a long vago-vagal reflex (similar to the increased production of gastric acid secondary to gastric distension), or that it may be a true cephalic phase event.
If the choleretic response to feeding is mediated by a vago-bagal reflex, then it is likely that it relays in the solitary tract nucleus in the brainstem, which is the first relay nucleus for all afferent bisceral sensation.
This nucleus contains neuropeptide Y receptors and it is potentially one site at which neuropeptide Y given intraventricularily may have bound to produce the effects observed in these studies.
Alternatively, neuropeptide Y may have produced its choleretic effect by binding at a hypothelamic level, where neuropeptide Y receptors are also plentiful.
However, a direct vasomotor effect of central neuropeptide Y on the nepatic artery vasculature, resulting in increased blood flow, cannot be ruled out entirely and may indeed be the mechanism causing the observed effect on biliary secretion in dogs where the arterial component to blood flow is significant as opposed to rats.
Because of its effects on feeding, and gastric and pancreatic secretion, it has been suggested that neuropeptide Y is a mediator of the cephalic phase secretory response to feeding.
The site of neuropeptide Y's action on feeding seems to be in the hypothalamus, and it is likely that the cephalic phase response is also integrated at this level.
The effect on bile secretion seen after intracerebroventricular injection of neuropeptide Y in these studies may therefore be the result of neuropeptide Y binding to receptors that are responsible for releasing cephalic phase secretion.
Although nerve fibres are abundant in the liver, particularly in the portal triads, their metabolic importance remains obscure.
Central nervous system regulation of hepatic function may provide a mechanism by which bile production is integrated with other metabolic activities particularly, digestive functions.
Central neuropeptide Y release may be the primary stimulus for an integrated feeding response that includes the secretion of alkaline bile.
Distribution of macrophages and granulocytes expressing L1 protein (calprotectin) in human Peyer's patches compared with normal ileal lamina propria and mesenteric lymph nodes
Abstract
Antibodies to the cytosolic leucocyte L1 protein (or calprotectin) were examined for reactivity with macrophages, neutrophils, and eosinophils identified by paired immunofluorescence staining in sections of normal human ileal mucosa, including Peyer's patches.
Macrophages were recognised by expression of the myelomonocytic antigen CD68 (monoclonal antibody KP1).
Neutrophilic granulocytes were identified by their content of neutrophil elastase, and eosinophilic granulocytes by monoclonal antibody EG2.
Virtually all CD68 macrophages in normal lamina propria and Peyer's patches were L1 and the same was true for most extravasated macrophages in normal peripheral lymph nodes.
Some mesenteric lymph nodes, however, and all peripheral lymph nodes with overt pathological processes (malignant lymphoma) contained many CD68 macrophages.
Numerous L1 cells were also localised to the crypt region and to some extent beneath the villous epithelium in normal lamina propria, but they were mainly identified as EG2 eosinophils.
Such cells were remarkably scarce or absent beneath the follicle associated epithelium in the dome region of Peyer's patches, where CD68 macrophages were abundant.
Also subepithelial and interfollicular CD68 interdigitating dendritic cells in Peyer's patches (recognised by antibody to S-100 protein) were usually unreactive with L1 antibody.
The L1 protein shows a broad spectrum of antimicrobial activities in vitro, and its putative anti-proliferative properties are interesting in relation to the immunosuppression postulated to take place in lamina propria.
The virtual absence of L1 producing cells beneath the follicle associated epithelium in Peyer's patches may induce the immunostimulatory function of these macrophage rich structures, which are held to be crucial for induction of specific mucosal immunity.
The immune system has evolved to defend the individual against a diverse array of micro-organisms.
Apart from the physical protection afforded by the surface epithelium, the innate defence system includes primarily monocytes/ macrophages, neutrophilic and eosinophilic granulocytes, and natural killer cells along with various anti-microbial factors produced by all these cell types.
Specificity and memory are properties of the adaptive immune system, depending on B and T lymphocytes acting with accessory cells.
The monocyte/macrophage cell lineage is remarkably heterogenous, including classic macrophages and various dendritic antigen presenting cells.
They originate from pluripotent bone marrow stem cells and migrate through peripheral blood to tissues and body cavities where they differentiate into specialised cells showing great diversity of phenotopic and functional characteristics.
After emigration, mononuclear phagocytes may remain as immobile tissue macrophages for several months until they are stimulated or activated.
It remains uncertain whether the precursors of different dendritic cells are found among the peripheral blood monocytes or represent a discrete circulating cell type.
By the time the dendritic cells appear in peripheral lymph, however, they have become irreversibly differentiated and may terminate as interdigitating dendritic cells in T cell zones of organised lymphoid tissue.
Interdigitating dendritic cells are characterised by a highly irregular surface, strong constitutive expression of major histocompatibility complex class II molecules, and low phagocytic ability.
Interdigitating dendritic cells are therefore believed to function primarily as antigen presenting cells, although they are often included in the generic term ‘macrophages’.
Previous studies of the distribution and nature of macrophages in human intestinal mucosa and Peyer's patches have shown a bewildering heterogeneity, probably reflecting both developmental and functional overlaps (see Disussion).
The formalin resistant myelomonocytic L1 antigen detected by polyclonal (reviewed in ref 5) and monoclonal antibodies has previously been proposed as a marker for reactive macrophages and certain monocyte derived histocytoses.
Because of the interesting anti-microbial and anti-proliferative properties of this cytosolic protein, which is also called calprotectin, we decided to examine its distribution in macrophages and granulocytes of the normal human gut, focusing on ileal mucosa and Peyer's patches.
Virtually all peripheral blood monocytes and neutrophilic granulocytes are L1 positive.
Conversely, circulating eosinophils have been shown to be negative, whereas they apparently may express L1 after extravasation into inflamed tissue.
It has been reported that there is very little overlap between major histocompatibility complex class II (HLA-DR) and L1 expressing lamina propria cells in normal human gut mucosa but the nature of those producing L1 at this site has not been determined.
L1 expression was therefore in this study related to the distribution of various other cell markers identifying macrophages (CD68), neutrophils (neutrophil elastase), and eosinophils (eosinophil cationic protein) by two or three colour immunofluorescence staining in situ.
For comparison, similar marker studies were performed on sections of peripheral and mesenteric lymph nodes.
Methods
COLLECTION AND PREPARATION OF TISSUE SPECIMENS
Specimens of distal ileal mucosa containing Peyer's patches identified macroscopically, and mesenteric lymph nodes, were obtained from seven organ donors with maintained peripheral circulation (age 10–47 years) and from one patient (age 57 years) with cancer of the ascending colon.
Additional ileal biopsy specimens from eight patients (age 15–78 years) and eight peripheral lymph nodes removed for diagnostic purposes were included.
Histological examination of the material showed normal mucosa with frequent appearance of secondary (activated) lymphoid follicles in Peyer's patches.
Slight reactive changes were seen in the lymph nodes, dominated by follicular hyperplasia in the peripheral and sinus histiocytosis in the mesenteric ones.
Peripheral lymph nodes with high grade malignant non-Hodgkin's B cell lymphoma (n=4) were also included.
The specimens from the organ donors were immediately placed in ice cold isotonic saline.
Small tissue blocks of Peyer's patches and the surrounding mucosa at some distance were excised as soon as possible (less than two hours) after collection, and were fixed in cold ethanol (96%) and then embedded in low melting paraffin wax.
Additional specimens were fixed in buffered formalin (10%, pH 7.4) at room temperature for 48 to 72 hours before routine paraffin embedding.
Serial sections were cut at 4–6 µm perpendicular to the mucosal surface.
After dewaxing, one section from each series was stained with haematoxylin and eosin for histological evaluation; the remainder were subjected to paired immunohistochemical staining (see below).
Sections of formalin fixed tissue were pretreated with trypsin (1.0 g/l) for 10–15 minutes at 37°C before application of the primary antibodies.
Sections of ethanol fixed tissue were prefixed in periodate lysine (2%) paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes at 4°C and briefly washed in isotonic phosphate buffered saline (pH 7.5) before use.
TWO AND THREE COLOUR IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE STAINING
Table I lists the different monoclonal and polyclonal primary antibody reagents as well as the secondary reagents.
In paired stainings (Table II) the reaction sites of monoclonal antibody to CD68, HLA-DR, eosinophil cationic protein, or L1 discovered by a three step method employing biotinylated horse anti-mouse IgG and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) labelled Streptavidin.
The first step also included tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC) labelled rabbit anti-L1 or unlabelled rabbit anti-S-100 protein whose red signal was achieved in the last incubation step by means of TRITC labelled anti-rabbit IgG.
For paired staining of CD68 and HLA-DR the first marker was seen by biotinylated goat anti-mouse IgG1 and Streptavidin Texas Red, and the second by FITC conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG2a (Table I).
The gut epithelium could in this combination be delineated by costaining for cytokeratin with a primary rabbit anteserum followed by 7-amino-4-methylcoumarin-3-acetic acid (AMCA) conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Table I).
To discriminate clearly between various L1 containing cell types in the same section, five step three colour staining was performed as follows:(a) monoclonal antibody to either eosinophil cationic protein or neutrophil elastase or a mix of both was first applied;(b) biotinylated horse anti-mouse IgG;(c) mix of FITC-labelled Streptavidin, monoclonal antibody to CD68, and unconjugated antiserum to L1;(d) biotinylated horse anti-mouse IgG; and (e) AMCA-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG mixed with Streptavidin Texas Red.
Eosinophils (EG + ) or neutrophils (elastase + ) or both (EG2 + and elastase + ) stained green, macrophages (CD68 + ) red, and L1 + cells blue (see Fig 3 below).
Expression of L1 could therefore be related to each phenotype, allowing in particular CD68 + macrophages to be distinguished from neutrophils expressing this marker.
Reagents were appropriately diluted (Table I) in phosphate buffered solution containing bovine serum albumin at 125 g/l, and all incubations of the primary antibodies took place for 20 hours at room temperature.
Biotinylated anti-mouse IgG and Streptavidin were applied for three hours or 30 minutes, respectively, whereas the subclass specific goat anti-mouse IgG conjugates were applied for 12 hours.
Negative controls were obtained by omitting or exchanging the primary antibodies.
To ensure that conjugates were not non-specifically bound to eosinophils, control sections were treated with 1% chromotrope 2 R.
After a final wash in phosphate buffered solution (10–15 minutes), all sections were briefly rinsed in deionised water, air dried, and mounted in buffered (pH 8) polyvinyl alcohol.
IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE COMBINED WITH CYTOCHEMISTRY
Monoclonal anti-CD68 or anti-L1 was applied for 20 hours on ethanol fixed sections, and both markers were visualised as described above with FITC fluorescence.
For costaining of acid phosphatase the sections were thereafter incubated for one hour at 37°C in the following substrate solution: 2 ml Naphthol AS-MX Phosphate acid (Sigma 388-B), 2 ml 2.5 M acetate buffer (pH 5.2), 46 ml distilled water, and Fast Garnet GBC, 15 mg per 50 ml (Sigma F-6504).
FLUORSCENCE MICROSCOPY AND HISTOMORPHOMETRY
The tissue sections were examined in a Leitz Orthoplan fluorescence microscope equipped with a Ploem-type epi-illuminator, an ×25 Leitz immersion objective, and an ×10 ocular.
The filter system facilitated repeated study of individual cells with regard to fluorescein (green), rhodamine or acid phosphatase (red), and AMCA (blue) emission.
The spatial relation between the two or three colours was further evaluated in double or triple exposed colour slides taken on Kodak Ektachrome 800 ASA daylight film (see Figs 1–3).
An ocular grid (Leitz code No. 519902), to count the fluorescent gut cells, was moved systematically along the villous epithelium and the typical flattened goblet cell depleted follicle associated epithelium of Peyer's patches domes.
By permitting one side of the frame to touch the basement membrane, the subepithelial zone was divided into areas of 0.008 mm, which usually included the whole lamina propria of the villi and the so called‘mixed cell zone’ of the Peyer's patches domes.
Cells expressing L1 within each grid and in the corresponding epithelial layer were counted in relation to the CD68 marker.
In such enumerations, CD68 negative eosinophils as well as CD68 positive macrophages could generally be distinguished from neutrophils (which showed much brighter staining for L1 than the macrophages).
Preliminary counts suggested that only about 5% of the L1 posiutive cells in the lamina propria were neutrophils, a finding supported by staining for chloroactate esterase in the same sections.
Results
CD68 + macrophages in the ileal lamina propria were deemed to coexpress L1 quite rarely (about 0.5%).
Most L1 + cells at this site were this taken to represent granulocytes, which was supported by the fact that the CD68 + L1 -cells showed a much stronger reaction for acid phosphatase than those expressing L1 in all ethanol fixed specimens examined.
Acid phosphatase was also expressed apically on the epithelium, which served as an inherent control.
CD68 + macrophages were on the whole slightly more numerous than L1 + granulocytes in formalin fixed tissue (Table III).
In preliminary counts on ethanol fixed sections (n=8) the values were somewhat reversed (56% v 44%), probably because of L1 leaching when cross linking fixative was omitted.
The L1 + granulocytes were often quite numerous at the base of the villi and in the crypt area (Fig 1A), while CD68 + macrophages were relatively predominant near the tips of the villi (Fig 2A).
The few positive intraepithelial cells seen in the villus epithelium after costaining for CD68 and L1 were usually granulocytes; less than 10% were CD68 + L1 -macrophages (six of a total of 64 evaluated cells).
Relatively few L1 + cells were seen in the dome area of Peyer's patches (defined as the zone beneath the typical flattened follicle associated epithelium containing few or no goblet cells); and they were totally absent in the germinal centres of Peyer's patches (Fig 1A), as previously seen in other lymphoid tissues.
Conversely, CD68 + L1 -macrophages abounded in the dome area (Fig 2B and Table IV), and such large cells were also frequently seen in the germinal centres where they apparently represented tingible body macrophages.
In the lamina propria about 90% of the L1 + cells taken to be granulocytes were by specific marker eosinophil cationic protein shown to be eosinophilic granulocytes (median number of EG2 + cells examined per specimen: 120, range 9–225; n=7).
In fact, no L1 -eosinophils were seen in the lamina propria (Fig 1B) by contrast with lymph nodes where some such cells apparently lacked this protein (see below).
The density of both L1 + cells (Table IV) and EG2 + cells (Table V) was on average seven times higher in the ileal villi than in the Peyer's patches domes.
Also most of the CD68 + macrophages occurring in the fairly normal peripheral lymph nodes lacked L1.
In some of the mesenteric lymph node specimens, however, many macrophages were CD68 + L1 + , perhaps because of the comparatively increased traffic of mononuclear cells as suggested by comparatively pronounced sinus histiocytosis; on average, 50% of all L1 + cells without granulocyte markers expressed CD68 in these nodes (Fig 3A, Table VI).
Also, CD68 + smaller round cells considered to be monocytes often developed intravascularly in ileal lamina propria and lymph node pulpa as well as in marginal sinuses.
By contrast with the normal situation, most CD68 + macrophages (70–90%) infiltrating areas of lymph nodes occupied by malignant B cells expressed L1 (Fig 2B).
These tumour areas contained only scattered L1 + granulocytes and some of the eosinophils (0- 20%) seemed to lack L1.
The abundant subepithelial and intrafollicular CD68 + macrophages seen in Peyer's patches were all HLA-DR positive (Fig 2B), as were the S-100 protein + interdigitating dendritic cells sometimes found beneath the follicle associated epithelium (Fig 1A).
Conversely, most L1 + cells both in Peyer's patches and lamina propria did not express HLA-DR; only 1% (range 0–8.9%) of these cells were DR + (median number of L1 + cells evaluated per ethanol fixed ileal specimen: 115, range 75–201; n=8).
This implied that eosinophils in normal gut mucosa generally do not express class II molecules, which was directly confirmed by paired staining for eosinophil cationic protein (EG2) and HLA-DR (median number of EG2 + cells examined: 101, range 64–280, n=4) in which only four double positive cells were found.
Most S-100 protein + interdigitating dendritic cells were clustered in the interfollicular zones of Peyer's patches.
Also at this site they were CD68 -L1 -but expressed strongly HLA-DR.
Only four S-100 protein + cells in eight double stained formalin fixed sections seemed to express CD68 and two L1 (median 65, respectively 73, S-100 protein + cells were examined).
A few S-100 protein + , comparatively large elements (deemed not to be nerve fibres) were seen scattered or as small clusters in the villous lamina propria (Fig 1A).
Follicle associated epithelium and villous epithelium showed apical expression of CD68, apparently related to the brush border in a granular pattern completely congruent with that of HLA-DR (Fig 2A).
Because the CD68 antigen is derived from lysosomes, this finding is in agreement with the fact that lysosomal proteins may be subjected to apical transport, thus reaching the microvilli of polarised cells.
Discussion
The M r approximately 36.5 K myelomonocytic L1 protein complex belongs to the S-100 protein family and may play a part in the regulation of cellular proliferation and differentiation.
Its two chains (L1 L and L1 H ) are regrettably referred to by a bewildering collection of names, various authors having different preferences (MRP-8 and MRP-14; p8, p14; CFA or calgranulin A and B).
The most recent proposal is calprotectin because of L1's calcium binding properties and its anti-microbial effects shown in vitro.
In this study we examined expression of L1 by macrophage subpopulations in the normal distal ileum using CD68 and S-100 protein as cell markers.
Similar examinations were performed in reactive lymph nodes for comparison, because previous studies have shown striking expression of L1 by macrophages infiltrating pathological processes.
In the normal ileum, however, we found that virtually all CD68 + macrophages and (not unexpectedly) S-100 protein + dendritic cells lacked this protein.
Lamina propria macrophages thus show remarkably downregulated L1 production in the normal state.
The usual course for mononuclear cells after extravasation is in fact to lose functional capacity; resident macrophages in normal tissues are therefore in some aspects less differentiated than monocytes, but they may nevertheless be more active in other instances.
Macrophage heterogeneity is indeed quite common, even within a single lymphoid organ.
Monoclonal antibodies have greatly helped to dissect such subpopulations, but the results are often inconclusive because of overlapping reactivity and lack of related functional information.
Available information about the distribution of various macrophage subsets in the human gut (Table VII) has mostly been based on single immunohistochemical staining in serial tissue sections, rendering evaluation of multiple marker expression difficult or impossible.
The monoclonal antibodies 25F9 and RFD7 bind to mature human tissue macrophages whereas RFD1 identifies interdigitating dendritic cells.
Interestingly, in normal colonic lamina propria most cells (87%) recognised by these reagents seem to be positive for all three markers and can apparently function both as phagocytes and antigen presenting cells.
By contrast, antibody RFD7 does not react with macrophages in the dome region or germinal centres of Peyer's patches, while antibodies EBM11 and Y1/82 directed against CD68, have been found to detect most intestinal macrophages.
This also includes the two latter tissue sites, which is in keeping with our findings based on antibody KP1.
It is quite possible that co-operation between various macrophage subsets takes place in Peyer's patches.
Wright et al reported that particular antigens, after initial phagocytosis, may be reprocessed for presentation to T cells, and Guides et al proposed a functional complementation between mononuclear phagocytes and interdigitating dendritic cells.
The first subpopulation may thus provide processed antigens in a form more suitable for presentation by dendritic cells lacking acid phosphatase, whereas the second (with strong constitutive class II expression) may present very efficiently antigenic peptides to CD4 + T cells.
Perhaps such a dichotomy exists between the CD68 + and S-100 protein + cell populations in Peyer's patches.
A particular difference between murine class II-expressing macrophages and interdigitating dendritic cells seems to be that only the second subset is capable of triggering resting T cells, whereas the first needs primed T cells to induce immune responses.
Formation of clusters with unprimed T cells has thus been shown to be a functional feature of dendritic cells; this may explain the striking appearance of S-100 protein + cells in Peyer's patches, which are considered important sites for induction of primary immune responses.
The exact activation state of normal lamina propria macrophages is currently unknown, but the lack of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (CD54) may restrict their function in antigen presentation especially to unprimed CD4 + T cells despite being pan-class II-positive.
With regard to their lack of L1, this feature is shared with resident macrophages in many other normal tissues such as tonsils, peripheral lymph nodes, thymus, spleen, and liver.
We have recently found that in inflammatory bowel disease, large numbers of CD68 + L1 + mononuclear cells develop in the affected gut mucosa.
They most likely represent recently emigrated monocytes and may thus turn out to be highly responsive young ‘inflammatory macrophages’.
It is currently unknown, however, whether this subset belongs to the same functional category as the CD68 + L1 + mononuclear cells infiltrating malignant lymph node processes and often developing in normal (reactive) mesenteric lymph nodes.
Further studies are also required to evaluate any disparity in their expression of the two L1 chains.
These peptides are complexed in both neutrophils and monocytes, but recently extravasated mononuclear cells have been claimed to express only the L H chain in acute inflammation — contrasting with chronic inflammatory conditions in which macrophages often are found to express both chains.
One hypothesis is thus that lack of L1 L downregulation might reflect failure of monocyte differentiation to macrophages in chronic inflammation.
More work is needed, however, to clarify such putative differential regulation of the two L1 chains; possible immunohistochemical artifacts cannot be discounted because quite contrasting results have been reported with regard to expression of the two chains in immune granulomas.
Our results show that eosinophilic granulocytes are the main cellular source of L1 in the normal gut.
Circulating eosinophils have been reported to be negative for L1 and they apparently show only variable positivity in inflamed tissue.
It is remarkable, therefore, that in normal ileal mucosa these cells all express L1.
As well as its anti-microbial activities, an anti-proliferative function has recently been shown for L1 and tentatively ascribed to its inhibition of casein kinase II.
Such a putative immunosuppressive effect of L1 might accord with the intestinal distribution seen of the L1 + eosinophils: they are localised mainly in the lamina propria where a downregulating effect on lymphocyte proliferation would be beneficial to dampen immune responses to food antigens, but they are virtually absent beneath the follicle associated epithelium of Peyer's patches where adequate immunostimulation to potentially pathogenic antigens is desirable.
Interestingly, L1 may share an immunoregulatory function with another eosinophil product, eosinophil cationic protein, which has been shown to inhibit the proliferation of human T and B cells and also the immunoglobulin production of plasma cell lines in vitro.
This inhibition can be reversed by IL-6, a cytokine which has been implicated as a positive factor for mucosal IgA production.
In vitro experiments have suggested that secretory IgA is a very potent activator of eosinophils as measured by degranulation, being two to three times more potent than monomeric IgA.
Locally produced polymeric IgA antibodies may therefore be the principal immune stimulator of eosinophil effector functions at mucosal surfaces, both in protective and tissue destructive situations.
Much more work is required, however, to clarify possible immunoregulatory and immunopathological interactions between eosinophils and the mucosal IgA system in the human gut.
Immunohistochemical analysis of mucosal gamma-interferon production in coeliac disease
Abstract
The role of γ-interferon in the pathogenesis of enteropathies with an immunological basis such as coeliac disease, is unclear.
γ-interferon immunoreactive lymphocytes was quantified in jejunal biopsies from patients with coeliac disease and from normal controls.
In coeliac disease, there was an apparent decrease in the percentage of both intraepithelial (3.5% v 13.5%) and lamina propria (10.3% v 47.2%) lymphocytes expressing γ-interferon compared with controls.
In patients successfully treated with a gluten free diet, the percentage of γ-interferon immunoreactive intra-epithelial lymphocytes was 10.3%.
Intraepithelial lymphocytes were immunonegative for class II major histocompatibility complex, while epithelial cells showed increased expression of this product in coeliac disease.
The results show that a relatively large proportion of lymphocytes in normal small bowel express γ-interferon.
They also indicate that in coeliac disease the major increase in the numbers of mucosal lymphocytes is the result of infiltration by lymphocytes not expressing γ-interferon.
Gamma-interferon plays a critical role in protective immune responses because of its ability to stimulate the effector functions of several non-specific cells such as macrophages and natural killer cells, and to enhance the expression of class II major histocompatibility complex antigens on antigen presenting cells and other tissue cells.
γ-interferon has also been shown to modulate the proliferation and function of tissue cells from a variety of organs, including thyroid, pancreas, brain bone, and kidney.
Therefore, this T lymphocyte product has been implicated as an important mediator of pathology in a variety of autoimmune and inflammatory conditions.
Gamma-interferon may play a similar role in enteropathies with an immunological basis such as coeliac disease, and this has been supported by several recent findings.
Enhanced expression of class II major histocompatibility complex antigens is a characteristic feature of coeliac disease and γ-interferon is a potent inducer of major histocompatibility complex expression by human enterocytes in vitro.
Furthermore, the similar form of enteropathy which occurs during a graft- versus -host reaction in experimental animals can be prevented by in vivo administration of anti γ-interferon monoclonal antibodies.
There is no direct evidence, however, that γ-interferon plays a pathogenetic role in clinical enteropathy.
In addition, it is not known whether γ-interferon producing cells are present within the intestinal mucosa or if the production of γ-interferon correlates with pathological changes in the epithelium.
In this report, we have attempted to define the role of γ-interferon in intestinal immunopathology by enumerating γ-interferon producing lymphocytes in paraffin embedded sections of normal and coeliac disease intestine using an immunohistochemical technique.
In parallel, we have correlated the number of γ-interferon secreting cells with the epithelial expression of class II major histocompatibility complex antigens and have examined the effects of treatment with a gluten free diet.
Methods
JEJUNAL BIOPSIES
Formol saline fixed, paraffin embedded Crosby capsule jejunal biopsy specimens were collected by reviewing the archives of the Royal Infirmary Pathology Department over a five year period.
Thirty six biopsy specimens from 34 adult patients with coeliac disease were retrieved and these were classified into four groups as described below and in the Table.
Group 1 comprised biopsies from patients with untreated coeliac disease (n=19).
Group 2 comprised biopsies from patients previously diagnosed as having coeliac disease.
The biopsies studied in this group showed no histological improvement despite the patients claiming to adhere strictly to the gluten free diet (eight).
Group 3 comprised biopsies from patients previously diagnosed as having coeliac disease who admitted not adhering to a gluten free diet.
These biopsies (two) showed no histological improvement.
Group 4 comprised follow up of histologically normal biopsy specimens from five patients, previously diagnosed as having coeliac disease, who had strictly adhered to a gluten free diet.
The interval between the initial diagnosis of coeliac disease and subsequent jejunal biopsies (Groups 2, 3, and 4) varied between three and 12 months (average seven months).
An additional 32 biopsies from adults investigated for diarrhoea but with a normal jejunal mucosa on histology were selected as controls.
The age and sex distribution of all patients are details in the Table.
STAINING TECHNIQUES
Five micron serial sections were cut from the tissue blocks and placed on 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane coated slides.
The first serial section from each block was stained by haematoxylin and eosin.
Subsequent sections were stained by indirect immunoperoxidase techniques using overnight incubation at 4°C of the following primary antisera:(1) mouse monoclonal antileucocyte common antigen (CD45 Dako, High Wycombe, UK), was used to identify total lymphocyte numbers;(2) rabbit antihuman class II major histocompatibility complex (a gift from Dr J J Neefjes, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and (3) sheep antihuman interferon-gamma (a gift from Dr K Cantell, Helsinki, Finland).
The rabbit antibody to class II major histocompatibility complex was used at a dilution of 1:100, while the sheep anti interferon-gamma antiserum was absorbed twice with a 1:1 mixture of porcine and guinea pig liver powders (Sigma, Dorset, UK) before being used on sections at a dilution of 1:100.
Normal tonsil and inflamed nasal polyps were used as positive controls for class II major histocompatibility complex and interferon-gamma staining respectively.
Details of these techniques have been given previously.
The antibody to γ-interferon was raised to highly purified natural human γ-interferon and had a neutralising titre against γ-interferon of 1:10000 but had no detectable activity against human alpha or beta interferons.
As negative controls, additional sections were stained with appropriately diluted normal rabbit or sheep sera.
The following secondary antisera were used in the indirect techniques: peroxidase conjugated swine antirabbit immunoglobulin (dilution 1:50, Dako, High Wycombe, UK), peroxidase conjugated swine antisheep immunoglobulins (dilution 1:100, Serotec, Oxford, UK) and peroxidase conjugated rabbit anti mouse immunoglobulins (dilution 1:50, Dako).
Diaminobenzidine was used as substrate in the techniques.
ENUMBERATION OF POSITIVELY STAINED CELLS
Quantification of cells expressing CD45 or γ-interferon was achieved by using an eye piece graticule in a laborlux microscope (Leitz) under ×400 magnification.
The number of positive intra-epithelial lymphocytes was counted per unit length of epithelium (0.19 mm) and the number of positive lymphocytes within the lamina propria was counted per unit area (0.0025 mm).
In each case, the numbers of γ-interferon positive cells were expressed both per unit length (or area) and as a percentage of the total number of CD45+ cells.
The extent and intensity of class II major histocompatibility complex staining of epithelial cells was assessed in both surface epithelium and crypt epithelium.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The Mann-Whitney U-test was used to compare results for different groups.
Results
EXPRESSION OF CLASS II MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX ANTIGENS ON ENTROCYTES
Class II major histocompatibility complex antigen could be detected on the epithelial cells of all control cases.
This was usually at low concentrations and was found predominantly in the upper two-thirds of the villi, with crypt epithelial cells being entirely negative.
In coeliac disease, patients with abnormal histology have increased intensity of epithelial staining which in some cases now extended into the crypts.
In patients whose mucosa had returned to normal after a gluten free diet, the intensity and extent of class II major histocompatibility complex expression were similar to that seen in control biopsies.
GAMMA-INTERFERON EXPRESSING LYMPHOCYTES IN NORMAL MUCOSA
Gamma-interferon expressing cells which all had the morphology of small lymphocytes, were readily detected both in the lamina propria and epithelium of the normal controls (Fig 1).
Indeed, the median number of γ-interferon expressing cells in the lamina propria was almost half the total of leucocytes identified by the anti-CD45 antibody (range: 20–88%), while 13.5% of normal intraepithelial lymphocytes were positive for γ-interferon (range: 2–35%).
The staining was specific for γ-interferon as it could be blocked by preincubating the antibody with recombinant human γ-interferon.
GAMMA-INTERFERON EXPRESSION BY INFILTRATING LYMPHOCYTES IN COELIAC DISEASE
As anticipated, patients with untreated coeliac disease had an increased density of CD45+ intra epithelial lymphocytes compared with disease controls (although this did not reach statistical significance), as did patients on a gluten free diet with abnormal histology (Table).
The density of lamina propria lymphocytes was somewhat increased in most groups of coeliac patients, but this showed considerable variability and did not exhibit the same relationship to dietary status (Table).
Despite the increased total intra epithelial lymphocyte count, there was no corresponding increase in the absolute number of γ-interferon expressing intra epithelial lymphocytes in coeliac patients with abnormal histology (Table, Fig 2).
As a result, the proportion of intra epithelial lymphocytes which expressed γ-interferon was considerably reduced in these patients, compared with disease controls (Fig 3).
Although this did not attain statistical significance in individual groups, the proportion of γ-interferon expressing intra epithelial lymphocytes in untreated coeliacs was only 25% of the value found in normal mucosa and a similar reduction was found in other groups with mucosal pathology (Fig 3).
Furthermore, in those patients with resolution of pathology on a gluten free diet, the proportion of γ-interferon expressing intra epithelial lymphocytes returned towards normal concentrations, indicating a true disease related effect (Fig 2).
The proportion of γ-interferon expressing lymphocytes in the lamina propria of coeliac patients showed an identical pattern, with reduced levels (33%-43% of control values) in all groups of patients with abnormal histology and a return towards normal during a successful gluten free diet (Table, Fig 4).
Discussion
Our study is the first to enumerate γ-interferon producing cells in sections of human intestine and the results show that a remarkably large proportion of lymphocytes in the lamina propria and epithelium of normal small bowel mucosa contain γ-interferon.
As γ-interferon is produced primarily by activated T cells, these findings confirm other impressions that intestinal T lymphocytes are in a constant state of immune activation, with a large proportion of human mucosal T cells expressing memory cell markers associated with the capacity to produce large amounts of a range of different cytokines.
Our results contrast with recent reports which found few γ-interferon secreting cells in normal human intestinal mucosa, but this absence could reflect the effects of isolating mucosal lymphocytes.
In addition others have shown in mice that a high proportion of mucosal lymphocytes produce cytokines such as γ-interferon and interleukin 5 in vitro.
These findings support our own observations and it would be of interest to use immunohistochemistry to examine for the presence of other cytokines in the normal human mucosa.
We were unable to analyse the phenotype of the lymphocytes producing γ-interferon because the specimens had been fixed in formalin.
CD4+ T cells are normally held to be the principal source of this mediator and the higher proportion of γ-interferon producing cells we found among lamina propria lymphocytes compared with intra epithelial lymphocytes is consistent with the relative numbers of CD4+ T cells in these sites.
Nevertheless, CD8+ T cells from mouse intestine can produce significant amounts of γ-interferon in vitro, emphasising the need to determine the phenotype of γ-interferon producing lymphocytes directly.
Furthermore, direct confirmation is needed that the cytoplasmic γ-interferon we detected was being synthesised actively by these cells, using appropriate techniques to assess the presence of cytoplasmic mRNA.
An unexpected finding from our study was that, in untreated coeliac disease, the proportion of γ-interferon positive cells in the lamina propria and epithelium was reduced compared with normal mucosa.
This was despite the fact that out patients had the expected increases in intra epithelial lymphocyte count, as well as increased expression of epithelial class II major histocompatibility complex antigens.
The proportional reduction in γ-interferon production appeared to be truly disease related as the numbers of γ-interferon positive intra epithelial lymphocytes and lamina propria lymphocytes returned towards normal on a gluten free diet, in parallel with the improvement in mucosal pathology and in other indices of immunopathology.
In addition, all parameters remained abnormal in patients not adhering to their gluten free diet, or in whom villous atrophy had not resolved.
The reduced concentrations of γ-interferon were surprising in view of its involvement in other forms of immunopathology and of the recent finding that there is increased spontaneous production of γ-interferon by lamina propria cells in Crohn's disease.
There is also experimental evidence implicating γ-interferon in the epithelial manifestations of immunologically mediated eneteropathy, while coeliac disease is associated with the presence of increased numbers of activated T lymphocytes.
One possible reason for these findings is that increased synthesis of γ-interferon does occur in coeliac disease, but that this is accompanied by more rapid secretion from the cell.
As a result there could be a decrease in stainable immunoreactive product in the cell.
A similar phenomenon seems to occur in Crohn's disease, but direct confirmation of this idea would need examination of messenger ribonucleic acid concentrations.
We consider it more likely that increased numbers of non-γ-interferon producing lymphocytes infiltrate the mucosa in coeliac disease.
This is suggested by our observation that the absolute number of γ-interferon positive cells remains close to normal in coeliac disease but that the total number of intra epithelial lymphocytes and lamina propria lymphocytes is increased.
Therefore, it may be these additional lymphocytes which are responsible for the enteropathy of coeliac disease and γ-interferon may play no direct pathogenic role in this condition.
The nature of the lymphocytes which dilute out the interferon positive cells must remain speculative, but could reflect increased numbers of cells producing other cytokines which have a primary role in the mucosal damage.
Tumour necrosis factor α and α/; Β interferon are enteropathic in mice, while mucosal tumour necrosis factor α production is increased in Crohn's disease.
It would be of interest to use an immunohistochemical approach to examine the production of these and other mediators in coeliac disease.
Prevalence of oesophagitis in asthmatics
Abstract
The exact relation between gastro-oesophageal reflux and asthma remains poorly understood.
To determine whether gastro-oesophageal reflux in asthmatics results in oesophagitis, endoscopy and oesophageal biopsy were performed on 186 consecutive adult asthmatics.
The presence or absence of reflux symptoms was not used as a selection criterion for asthmatics.
Endoscopy was performed by two endoscopists using predefined criteria.
All asthmatics had discrete wheezing and either a previous diagnosis of asthma or documented reversible airways obstruction of at least 20%.
The oesophageal mucosa was graded as normal if no erosions or ulcerations were present in the tubular oesophagus; as oesophagitis if a mucosal break with exudate (erosions and/or ulcerations) was present; and as Barrett's if specialised (intestinal) columnar epithelium was present.
A hiatal hernia was diagnosed if 32 cm of gastric mucosa appeared above the diaphragm during endoscopy.
Thirty nine per cent of the patients with asthma and oesophagitis or Barrett's oesophagus, or both.
There was no difference in the oesophageal mucosal status between asthmatics who required and those who did not require bronchodilators.
Fifty eight per cent of asthmatics had a hiatal hernia.
We conclude that oesophagitis is common and independent of the use of bronchodilator therapy in asthmatics.
Gastro-oesophageal reflux (GOR) and asthma often co-exist.
Although their relationship remains poorly understood, one of cause and effect has been suggested by a number of authors.
Prolonged ambulatory pH monitoring has shown acid reflux in more than 80% of asthmatics.
This reflux does not seem to be a result of the use of bronchodilators.
In addition, asthmatics with or without bronchodilators have been shown to have diminished but similar lower oesophageal sphincter (LOS) pressures.
The purpose of this study was to determine by endoscopic examination the prevalence of oesophageal mucosal injury in asthmatics.
Patients
As part of a clinical research protocol on the relationship between GOR and asthma, 330 patients from the ‘drop-in’ clinic, pulmonary clinic, and general outpatient clinics were screened for asthma.
The presence or absence of GOR symptoms was not used as a selection criterion.
Of the 330 patients, 144 were excluded from analysis for the following reasons: asthma present, but referred for endoscopy because of gastrointestinal symptoms (56); chronic obstructive airways disease present rather than asthma (18); no asthma present (58); and declined offer to have endoscopy (12).
The remaining 186 asthmatics, whose primary diagnosis was asthma, represent a group of patients recruited from the outpatient, ‘drop-in,’ pulmonary, and non-gastrointestinal clinics.
Thus, of the 198 asthmatics who qualified as ‘consecutive and unselected,’ 12 (6%) declined and 186 (94%) consented to have endoscopy.
We previously reported th oesophageal pH test results in 104 of the 186 asthmatics in this group.
This study reports the endoscopic findings in the 186 consecutive, unselected asthmatics.
GROUP I: ASTHMATICS WHO RECEIVED CHRONIC BRONCHODILATOR THERAPY
One hundred and forty asthmatics (134 men and six women; age range 21–76 years, mean (SEM) 54 (1.1) years) were studied while taking their usual combinations of theophylline, trbutaline, inhalants, and prednisone.
GROUP II: ASTHMATICS WHO DID NOT RECEIVE CHRONIC PULMONARY MEDICATION
Forty six asthmatics (44 men and two women; age range 27–70 years, mean (SEM) 49 (2.0) years) were studied while receiving no bronchodilator medication.
Although these patients may have used bronchodilators intermittently in the past for control of asthma, none required them during the week before endoscopy.
Methods
DOCUMENTATION OF ASTHMA
Asthma was defined as discrete episodes of wheezing and either a previous diagnosis of asthma or documented reversible airway obstruction as determined by a 20% improvement in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV 1 ) after bronchodilator administration or a 20% decrease in FEV 1 after methacholine bronchoprovocation, performed in accordance with the American Thoracic Society guidelines.
A patient was considered to have a previous diagnosis of asthma if they were enrolled in the pulmonary clinic with the diagnosis of asthma, were receiving chronic bronchodilator therapy, and had a FEV 1 of not less than 1.5 litres.
ENDOSCOPY
All endoscopies were performed by either of two endoscopists using predefined criteria.
Tissue was obtained under direct vision from the squamocolumnar jucntion to establish the presence or absence of Barrett's oesophagus.
The oesophageal mucosa was scored from grade 1 to 4 based on the endoscopic not histological appearance (Table I).
Normal (grade 1)
The absence of macroscopic oesophagitis or the presence of erythema only.
Oesophagitis (grades 2–4)
Any break in the mucosa (erosions and/or ulcerations) with or without exudate, as observed during endoscopy.
Barrett's oesophagus was defined as any columnar epithelium of the specialised (intestinal) type, with or without oesophagitis, obtained by biopsy from any level of the tubular oesophagus.
The presence of columnar epithelium of the gastric type only was not considered to be Barrett's oesophagus.
Histological examination of the oesophageal mucosa was only used to establish the presence of Barrett's oesophagus and not the diagnosis of oesophagitis.
ESOPHAGEAL MANOMETRY
Oesophageal manometry was performed through the nose using a NARCO ‘Bio-systems’(Houston, Texas) Motility Transducer catheter and Physiograph Recording System.
The LOS was identified by a sustained resting pressure are that relaxed with swallowing; it was measured in centimeters from the nose.
When resting pressure was not increased, the point of initial peristalsis, as determined on withdrawal of the catheter, was used to define the LOS area.
HIATAL HERNIA
A hiatal hernia was considered to be present if during endoscopy gastric folds were seen extending at least 2 cm above the diaphragmatic hiatus during quiet respirations.
If during the procedure the two endoscopists present did not agree, a hiatal hernia was considered to be not present.
HABITS
Consumption of tobacco and alcohol was recorded as follows
Quit smoking; quit drinking
Abstinence for at least the previous 12 months.
Active smoking; active drinking
Presently consuming or consumed in the previous 12 months.
Pack years; ounce years
Number of cigarette packs daily×number of years; ounces of alcohol daily×number of years.
One ounce was equivalent to (a) one 12 ounce can of beer,(b) one ounce (30 cc) of spirits, or (c) four ounces of wine.
Since alcohol consumption may have varied with time, efforts were made to obtain estimates based on patient recall and chart review.
This study was approved by the Human Studies Subcommittee at the Veterans Administration Hospital, Hines, IL.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
χ 2 tests of significance were used for comparisons between study groups (bronchodilators v no bronchodilators; smoking v non-smoking; drinking alcohol v not drinking alcohol; hiatal hernia v no hiatal hernia) and categorical dependent variables (oesophagitis v no oesophagitis).
The Mann-Whitney U test was used to detect differences in continuous dependent variables (age, pack years, ounce years) between the two groups.
Logistic regression analysis was used to determine whether any of the reflux variables was predictive of oesophagitis.
Three logistic regressions were conducted in which the oesophageal mucosal status was a dichotomous criterion variable.
For each regression the severity of oesophageal mucosal disease was considered differently:
(1)[grade 1]v [grade 2 or 3 or 4]
(2)[grade 1 or 2]v [grade 3 or 4]
(3)[grade 1 or 2 or 3]v [grade 4]
Hiatal hernia, LOS pressure, pack years of smoking, current smoking status, ounce years of alcohol consumption, age, and the use of bronchodilators were used as predictor variables in the logistic regressions.
Odds ratios were used to determine the magnitude of the association between two dichotomous variables.
Results
Table II shows the criteria used to establish asthma.
All 186 patients had discrete attacks of wheezing.
Objective evidence of bronchial hyper-reactivity was obtained in 113 patients: 92 had a positive methacholine test and 21 had a 20% improvement in FEV 1 after bronchodilator administration.
The remaining 73 patients were enrolled in the pulmonary or medical clinics and had a previous diagnosis of asthma.
The prevalence of oesophageal mucosal disease is shown in Figure 1.
Macroscopic oesophageal erosions or ulcerations, or both, were present in 39.3% of asthmatics — grade 2, 25.8%; grade 3, 8.1%; and grade 4, 5.4%.
Figure 2 shows the detailed distribution of oesophageal mucosal abnormalities in the 186 asthmatics.
Twenty four asthmatics (12.9%) had Barrett's oesophagus, 18 with oesophagitis and six without oesophagitis.
Overall, 42.5% of the asthmatics had oesophagitis or Barrett's oesophagus, or both.
Table III shows the characteristics of the 186 asthmatics according to need for bronchodilators.
Asthmatics who required bronchodilators were significantly older than those who did not (p).
There were no differences between the two groups with regard to cigarette or alcohol consumption.
The logistic regression analysis showed that of the seven reflux variables only hiatal hernia predicted oesophageal mucosal status.
The LOS pressure, current smoking status, pack years, alcohol ounce years, age, and the use of bronchodilators did not seem to affect the oesophageal mucosa.
The percentage of patients with oesophagitis was similar in those taking and those not taking bronchodilators (Fig 3; p=NS).
Hiatal hernia was the only statistically significant predictor of oesophageal mucosal status.
Individuals with a hiatal hernia were more likely to have oesophagitis.
The relation between hiatal hermoa and oesophageal status was stronger when the oesophageal mucosal status was categorised as wither normal (grade 1) or oesophagitis (grades 2–4).
Hiatal hernia occurred in asthmatics with oesophagitis seven times more frequently than it occurred in asthmatics without oesophagitis (odds ratio=7.0; confidence interval=3.5–14.2; χ 2 =33.2; p).
Figure 4 shows the percentage of patients with oesophagitis in relation to the presence of a hiatal hernia.
Oesophagitis was present in 57.7% of asthmatics with a hiatal hernia compared with only 16.3% of those without hiatal hernia.
Figure 5 shows a stepwise increase in the percentage of asthmatics with hiatal hernia as the oesophageal mucosal status worsens (χ 2 =36.6; p).
These results clearly show that hiatal hernia is associated with more severe oesophageal mucosal disease in asthmatics.
Discussion
This study is the first to report the prevalence of oesophageal mucosal disease in unselected asthmatics.
The results clearly show a high prevalence of oesophagitis in the adult asthmatic population.
The design of the study was based on firm methodology:(1) the asthma was well defined and well documented;(2) the selection pattern included only asthmatics whose primary complaint was asthma;(3) all consenting asthmatics were studied; and (4) all endoscopies were performed by two endoscopists using the same predefined criteria.
The definition of ‘consecutive’ or ‘non-selected’asthmatics was strictly adhered to by excluding from the study all those referred for investigation because of gastrointestinal signs or symptoms.
Because most of our patients were men (96%), our observations may apply only to the male population.
Numerous investigators have studied the relation between GOR and asthma.
Reported mechanisms by which GOR and asthma may be related include (1) activation by GOR of a vagal reflex arc from the oesophagus to the lung resulting in bronchoconstriction; and (2) microaspiration of gastric contents into the lung resulting in an exudative mucosal reaction.
Indeed, reports showing a reduction, or even disappearance of the asthma with surgical repair or medical management of the reflux have further strengthened support for a GOR-asthma association.
Our results do not clarify the nature of the GOR-asthma relation or the mechanisms of reflux induced asthma.
The high frequency with which oesophageal mucosal disease occurs in asthmatics is consistent with both the vagal reflex theory and the microaspiration theory, and does not support one more than the other.
Few data are available on either the prevalence of oesophageal mucosal disease in asthmatics or the effect of bronchodilator therapy on the oesophageal mucosa.
Several investigators have concluded that bronchodilator therapy may adversely affect GOR by decreasing the LOS pressure.
However, two recent placebo controlled studies using prolonged oesophageal pH monitoring failed to show any effect of theophylline or Β agonists on the severity of GOR parameters.
Furthermore, we previously showed that asthmatics, when compared with normal subjects, had diminished LOS pressures and significantly greater acid reflux that was not a result of the bronchodilator therapy.
Thus, this study, which shows that asthmatics dependent on chronic bronchodilator therapy have a prevalence of oesophagitis similar to asthmatics who are not dependent on this, supports the conclusion that long standing use of bronchodilators does not adversely affect the oesophageal mucosa in asthmatics.
We also showed that hiatal hernia was present in 58% of asthmatics.
In asthmatics with oesophagitis, a hiatal hernia occurred seven times more frequently than in asthmatics without oesophagitis.
Thus, hiatal hernia in asthmatics is associated with more severe oesophageal mucosal disease.
It remains to be determined whether the presence of hiatal hernia, oesophagitis, or both, is a useful indicator of reflux induced or reflux exacerbated asthma.
We recognise the inherent limitations of our study.
These limitations, which have the potential to bias the results, are concerned with the techniques used to select patients for study, the methods used to ensure a representative sample of oesophageal mucosal diseases, and the technique employed for diagnosing the presence or absence of hiatal hernia.
Such limitations are referred to as patient selection bias, spectrum bias, and observer (signal detection) bias, respectively.
Firstly, patient selection bias would have affected the results if we ‘picked and chose’(either consciously or unconsciously) which patients were to receive endoscopic examination.
If asthmatics with reflux were somehow more readily influenced to have endoscopy than asthmatics without reflux, our results would apply only to a selected group of asthmatics, and selection bias would be present.
We attempted to avoid this bias by offering endoscopy to every asthmatic patient regardless of the presence or absence of reflux symptoms.
In addition, we eliminated from the study all patients who were referred because of reflux symptoms even though they had asthma.
We suggest that since 94% of the asthmatics consented to endoscopy, selection bias was unlikely to be a major factor in biasing our results.
Secondly, spectrum bias, which could occur if more asthmatics with severe asthma than without severe asthma were included in the study.
This appears to be a common problem in clinical samples.
Spectrum bias is unlikely to have influenced our results for two reasons:(1) almost all the asthmatics agreed to be studied (only 6% refused endoscopy) and (2) one quarter of the asthmatics did not require chronic bronchodilator therapy, indicating that not all the patients had severe asthma.
Thirdly, observer (signal detection) bias, which may occur when a particular sign or symptom signals the observer to look more intensely for another sign or symptom.
For instance, observer bias would have occurred in our study if the endoscopist has looked more intensely for a hiatal hernia after noting that oesophagitis was present.
In such circumstances, the presence of observer bias would increase the magnitude of the association between oesophagitis and hiatal hernia.
Indeed, when compared with asthmatics without oesophagitis, asthmatics with oesophagitis had a sevenfold increase in the frequency of hiatal hernia.
Although all the endoscopic examinations were performed by two endoscopists using the same criteria, there is still the possibility that observer bias was present.
Unfortunately, we did not anticipate the importance of observer bias, and we did not arrange for third party blinded observation.
Nevertheless, regardless of hiatal hernia, the high prevalence of oesophagitis in asthmatics and the apparent lack of effect of bronchodilators on the oesophageal mucosa are important clinical observations that provide additional evidence for a close relation between GOR and asthma.
In summary, oesophageal mucosal disease as manifest by the presence of endoscopic oesophagitis or Barrett's oesophagus, or both, is present as a result of GOR in 39% of unselected asthmatics.
The chronic use of bronchodilator therapy does not seem to influence adversely the oesophageal mucosal disease.
Role of cholecystokinin in pancreatic adaptation to massive enterectomy
Abstract
Since pancreatic adaptation to massive proximal small bowel resection (PSBR) may be modulated through cholecystokinin (CCK) secretion, we tested the effect of the CCK antagonist CR-1409 on this response.
Male Wistar rats (n=72) weighing 220–225 g were randomised to receive either PSBR or transection/resuture followed by saline or CR-1409 (12 mg/kg daily subcutaneously).
Rats were killed one, two, and three weeks postoperatively, at which time blood was obtained for CCK assay and the pancreas was assessed for proliferative activity by three parameters: nucleic acid and protein content, bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd) labelling index, and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) expression.
PSBR increased plasma CCK concentration by 83–102% at 1.3 weeks, irrespective of CR-1409 administration.
Total pancreatic DNA content per 100 g body weight increased by 34% at two weeks (p) and by 82% at three weeks (p), while RNA content increased by 60% and 178% (p) and protein content by 20% and 57% (p).
PSBR increased the Brd Urd labelling index and the percentage of PCNA immunoreactive cells.
CR-1409 completely abolished this proliferative response and also prevented the rise in nucleic acid and protein contents.
Apart from growth stimulation, PSBR also enhanced pancreatic exocrine function, as shown by ultrastructural evidence of an appreciable decrease in zymogen granules; CR-1409 also inhibited this functional effect of hypercholecystokininaemia.
The results confirm the tropic role of CCK after PSBR, and CR-1409 prevents this pancreatic adaptation.
The compensatory response to extensive proximal small bowel resection (PSBR) includes growth of the remaining small intestine (duodenum and ileum) and of the gastric parietal cells, causing acid hypersecretion.
The pancreas shares in this adaptive response.
Pancreatic hyperplasia can be detected as early as one week after 90% PSBR and persists for at least six months.
Fifty and 75% PSBR also produce early and appreciable increases in basal pancreatic secretion of water and bicarbonate, but unlike the structural adaptation, these functional changes are transient.
Intestinal adaptation to PSBR is controlled by both luminal and humoral factors, but since the pancreas lies outside the alimentary tract, only systemic factors seem likely to mediate its adaptive response.
There are several candidate gastrointestinal hormones for the role of ‘pancreatotropin’.
Although long term administration of pentagastrin can stimulate pancreatic growth and enterectomy causes hypergastrinaemia, elegant studies in rats with antrectomy or vagotomy have excluded its involvement in the response to PSBR.
Circulating levels of insulin, pancreatic glucagon and neurotensin are unchanged after small bowel resection, whereas enteroglucagon is increased and concentrations correlate with indices of musocal mass and cell turnover in the pancreas.
Cholecystokinin is also increased 12 days after PSBR, and persistent hypercholecystokininaemia can certainly cause pancreatic hyperplasia.
The present study was designed to test whether massive (90%) PSBR would remove sufficient enteroendocrine cells to prevent the hypercholecystokininaemia of lesser enterectomies and, if not, whether the CCK receptor antagonist CR-1409 would blunt the adaptive response of the pancreas.
Daily administration of CR-1409 can inhibit CCK induced pancreatic growth after pancreatobiliary diversion.
Pancreatic mass can be assessed by measuring wet weight, nucleic acid contents, and protein contents.
We have attempted to measure cell proliferation, which should proceed any increase in organ mass, by adopting two immunohistological methods to the pancreas: proliferating exocrine cells were labelled either with 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (Brd Urd) or with a monoclonal antibody (PC10) against proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA).
Methods
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Male Wistar rats (n=72) weighing 200–225 g were housed in groups of five in animal quarters with a 12 hour day/night cycle.
Standard pelleted rat food (Paterson and the Christopher Hill Group, Porton-diet PRD) and water were freely available.
After 48 hours' acclimatisation, animals were randomised to receive either 90% proximal small bowel resection (as measured from the ligament of Treitz) or jejunal transection and resuture (controls).
Operations were carried out under light ether anaesthesia.
A continuous 6/0 silk suture was used for intestinal anastomoses.
Immediately after the operation, half the animals in each group were further randomised to receive either CR-1409 (12 mg/kg/day) or saline (3 ml/kg) by daily subcutaneous injection.
CR-1409 was dissolved in distilled water and brought to pH 9 by 0.01 N NaOH to give a 0.4% solution.
Food was reintroduced 12 hours postoperatively.
After ove rnight fasing, representatives of each of the four groups were killed at 1, 2, and 3 weeks after operation.
Blood was obtained by direct cardiac puncture for cholecystokinin assay.
The pancreas was excised, trimmed free of adherent fat and lymph nodes, and weighed.
Small samples were removed for protein and nucleic acid content measurement, Brd Urd labelling index, and PCNA immunoreactive cell count.
NUCLEIC ACID AND PROTEIN CONTENTS
Pancreatic tissue was homogenised in phosphate buffered saline (PBS)(136.9 mmol/l NaCl, 2.7 mmol/l KCl, 8.1 mmol/l Na 2 HPO 4 , 1.5 mmol/l KH 2 PO 4 , 0.9 mmol/l CaCl 2 , 0.5 mmol/l MgCl 2 -6H2O, adjusted to pH 7.5 with NaOH), and the concentration of the homogenate was adjusted to 1 mg tissue per ml.
Pancreatic contents of DNA and RNA were assayed by the fluorimetric method of Boer but using an excitation wavelength of 536 nm and an emission wavelength of 602 nm.
Protein content was determined by the method of Lowry et al .
Since body weight has a prodound effect on pancreatic weight, the results were expressed as mg per 100 g body weight to correct for this variable.
BRDURD LABELLING INDEX
BrdUrd is a thymidine analogue that is readily and specifically incorporated into DNA during the S phase of the cell cycle.
Rats were given an intraperitoneal injection of BrdUrd (60 mg-kg body weight) one hour before sacrifice.
A small sample of the excised pancreas was placed in Carnoy's solution (absolute alcohol:chloroform: glacial acetic acid=6:3:1 by volume) for two to four hours and transferred to 75% ethanol.
Tissue was processed in chloroform, wax embedded, and 4 µm sections were cut.
Sections were dewaxed and dehydrated in 100% alcohol.
Endogenous peroxidase activity was removed by subsequent immersion in methanol/hydrogen peroxide (98.4%/1.6%).
Dissociation of histones was achieved by using 1 mol/l HCl, which also partially denatured DNA.
Each section was treated with a drop of primary antibody (mouse anti-human Brd Urd, Dako, High Wycombe; 1:20 dilution in PBS).
After overnight incubation at 4°C, the section was incubated with a peroxidase conjugated second antibody (rabbit anti-mouse IgG, 1:50 dilution with PBS) for one hour at room temperature.
The colour reagent diaminobenzidine plus H 2 O 2 was used for staining, and each section was counterstained with haematoxylin.
The number of labelled cells in each section was estimated from a count of 2000 exocrine pancreatic acinar cells, the result expressed as a percentage — the labelling index.
PCNA LABELLING INDEX
PCNA is an acidic nuclear protein, expression of which is directly correlated with rates of cell proliferation and DNA synthesis.
The monoclonal antibody PC10 will ‘recognise’ PCNA in conventionally fixed and processed histological material.
The tissue sample of the excised pancreas was placed in buffered formalin for two to four hours and transferred to 75% ethanol.
Tissue was processed in chloroform and embedded in wax before 4 µm sections were cut.
Sections were dewaxed and taken down through graded alcohols; endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by incubating the sections in 3% hydrogen peroxide and methanol for one hour.
After washing in PBS, pH 7.4, each section was treated with a drop of primary antibody (1:20 dilution in PBS).
After overnight incubation at 4°C, the sections were washed in PBS, 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA), and Tris-BSA.
The second layer antibody, biotinylatd goat anti-mouse IgG (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) was applied at a dilution of 1:50 and incubated for two hours at room temperature.
After washing in PBS, streptavidin-peroxidase (jackson Immunonuclear Laboratories, Westgrove, PA, USA) was applied to the sections at a 1:5000 dilution in PBS with 1% BSA for 30 minutes at room temperature.
Diamino-benzidine-hydrogen peroxide was employed at a chromogen, and a light haematoxylin counterstain was used.
The PCNA labelling index was estimated from a count of 2000 exocrine acinar cells and expressed as a percentage.
PLASMA CCK ASSAY
Plasma CCK peptides were extracted from cardiac blood samples with C18 ‘SepPak’ cartridges (Water, Harrow, UK), and eluates were dried by centrifugal evaporation (Savant, Famingdale, NY, USA).
CCK was measured by a specific radioimmunoassay based on antiserum A 2 , raised by immunising a rabbit with natural porcine CCK-33 (donated by Professors V Mutt and S R Bloom).
Antiserum A 2 (1:60000) was incubated at 4°C for three days with standard CCK-8 or with plasma samples plus CCK-8 tracer labelled with iodine-125 (1000 cpm, Amersham, UK) in 0.05 mol/l sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) with 0.25% gelatin and 0.01% mol/l ethylinediamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA).
Free and bound tracer were separated by the addition of 6% (weight/volume) charcoal (Norit PN5, BDH, Poole, UK) with 0.6% (weight/ volume) dextran.
The concentrations of pure peptides that produced half maximal inhibition of binding of tracer to A 2 were 2.0 pmol/l for CCK-8, 2.4 pmol/l for CCK-33, and 2.2 nmol/l for gastrin 17.
The coefficient of variation within assays was 8.2% and between assays 12.8%.
The sensitivity of the assay (defined as minimal amount of CCK-8 that could be distinguished from zero with 85% confidence) was 0.2 pmol, and the recovery of CCK-8 and CCK-33 through the SepPak and assay procedure was 79%.
ULTRASTRUCTURAL STUDIES
Samples of all categories of pancreas, not exceeding 1 mm in volume, were fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde for two hours.
After washing in phosphate buffer, tissues were osmicated and dehydrated in acidified DMP before routine embedding in Taab resin.
Sections (1 µm) were cut and stained with toluidine blue for observation by light microscopy, followed by ultrathin sections of approximately 100 nm, collected on nickel grids and stained with unranyl acetate and lead citrate, for observation on a Philips CM-10 electron microscope.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Student's t test for unpaired data was used for the group analysis.
Nucleic acid and protein contents and plasma CCK values were expressed as mean (SEM) whereas those of BreUrd labelling index and PCNA labelling index were expressed as medians.
The Spearman correlation coefficient was used to assess the correlation between the results of the BrdUrd and PCNA labelling indices.
Results
MORTALITY AND BODY WEIGHT (FIG 1)
There were two deaths from anastomotic leakage (one control and one PSBR rat).
Rats undergoing massive small bowel resection weighed less than controls both at one and two weeks whether or not they received CR-1409 (8–14% less at one week, p; 10–24% less at two weeks, p).
By three weeks, resection rats weighed 15% less than controls, but there was no difference in body weight between the resection and transection animals receiving CR-1409.
PANCREATIC WEIGHT (FIG 2)
Proximal small bowel resection had a clearcut effect on both absolute and relative pancreatic weight.
Absolute pancreatic weight was 4.9% less than controls at one week but was 18% greater than controls at two weeks and 27% greater at three weeks.
Likewise, enterectomy caused a 32% increase in relative pancreatic weight over controls at two weeks and a 50% increase at three weeks.
CR-1409 completely abolished this pancreatic growth, so that differences in absolute and relative pancreatic weights between resecton and transection animals were no longer significant.
PLASMA CHOLECYSTOKININ (TABLE)
Small bowel resection caused a sustained increase in circulating CCK concentrations — by 83% at one week, by 102% at two weeks, and by 96% at three weeks.
Administration of CR-1409 had no appreciable effect on plasma hormone concentrations.
NUCLEIC ACID AND PROTEIN CONTENTS (FIG 3)
Pancreatic nucleic acid and protein contents increased after proximal small bowel resection, but the increase did not attain statistical significance until two weeks, when DNA was 34% higher, rna 60% higher, and protein 20% higher than in controls.
These changes were more obvious by three weeks, when increments were 82%, 178%, and 57%. with the exception of the DNA contents at two weeks, the CCK antagonist completely inhibited growth stimulation produced by PSBR.
BRDURD LABELLING INDEX (FIG 4)
One week after PSBR, the labelling index was already higher than in controls (0.35 v 0.05%).
The increase in proliferative response became increasingly obvious at two weeks (1.43 v 0.20%) and was still present at three weeks (0.88 v 0.35%).
CR-1409 abolished the effect of proximal enterectomy, so that there was no difference from control values at any time point.
The antagonist had no effect in rats with small bowel transection.
PCNA LABELLING INDEX (FIG 5)
Broadly similar results were obtained for the cell kinetic data derived by counting pcna immunoreactive cells.
PSBR caused an increase in the proliferation rate at one week (0.70 v 0%).
The differences were more marked both at two weeks (4.13 v 0%) and at three weeks (2.10 v 0.55).
Again, CR-1409 largely abolished the growth stimulation produced by bowel resection but had no consistent effect within the control groups.
There was a correlation between the brdurd labelling index and the pcna labelling index, with a spearman correlation coefficient of 0.68.
ULTRASTRUCTURAL STUDIES
Samples of pancreas from rats with transection and saline injection showed no differences from normal pancreas.
Acinar cells were typically pyramidal in shape with closely packed rough endoplasmic reticulum, numerous mitochondria and abundant apical zymogen granules (Fig 6).
By contrast, samples from animals with PSBR and saline showed incipient vacuole formation in the rough endoplasmic reticulum of many acinar cells, associated with marked degranulation (Fig 7).
No degranulation was noted in either transection or resection animals that had been treated with CR-1409, but incipient vacuolation of the rough endoplasmic reticulum was a feature of all CR-1409 treated tissues as well as those of the PSBR group (Fig 8).
Discussion
In line with other work, the present data show that an extensive proximal small bowel resection stimulates pancreatic growth, as characterised by increased wet weight and increased DNA, RNA, and protein contents.
The pattern of this adaptive growth is mainly one of hyperplasia, since the RNA/DNA ratio was little changed.
Increased organ mass was accompanied by increases in two markers of cell proliferation, the BrdUrd and PCNA labelling indices.
Our results firmly implicate CCK as a key intermediary in the adaptive response of the pancreas to massive proximal small bowel resection.
Not only were CCK levels increased two to threefold at the relevant time (one to three weeks postoperatively), but the specific antagonist CR-1409 completely abolished the increase in pancreatic mass and cell proliferation.
Since CR-1409 did not interfere with circulating concentrations of the hormone, it seemed to work by receptor blockade.
Hypercholecystokininaemia after enterectomy was reported by Lilja et al in 1983 and confirmed at our institute the following year.
Unlike gastrin, the increased CCK is not a transitory response but continues for at least 15 weeks.
There are at least three possible explanations:(1) loss of a negative feedback mechanism on CCK release by a depletion of the anticholecystokinin peptide normally released from the ileum, since our procedure removed more than 80% of the ileum;(2) hyperplasia of the endocrine cells within the remaining intestine, notably those in the duodenum (modest duodenal hyperplasia follows jejunectomy; and (3) impaired elimination of CCK after removal of jejunoileum.
Immunohistological methods of assessing cell proliferation have particular advantages over other techniques because of the maintenance of cellular and tissue architecture, the relative simplicity of the methodology, and the rapidity of results.
Pancreatic acinar cell kinetics can be estimated by using the methods of BrdUrd labelling index and metaphase arrest after vincristine administration.
Recently, PCNA, an auxiliary protein of DNA polymerase-delta, has been shown to play a critical role in the initiation of cell proliferation.
The distribution of PCNA in the cell cycle makes it a useful marked for proliferating cells: increasing through G 1 , peaking at the G 1 /S phase interface, decreasing through G 2 , and reaching low levels (which are virtually undetectable by immunocytochemical methods) in M phase and quiescent (G) cells.
PCNA can be demonstrated by using monoclonal antibodies, usually requiring cryostat sections or specially prepared histological material.
PC10 is a new antibody that has the advantage of recognising PCNA in conventionally fixed and processed histological material.
As expected, there were more PCNA staining cells than BrdUrd-incorporating cells giving the PCNA technique a potential advantage in organs like the pancreas where there is low level of proliferative activity.
Our preliminary studies indicate that raised circulating levels of CCK cause degranulation in pancreatic acinar cells.
Animals who underwent proximal enterectomy alone demonstrated acinar cell degranulation typical of the response of raised CCK levels, but these changes were not seen after treatment with antagonist.
Thus, CR-1409 not only abrogates the tropic effect of CCK on pancreatic growth but also inhibits functional stimulation of the exocrine cell.
The distension of the rough endoplasmic reticulum and the cell vacuolation caused by the antagonist probably reflect a direct effect on pancreatic acinar cells.
Role of platelet activating factor in pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis in rats
Abstract
The importance of platelet activating factor in acute pancreatitis was examined by determining the tissue content of endogenous platelet activating factor and the protective effects of TCV-309, a highly selective platelet activating factor blocker, against caerulein induced pancreatitis in rats.
Infusion of caerulein (10 µg/ kg/h) for five hours resulted in about 70% increase in pancreatic weight, 22% rise in protein content, 50% reduction in tissue blood flow, nine fold increase in tissue level of platelet activating factor and 165% rise in plasma maylase as well as histological evidence of acute pancreatitis.
Such infusion of caerulein in chronic pancreatic fistula rats caused a marked increase in protein output from basal secretion of 10 mg/30 minutes to 40 mg/30 minutes in the first hour of infusion followed by a decline in protein output to 15–20 mg/30 minutes in the following hours of the experiment.
Exogenous platelet activating factor (50 µg/kg) injected ip produced similar alterations in weight, protein content, bloow flow, and histology of the pancreas but the increment in serum amylase was significantly smaller and pancreatic secretion was reduced below the basal level.
TCV-309 (50 µg/kg) given ip before caerulein or platelet activating factor administration significantly reduced the biochemical and morphological alterations caused by caerulein and abolished those induced by exogenous platelet activating factor.
These results indicate that platelet activating factor plays an important role in the pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis probably by reducing the blood flow and increasing vascular permeability in the pancreas.
Acute pancreatitis is a severe disease with significant morbidity and mortality for which no specific treatment exists.
Several experimental models of acute pancreatitis have been produced by various methods but one of the most frequently used involves an excessive stimulation of pancreatic secretion by the administration of supramaximal dose of caerulein or cholecystokinin octapeptide.
Caerulein induced pancreatitis represents a reproducible model suitable to study the effects of potentially ameliorating agents but the mechanism of the pancreatic damage has not been fully explained.
The discharge of secretory proteins into the interstitial space because of excessive pancreatic stimulation and resulting oedema with accumulation of leukocytes are the major changes described in the caerulein induced pancreatitis.
It has been reported that pancreatic acinar cells, stimulated by caerulein or cholecystokinin, release substantial amounts of platelet activating factor.
Platelet activating factor is a low molecular weight phospholipid exhibiting potent biological effects including the platelet and neutrophil aggregation, systemic hypotension, pulmonary hypertension, and capillary leakage leading to haemorrhagic damage in the gastrointestinal tract.
Emanuelli et al reported that an injection of platelet activating factor into the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery induced the changes in the rabbit pancreas characteristic of acute pancreatitis.
These findings suggest that platelet activating factor may be involved in the progression of acute pancreatitis caused by infusion of caerulein but there is no experimental evidence so far to support this notion.
Development of specific platelet activating factor blockers such as TCV-309 has enabled us to examine the role of platelet activating factor in the pathogenesis of caerulein induced acute pancreatitis.
Methods
MATERIALS
Platelet activating factor (1–0-alkyl-2–0-acetyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-choline) was purchased from Bachem Feinchemikalien AG (Bubendorf, Switzerland).
The stock solution (in ethanol) was stored at -40°C.
Working solution was made fresh daily.
TCV-309 is 3-Bromo-5-[N-phenyl- [[2-(1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-2-isoquinolyl-carbonyloxy)ethyl]carbamoyl]-1-propylpyridinium kindly provided as a gift by Dr Y Oka from Takeda Industries, Osaka, Japan.
The aqueous solution was made fresh daily and used in the rats at a dose 10 times higher (50 µg/kg) than that shown in separate experiments on these animals to reduce by 50% the platelet activating factor induced hypotension (ID 5 =5 µg/kg ip).
The concentration of YCV-309 reducing by 50% platelet activating factor induced aggregation of human or rabbit platelets was found to be 10 -7 M and this concentration was used in the in vitro studies on the dispersed pancreatic acini.
Male Wistar rats weighing 250–300 g, were used in this study to examine the pancreatic secretion and pancreatic blood flow during infusion of caerulein and to examine the involvement of platelet activating factor in the pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis.
EXAMINATION OF PANCREATIC SECRETION IN VIVO 
Pancreatic secretion was examined in rats with chronic pancreatic fistula prepared as described previously.
Briefly, one polyethylene cannula was inserted into the common bile pancreatic duct to serve as the pancreatic fistula.
This cannula was connected to another polyethlene cannula placed in the duodenum to permit the circulation of the pancreatic secretion into the duodenum.
Both cannulae were brought to the exterior and protected by a stainless steel thimble allowing for the free movement of rats in their usual cages.
During experiment they were placed in modified Bollman type cages to maintain the minimum restraint necessary.
The metal thimble was removed, the cannulae were disconnected, the pancreatic cannula was used to collect the pure pancreatic juice, and the duodenal cannula was used for the reinfusion of the juice (diluted by saline 1:2) into the duodenum.
The secretory studies usually started after six to eight days of recovery from the surgery usually after 12 hours of food but not water deprivation.
The pancreatic secretion was collected from the pancreatic fistula in small preweighed vials in 30 minute aliquots to measure the volume flow and protein outputs as described previously.
A duodenal cannula was used for the reinfusion of the collected pancreatic secretion (diluted by saline 1:2).
Several series of rats, each comprising six to eight animals, with chronic pancreatic fistula were used in secretory studies with the five hour return of pancreatic secretion to the duodenum.
The following series were used;(i) sc infusion of saline (rate 1 ml/h) throughout the seven hour experiment;(ii) sc infusion of caerulein (10 µg/ kg/h, rate 1 ml/h) throughout five hour period;(iii) ip injection of TCV-309 (50 µg/kg) in 1 ml of saline) followed 90 minutes later by sc infusion of caerulein for the rest of experiment;(iv) ip administration of platelet activating factor (50 µg/kg) followed by sc infusion of saline for the duration of experiment;(v) ip injection of TCV-309 followed 30 minutes later by ip platelet activating factor and then by sc infusion of saline for the duration of experiment.
Rats used for studies with production of pancreatitis were allowed free access to water but no food for 18 hours before the beginning of experiment.
Pancreatitis was induced by caerulein that was diluted in saline and infused sc for five hours in conscious animals at a dose of 10 µg/kg/h and at a rate of 1 ml/h.
The infusion usually started at 800 am at which time water was removed.
The needle was inserted under the dorsal skin and attached to a tygon tubing (Irvington brand, size 24, 3 M Company, Minneapolis, Minnesota), which was connected to a 10 ml plastic syringe.
During the infusion, the animals were kept in semirestraining Bollman type cages as used also in secretory studies.
About five hours after the beginning of caerulein infusion, the animals were anesthetised with ether, the abdominal cavity was opened, and the pancreas exposed for measurement of the blood flow by the laser Doppler flowmeter using Laserflo, model BPM 403A, Blood Perfusion Monitor (Vasamedics Inc, St Paul, MN, USA).
Blood flow was measured in three different portions of the pancreas and the area of laser emission of the probe was 1 mm.
As the depth of measurement by laser Doppler flowmeter is about 3–5 mm, the technique used determined total pancreatic blood flow.
In a separate series of experiments, the progression of the changes in pancreatic blood flow was determined in rats anesthetised with ether at 60 minute intervals twice before and five times during a five hour infusion of caerulein (10 µg/kg/h).
In control tests, the blood flow was measured at 60 minute intervals during the seven hour infusion of saline.
The pancreatic blood flow was recorded in ml/ min/100 g tissues as displayed on the digital panel meter and presented either in absolute value or as per cent change from control value obtained in rats infused with saline.
Immediately after measurement of pancreatic blood flow, which lasted three to four minutes, the vena cava was exposed and blood was drawn into a 2 ml plastic syringe containing 0.2 ml heparin (200 IU)(Polfa, Poland).
Plasma amylase was determined by an enzymatic method using Bernfeld technique.
The values were expressed as units/litre.
HISTOLOGICAL EXAMINATION
The pancreas was then quickly dissected out from its attachment to the stomach, the duodenum, and the spleen, rinsed with saline, blotted on paper and weighed.
Some pieces of pancreas were exised from the body portion, fixed in 10% formalin and stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
The slides were examined histologically without the knowledge of the treatment given.
The histologic greading of oedema was made using a scale ranging from 0 to 3; 0=no oedema, 1=interlobular oedema, 2= interlobular oedema and moderate intralobular oedema, and 3=interlobular oedema and severe intralobular oedema.
Leucocytic infiltration was graded from 0 (absent) to 3 for maximal alterations (diffuse infiltration in the entire pancreatic gland).
Grading of vacualisation was based on the appropriate percentage of cell involved; 0=absent, 1=less than 25%, 2=25–50%, and 3=more than 50%.
DETERMINATION OF PANCREATIC PROTEIN AND PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR
A portion of the pancreatic tissue (about 200 mg wet weight) was homogenised in 0.15 M NaCl solution using high frequency (24000 rpm) Tissumizer (Ika Lab, Staufen, Germany).
Protein content was determined by the method of Lowry et al with bovine plasma albumin as a standard and expressed as milligrams of protein per total pancreatic tissue wet weight.
The content of platelet activating factor in pancreatic tissue was determined using bioassay technique with washed rabbit platelets as described previously.
About 100 mg pancreatic tissue was excised and frozen at -20°C until assay performed two to four days afterwards.
About 24 hours before assay the sample was placed in 80% ethanol to extract platelet activating factor from the tissue.
Biological activity of platelet activating factor was measured by platelet aggregation using a Chrono-log Corporation aggregometer.
Platelets were stirred in 400 µl buffer containing 2.6 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl 2 , 137 mM NaCl, 12 mM NaHCO 3 , 1.3 mM CaCl 2 , 5.5 mM glucose, 0.25 gelatine, 1 mM creatine phosphate and 10 IU/ml creatine phosphokinase (pH 7.4).
Standard curves were obtained using synthetic platelet activating factor (Bachem, Switzerland), which produced typical dose dependant platelet aggregation when added at 0.5–50 pg/tube.
EXAMINATION OF SECRETORY ACTIVITY OF DISPERSED PANCREATIC ACINI
Isolated pancreatic acini were prepared as described previously by collagenase digestion of the pancreas obtained from saline treated rats and those receiving infusion of caerulein alone, platelet activating factor alone, TCV-309+ caerulein or TCV+platelet activating factor.
Animals in this series of experiments were killed by cervical dislocation, the pancreas was removed and then digested by highly purified colleagenase (CLISPA, 540 IU/mg, Cooper Biomedical, Freehold, NJ, USA) according to the method of Amsterdam et al .
The volume of dispersed acini from each pancreas was measured and then the acini were suspended in the incubation medium saturated with oxygen and maintained at 37°C in a shaking bath.
Acinar suspensions were incubated in the presence of various concentrations of caerulein.
After incubation, tubes were centrifuged at 1000 g and the supernatant separated from the pellet.
Amylase content in the supernatant and dissolved pellet were determined as described by Bernfeld.
Unstimulated amylase release (C=control) during the entire experimental period was also determined and presented as basal value.
EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL WITH PANCREATITIS
Control experiments were first performed in which rats received sc infusion of saline (1 ml/h)(control) for five hours or sc infusion of caerulein (10 µg/kg/h) for five hours.
After determination that sc infusion of caerulein resulted in induction of acute pancreatitis four separate groups of rats, each consisting of six to eight animals were given (i) sc infusion of caerulein alone;(ii) ip injection of platelet activating factor (50 µg/kg),(iii) TCV-309 ip (50 µg/kg) and then 30 minutes later sc infusion of caerulein for five hours, and (iv) TCV-309 ip (50 µg/kg) and then 30 minutes later platelet activating factor (50 µg/kg ip) and then 30 minutes later sc infusion of saline for five hours.
STATISTICAL
Comparison of the difference between the mean values of the various groups of experiments was made by analysis of variance or the Wilcoxon's rank-sum test.
A difference with a p value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results are expressed as means (SEM).
Results
PANCREATIC SECRETION IN VIVO AND IN VITRO 
In rats with chronic pancreatic fistula, the basal pancreatic protein secretion was well sustained at a level of about 10 mg/30 minutes throughout the seven hour experiment (Fig 1).
Sc infusion of caerulein (10 µg/kg/h) for five hours resulted in almost immediate increase in protein secretion reaching the peak of about 40 mg/30 minutes during the first hour.
Then the secretory rate declined during second and third hours to the level of about 15–20 mg/30 minutes and remained at this level during the fourth and fifth hour of caerulein infusion.
Pretreatment with TCV-309 (50 µg/kg ip) did not affect basal secretion but reduced by about 40% the initial peak secretory response to caerulein and significantly (p) enhanced the protein outputs in next hours of caerulein infusion.
Administration of platelet activating factor (50 µg/kg ip) caused significant reduction in basal protein secretion by about 30% and this was completely reversed when TCV-309 (50 µg/kg) was administered before the platelet activating factor injection (Fig 1).
Dispersed pancreatic acini obtained from rats infused for five hours with sc caerulein or given ip platelet activating factor showed usual dose response to caerulein added to the incubation medium in gradually increased concentrations (Table I).
The maximal amylase response to caerulein of acini from saline (controls) treated rats was achieved at 10 -1 1 M of caerulein, while that obtained from animals infused for five hours with caerulein, it occurred at 10 -10 M of caerulein.
Similar shift to the right of the amylase response curve to caerulein was observed when the dispersed pancreatic acini were obtained from rats infused with caerulein plus TCV-309 or injected with platelet activating factor.
The volume of pancreatic acini isolated from the saline treated rats was about 2.2 (0.3) ml per pancreas, whereas that from the rats infused with caerulein and injected with platelet activating factor it was significantly (p) lower and declined to about 0.8 (0.1) ml and 0.9 (0.2) ml, respectively.
The volume of the acini obtained from rats infused with caerulein plus TCV-309 was also significantly reduced but that from platelet activating factor plus TCV-309 was not different from saline controls (Table I).
MORPHOLOGICAL, CIRCULATORY, AND BIOCHEMICAL ALTERATIONS IN PANCREATITIS
Subcutaneous infusion of caerulein at a dose of 10 µg/kg/h for five hours consistently produced pancreatitis in all tested rats.
The pancreas appeared grossly swollen and enlarged with visible collections of oedematous fluid.
Peritoneal fluid was present in all animals.
Platelet activating factor injected ip (50 µg/kg) also resulted in the gross enlargement of the pancreas but the oedema and the pancreatic fluid collection were not seen.
Caerulein infusion and platelet activating factor injection increased the weight of the pancreas by about 70% and 50% (Fig 2) and the protein content by 22% and 18%, respectively (Fig 3).
Plasma amylase concentrations rose by about 165% in rats infused with caerulein and 110% after injection of platelet activating factor (Fig 4).
Histological changes such as oedema, cell infiltration, and vacualisation of acinar cells closely correlated the biochemic findings (Table II).
In rats infused with caerulein, the interlobular oedema and moderate intralobular oedema were accompanied by perivascular infiltration of leucocytes and the presence of vacuolisation in over 50% of acinar cells.
In rats given platelet activating factor, both oedema and leucocyte infiltration were less pronounced and the vacuolisation was observed in less than 25% of acinar cells (Table II).
Pancreatic blood flow as measured by laser Doppler flowmetry at the end of a five hour infusion of caerulein or five hours after injection of platelet activating factor was reduced by about 50% (Fig 5).
As shown in Figure 6, the pancreatic blood flow in saline perfused control animals anesthetised at 60 minute intervals (for the use of laser Doppler flowmeter) was relatively well sustained throughout the experiments.
In rats receiving sc caerulein, the blood flow was significantly (p) reduced by about 43% after two hours of caerulein infusion and then showed only small further decrease during the remaining hours of the experiment.
Pretreatment with TCV-309 before caerulein infusion significantly reduced the increase in pancreatic weight (Fig 2), protein content (Fig 3) and plasma concentration of amylase (Fig 4) but all these parameters were significantly (p) raised above the controls obtained from rats infused with saline.
The fall in the pancreatic blood flow caused by caerulein was completely reversed by the pretreatment with TCV-309 (Fig 5).
The pancreas appeared somewhat swollen and enlarged but peritoneal fluid was minimal.
Cellular infiltration was significantly reduced but the extent of vacuolisation was not significantly different from that observed in animals infused with caerulein alone without pretreatment with TCV-309.
Pretreatment with TCV-309 before the administration of platelet activating factor almost completely prevented the alterations in pancreatic weight, protein content, and blood flow caused by platelet activating factor (Figs 2–5).
The pancreas appeared normal and histologically only small oedema and cellular infiltration or acinar cell vacuolisation were noticed (Table II).
Plasma concentration of amylase was not different from the control value (Fig 4).
Pancreatic tissue obtained from intact rats infused with saline for five hours released only minute amounts of platelet activating factor (1.6 (0.9) pg/100 mg of wet tissue).
Pancreatic specimens from rats infused sc with caerulein showed about nine-fold increase in the content of platelet activating factor (13.9 (5.5) pg/100 mg).
In rats pretreated with TCV-309 plus caerulein, the content of pancreatic platelet activating factor was significantly (p) smaller (4.5 (1.6) pg/ 100 mg) than in those treated with caerulein alone but about three times higher than in saline treated rats.
Discussion
This study confirms that subcutaneous infusion of caerulein induced acute oedematous pancreatitis that was accompanied by a marked increase in the content of endogenous platelet activating factor in the pancreatic tissue and shows that the pretreatment with highly specific and potent platelet activating factor blocker (TCV-309) ameliorated the biochemical, circulatory, and histological manifestations of caerulein induced pancreatic damage.
These results provide evidence that platelet activating factor plays an important role in the progression of pancreatitis induced by the overstimulation of the pancreas with caerulein.
Previous reports showed that caerulein administered intravenously at supramaximal dose is capable of inducing biochemical and morphological changes in the pancreas characteristic for acute pancreatitis.
Robert et al used sc infusion of caerulein in rats and also observed the enlargement of the pancreas and histological alterations in the pancreatic tissue accompanied by a marked rise in plasma amylase level similar to these reported earlier after intravenous infusion.
In their detailed study, the maximal increase in pancreatic weight was found after five to six hours of caerulein infusion and the optimal dose of sc infused caerulein to achieve oedematous pancreatitis was 5–10 µg/kg/h.
In this study we also used the technique of continuous sc infusion of caerulein at a dose of 10 µg/kg/h for five hours and this resulted in the increase in the pancreatic weight and the morphological alterations of pancreatitis comparable with that reported by Robert et al .
Our study describes for the first time the secretory and circulatory changes occurring with the progression of pancreatitis induced by caerulein infusion.
Pancreatic protein secretion in chronic pancreatic fistula rats infused with caerulein at supramaximal dose, that was used to induce the pancreatitis, showed a sudden rise, almost immediately after the start of infusion, reaching peak that was followed in the next hours by a marked decline to the level only slight above the baseline.
As the severity of histological changes in the pancreas in response to caerulein such as the vacuolisation of acinar cells and the rise in plasma amylase concentrations were already significant at the third hour of infusion, it is obvious that the decline in the exocrine secretory activity might be attributed to the damage of acinar cells.
The vacuoles appearing in these cells during infusion of caerulein contain activated lysosomal enzymes which in turn may activate the digestive enzymes leading to cell destruction and presumably to leakage of these enzymes into the interstitial tissue (where they produce inflammation) and into the blood.
It is of interest that the acini isolated from the pancreas damaged by caerulein responded to caerulein in the incubation medium with the concentration dependant increase in amylase secretion but this response curve was shifted to the right as compared with the acini obtained from saline infused rats.
This indicates that acinar cells in pancreatitis retain their responsiveness to direct secretory stimulation but for some reasons they become ‘resistant’ to the stimulation in vivo.
The reason for this apparent discrepancy is not obvious but the reduced secretory response in pancreatitis could be attributed to the marked fall in the pancreatic blood flow and to the reduction in the number of viable acinar cells in the pancreas.
According to our experience the pancreatic blood flow in caerulein induced pancreatitis is significantly reduced already after two hours of caerulein infusion and then this reduction progresses to reach after five hours of infusion about half of the normal flow.
This could result in the tissue ischaemia leading to the decrease in secretory activity of acinar cells.
The number of viable acini isolated in pancreatitis induced by caerulein was only about 30% of that obtained from the intact pancreas.
Thus, the reported previously and observed in our study gradual ‘resistance’ of acinar cells to stimulation after the onset of acute pancreatitis in various animal models could be explained by the dramatic decline in the blood perfusion and ischaemia of the pancreatic tissue as well as the mortality of the large population of acinar cells.
This study shows that an excessive stimulation of exocrine pancreas by caerulein leads to an increase in the content of platelet activating factor in the pancreatic tissue and that the pretreatment with platelet activating factor blocker reduces this excessive secretory stimulation by caerulein and significantly ameliorates the biochemical, circulatory, and morphological changes in caerulein-induced pancreatitis.
These results indicate that platelet activating factor may be an important factor in the progression of acute pancreatitis provoked by caerulein.
The origin of platelet activating factor released by the pancreas stimulated with caerulein is not known but it was shown earlier that caerulein and cholecystokinin are capable of increasing the incorporation of labelled acetate into platelet activating factor in the isolated pancreatic lobules and to increase the synthesis of this phospholipid.
The amounts of platelet activating factor like material detected in the pancreatic acini obtained from rats infused with saline in our study was lower than those reported previously for the isolated guinea pig acini from parotic glands and comparable with those found in the gastrointestinal mucosa.
According to our finding caerulein infused at supramaximal dose increased the production of platelet activating factor in the pancreatic tissue by about nine-fold.
Such excessive contents of platelet activating factor could result in further stimulation of acinar cells as platelet activating factor is capable of inducing the secretion of enzymes, of reducing the blood flow, and increasing vascular permeability leading to tissue oedema and injury.
As the pretreatment with TCV-309 reduced the content of platelet activating factor in the pancreas of rats infused with caerulein, it is not excluded that the increase of platelet activating factor in the pancreas is, in part, secondary to the tissue damage by overstimulation with caerulein.
Some of the effects of caerulein infusion have been reproduced in this study by exogenous platelet activating factor and the results indicate that platelet activating factor administered in a single dose by itself can induce pancreatitis with typical enlargement of the pancreas and inflammatory changes in the tissue as well as in the increase in plasma amylase concentration.
Platelet activating factor also caused a marked decrease in the pancreatic blood flow comparable with that observed after caerulein infusion.
These changes induced by platelet activating factor can be almost completely reversed by the pretreatment with highly specific and potent platelet activating factor receptor blocker, TCV-309.
Similar pancreatic injury was reported after the administration of platelet activating factor directly to the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery of rabbit.
The pretreatment with a platelet activating factor blocker in this study also prevented the development of morphologic changes in the pancreatic tissue and the increment in plasma amylase concentration.
These results support the concept that platelet activating factor is capable of inducing pancreatitis similar to that observed after infusion of caerulein and that it is mediated by specific platelet activating factor receptors.
There are, however, some differences in the action of caerulein and platelet activating factor on the pancreas.
Although platelet activating factor is capable of stimulating enzyme secretion from the isolated acinar cells, according to our results, it actually inhibits this secretion in vivo and this inhibition can be reversed by the pretreatment with TCV-309.
It is likely that the inhibition is mediated, at least in part, by the reduction in the pancreatic blood flow which is a well known limiting factor in exocrine pancreatic secretion.
Furthermore, pretreatment with a platelet activating factor blocker, which completely prevented the development of biochemical and morphological manifestation of platelet activating factor induced pancreatitis, only partly reduced the alterations involved in pancreatitis provoked by caerulein.
This suggests that caerulein induces more severe pancreatitis than platelet activating factor and that, in addition to platelet activating factors, other mediators are probably involved in the pathogenesis of this pancreatitis.
As the administration of platelet activating factor was reported to increase the release of leukotriene C 4 that is known to cause a potent vasoconstriction, it is likely that both platelet activating factor and LTC 4 play a synergistic role in the pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis.
Gliadin uptake in human enterocytes.
Differences between coeliac patients in remission and control individuals
Abstract
The pepsin trypsin digest of the wheat prolamin gliadin (PT-gliadin) is deleterious to the small intestinal mucosa of coeliac patients.
The handling of PT-gliadin by the intestinal epithelium in coeliac patients in remission and control individuals was investigated by in vivo instillation of PT-gliadin.
The uptake of PT-gliadin was monitored by immunofluorescence microscopy of intestinal biopsy specimens, using affinity purified PT-gliadin antibodies.
Control individuals show weak staining in the apical region of the enterocytes thereby showing an uptake of PT-gliadin.
Coeliac patients have a conspicuous fluorescence in relation to the lateral membrane/intercellular space of enterocytes and intense staining intracellularly in the apical region.
Thre is only weak staining in the enterocytes after the instillation was terminated, indicating an intracellular clearance.
The study shows that normal enterocytes are able to take up PT-gliadin.
The increased uptake in coeliac patients might be of importance of the pathogenesis either by direct toxicity or by presentation to immunocompetent cells.
Furthermore, the results are in agreement with the suggestion of a functional alteration in the zonula occludens in the intestinal epithelium of coeliac patients.
Coeliac disease is characterised by flattened jejunal mucosa which causes malabsorption.
It is well known, that in susceptible individuals, the intestinal mucosal damage is induced by polypeptides in the prolamin fraction of wheat, barley, rye and possibly oats.
Complete restoration occurs after a period of prolamin free diet.
Frazer et al showed in 1959 that a pepsin trypsin digest of the wheat prolamin gliadin (PT-gliadin), was deletrious when ingested orally by coeliac patients.
The authors used a rise in faecal fat as an objective measure for toxicity.
Bramble et al supplemented this observation by administering a PT-gliadin preparation directly into the proximal jejunum of adult coeliac patients in remission and controls.
The changes in brush border enzymes and morphology were conspicuous within four hours, thereby showing that the mucosal damage, characteristic for coeliac disease, occurred rapidly.
The exact toxic component(s) of gliadin has not been identified and the pathogenetic mechanism of coeliac disease remains uncertain.
It is thus well documented that when ingested gliadin and PT-gliadin are toxic to coeliac patients.
The intraluminal processing of ingested gliadin has only been partly studied, and a difference in the handling of gliadin in coeliac patients and healthy controls has not been demonstrated.
It must be presumed, however, that fragments of gliadin are present in the chyme of coeliac patients.
Several workers have investigated the breakdown of gliadin at the level of the enterocytes, using homogenates of intestinal biopsies from patients and controls.
Consistent quantitative differences in the enzymatic activities have not been definitely demonstrated, even though Cornell et al did show, that a certain fraction (no 9) of a gliadin digest was less well hydrolysed by enzymes from mucosal biopsies of coeliac disease patients in remission.
The capability of a breakdown of gliadin peptides by the intestinal brush border enzymes alone have been studied in detail by Bruce et al when it was shown that brush border from coeliac patients and controls were able to hydrolyse gliadin completely in vitro.
As there is no apparent difference in the digestion of gliadin in coeliac patients and control individuals, there may be a difference in the intestinal uptake and/or intracellular processing of the partly digested gliadin.
Gliadin fragments present at the microvillar membrane may be taken up by apical endocytosis.
The internalised fragments may subsequently be processed intracellularly and/or be directly toxic in coeliac patients.
Optionally, fragments could be transcytosed across the enterocyte and presented at the basolateral membrane for immunocompetent cells, maybe initiating a pathological response in coeliac patients.
A pathological route could alternatively be by an intercellular uptake, passing defect tight juctions.
In this case, the gliadin fragments may be directly toxic through a binding/uptake via the basolateral membrane.
An in vivo uptake of polypeptides by human enterocytes has so far not been demonstrated, however.
The purpose of the current investigation is to show a possible binding or uptake of PT-gliadin in the enterocytes, and to compare the handling of the components between coeliac patients and controls.
The study was carried out by in viro instillation of PT-gliadin in the jejunum of two control individuals and three coeliac patients in remission.
The fate of the PT-gliadin was monitored by immunofluorescence microscopy of intestinal biopsy specimens obtained before, during, and after the installation, using an affinity purified antibody against PT-gliadin.
Methods
MATERIALS
Gliadin, pepsin (P 7012), and trypsin (T 8642) were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co, St Louis, MO, USA, and Coomassie brilliant blue R 250 was a product of Merck, Darmstadt, Germany.
Triton X-100 was from Serva Feinbiochemica GmbH and Co, Heidelberg, Germany, while the bovine serum albumin was from Fluka Chemie, Buchs, Switzerland.
Statens Seruminstitut, Copenhagen, Denmark provided Freund's incomplete adjuvant and aprotinin was a product of Novo-Nordisk A/S, Bagsværd, Denmark.
The CMBr-activated Sepharose 4B and protein-A Sepharose CL-4B were from Pharmacia Fine Chemicals, Uppsala, Sweden.
Dakopatts, Glostrup, Denmark, provided the fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody.
The hydraulic suction tube for multiple biopsies was obtained from Quinton, Seattle, Wa, USA.
The air fuge tubes (0.2 ml) were a product of Beckman, Palo Alto, Calif, USA, and the microassay for measurement of protein was from Bio Rad, Richmond, Ca, USA.
All other chemicals were of analytical grade.
The interference filter was from Optisk Laboratorium, Lundtofte, Denmark.
ENZYMATIC DIGESTION OF GLIADIN
The enzymatic digestion of gliadin was carried out essentially as described by Bronstein et al .
One gram of gliadin was dissolved in 10.0 ml 0.1 mol/l HCl, 20 mg pepsin was added and after digestion (two hours, 37°C) pH was adjusted to 8.0 by 5.0 mol/l NaOH.
The gliadin was then further digested with 20 mg trypsin (four hours, 37°C) at constant stirring.
Inactivation of trypsin was achieved by heating (90°C, three minutes).
Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (10000× g , 30 minutes).
The molecular weight of the polypeptides in the PT-gliadin was estimated by sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis followed by staining with Coomassie brilliant blue R 250 as earlier described in detail.
The PT-gliadin was prepared within 24 hours before use and kept at room temperature.
PT-GLIADIN-SEPHAROSE 4B
PT-gliadin was dialysed for 16 hours at 4°C against the coupling buffer (0.1 mol/l sodium hydrogencarbonate, pH 8.3, 0.5 mol/l NaCl).
A total amount of 15 mg protein was coupled to 0.6 g (dry weight) CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B according to the instructions of the manufacturer.
The coupled Sepharose was packed in a 1.5 cm×1.3 cm column and carefully washed with a 50 mmol/l Tris/HCl, pH 8.0, 0.15 mol/l NaCl buffer.
HUMAN ENTEROCYTE PROTEIN-SEPHAROSE 4B
A biopsy specimen was taken under radiographic control from the jejunum of a healthy individual at the ligament of Treitz.
The biopsy was instantly frozen and kept at -80°C until further use.
The specimen was then thawed at room temperature and homogenised for three minutes on ice in 4 volumes of 50 mmol/l Tris/HCl, pH 8.0 containing 1% Triton X-100 and 2.8 µg aprotinin/ml.
The homogenisation was performed in a 0.2 ml air fuge tube, using a Teflon pestle, and the homogenate was subsequently centrifuged for one hour at 50× g .
The protein concentration in the supernatant was determined by use of a microassay version of the Coomassie G 250 method, using bovine serum albumin as a standard.
A total amount of 15 mg enterocyte protein was coupled to 0.6 g (dry weight) CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B as described above.
RABBIT ANTIBODIES AGAINST PT-GLIADIN
Immunisation
A 1 mg/ml PT-gliadin solution was prepared by dilution of the gliadin digest with distilled H 2 O and mixed with an equal amount of Freund's incomplete adjuvant.
A rabbit was injected intracutaneously with 400 µl of the solution.
After six weeks the rabbit was bled for 10 ml.
The immunisation was carried out every four weeks and 10 ml of blood was collected one week after each injection and analysed for reactivity against PT-gliadin by dot blotting.
After 42 weeks the rabbit started to produce antibodies against PT-gliadin.
Purification
The IgG fraction was isolated from 15 ml rabbit serum on a protein-A Sepharose CL4B.
The PT-gliadin reactive fraction was affinity-purified by using the PT-gliadin-Sepharose 4B column according to the procedure earlier described in detail.
In order to eliminate possible antibodies cross reacting with proteins originating from human enterocytes, the purified PT-gliadin immunoglobulin fraction was passed through the human enterocyte protein Sepharose 4B column.
The fractions were analysed for reactivity against PT-gliadin and solubilised proteins from human enterocytes by dot blotting.
The fractions containing reactivity against PT-gliadin only were pooled and stored at 4°C after the addition of sodium azide.
The final IgG concentration (0.14 mg/ml) was determined spectrophotometrically from the absorbance at E 2 8 .
INSTILLATION OF PT-GLIADIN
Two control individuals and three adult coeliac patients in remission agreed to take part in the study.
No significant intestinal pathology or malabsorption was found in the controls.
The coeliac patients were originally diagnosed according to the procedure recommended by the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition and had all been on a complete gluten free diet for at least five years and did not present symptoms indicative of active disease.
All those included in the study presented IgG and IgA gliadin-antibody titres within normal range.
The Quinton multiple biopsy instrument was introduced to a position corresponding to the ligament of Trietz and left in place during the study.
Before the instillation of PT-gliadin, a biopsy specimen was taken and studied under a steromicroscope in order to indicate a normal jejunal villous structure.
These biopsies were later investigated in a light microscope to confirm a normal mucosa.
Each person was challenged with 50 ml PT-gliadin (8 mg/ml) over a period of 40 minutes through the biopsy tube.
The position of the tube was repeatedly controlled by radiography.
Biopsies were taken after 20, 40, and 75 minutes from the control persons and after 20, 40, and 60 minutes from the coeliac disease patients.
Each biopsy specimen was sectioned into four pieces and immediately frozen in a drop of methylbutane in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C for subsequent studies.
IMMUNOFUORESCENCE MICROSCOPY
Sections (5 µm) were cut from the frozen biopsies on a cryostat microtome.
They were incubated for one hour at 4°C, with a series of PT-gliadin IgG rabbit antibodies (0.07 mg/ml, 0.028 mg/ml, 0.014 mg/ml) diluted with phosphate buffered saline, pH 7.4.
The sections were washed three times for five minutes in the phosphate buffered saline and goat antirabbit IgG conjugated to fluorescein isothiocyanate was applied (one hour at 4°C).
The washing procedure was repeated and the sections mounted in buffered glycerol containing α-phenylenediamineto prevent fading of the fluorescence.
A Zeiss epifluorescence microscope equipped with interference filters for fluorescein isothiocyanate was used for the examination.
The control experiments included both use of a non-immune serum as the first layer and staining with conjugate alone.
Additionally, a solution of the purified primary antibody absorbed with PT-gliadin was tested.
The sections were evaluated blindly by the second author twice with two months interval.
The exposure of control experiments was approximately doubled in order to achieve a reasonable background structure.
ETHICS
The study was approved by the local ethical committee.
Results
The pepsin trypsin digest of gliadin was water soluble and contained polypeptides with maximal molecular weight of approximately 20 kD as estimated by sodium dodecyl sulphate/ polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Fig 1A).
The dot blotting experiments showed that the immunoadsorbent purified PT-gliadin IgG antibodies did not cross-react with endogenous antigens from human enterocytes (Fig 1B).
Fluorescence was not detected in control experiments, which included use of a non-immune serum as the first layer or incubation with fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugate alone.
Furthermore, staining could not be observed when the solution of purified primary antibody absorbed with PT-gliadin was used as the first layer (figure not shown).
UPTAKE PF PT-GLIADIN IN CONTROL INDIVIDUALS
PT-gliadin can not be detected before the instillation in normal individuals (figure not shown).
During the instillation reactivity was detected extracellulary at the luminal surface.
In the sections of intestinal biopsies obtained after 20 (Fig 2B) and 75 minutes a faint colouring was seen apically in the enterocytes.
The staining was homogeneous and without an apparent localisation in granules.
There was no difference in the staining between the villous and the crypt regions.
Staining could not be demonstrated in relation to the basolateral membrane/intercellular space.
After 75 minutes (35 minutes after the instillation was terminated) only very weak intracellular colouring was seen in the two control individuals.
Furthermore, the intracellular staining was only observed when the most concentrated immunoglobulin solution (0.07 mg/ ml) was used.
The sections incubated with the more diluted antibodies displayed only extracellular staining at the luminal surface of the enterocytes.
UPTAKE OF POT-GLIADIN IN COELIAC PATIENTS
The results of the immunofluorescence studies of sections from the intestinal biopsy specimens from coeliac patients are shown in Fig 2A, C-F.
There was no staining for PT-gliadin in relation to the enterocytes before the instillations (Fig 2A).
Staining was seen in goblet cells in one of the coeliac patients but occurred in only one patient and is thus considered of no importance.
After 20 minutes of instillation a conspicuous fluorescence was detected in association with the lateral membrane/intercellular space of the enterocytes.
The staining was most intense in the villous part, but weak colouring also occurred in the crypts.
Intense staining was also seen intracellularly in the enterocytes (Fig 2C).
This intracellular fluorescence was located at the brush border region and a granular staining was observed apically within the enterocytes (Fig 3).
The applied immunofluorescence technique, however, did not allow a detailed description of the subcellular localisation of the internalised antigen.
The pattern changed after 40 minutes of instillation (Fig 2D, E).
The subcellular location of the staining was similar.
The staining in relation to the lateral membrane/intercellular space and the apical region of the cells was now more intense in the crypt region (Fig 2D) compared with the villous region (Fig 2E).
The last biopsy specimen in the series was taken after 60 minutes, and thus 20 minutes after the PT-gliadin instillation was terminated.
The staining, which was still most intense in the crypt region, was located in small granules not only near the microvillar membrane, but generally distributed all over the cytoplasm apically for the nucleus (Fig 2F).
A marked staining at the lateral membranes could no longer be observed.
All sections were analysed with the three antibody dilutions.
Noticeably, there was no apparent variation in staining intensity between the tested dilutions in the specimens from coeliac patients.
Discussion
The current study clearly shows for the first time that PT-gliadin and/or fragments are intracellulary present in normal enterocytes after exposure.
The PT-gliadin is homogeneously distributed in the apical region of these cells.
We have previously performed similar instillation experiments, using undigested gliadin (unpublished results).
The gliadin was detected at the microvillar membrane, but an uptake could not be demonstrated.
Accordingly, it seems as though only small fragments of gliadin can be taken up, and that an intraluminal digestion of orally ingested gliadin is a prerequisite for the uptake.
Even though the intestinal brush border enzymes from healthy individuals in vitro are able to hydrolyse gliadin completely, our results show, that at least a proportion of the instillated PT-gliadin escapes complete hydrolysis in vivo.
The demonstration of PT-gliadin in enterocytes of normal individuals shows that internalised PT-gliadin is not toxic per se .
An in vivo uptake of polypeptides by the human enterocytes has not been demonstrated previously, and the zonula occludens (tight junction) between the cells is usually considered impermeable to macromolecules in man under physiological conditions.
PT-gliadin can not be detected in relation to the intercellular space in the controls in the current study and an uptake of PT-gliadin via the tight junctions/lateral membranes therefore seems unlikely in healthy individuals.
There are different possibilities as to the fate of the internalised PT-gliadin.
The staining for PT-gliadin decreases after the instillation is terminated and this might be explaiend by enzymatic digestion and/or transcytosis.
In contrast with that of normal subjects, the biopsy specimens from coeliac patients show a conspicuous staining at the lateral membrane/ intercellular space after only 20 minutes of instillation.
Noticeably, the lateral membrane/ intercellular space staining is more intense in the crypt region than in the villous region after 40 minutes of instillation, and therefore a distinct change from the uptake observed after 20 minutes of instillation.
The intracellular staining is intense during the instillation, when compared with normal controls, and still distinct 20 minutes after the instillation is terminated.
The lateral membrane/intercellular space staining, however, has vanished after the instillation is terminated.
Using electron microscopy, Rubin et al showed that the tight junctions appeared morphologically unchanged in untreated coeliac disease patients.
The number of strands in the tight junctions may correlate inversely with the permeability of the epithelium and it has been shown that the crypt tight junctions have fewer strands than the villous junctions.
Therefore, the results of the current study may indicate that the tight junctions are functionally altered, thereby allowing PT-gliadin to pass into the intercellular space.
The increased cellular uptake of PT-gliadin in coeliac patients could therefore occur indirectly through endocytosis at the lateral membrane.
Accordingly, the results are in agreement with the observation that endocytosis from the basolateral membrane is more abundant in the crypt region than in the villous region (G H Hansen, unpublished results).
Experiments with instillation of undigested gliadin did not show intracellular gliadin or gliadin in relation with basolateral membrane/intercellular space (unpublished results).
The explanation might be that a probable leak at the tight junction is relative, allowing only small molecules to pass into the intercellular space.
An increased amount of intracellular antigen caused by a constitutional increased apical endocytosis and/or a disturbance in an intracellular degradation of PT-gliadin in coeliac patients, however, can not be excluded.
An increased permeability of the mucosa in patients with coeliac disease has previously been shown by Bjarnason et al .
They showed that a majority of patients in remission have an increased absorption of 5 1 Cr-labelled ethylenediaminetetra acetic acid (EDTA), suggesting that coeliac disease was caused by a primary defect in intestinal mucosal permeability.
The authors suggested that the increased permeability may reflect alterations in the intercellular junctional complexes allowing enhanced entry into the intercellular and submucosal spaces.
Our results support the hypothesis of a functional alteration in the zonula occludens in the intestinal epithelium of coeliac patients.
A less likely interpretation of the results demonstrating an increased and substantial amount of PT-gliadin intracellulary in granules in coeliac disease patients is compatible with a pathological binding of PT-gliadin to surface receptors and a disturbance in the further intracellular processing.
The immunological events of the disease might subsequently be initiated after transcytosis of the receptor ligand complexes.
There are several possible fates for the endocytosed PT-gliadin also in coeliac disease patients.
In a review Davidson and Bridges pointed out, that an enhanced uptake of gliadin peptides might initiate lysosomal damage, and/ or increased permeation into the mucosal and submucosal space might trigger a cascade of local immunological events.
It has previously been shown that infiltration of lymphocytes in the submucosa occurs within only a few hours after gliadin challenge.
This argues for a local exposition of gliadin related antigens.
The observations in the present study indicate a pathologically increased entry of PT-gliadin across the epithelium in coeliac disease causing adverse immunological reactions ot occur.
Trophic effect of gastrin on the enterochromaffin like cells of the rat stomach: Establishment of a dose response relationship
Abstract
Gastrin was given to rats by continuous subcutaneous infusion through implanted osmotic minipumps in doses covering a wide range of the dose response relationship fog astrin with regard to the trophic effect on the enterochromaffin like cells of the oxyntic mucosa.
Thirty five rats were divided into five groups (each of seven rats), one group receiving a control solution of 1% albumin, the others receiving gastrin in 1% albumin at doses of 2.5, 5, 10, and 15 µ g/kg/h, respectively.
The plasma gastrin concentrations in the various groups increased in the same order of magnitude as expected from the gastrin dose given.
Gastrin induced a dose dependent increase in enterochromaffin like cell density, oxyntic mucosal histamine concentration and histidine decarboxylase activity up to the dose of 5 m g/ kg/h, where the increase levelled off.
Hence, the dose response relationship for the trophic effect of gastrin on the enterochromaffin like cells seems to follow a polynominal rather than a linear function.
These findings may also contribute to the understanding of the trophic effect of gastrin on enterochromaffin like cells in man with conditions associated with hypergastinaemia.
It is generally accepted that gastrin controls the growth of the enterochromaffin like cells of the oxyntic mucosa.
Thus, profound inhibition of acid secretion by omeprazole or histamine 2 receptor blockers in the rat led to endogenous hypergastrinaemia and enterochromaffin like cell hyperplasia.
The hypergastrinaemia and enterochromaffin like cell hyperplasia induced by these agents were abolished by antrectomy.
Furthermore, hypergastrinaemia after antrum exclusion or partial gastric corpectomy and exogenous hypergastrinaemia induced by continuous infusion of gastrin evoked proliferation of the enterochromaffin like cells in the rat stomach.
Therefore acid inhibition is not a prerequisite for the hyperplasia.
It has been suggested that there is a linear correlation between plasma gastrin concentration and the enterochromaffin like density in the oxyntic mucosa of the rat.
No report has fully established the relationship between the gastrin concentration and the trophic effect on the enterochromaffin like cell, however, as neither the minimal nor the maximal effective gastrin concentration with regard to the trophic effect on the enterochromaffin like cell has been assessed.
From the study of Larsson et al , it could appear that the number of enterochromaffin like cells would increase infinitely with the gastrin concentration.
In the rat, the enterochromaffin like cells produce and store most of the histamine in the oxyntic mucosa.
From our laboratory, it has previously been reported that the acid stimulatory effect of gastrin can be fully explained by the stimulation of histamine release.
Gastrin induced histamine release in a concentration-dependent fashion with threshold concentration of 2 pmol/l and reaching a maximum effect at a gastrin concentration of about 260–520 pmol/ l.
Furthermore, the histamine synthesising enzyme, histidine decarboxylase, and the histidine decarboxylase mRNA abundance are regulated by gastrin.
The present study was done to establish a dose response relationship for the trophic effect of gastrin on the enterochromaffin like cells by giving exogenous gastrin in graded doses.
Methods
ANIMALS
The procedure described by Ryberg et al was followed.
Thirty five female Sprague-Dawley rats each weighing approximately 200 g, were used.
The animals were divided into five different groups, each group consisting of seven rats.
One group was given a control solution (1% albumin) and the other four groups were [Leu 1 5 ]-gastrin-17 (L-G-17) in 1% albumin in the doses shown in the Table.
Human L-G-17 and albumin were purchased from Sigma (St Louis, Mo, USA).
L-G-17 or the control solution was administered subcutaneously through osmotic minipumps (ALZET 2 ML1, ALZA Corp, Palo Alto, Calif, USA) implanted on the back of the rats under general anaesthesia (0.2 ml 100 g/body weight of a solution containing fluanisone 2.5 mg/ml, phentanyl 0.05 mg/ml, and midazolam 1.25 mg/ml).
The animals were treated for 28 days and the minipumps were changed every seventh day.
At day 28, the rats were bled by heart puncture under general anaesthesia (as described above).
The stomach was removed, opened along the greater curvature, rinsed in ice cold 0.9% saline and weighed.
Subsequently the stomach was laid out on a glass plate and a tissue specimen, 4 mm in diameter, was taken by a punch press from the anterior wall on the greater curvature.
The antrum was discarded and the oxyntic mucosa scraped off, weighed, diluted to 100 mg/ml in ice cold 0.01 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, and homogenised.
Aliquots of the homogenates were stored at -70°C for later determination of the histidine decarboxylase activity.
One portion of the homogenates was boiled for 10 minutes, centrifuged at 5000 g for 10 minutes and the supernatant stored at -20°C for the later determination of histamine.
The tissue specimens were fixed overnight in freshly prepared Stefanini's solution with 1% (weight/volume) 1-ethyl-3(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide (Sigma), dehydrated in ethanol, and embedded in paraffin.
The study was approved by the animal welfare committee at the University Hospital of Trondheim.
PLASMA GASTRIN
Plasma gastrin concentration was determined in 200 µl plasma using a double antibody liquid phase 1 2 5 I-radioimmunoassay (Diagnostic Products Corporation, Los Angeles, Calif, USA).
These antibodies have the same immunoreactivity towards L-G-17 and gastrin-17 (unpublished data).
Results are expressed as pmol equivalents of synthetic human gastrin 17/l plasma.
HISTAMINE IN OXYNTIC MUCOSA
The determination of histamine in the oxyntic mucosal homogenates was performed using a commercially available radioimmunoassay kit (Immunotech, Marseilles, France) with high specificity and sensitivity.
Results are expressed as nmol histamine/g wet weight of oxyntic mucosa.
HISTIDINE DECARBOXYLASE ACTIVITY
The microprocedure described by Beaven et al with some modifications was used.
We incubated 80 µl oxyntic mucosal homogenate with [1- 1 4 -C]L-histidine (24 nCi, 0.48 nmol; New England Nuclear, Boston, Mass, USA), 5 .10 -4 M L-histidine, and 10 -5 M pyridoxal-5-phosphate in a total reaction volume of 160 µl at 37°C for 60 minutes.
The reaction was stopped by adding 80 µl 2 M perchloric acid followed by an incubation at 37°C for 30 minutes.
The expelled 1 4 CO 2 was trapped in 50 µl Protosol (New England Nuclear) and counted after adding scintillation fluid.
Results are expressed as pmol 1 4 CO 2 /mg wet weight per hour.
MORPHOMETRIC ANALYSES
Sections of 5 µm thickness were cut perpendicular to the mucosal surface.
For the determination of enterochromaffin like cells, specimens were stained with histamine antibodies no. 8531 (Milab, Malmö, Sweden, kindly provided by Prof R Håkanson, University of Lund, Sweden) and visualised using the peroxydase antiperoxydase reaction.
In the rat this method can be regarded as specific for the enterochromaffin like cells, because the mast cells are few in the mucosa and restricted to the superficial layer.
The enterochromaffin like cell density was determined in randomly selected fields.
An eye piece ×10 with an ocular grid inserted and an objective ×40 were used.
epithelial cells located between the lines of the grid (0.25 mm mucosal length) in at least three visual fields in two different sections from each specimen were counted.
Only enterochromaffin like cells with a visible nucleus were counted.
The enterochromaffin like cell density is expressed as number of cells per mm mucosal length.
The specimens were coded and the examiner was unaware of the group to which they belonged.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
A non-parametric one way analysis of variance, the Kruskal-Wallis H-test, was used for examination of a global difference between all groups.
When significance was indicated, the two sample Mann-Whitney U-test was applied.
All values are given as mean (SE).
The level of statistical significance was set at 0.05.
Results
The results are summarised in the Table and Figure.
The plasma gastrin concentrations increased from group to group as expected from the dose given.
The rat weights did not differ between the groups.
There was a significant increase in the weight of the whole stomach and oxyntic mucosa (p=0.030 and p=0.018, respectively).
These differences were mostly caused by the increase in the weights in the treated groups compared with the control group.
The enterochromaffin like cell density increased from 66 (7) in the control group to 78 (12)(NS) in the group receiving 2.5 µg/kg/h and to 127 (12)(p=0.002) in the group receiving 5.0 µg/kg/h.
The mucosal histamine content increased from 264.1 (20.1) nmol/g to 379.0 (45.5) nmol/g (p=0.015) in the group receiving 2.5 µg/kg/h.
There was a further significant increase to 670.9 (112.2)(p=0.022) in the group receiving 5.0 µg/kg/h.
The histidine decarboxylase activity increased from 12.8 (1.8) pmol CO 2 /mg/h to 35.5 (5.5) pmol CO 2 /mg/h (p= 0.007) in the group receiving 2.5 µg/kg/h.
There was also a further increase in histidine decarboxylase activity to 83.7 (12.9) pmol CO 2 /mg/h (p= 0.01) with increasing gastrin dose from 2.5 µg/ kg/h to 5.0 µg/kg/h.
There was no significant difference in enterochromaffin like cell density, histamine content or histidine decarboxylase activity between the groups receiving the three highest gastrin doses.
Thus, for all three enterochromaffin like cell parameters, the dose response curves fitted a qudratic function (y= a+bx+cx 2 ), compatible with a maximal effect of gastrin within the given dose range.
Discussion
For the first time a wide range dose response relationship for the trophic effect of gastrin on the enterochromaffin like cells of the rat stomach has been established.
The dose response curve for the trophic effect of gastrin is best described by a quadratic function with a maximal effect of gastrin at a plasma concentration in the range 200–500 pmol/l.
Thus, the enterochromaffin like cell density, histamine content and histidine decarboxylase activity of the oxyntic mucosa all increased with increasing gastrin dose up to a maximal level at a gastrin concentration in the same range as found for the maximal histamine releasing and acid stimulatory effect of gastrin.
Hence, the histamine releasing and trophic effect of gastrin on the enterochromaffin like cells show about the same concentration dependence with regard to the minimal concentration of gastrin causing maximal effect.
This may suggest that the histamine releasing and the trophic effects of gastrin on the enterochromaffin like cells are mediated by interaction with the same receptor.
Ryberg et al using the same radioimmunoassay for determination of plasma gastrin, found higher concentrations for the corresponding gastrin doses than we did.
The basal gastrin concentration, however, was also proportionately lower in the present study.
Furthermore, Ryberg et al showed that continuous infusion of L-G-17 through osmotic minipumps gave somewhat lower plasma gastrin concentrations just before the pumps were changed.
Therefore, the gastrin concentrations in the present study are probably measured at the lowest level.
The linear relationship between plasma gastrin concentration and the enterochromaffin like cell density previously reported may only reflect a more prolonged endogenous hypergastrinaemia in those with the highest gastrin concentration two hours after administration of the drug.
In the study by Ryberg et al gastrin was probably given in such a dose that the gastrin concentration just reached the maximal effective level.
In another study by Ryberg et al the enterochromaffin like cell labelling index was shown to increase linearly with the plasma gastrin concentration.
From their figure, however, it can be extrapolated that the labelling index tended to level off, at a gastrin concentration corresponding to the lowest concentration giving maximal effect in the present study.
In the study by Mattsson et al describing development of enterochromaffin like carcinoids in rats afer longterm hypergastrinaemia caused by partial corpectomy, the plasma gastrin concentration might have been above the minimal concentration necessary to give maximal trophic effect (supramaximal concentration).
Extrapolation of data from rat to man is difficult, but it is tempting to speculate that the findings in the present study may have its parallel in man and explain some findings reported in patients with diseases accompanied by hypergastrinemia.
Blair et al reported that circulating gastrin accounted for approximately 90% of acid secretion in response to eating.
They found that on average, a gastrin concentration of 1000 pg/ml (-500 pmol/l) gave maximal gastric acid stimulation.
In man and other species, there is accumulating evidence that gastrin stimulates acid secretion by releasing histamine.
Furthermore, there is no relationship between the magnitude of the hypergastrinaemia and the density of argyrophilic cells in patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, which may indicate that there also in man exists a maximal gastrin concentration above which no further trophic effect on enterochromaffin like cells may be obtained.
Hence, many of these patients may actually have supramaximal gastrin concentrations.
Similar findings were also reported by Sjöblom et al studying patients with pernicious anaemia.
They found that patients with the highest serum gastrin concentrations did not necessarily have the highest enterochromaffin like cell counts.
In fact, from their data it can be extrapolated that the maximal trophic effect of gastrin occurs at a concentration of approximately 500 pmol/l.
Moreover, they also showed that patients with pernicious anaemia and carcinoid tumours or nodular argyrophilic cell hyperplasia did not have the highest serum gastrin concentrations.
These patients were characterised by an early onset and long duration of pernicious anaemia.
These data may therefore indicate that when the gastrin concentration giving maximal trophic effect is reached, further growth of the enterochromaffin like cells id eependent on the duration of the hypergastrinaemia.
Furthermore, Cattan et al reported that in patients with atrophic gastritis, the gastrinaemia was similar for patients with slight, moderate, and marked hyperplasia of argyrophilic cells.
Our findings may also have clinical implications concerning longterm treatment of acid related disorders with potent inhibitors of acid secretion.
According to our findings, hypergastrinaemia above a certain level will have the same trophic effect on the enterochromaffin like cells.
In man the lowest maximal effective gastrin concentration may, however, vary between individuals, analogous to the interindividual differences described for the gastrin concentration giving maximal gastric acid stimulation.
In conclusion, the present study indicates that there is an increasing enterochromaffin like cell density with increasing gastrin concentration up to a certain level, and increasing the gastrin concentration above this level does not lead to further hyperplasia.
Raised concentrations of platelet activating factor in colonic mucosa of Crohn's disease patients
Abstract
Platelet activating factor (PAF-ACETHER or PAF) and precursors of platelet activating factor were investigated in 26 patients with acute Crohn's disease and in 10 healthy controls.
Platelet activating factor, lyso platelet activating factor, and alkyl acyl glycerophosphocholine, were determined in colonic mucosal biopsies in patients with acute Crohn's disease, during prednisolone therapy and in remission.
Biopsy specimens were submitted to histopathology examination and to phospholipid extraction.
Platelet activating factor, lyso platelet activating factor, and alkyl acyl glycerophosphocholine were found in patients with acute Crohn's disease and in remission as well as in controls.
Whatever the site of the biopsy, the level of platelet activating factor in colonic mucosa was higher (p) in Crohn's disease than in controls.
There was no correlation between the level of colonic PAF-ACETHER and age, sex, Crohn's disease activity index, and biological parameters in sera.
Although concentrations of colonic platelet activating factor content were higher (p) when colonic mucosa displayed cell infiltration, they were neither related to the severity nor the type of inflammatory cells.
Platelet activating factor decreases with prednisolone therapy and might return to normal concentrations in quiescent patients.
Lyso platelet activating factor and alkyl acyl glycerophosphocholine were not significantly higher in Crohn's disease than in controls.
These data suggest that platelet activating factor may be involved in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease and that it could be used as a marker of the mucosal activity of the disease.
Crohn's disease is a recurrent inflammatory disorder of unknown aetiology and pathogenesis.
Histologically, Crohn's disease is characterised by an important infiltration of proinflammatory cells involving the entire gastrointestinal tract from the mouth to the anus.
The mechanisms underlying the inflammatory process are poorly understood.
When infiltrated by inflammatory cells, the mucosa is known to generate a variety of inflammatory lipidic mediators such as arachidonic acid metabolites (for example, prostaglandins, thromboxane, and leukotrienes) and platelet activating factor (also called platelet activating factor acether).
Platelet activating factor, first described in 1972 as platelet activating factor has been identified as 1–0-alyl-2–0-acetyl- sn -glycero-3-phosphocholine.
Platelet activating factor is a lipid mediator derived from membrane phospholipids and involving in hypersensitivity and inflammatory reactions.
It is synthetised by numerous human cell types, including neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages, platelets, eosinophils, vascular endothelial cells, and several cancer cell lines including gastric epithelial (HGT1) cells.
It is capable to induce inflammatory reactions such as increased vascular permeability, leucocyte adhesion and chemotaxis.
Some of the manifestations of septic shock, such as hypotension, haemoconcentration, and gastrointestinal ulceration were reported to be mimicked after intravenous administration of platelet activating factor in rats suggesting that it plays a role in this syndrome.
At present, little is known about the role of platelet activating factor in ulcerative diseases of the gastrointestinal tract in man, although it has been reported in mucosal biopsy specimens from patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
The aim of this study was to determine amounts of platelet activating factor and metabolites (lyso platelet activating factor and alyl-acyl-glycerophosphocholine).
In the intestinal mucosa of patients with Crohn's disease related to disease activity in order to assess the possible role of platelet activating factor in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease.
Methods
SUBJECTS
Twenty six patients (12 men, 14 women; mean age 28 yr, ranging 30–80) with active Crohn's disease (duration of the disease one to 11 years) located to the colon (15), the ileum (three) or both (eight), were investigated.
Their diagnosis was based on Morson's morphologic criteria and the activity of the disease was assessed on the Best index (CDAI) and biological parameters (erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), white blood cell count (WBC), platelets, α 2 globulin, fibrogen).
Ten healthy volunteers (five men, five women; mean age 31 yr, ranging 30–80) were investigated as controls.
COLONOSCOPY
All individuals underwent endoscopy examination of the colon (Olympus CF 2 HL) under sedation (midazolam, noramidopyrin, trimebutin), after colonic preparation with PEG 4000 (4 l) and before anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive therapy.
Five of the 26 Crohn's disease patients underwent a flexible sigmoidoscopy after four weeks of 1 mg/kg/day prednisolone therapy.
A third flexible sigmoidoscopy was performed one month after cessation of all therapy when the disease has been considered in stable remission with no symptoms of recurrence.
Biopsy specimens were taken from non-ulcerated areas in right and left sides of colon when Crohn's lesions were present and from macroscopically normal mucosa in control subjects and in the five CD patients after healing.
HISTOPATHOLOGY
Biopsy specimens were fixed in Bouin's aqueous solution.
Sections were stained with haematoxyling and eosin.
Mucosal infiltration by inflammatory cells was evaluated as: absent (0), moderate (+), mild (++), intense (+++) by an experimented pathologist who was blinded to the results of platelet activating factor.
PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR ASSAY
Biopsy specimens were transferred into tubes with 80% ethanol as previously described for ethanolic platelet activating factor extraction from cells as well as from biopsies and frozen at -20°C until assayed for platelet activating factor activity.
Twenty four hours before platelet activating factor assay, biopsy specimens in 80% ethanol were cut into small pieces (less than 1 mg).
Extraction of platelet activating factor was performed during 10 hours at -4°C using a ‘roller’.
All samples were directly measured using the aggregation of washed rabbit platelets.
Rabbit platelets were washed as described previously: aspirinated platelets (1.6×10 8 ) in 300 µl Tyrode's solution, containing 2.5% gelatin and the ADP scavenger mixture creatine phosphate (1 mM) and creatine phospholinase (10 IU/ml) were stirred in an aggregometer (Icare, Marseille, France).
The aggregating activity of the samples was measured over the linear portion of the calibration curve obtained with 5–50 pg of synthetic platelet activating factor.
ASSAY FOR LYSO PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR
Lyso platelet activating factor was chemically acetylated into platelet activating factor, extracted in ethanol and measured as previously described.
Briefly, the ethanolic extracts were dried under an air stream, mixed with 200 µl pyridine and acetic anhydride and kept for 18 hours in the dark, at room temperature.
The extracts were evaporated and traces of pyridine removed with dichloromethane.
Samples recovered with 100 µl of 60% ethanol and then assayed as described above.
The amount of lyso platelet activating factor was calculated as the difference between the quantity of platelet activating factor measured after and before acetylation of the samples.
ASSAY FOR ALKYL ACYL GLYCEROPHOSPHOCHOLINE (AAGPC)
Alkyl acyl glycerophosphocholine were measured after alkaline hydrolysis and subsequent acetylation.
Briefly, aliquots of the dried extracts were treated with 0.03 N NaOH in methanol for two hours at room temperature.
The pH was adjusted to 7.0 with 1 N HCl and the mixture was evaporated to dryness.
The dried residues were then acetylated as described above and platelet activating factor was assayed.
The amount of alkyl acyl glycerophosphocholine was calculated as the difference between the levels of platelet activating factor measured before and after alkaline hydrolysis and acetylation.
CHARACTERISATION OF PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR
For further characterisation of the platelet aggregation molecules, platelet activating factor extracted from biopsy specimens from patients with Crohn's disease was pooled, dried and eluted on high performance liquid chromatography.
The platelet aggregating activity was eluted from 18 to 21 minutes — that is, with a retention time similar to that of synthetic platelet activating factor.
The efficiency of this procedure averaged 80% using [3 H]platelet activating factor as internal standard.
In addition to its ADP and arcachidonic acid independent aggregating activity on rabbit platelets, the lipidic material was further characterised as platelet activating factor on the basis of the following criteria:(a) its aggregating activity in the presence of 0.1 mM BN 52021, a specific platelet activating factor receptor antagonist;(b) its aggregating activity after incubation of the samples with 10 µg/ml phospholipase A 2 from hog pancreas and with 100 µg/ml lipase A 1 from R arrhizus ;(c) its retention time during high performance liquid chromatography analysis using phosphatidylcholine, lysophosphatidylcholine, and synthetic C-18 platelet activating factor as standards.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All values are expressed as mean (standard error of the mean (SEM)).
The Mann-Whitney U rank sum test and Spearman rank correlation test were used for statistical evaluation.
The study was approved by the Ethical Committee of the Bichat Hospital.
Results
CLINICAL AND BIOLOGICAL PARAMETERS
In acute Crohn's disease, the Best index (CDAI) was more than 150 in all patients with mean (SEM) 203 (23).
Biological parameters were consistent with systemic inflammation (m (SEM)): ESR=51 (5) mm/h, WBC=10322 (632) /dl, platelets=439 (31) 10 3 /del and α 2 globulin=8.4 (0.4) g/l.
All these parameters were normal in patients with Crohn's disease in remission and in controls.
ENDOSCOPY
Endoscopy examination was normal in all the 10 controls whereas ileal and/or colonic ulcerations and inflammed mucosa were noted in all Crohn's disease patients before prednisolone therapy.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy showed occasional ulceration in the left colon in four of five patients examined during prednisolone therapy and normal mucosa in all patients with Crohn's disease examined in remission.
HISTOPATHOLOGY
None of the 10 controls had mucosal infiltration by inflammatory cells whereas in patients with active Crohn's disease, inflammatory cells were present in at least one site (left or right) of the colon (26) or in both (23).
Mucosal infiltration by inflamatory cells was ranged as absent, moderate, mild, intense in 3, 8, 9, 6 patients respectively in the right site of the colon and in 4, 6, 7, 8 patients respectively in the left site of the colon.
After four weeks after prednisolone therapy (five) the sore of inflammation decreased in a lesser extent: two with moderate mucosal inflammatory cell infiltration remained at moderate, two with mild musocal inflammatory cell infiltration returned to normal (absent) and one with intense mucosal inflammatory cell infiltration decreased to mild.
The inflammatory cells were absent in the colonic mucosa of Crohn's disease patients examined in remission.
PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR IN COLONIC BIOPSIES
The platelet activating factor content of mucosal samples was significantly (p) higher in patients with Crohn's disease than in controls, both in the right (270 (100)v (11) pg/mg net weight) and left colon (280 (110)v 30 (8) pg/ mgW)(Fig 1).
Whatever the site of the biopsies, lyso platelet activating factor and alkyl acyl glycerophosphocholine concentrations were not significantly higher in Crohn's disease than in controls (4.5 (1.2)v 3.4 (0.8) µg/mgW and 190 (30)v 180 (60) µg/mgW respectively (Fig 2).
COMPARISON OF PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR LEVELS WITH CLINICAL, BIOCHEMICAL, AND HISTOLOGICAL PARAMETERS
The mucosal content of platelet activating factor was higher (p) in inflamed than in non-inflamed mucosa, but no significant correlation was observed with the severity of mucosal inflammation (Fig 3).
Even the platelet activating factor levels were higher when mucosal histology examination showed granuloma (310 (70) pg/mgW) or mononuclear cells (300 (110) pg/mgW) than polymorphonuclear cells (170 (8) pg/mgW), there was no significant correlation between colonic platelet activating factor content and mucosal infiltration of different type of inflammatory cells (Fig 4).
There was no correlation between the mucosal content of platelet activating factor and the level of age (r': 0.24; p=0.16), sex (r': 0.10; p=0.57), CDAI (r': 0.16; p=0.44), EST (r': 0.1; p=0.6), platelets (r': 0.14; p=0.48), WBC (r': 0.3; p= 0.1), and α 2 globulin (r': 0.3; p=0.09).
PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR LEVELS AFTER PREDNISOLONE THERAPY
Five patients with Crohn's disease after treatment with prednisolone underwent flexible sigmoidoscopy.
The amount of colonic platelet activating factor content decreased significantly (p) in four and returned to normal values in three patients (Fig 5).
There was no significant difference on mucosal content of platelet activating factor in patients with Crohn's disease in remission than in controls (p=0.07).
Discussion
The results obtained in this study indicate that the mucosal platelet activating factor content is considerably increased in patients with acute Crohn's disease, decreased by glucocorticoid therapy and may return to normal levels in quiescent Crohn's disease.
Platelet activating factor was extracted from biopsies using ethanolic extraction as previously reported by us and others.
Biopsy specimens should be conserved in 80% ethanol and frozen at -20°C until assayed for platelet activating factor activity.
In these conditions, the platelet activating factor acetylhydrolase activity (the enzyme which cleaves platelet activating factor into the inactive lyso platelet activating factor) which is naturally present in biopsy specimens is inactivated.
One freeze treatment did not affect the acetylhydrolase activity.
Ethanolic extraction is now a common method to extract platelet activating factor from various organs including biopsy specimens.
In the present study the aggregating activity of materials obtained from patients with Crohn's disease was characterised as platelet activating factor according to:(i) its retention time from high performance liquid chromatography which was similar to that of synthetic platelet activating factor;(ii) its inhibition by specific platelet activating factor antagonist and phospholipase A2 (PLA2) and no by PLA1.
The possibility that platelet activating factor may be involved in Crohn's disease has been suggested by Kald et al .
These authors have shown that colonic platelet activating factor content was significantly increased irrespective of colonic inflammation.
Our data supported by quantification of mucosal inflammatory cell infiltration, suggest that the increase of platelet activating factor levels in colonic mucosa of Crohn's disease patients are neither related to the severity nor the type of inflammatory cell infiltration.
So far, the cellular origin of platelet activating factor from colonic mucosa remains unclear.
The lack of correlation between platelet activating factor content and the severity of inflammation in colonic mucosa shown by our present findings, speaks against inflammatory cells as the sole source of platelet activating factor synthesis.
In addition platelet activating factor was also found, although to a lesser extent in normal, uninflamed mucosa.
The possibility that intestinal epithelial cells may produce platelet activating factor has been suggested by Kald et al .
Although the present investigation did not reveal more platelet activating factor in colonic mucosa in patients with Crohn's disease in remission than in controls, this hypothesis could be possible but needs further investigations.
Alternatively, the presence of platelet activating factor reflects not only inflammatory cell infiltration, but may also represents a stage of inflammatory amplification in which inflammatory cells are about to be recruited.
This hypothesis seems likely, because Crohn's disease patients with inflamed mucosa had a very high mucosal platelet activating factor content that decreased during prednisolone therapy, and sometimes returned to normal levels in remission.
It is well known the Crohn's disease is a diffuse lesion of the entire gastrointestinal tract.
We have not investigated platelet activating factor content, however, in duodenal or jejunal mucosa of Crohn's disease patients, therefore we have no information whether the increase of platelet activating factor levels occurs all along the gastrointestinal tract.
Numerous data have suggested a role of arachidonic acid metabolite in the pathophysiology of various gastrointestinal disorders.
For example, enhanced synthesis of protaglandins, thromboxane A 2 and prostacyclin and leukotriene B4 have all been shown in chronic inflammatory bowel diseases.
It has been reported that PLA2 activity contributes to the inflammatory process and promotes the formation arachidonic acid metabolites.
Of interest two metabolic steps are involved in platelet activating factor biosynthesis: first, PLA 2 acts on choline-containing membrane alkyl-phospholipds resulting in the production of lyso platelet activating factor — that is, 1–0-alkly- sn -glycero-3-phosphocholine; and, second, this lyso platelet activating factor compound is acetylated by an acetyltransferase to yield a biologically active platelet activating factor molecule.
Eliakim et al have reported that prednisolone and 5-aminosalycilate inhibit colonic platelet activating factor synthesis in vitro.
The mechanism of this inhibition is poorly understood.
As PLA2 has been shown to be increased in Crohn's disease patients, it has been postulated that steroids inhibits colonic platelet activating factor synthesis by interfering with PLA 2 activity.
The fact that lyso platelet activating factor levels are not significantly enhanced in acute Crohn's disease mucosa compared to normal mucosa, however, may suggest that raised platelet activating factor levels are related to an increased acetyltransferase rather than to PLA 2 activity.
The role of specific acetyltransferase activity in Crohn's disease patients has not been so far studied, and deserves investigation.
It is unknown whether high activity of enzymes is related to change involving the inflammatory cells or both intestinal epithelial and inflammatory cells.
Therefore we suggest that platelet activating factor should be considered as a global mucosal activity marker.
Because no significant difference was observed between colonic platelet activating factor content from the left or right sides of the colon and was unrelated to the extent of disease, biopsies from sigmoid may reflect the levels of platelet activating factor in the whole intestine.
In conclusion, the colonic platelet activating factor is raised in acute Crohn's disease patients irrespective of the severity or the type of inflammatory cell infiltration.
As shown in this study, two biopsies from the left side of the colon are sufficient to assess the mucosal disease activity in Crohn's disease patients whatever the location of the disease.
The role of platelet activating factor blocker in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease deserves investigation.
Epidermal growth factor in the oesophagus
Abstract
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) has been implicated in mitogenesis and oncogenesis in the gastrointestinal tract.
To determine the role of EGF in oesophageal disease, its quantity and distribution in the oesophageal mucosa of control subjects and patients with oesophageal disease were studied.
Oesophageal biopsy specimens, taken 20–40 cm from the incisors in 72 patients, were graded histologically and adjacent specimens were taken for immunohistochemical analysis of the distribution of EGF.
In patients with Barrett's columnar lined oesophagus, specimens were also taken from the gastric cardia for comparison.
Twenty two biopsy specimens showed oesophagitis, 20 Barrett's mucosa, and 30 were histologically normal.
EGF was found in the capillary endothelium of the normal oesophageal papillae and basal mucosa.
Significantly more EGF positive papillae were found in the normal mucosa (81%) than in the inflamed mucosa (42%)(p).
The 20 patients with Barrett's mucosa showed abnormal expression of EGF in 25% of the isthmus and superficial epithelial cells.
This study has shown that EGF is found only in the endothelial cells of the capillaries of the normal oesophageal mucosa and that the peptide is detectable significantly less frequently than normal in the inflamed oesophageal mucosa.
EGF is also abnormally present, in large quantities, in the cytoplasm of the epithelial cells of Barrett's mucosa compared with gastric mucosa.
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is a single chain polypeptide that is secreted by submandibular glands, Brunner's glands in the duodenum, Paneth cells of the small intestine, and other exocrine glands, including the pancreas.
EGF is also found in ‘a novel cell lineage containing neutral mucin’ in the stomach and intestine adjacent to ulceration of the mucosa and in many gastrointestinal tumours.
EGF is found in many body fluids, including saliva.
Circulating concentrations are low, but high concentrations are found within platelet granules.
By binding to the EGF receptor, EGF exerts protean actions, including effects on wound healing, cellular proliferation, differentiation, and oncogenesis in the gastrointestinal tract.
EGF has been reported to increase epithelial proliferation throughout the gastrointestinal tract and also in other squamous epithelia including the skin.
Wether there is a deficiency of secreted salivary EGF in patients with uncomplicated reflux oesophagitis is unknown, because reports have been contradictory.
In any case, the luminal route of action of EGF for maintaining oesophageal mucosal integrity seems unlikely since the oesophageal proliferative cells are situated in the basal layer.
This study aimed to define the route whereby EGF gains access to the oesophageal epithelium, by immunohistochemical determination of the EGF distribution in biopsy specimens from healthy and diseased oesophageal mucosa, to determine whether it plays any role in the pathogenesis of oesophagitis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS
Twenty eight women and 24 men (mean age 48 years (range 20–77)) who attended an endoscopy clinic were studied, as were a further 20 patients (eight women and 12 men)(median age 67 years (range 42–81) who had proved Barrett's mucosa.
All patients gave informed consent.
None was taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: 26 were taking ranitidine 150 mg twice daily.
An oesophageal biopsy specimen was taken 20–40 cm from the incisors for histological examination.
An immediately adjacent specimen was snap frozen in the endoscopy suite.
Patient's with Barrett's mucosa had three specimens taken from the area of columnar lined oesophagus and a fourth from the gastric cardia for comparison.
Cryostat sections (6 µm) were cut and EGF distribution was studied immunohistochemically.
Monoclonal antibody (IgG) to EGF type 1 was supplied by Oncogene Science (Manhasset, NY, USA).
This monoclonal antibody shows no cross reactivity with transforming growth factor alpha.
The avidin-biotin complex method followed by DAB visualisation were used to show the EGF-antibody complex.
Negative control slides comprised normal oesophageal mucosa which had been treated with either avidin-biotin or EGF monoclonal antibody alone.
In addition, we used absorbance experiments, incubating sections with purified EGF (BM, UK) at 1 µg/ml.
Sections of salivary glands containing EGF were used as positive controls.
Some sections were also stained immunohistochemically with polyclonal antibody to blood group factor H (Becton-Dickenson, UK).
Blood group factor H has been reported to blind preferentially to endothelial cells as well as intestinal mucins and other glycoproteins.
One of the authors (i) assessed the biopsy specimens and graded them according to the severity of histological inflammation (Jarvis criteria) and (ii) classified Barrett's mucosa according to the type of metaplasia — intestinal, junctional, or fundic.
Sections of metaplastic mucosa that had a homogeneous pattern (>mucosal surface) were selected.
Dysplasia of the Barrett's mucosa was classified according to Riddell.
Two observers independently assessed the EGF staining of the biopsy specimens without information about the histological status.
The percentage of positively stained papillae containing EGF endothelium in each biopsy specimen was calculated as a percentage of the total number of papillae.
The positive EGF staining of Barrett's mucosal biopsy specimens was graded according to a criteria that we have developed.
Five randomly viewed areas of at least 400, to a maximum of 1000, consecutive nucleated epithelial cells in well orientated sections were independently assessed by two observers.
The sections were considered positive only if the number of epithelial cells which had at least 1+ staining was >of the total epithelial cells.
The intensity of staining was graded as 0–3 (0 — no staining; 1+ — weakly positive; 2+ — moderately positive (cytoplasm positive but unstained cytoplasm also visible); and 3+ — strongly positive (entire cytoplasm densely stained)).
The grade considered to be 3+ was stained as densely as simultaneously stained (control) submandibular tissue.
In some sections with non-homogeneous staining, intensity per section was calculated.
For example, if 500 cells were counted in one section and the number of cells of each intensity was as follows; 0=20, 1=150, 2=230, 3=100, the mean count was calculated as follows:(0×20) + (1×150) + (2×230) + (3×100) =910/500 and the mean intensity in the section was rounded up to ‘2’.
Sections of Barrett's mucosa were also stained to show neutral and acid mucous substances by the Alcian blue/distance periodic acid Schiff method.
STATISTICS
The distribution of the data was Gaussian for normal and inflamed squamous oesophagitis and therefore analysis of variance was used to calculate the significance of intergroup distribution compared with intragroup variation to 95% confidence intervals.
Because the distribution of the data from the Barrett's mucosa was not Gaussian the Kruskal-Wallis test was used to assess the variation between EGF expression in normal cardiac mucosa, Barrett's intestinal mucosa, and Barrett's junctional/cardiac mucosa.
In addition, the Wilcoxon rank test was used to assess specifically the difference in EGF expression between Barrett's intestinal mucosa and Barrett's junctional/cardiac mucosa as well as between Barrett's mucosa with dysplasia and Barrett's mucosa without dysplasia.
Results
Thirty patients, 16 women and 14 men (median age 52 years) were subsequently shown to have both normal endoscopic and histological findings.
Twenty two patients (12 women and 10 men)(median age 42 years) were subsequently shown to have oesophageal inflamation endoscopically and histologically.
Twenty biopsy specimens had previously been noted to show Barrett's mucosa.
Some sections incubated with EGF monoclonal antibody and EGF peptide showed minimal staining in the cytoplasm but this was less than grade 1 in our grading system and therefore did not interferewith our quantitation.
The cells in the squamous mucosa of the oesophagus that showed positive staining for EGF were confined to the capillary endothelial cells immediately adjacent to the basal cells of the papillae (Fig 1).
The staining pattern was cytoplasmic in nature.
There was no discernable staining of the mucosa in the control slides treated with either EGF or avidin-biotin complex alone.
The glandular and ductal cells of the salivary glands stained strongly for EGF.
Serial sections in 10 patients stained for the presence of blood group factor H (Fig 2A) showed that the staining pattern detected all endothelium whereas (Fig 2B) not all blood vessels stained positively with EGF, only those in the lamina propria.
When the sections were stained with elastase red and yellow (a marker of elastic fibres in the smooth muscle of vascular tissue) none of the EGF positive vessels were stained (not shown).
In sections from normal oesophageal mucosa, almost all the endothelium in the papillae stain positively for EGF (Fig 3A).
On the other hand, sections from inflamed oesophageal mucosa contain little EGF in the capillary endothelium resulting in few EGF positive papillae.
Consequently, the proportion of papillae with EGF positive capillaries was significantly decreased in inflamed oesophageal mucosa (42.5%) compared with normal oesophageal mucosa (82.5%)(p)(Fig 4).
The 30 patients with normal endoscopic and histological findings had biopsy specimens taken at different levels of the oesophagus.
Eleven patients had specimens taken at 20 cm, nine patients at 30 cm, and 10 at 40 cm.
There was no significant difference in EGF staining of mucosa obtained from different levels of the oesophagus (Fig 5).
Periodic acid Schiff staining showed that most Barrett's mucosa and all the gastric mucosa contained neutral mucin (red colouration in cytoplasm) while some areas, especially those composed of intestinal mucosa, contained acid mucin (blue colouration in cytoplasm) or glands with both acid and neutral mucin (purple colouration in the cytoplasm).
On histological examination, five of the subjects with Barrett's mucosa had moderate or high grade dysplasia, while the other 15 had no dysplasia.
Although the areas that stained positively for EGF corresponded well with the acid mucin or mixed mucin glands in intestinal-type mucosa, in the other types of Barrett's epithelium EGF stained strongly positive in an average of 25% (range 12- 24%) of the superficial epithelial cells of the mucosa, irrespective of PAS staining (Fig 3B).
Not all the glandular tissue in any section was positively stained, showing that the expression of EGF in Barrett's epithelium is not uniform.
The staining of the epithelial cells is cytoplasmic, involving the basolateral and, to a lesser extent, the apical surfaces of the cells and EGF can also be seen in the mucus derived from the glandular ducts in many cases (Fig 3C and D).
Although EGF was expressed to a greater degree in intestinal and fundic/junctional Barrett's mucosa than in gastric mucosa (p), there was no difference between the metaplastic types of Barrett's mucosa or the degree of dysplasia (p=0.5)(Fig 6).
There was no difference between EGF expression in patients with uncomplicated reflux oesophagitis receiving treatment with ranitidine and those without therapy (median values 2 and 2, respectively)(p=0.8).
Discussion
There have been no previous reports of the occurrence or distribution of EGF in the healthy and inflamed squamous oesophagus, although we have described the occurrence of EGF in Barrett's mucosa.
We have shown that the EGF antibody used in this study binds reliably to EGF peptide as reported by other workers.
This study has shown that EGF can be found in the endothelial cells immediately adjacent to basal cell layers of the normal oesophagus, including those forming papillae.
This is in keeping with previous studies that have found EGF in the vascular endothelium immediately adjacent to basal cells in bile ducts, glomeruli, and human oral mucosa.
In normal oesophageal mucosa the distribution of EGF does not alter from proximal to distal oesophagus.
It is interesting to note that not all vascular endothelium stains with EGF.
It seems that EGF is confined to the capillaries and is not found in the submucosal venules and arterioles.
This study has also shown there are significantly fewer EGF-positively staining endothelial cells in inflamed than in normal oesophageal mucosa, although the distribution of the EGF is similar in inflamed and normal mucosa.
EGF is also found in the superficial epithelial cells in Barrett's oesophagus, a distribution which is quite different to that in the squamous mucosa.
The origin of the EGF found in the oesophageal endothelial cells has not been defined.
It is possible that EGF is not produced in the oesophagus but is transported to the oesophageal mucosa by the blood stream, being released from the platelets and then transported into capillary endothelium.
It has been shown previously that EGF exerts greater trophic action when administered intravenously than via the luminal route.
Perhaps EGF is stored in the endothelial cells of the normal mucosa and when inflamation develops is rapidly utilised to stimulate cell proliferation because EGF is cruicial for the change from quiescent cells to the S phase of the proliferative cycle.
EGF is known to stimulate keratinoxyte proliferation in vitro and in vivo.
Our inding that EGF is depleted in oesophagitis is perhaps explained by a report that EGF has a relatively short duration of action (<hours), so that continual stimulation by fresh EGF is required to maintain a mitogenic response, depleting stores of EGF in the endothelial cells.
Moreover we, and others, have also shown that the density of EGF receptors is maximal in the basal layer of the squamous oesophagus, which is the proliferative zone.
The assumption that the lower levels of EGF in oesophagitis are secondary to the oesophagitis has not yet been confirmed.
The alternative — that these lower levels are partly responsible for the development of oesophagitis — is also possible.
EGF production is known to decrease with age.
Reduced production may reflect decreased delivery of EGF to the oesophageal mucosa, which may partly explain the increased incidence and severity of oesophagitis in the elderly.
Increased cellular proliferation has previously been reported in Barrett's mucosa, and it is interesting to note that EGF is found in many of the epithelial cells of Barrett's epithelium.
It has been proposed that the trophic and antisecretory effects of EGF are mediated by the luminal route in the stomach.
However, it has been stated that EGF does not stimulate the proliferation of gastric mucosal cells unless there is a breach of the mucosal lining.
On the other hand, luminal EGF may be involved in the proliferative abnormalities of Barrett's mucosa because EGF receptors have been found throughout the glands of Barrett's mucosa.
It is apparent from the present study that the EGF content of the different metaplastic and dysplastic types of Barrett's mucosa is similar.
Therefore it seems that the EGF concentration in the cells does not explain the greater carcinogenic potential of mucosa with high grade dysplasia.
In this context, it has been reported that over-expression of EGF in gastric mucosa is, by itself, unlikely to cause transformation without the simultaneous overproduction of the EGF receptor.
Some areas of intestinal type Barrett's mucosa contained predominantly acid mucin where as all other forms of Barrett's mucosa contained neutral mucin (normal type of mucin in gastric mucosa).
Wright et al have described EGF secreting lineages containing neutral mucin arising beside ulcerated intestinal mucosa.
We found no difference, however, between the expression of EGF in Barrett's mucosa containing neutral mucin and that containing acid mucin (data not shown).
In conclusion, this study has shown EGF or EGF-like peptide in the capillaries of the oesophagus and in the glandular tissue of Barrett's mucosa, and confirms previous reports.
Decreased amounts of EGF are found in the mucosa of the inflamed oesophagus, indicating that EGF may also play a role in the development or healing of oesophagitis.
Non-invasive assessment of gastrointestinal motility disorders in diabetic patients with and without cardiovascular signs of autonomic neuropathy
Abstract
Twenty six patients with insulin dependant diabetes mellitus underwent a gastric emptying test, a gall bladder contraction test, an orocaecal transit study, and a colon transit test.
Eleven patients had signs of cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy, 15 patients wre without signs of cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy.
Mean gastric clearance of radioopaque markers ingested with a meal averaged 29.5 (2.3) markers per six hours in subjects without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy compared with 17.8 (2.3) markets per six hours in patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (p).
Gall bladder emptying in response to graded CCK8 stimulation was impaired in five of 11 patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy, whereas it was normal in the patients without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (p).
Oral caecal transit times were not significantly different in the two patient groups, whereas colonic transit was slower in the patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy compared with the group without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (p).
There was no correlation between disturbed gastric clearance, impaired gall bladder contraction, and prolonged colonic transit time in the patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy nor was there a correlation between any disturbed motor function and age or duration of diabetes.
We conclude that autonomic neuropathy can affect motor functions throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
Any disturbed motor function in the gut could therefore be one of the numerous expressions of diabetic neuropathy affecting the cardiovascular, the endoctine or the gastrointestinal system.
Autnomic neuropathy is a frequent complication of long standing diabetes mellitus.
Clinically autonomic neuropathy is well known to produce symptoms caused by cardiovascular dysfunction and cardiovascular reflexes are used to diagnose autonomic neuropathy.
The gastrointestinal tract, however, is another are that may become severely affected by autonomic neuropathy.
The prevelance of symptoms caused by gastrointestinal dysfunction may reach 76% in an unselected population of diabetic outpatients.
Delayed gastric emptying as a result of gastroparesis is probably the best known and most extensively evaluated motor disturbance of the gastrointestinal tract in diabetic patients.
Other parts of the digestive system may, however, also be affected and in a number of different studies constipation and diarrhoea as well as impaired gall bladder contraction in diabetic patients have been attributed to autonomic neuropathy.
Despite these many reports, a comprehensive evaluation of the motor function at different levels of the gastrointestinal tract in diabetic patients has never been carried out.
Thus, in the present study we evaluated gastric clearance of indigestible markers, orocaecal transit time, colonic transit time, and gall bladder contraction in two groups of diabetic patients who differed as to whether they had or did not have signs of autonomic neuropathy affecting the cardiovascular system.
Methods
PATIENTS
Diabetic patients attending our outpatient clinic were evaluated for participation in this study.
Patients were selected on a random, consecutive basis.
They were asked to participate only if they had no history of gastrointestinal diseases or abdominal surgery other than appendectomy, and if they had no symptoms that could be attributed to gastrintestinal motility disorders.
Twenty six patients in whom the presence or absence of autonomic neuropathy affecting the cardiovascular system was established participated in this study.
The study protocol was approved by the Human Ethical Committee of the University of Basel and written informed consent was obtained from each subject.
Clinical data of the patients studied are given in Table I.
ASSESSMENT OF CARDIOVASCULAR AUTONOMIC NEUROPATHY
Patients were considered to have cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy if at least two of four cardiovascular tests were found to be pathological.
None of the patients was taking any medication known to interfere with cardiovascular reflexes.
The test battery for cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy assessment included beat-to-beat variation at rest and during forced respiration, heart rate response to standing, and Valsalva manoeuvre.
The tests were done using the ProSciCard Program (Pro Science GmbH, Linde, FRG) whereby a standard electrocardiograph (ECG) recording was amplified by an ECG preamplifier and fed to a Pro Science laboratory computer.
All tests were performed after overnight fasting and before injecting the morning insulin dose.
The test procedures were as follows:
Beat-to-beat variation at rest
Aftr the patient had remained in recumbent position for at least 10 minutes and the heart rate had reached a steady state, R-R intervals were recrded contrinuously for five minutes or over 170 beats.
From the first 150 R-R intervals free of artefacts, the coefficient of vatiation as well as the root mean square of successive differences were computed.
Beat-to-beat variation during forced respiration
The patient was asked to breathe deeply at a rate of six breaths/minute, the inspiration lasting for four seconds, the expiration for six seconds.
Breathing rhythm was established by the movement of a bar graph displayed on the computer screen.
Coefficient of variation and root mean square of successive differences were calculated for 100 R-R intervals free of artefacts.
From the breathing cycle with the maximal heart rate variation, the longest (R-Rmax) and the shortest R-R interval (R-Rmin) were determined and the difference R-Rmax-R-Rmin as well as the quotient R-Rmax/R-Rmin (E/I ratio) calculated.
In addition, the ‘mean circular resultant’ was computed.
This parameter was particularly independent of the intrinsic heart rate.
Heart response to standing (Ewing test)
While the ECG was recorded, the patient was asked to change from supine to standing position.
The ratio between the length of the R-R intervals at beats number 30 and 15 after standing (R-R30/R-R15) were calculated.
In addition, a modified quotient was calculated based on the shortest R-R interval between beat number 5 and 25 and the longest interval between beat number 21 and 45.
Heart rate response to Valsalva manoeuvre
The sitting patient was asked to blow into a mouthpiece connected to a manometer held at 40 mm Hg pressure for 15 seconds and then to breathe normally.
Timing was controlled for by optical and acustical computer signals.
The ratio between the longest R-R interval during the first 15 sec after the manoeuvre and shortest R-R interval during the manoeuvre was calculated.
Test results were compared with age related reference values derived from a study on 168 nondiabetic healthy subjects.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES: ASSESSMENT OF GASTROINTESTINAL MOTOR FUNCTIONS
Gall bladder contraction
Gall bladder contraction was assessed by high resolution real time ultrasonography (Aloka SSD650) with a 3.5 MHz probe on a sector scanner.
Details on the procedure have been published previously.
Longitudinal sonograms of the gall bladder were recorded on film.
Scans were obtained by manipulating the transducer so that it followed the appropriate long axis of the gall bladder and the largest gall bladder diameters at each time were recorded.
No gall stones, gall bladder wall thickening, or other pathology were identified in any subject.
Gall bladder volumes were calculated from the measured parameters with the software of the ultrasound unit, assuming that the shape of the gall bladder approximated a solid with elliptical sections, the excentricity depending on that at the level of the greatest transverse section.
These assumptions and the mathematical formula used to calculate the volume have been described and validated by Everson and colleagues.
All patients were studied after overnight fasting.
After a basal period of 30 minutes, increasing doses of synthetic cholecystokinin octapeptide (CCK8) were infused intravenously, each dose for 30 minutes (2.4, 7.2, 21.6 pmol/kg/ hour).
Every 10 minutes, three images of the gall bladder were taken and the mean of the three measurements was taken as the response at this time point.
Gastric clearance of indigestible markers
Gastric emptying was assessed on a different day after overnight fasting by means of 10 radioopaque markers ingested with a standard test meal.
These markers were custom made polyurethane particles impregnated with barium sulphate, of density 1.7 g/ml, measuring 2×2×10 mm.
Radiographs of the upper abdomen (24×30 cm) were taken 1.5, 3, 4.5, and 6 hours after a meal and marker ingestion by high voltage technique (100 kV, 20 mAs) to minimise radiation exposure.
Two observers independently assessed the films to count the number of markers retained in the stomach.
If all markers had passed from the stomach in less than six hours, subsequent radiographs were not taken.
The test meal consisted of 10 readiopaque markers, orange juice, crunchy nut cornflakes, 100 ml milk, and biscuits with cheese amounting to a total of 69.5 g carbohydrates, 10.4 g fat, and 7.8 g protein (413 kcal).
Twenty minutes before ingestion of the meal, the usual insulin dose was administered by the patients.
The meal was eaten within five minutes.
Orocaecal transit time
Orocaecal transit time was measured by hydrogen breath analysis.
The test meal contained 12 ml lactulose and was eaten after overnight fasting by each subject within five minutes, again 20 minutes after insulin injection.
End expiratory breath samples were collected at baseline before intake of the meal and then every 15 minutes for up to five hours using a commercially available double bag designed to collect alveolar air.
Hydrogen concentration (ppm) in the breath samples was measured on a hydrogen analyser (GMI Medical, Renfrew, Strathclyde, Scotland).
Orocaecal transit time was defined as the time between meal intake and initial rise in hydrogen concentration of at least 10 ppm above fasting levels.
The tests were done in a quiet room with patients sitting at a table.
Colonic transit time
Colonic transit time was assessed by means of radioopaque markers.
The subjects ingested three sets of 20 markers at 24 hour intervals and a single abdominal radiograph was taken of the subject supine 24 hours after ingestion of the last set of markers.
Two investigators independently evaluated the films to count the number of markers within the colon.
Colonic transit time was calculated as 1.2×the sum of markers in the colon.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are expressed as mean (SEM) if not specified otherwise.
Statistical evaluation was performed by analysis of variance, Student's t test or χ 2 tests where appropriate.
Results
Twenty six diabetic patients, of whom 22 were insulin dependent and four non-insulin-dependent (Table I), were studied.
Eleven of these patients had signs of autonomic neuropathy affecting the cardiovascular system and in 15 patients there were no signs of autonomic cardiovascular dysfunction.
The two patient groups did not differ with respect to age and gender, but there were significant differences as to mean Hb A 1 C levels, in duration of diabetes and the presence of retinopathy (Table I).
GALL BLADDER CONTRACTION
Mean fasting gall bladder volumes were similar in the two patient groups (17.2 (2.8) ml in patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy and 17.9 (1.6) ml in patients without).
Intravenous infusion of graded doses of cholecystokinin 8 induced a dose dependent and significant decrease in gall bladder volume in both groups of patients.
Gall bladder contraction was significantly (p) weaker, however, in patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy as compared with those without (Fig 1) as in the former patients only the highest dose of cholecystokinin 8 induced a significant decrease of gall bladder volumes.
In patients without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy infusion of increasing doses of cholecystokinin 8 induced after 30 minutes a reduction of the gall bladder volume to 19 (5) % of fasting volume.
In contrast, in patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy the gall bladder volume decreased in response to the same dose of cholecystokinin 8 to only 51 (6) %, the difference being highly significant (p).
Gall bladder contraction during cholecystokinin 8 infusion at doses reproducing physiological blood levels — that is, up to 7.2 pmol/kg/hour) was impaired in five of 11 patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy whereas it was normal in the patient group without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy according to the criteria of Pomeranz and Shaffer.
GASTRIC CLEARANCE OF INDIGESTIBLE MARKERS
Mean gastric clearance of radioopaque markers ingested with the test meal was significantly (p) faster in patients without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy as compared to patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (Fig 2).
The area under the emptying curve (number of markers×h) averaged 29.5 (2.3) in patients without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy compared with 17.8 (4.3) in patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (p).
Three of 11 patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (27%) had a gastric emptying test considered abnormal according to the criteria of Feldman and coworkers and our own normal values, although none of these patients had symptoms that could be attributed to the late gastric emptying.
OROCAECAL TRANSIT TIME
Mean orocaecal transit time of the test meal containing lactulose, assessed by hydrogen breath analysis was similar in the two patients groups: in patients without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy it averaged 170 (19) minutes and in patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy 138 (19) minutes.
These results are not statistically different.
COLONIC TRANSIT TIME
Mean colonic transit time was 35.4 (4.7) hours in patients without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy, being much shorter (p) than in patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in whom it averaged 53.8 (5.5) hours.
The results of segmental transit time are given in Table II.
Transit time tended to be slower in all three segments of the colon (right, left, and rectosigmoid colon) in patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy although the differences reached statistical significance in the right colon only.
CORRELATIONS
We have calculated potential correlations between any disturbed motor function and the presence or absence of cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy.
Furthermore, we have analysed potential correlations between individual motor function disturbances and age or duration of diabetes using univariate histograms and bivariate scatter plots (generalized draftman's display).
In no instance did we find any significant correlation (data not shown).
Discussion
There is good evidence that gastrointestinal motor functions become impaired as diabetic patients develop autonomic neuropathy.
Interdigestive motor complexes are absent, postprandial antral motor activity is decreased, gastric emptying of radioopaque is delayed, and gall gladder contraction is reduced.
A comprehensive evaluation of the motility at different levels of the gastrointestinal tract in diabetic patients, however, has not been so far reported.
In the present study, we classified asymptomatic diabetic patients into two groups according to presence or absence of cardiovascular signs of autonomic neuropathy using standardised criteria.
Motility was then assessed in each patient by non-invasive tests: gastric emptying was measured by means of solid radioopaque markers, gall bladder contraction in response to cholecystokinin 8 stimulation by ultrasonography, mouth-to-caecum transit time by using the lactulose hydrogen breath test, and colonic transit time again by means of indigestible radioopaque markers.
Gastric clearance of indigestible markers was significantly slower in patients with than in those without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy.
Gastric clearance had to be considered abnormal in three asymptomatic patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy according to Feldman and coworkers as well as to our own criteria: in healthy subjects all 10 markers were emptied from the stomach by six hours.
Thus, a radiograph six hours after meal intake showing incomplete gastric emptying of markers indicates delayed gastric emptying.
Emptying of radioopaque markers does not reflect gastric emptying of food components, as it is known that indigestible particles larger than 1.5 mm are emptied from the stomach during the interdigestive period.
It has, however, been suggested that clearance of radioopaque markers is a more sensitive test than standard radionuclide scintigraphy for documenting gastric motor dysfunction in diabetics.
Here wr extend these observations by showing that 25% of asymptomatic diabetic patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy have abnormal gastric emptying of indigestible particles.
This abnormality can be documented with a simple test that is readily available.
The frequency of gall bladder motor disorder in patients with diabetes mellitus is still controversial.
Enlargement of fasting gall bladder volumes as well as impaired gall bladder contraction in response to sham feeding, to oral meal intake or to hormonal stimulation has been reported.
In the present study we found that five asymptomatic diabetic patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy had impaired gall bladder emptying in response to graded doses of cholecystokinin 8.
These results closely agree with a study of Stone and coworkers who, using cholesintigraphy, observed a 21% reduction of gall bladder emptying in response to a maximal dose of cholecystokinin 8 in diabetic patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in comparison with patients without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy.
Discrepant results have been described by Fiorrucci and coworkers who were unable to confirm any difference in gall bladder emptying rates induced by hormonal stimulation.
The discrepancy with this latter study and our present results cannot easily be explained.
In both studies, gall bladder emptying was determined by ultrasonography and dose response curves were determined in both studies.
Fiorrucci and coworkers, however, infused the synthetic cholecystokinin analogue caerulein, whereas we used human cholecystokinin 8.
Because the relative molar potency of caerulein compared with that of the naturally occurring cholecystokinin for gall bladder contraction is not known, decreased gall bladder contraction in the study of Fiorucci could have been masked by using caerulein.
Breath hydrogen analysis after oral lactulose containing meals is an easy, non-invasive, bedside test to measure mouth-to-caecum transit time.
The test has several shortcomings, however:(i) it can only be accurately interpreted, if the small intestinal flora is normal;(ii) it requires a bacterial flora in the caecum which is capable of producing H 2 ;(iii) it only measures the transit of the head of the meal; and (iv) its reproducibility has been questioned.
Its main advantage is the simplicity of the test.
In the present study, we could not detect a significant difference in orocaecal transit time between patients with and patients without cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy.
We believe that methodological limitations of the lactulose hydrogen breath test may explain the present results and account for the reported controversies.
Colonic transit time was significantly longer in the patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy.
This resulted from slower regional transit through all three parts of the colon, although the difference was significant for the right colon only.
These findings agree with a previous study of diabetic neuropathy where constipation was the most common gastrointestinal symptom.
It has to be pointed out, however, that we selected asymptomatic patients and thus total colonic transit times have still to be considered in the high normal range.
The present study confirmed and extended previous observations that different gut motor functions can be impaired in diabetic patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy.
We did not find a correlation between disturbed gastric emptying, impaired gall bladder contraction, and prolonged colonic transit time in the patients with cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy; also, there was no correlation between any disturbed motor function and age or longstanding history of diabetes.
These findings support the hypothesis that autonomic neuropathy affects motility throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
Any disturbed motor function in the gut could therefore be one of the numerous expressions of diabetic neuropathy which can affect the cardiovascular, the endocrine or the gastrointestinal system.
The lack of correlation between the four motility parameters furthermore implies that the disturbed motor functions develop independently and can affect any gut system.
From our results one could speculate that impairment of gall bladder contraction is a sensitive parameter for the diagnosis of autonomic neuropathy in the gastrointestinal tract.
Such a hypothesis requires, however, confirmation in a large group of patients.
Gastroscopic follow up of pernicious anaemia patients
Abstract
To assess the value of gastroscopic cancer surveillance of patients with pernicious anaemia, 56 patients were re-endoscoped and biopsied after three years.
In addition, changes in the density of fundic mucosal endocrine cells were evaluated morphometrically.
Two cases (3.6%) of early gastric cancer and two cases of small gastric carcinoid tumours (3.6%) were detected in addition to the five carcinoids that had been found at the initial endoscopic screening.
Nodular argyrophil cell hyperplasia and morphometric density of argyrophil cells were not stable phenomena: nodular hyperplasias regressed in five patients, remained similar in six, and progressed to a small carcinoid tumour in one.
Serum gastrin concentrations did not correlate well with changes in the endocrine cell density.
Regular endoscopic surveillance for gastric cancer may be beneficial and realistic in young patients with pernicious anaemia while the importance of fundic endocrine cell hyperplasia and that of small gastric carcinoids need further study.
The basic histopathological phenomenon in pernicious anaemia is severe chronic atrophic gastritis in the proximal acid producing gastric mucosa (type A chronic atrophic gastritis).
The atrophic process gradually causes the disappearance of all acid producing parietal cells (total atrophy) and leads to achlorhydria.
The antral mucosa is, as a rule, devoid of atrophy and achlorhydria causes hypergastrinaemia through sustained secretion of gastrin from antral G cells because of the loss of negative feedback of acid.
It has long been known that pernicious anaemia predisposes to development of gastric adenocarcinoma.
Intestinal metaplasia, achlorhydria, and the formation of carcinogenic N-nitroso compounds are suggested pathogenetic factors.
However, the prevalence of gastric adenocarcinoma does not exceed 1–3% in patients with pernicious anaemia, and only 2% of gastric adenocarcinomas are associated with pernicious anaemia.
The need for gastroscopic follow up of pernicious anaemia patients is therefore still debated.
More recent findings indicate that hypergastrinaemia associated with pernicious anaemia leads to hyperplasia of fundic endocrine cells.
In association with endocrine cell hyperplasia, gastric carcinoid tumours have been observed in 1–7% of pernicious anaemia patients screened by gastroscopy.
Procedures after the discovery of these tumours have varied from mere follow up to radical gastrectomy.
The long term behaviour of small gastric carcinoids and results after their treatment need to be further observed.
In this study we evaluated the findings of follow up gastroscopies performed three years after primary gastroscopic screening of pernicious anaemia patients.
The aim of the gastroscopies was to detect possible new gastric tumours, to follow up known gastric carcinoids, and to observe the effect of sustained hypergastrinaemia on fundic endocrine cell changes.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
In 1986, 70 pernicious anaemia patients below the age of 76 years were screened by gastroscopy at the Second Department of Surgery of the Helsinki University Central Hospital.
These patients had been treated earlier for pernicious anaemia in the same hospital between 1972 and 1985.
The screening showed hyperplastic polyps in 12 patients (17%), a tubular adenoma in one patient (1%), and carcinoid tumours in five patients (7%).
The lesions were found in the atrophic mucosa of the gastric corpus and fundus except for one antral carcinoid tumour.
The carcinoids were associated with diffuse and nodular hyperplasia of fundic endocrine cells.
Fifteen additional patients showed nodular hyperplasia of endocrine cells that was not seen in 14 normal controls.
No cases of adenocarcinoma were found.
The carcinoids were removed by hot biopsy forceps or electrocautery snare.
In 1989, that is three years after the original gastroscopic screening, the same pernicious anaemia patients were called for a follow up gastroscopy.
Fifty four of the original 70 patients attended the examination and two additional patients who had moved from the district had gastroscopy done elsewhere.
The mean age of the patients (22 men and 34 women) was 60 years (range 27–78 years) at the time of the second gastroscopy.
ENDOSCOPIC, HISTOLOGICAL, AND LABORATORY METHODS
Several antral and fundic biopsy specimens were taken during the gastroscopies (Olympus GIF-Q 10).
In addition to routine biopsy specimens all local changes such as discoloured spots, ulcerative lesions, and polyps were biopsied separately.
The specimens were fixed overnight in neutral buffered 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin wax.
The sections (4 µm) were stained with haematoxylin and eosin, Alcian blue (pH 2.5)— periodic acid Schiff, and Grimelius techniques.
The diagnosis of carcinoid tumours was based on the typical histological morphology and positive Grimelius staining.
The limit between nodular hyperplasia of endocrine (argyrophil) cells and carcinoid tumours was set at the size of 0.5 mm according to the classification of Solcia et al .
Hyperplasia of endocrine cells was called nodular when there were clusters of five or more endocrine cells as suggested by Borch et al .
Argyrophil (Grimelius positive) staining was supposed to detct most fundic endocrine cells.
Morphometric calculation of these cells was performed using an ocular with a square raster plate (64 points) in the microscopic examination (magnification ×400).
The technique has been described in detail previously.
Briefly, the count of argyrophil cells and the count of raster points coinciding on the mucosa were calculated in areas of standard length and whole thickness of mucosa.
Thus it was possible to determine the density of argyrophil cells in arbitrary units of cell count per volume of the mucosa as expressed by the number of conciding raster points.
To reduce the risk of variable staining intensities, Grimelius staining was performed at the same time for all the specimens of one examination year.
During both periods the same person (S-MS) did the countings blindly from the biopsy specimens which randomly represented the fundic (oxyntic) mucosa.
Fasting serum gastrin was measured by a GASK-PR radioimmunoassay kit from Oris Company, France (normal range 5–50 pmol/l).
According to the information provided, the antiserum used in the assay stained big-gastrin.
Results
ADENOCARCINOMA
The follow up gastroscopies showed two cases of adenocarcinoma.
The ages of the patients were 58 and 68 years, and the duration of pernicious anaemia was seven and three years, respectively.
One of the carcinomas presented as an ulcer in the distal antrum and the other carcinoma was situated in the distal corpus in a tubular adenoma measuring about 3 mm in diameter.
Both patients underwent subtotal gastrectomy without complications.
One of the tumours infiltrated the submucosa and the other was confined to the mucosa.
There was no spread to the lymph nodes.
As for possible premalignant changes, all the patients had severe chronic atrophic gastritis in corpus biopsy specimens consistent with the diagnosis of pernicious anaemia, and four patients had slight atrophic changes in antral specimens.
Corpus biopsy specimens showed intestinal metaplasia in 49 patients and all four patients with slight atrophic changes in antral specimens also had intestinal metaplasia in the antrum.
In 1986 two patients had slight dysplastic changes in random biopsy specimens of the corpus area and six additional patients showed dysplastic changes in antral biopsy specimens.
In 1989 the same two patients who had had dysplastic changes in the corpus specimens three years earlier again showed slight dysplasia.
Of the six patients with dysplastic changes in the antral biopsy specimens in 1986, two did not participate in the follow up examination and the antral specimens of the remaining four patients were now interpreted as being devoid of dysplastic changes but in one case showing intestinal metaplasia.
One additional patient showed slight dysplasia in the antrum.
However, the random biopsy specimens in the patients with early gastric cancer did not show dysplasia at either investigation.
No severe or moderate dysplasia was seen in any of the patients examined.
CARCINOID TUMOURS
The previous gastroscopic screening has shown five cases of gastric carcinoids.
After the removal of the tumours all these patients had been followed up by gastroscopies every six to 12 months.
Two patients showed carcinoid tissue in the electrocautery scars.
In one patient the lesion was destroyed by hot biopsy forceps and further biopsy specimens were free from carcinoid infiltration.
The other kept showing carcinoid infiltrationin repeated specimens.
Finally, the tumour was excised and antrectomy was performed to reduce the gastrin concentration.
In the present follow up gastroscopy, the former patient harboured a new carcinoid tumour in a different location of the gastric corpus.
In addition, two new cases of carcinoid tumours were discovered: one was a polypoid lesion of only 2 mm in diameter, the other was a histological finding as a macroscopic tumour was not evident.
It was, however, considered a true neoplasm because of its wide extension (>mm) and infiltrative growth pattern in the mucosa.
The ages of the patients were 51 and 55 years, the duration of pernicious anaemia 8 and 20 years, and serum gastrin 1550 and 208 pmol/l, respectively.
SERUM GASTRIN
When comparing the values of 1986 and 1989, large variations in the gastrin concentrations were exceptional in cases with a moderate increase in serum gastrin (<pmol/l) and common in cases with a considerable increase in serum gastrin (>pmol/l)(Fig 1).
There were large differences in gastrin concentrations between individual pernicious anaemia patients at the beginning of the disease, but when pernicious anaemia had lasted more than 10 years, the vast majority of gastrin values were within the range of 200–400 pmol/l.
ARGYROPHIL ENDOCRINE CELLS
In 1986, the histological specimens of gastric corpus biopsy specimens showed variable amounts of diffuse argyrophil cell hyperplasia in 44 patients, nodular argyrophil hyperplasia in 15 patients, and carcinoid tumours in five patients.
Of the 15 patients with nodular argyrophil cell hyperplasia, 12 were biopsied again in 1989.
In five patients the nodules had disappeared and histological specimens showed only diffuse hyperplasia of argyrophil cells.
In six patients the specimens still showed nodular argyrophil cell hyperplasia, and one patient had developed a carcinoid tumour.
This patient also had a serum gastrin concentration that had increased from 710 to 1550 pmol/l.
The histological specimens from 1986 are insufficient for analysis of the other patient with a newly developed carcinoid tumour.
The density of argyrophil cells varied considerably from 1986 to 1989 (Fig 2).
The largest changes in the densities were not, however, associated with marked variations in serum gastrin concentrations (Fig 3).
As a whole the argyrophil cell densities had been reduced by 22% during the three years in question.
Discussion
Considering the increased incidence of gastric adenocarcinoma in patients with pernicious anaemia, the present study is in agreement with several previous reports.
According to the Finnish Cancer Registry there were 1244 new cases of gastric adenocarcinoma in Finland in 1984, at which time the population was 4893748.
Thus, the yearly incidence rate was 0.03% for the whole population, and even if it had been adjusted to an age-standardised incidence, the observed incidence of 1.2% would still be more than expected, considering that the uncorrected risk ratio was 40.
Both the carcinomas observed were still so called early gastric cancers with a favourable prognosis.
Regular gastroscopy, if this could be achieved, would benefit pernicious anaemia patients.
However, most authors agree that it is impractical and expensive to follow up all pernicious anaemia patients.
There are some known premalignant conditions that might theoretically be used to identify those patients most in need of regular endoscopic follow up.
As for specific premalignant lesions, tubular adenoma in one patient harboured cancer in this study.
But in terms of general premalignant changes, almost all the patients with chronic atrophic gastritis had intestinal metaplasia, and the mild dysplastic changes in random biopsy specimens in this study did not coincide with the observed cancers.
None, however, had severe dysplasia.
Based on this study, it cannot be said that the pernicious anaemia patients with the greatest risk of developing gastric cancer could be identified using intestinal metaplasia or mild dysplasia in random biopsy specimens as a guide.
However, the age of onset of pernicious anaemia is more than 70 years in 32% of cases and more than 60 years in 64% of cases.
Perhaps it would be possible to screen all pernicious anaemia patients gastroscopically at the time of the diagnosis and follow up at least young patients (those under 60 years of age) endoscopically every three years.
There is no doubt about the malignant potential of adenocarcinoma, but the behaviour of gastric carcinoids is more obscure and needs long term observation.
In older series, only large clinically overt gastric carcinoids were discovered, extensive gastric resections was practised, and the five year survival was only about 50%.
Recently, endoscopic examinations have increasingly resulted in the discovery of small polypoid gastric carcinoids with a favourable prognosis, and the best treatment of these has been debated.
There have been reports of simple gastroscopic monitoring without removal of the tumours and cases of spontaneous regression of the tumours have been observed.
In a large Japanese series of 100 cases of gastric carcinoid tumours, those less than 1 cm in diameter were not associated with metastases in any case, those 1–2 cm in diameter were associated with metastases in 16% of cases, and those 2–5 cm in diameter were associated with metastases in 33% of cases.
On the basis of these and similar findings, it has been suggested that in cases of small tumours up to 1 cm in diameter, endoscopic removal or local excision would be sufficient, but that larger or numerous carcinoid tumours should be treated by gastric resection or gastrectomy with removal of regional lymph notes.
The role of antrectomy in these apparently gastrin dependent tumours is still obscure, but there are reports of regression of fundic carcinoids after antrectomy and subsequent return to normal segum gastrin concentrations.
In our series, we also treated multiple gastric carcinoids endoscopically, with gastroscopic removal of all individual carcinoid polyps.
However, with very large numbers of carcinoid polyps endoscopic removal would be impractical.
In one of our patients endoscopic removal of the carcinoid failed and local excision with accompanying antrectomy was performed.
Other patients were treated endoscopically and during the follow up of three years no residual tumours were observed in the polypectomy scars after complete removal of the primary tumours had been accomplished.
One patient developed a polypoid carcinoid but it was in a new location in the stomach.
However, the follow up period of three years is relatively short.
The stability of gastric carcinoids and hyperplastic endocrine cell changes in the gastric corpus of pernicious anaemia patients has not been extensively studied.
It is generally assumed that hypergastrinaemia predisposes to the development of gastric carcinoids through progressive hyperplastic changes of fundic endocrine cells.
Antrectomy and reduction of gastrin levels had led to regression of gastric carcinoids.
But as mentioned earlier, there has also been regression of gastric carcinoids without such operative intervention.
Recent reports suggest that hyperplasia of fundic endocrine cells is a stable phenomenon in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and very high serum gastrin concentrations.
In addition, Roycayrol and Cattan studied fundic biopsy specimens of 18 totally achlorhydric patients, 12 of whom had pernicious anaemia.
Gastroscopies (2–5 per patient) had been performed with the interval between the first and the last endoscopy varying from 11 to 170 months.
The severity of argyrophil cell hyperplasia was assessed, based on the number of argyrophil cell clusters per mm.
Out of 12 patients originally presenting with argyrophil cell clusters, nine had an unchanged degree of hyperplasia, two had decreased hyperplasia, and one had increased hyperplasia at the end of the study.
The stability of nodular endocrine cell hyperplasia in the previous studies is different from our findings.
In our study, only six patients out of 12 had stable nodular hperplasia of endocrine cells.
In one patient nodular hyperplasia was now associated with a carcinoid tumour, and in five patients the nodules had dissappeared and the biopsy specimens showed only diffuse hyperplasia of fundic endocrine cells.
As a whole, argyrophil cell densities were smaller in 1989 than three years earlier, which may be a true time-related change in pernicious anaemia patients or a methodological failure caused by different staining intensities in different years and because of variations in the counting procedure of the cells in spite of the presence of the same observer.
The density of argyrophil cells also varied considerably in individual patients without large changes in gastrin concentrations.
There must be other significant factors besides hypergastrinaemia which determine the degree of hyperplasia of fundic endocrine cells in pernicious anaemia.
It seems that in addition to a large number of pernicious anaemia patients with stable nodular hyperplasia of fundic endocrine cells, there are patients in whom the hyperplastic change may progress to carcinoid tumours and some in whom it regresses.
In addition, all modules of endocrine cells are perhaps not hyperplastic but related to atrophy of the surrounding structures, since nodules of fundic endocrine cells have also been observed in a recent study in patients with chronic atrophic gastritis and normal serum gastrin values.
In these cases, the nodules may represent passive clumping of non-proliferating endocrine cells in glands in which the non-endocrine epithelial cells have disappeared.
Multiple and recurrent inflammatory fibroid polyps in a Devon family (‘Devon polyposis syndrome’):
Abstract
Inflammatory fibroid polyps are uncommon but well documented as solitary polyps occurring typically in the stomach or ileum.
A Devon family has previously been reported in which a female in three successive generations has presented with multiple polyps requiring repeated surgery over a number of years.
A further two female family members, both siblings from the 3rd generation, who required surgery for the same condition are now reported.
The term ‘inflammatory fibroid polyp’ is now generally accepted and is regarded as distinct from eosinophilic gastroenteritis and other conditions with which it had been previously confused.
The lesions may present at any age and they have always been recorded as solitary, except in one case, and possibly in anothr, in which a second polyp was resected from the site of anastomosis of the previous operation six months before.
The most common site is the stomach, followed by the ileum, and rarely the colon, duodenum, and oesophagus.
The lesion consists of loosely arranged fibrovascular connective tissue with a variable inflammatory infiltrate including eosinophils.
The aetiology remains unknown.
Multiple and recurrent inflammatory fibroid polyps in three generations of a Devon family were reported in 1984.
One female was affected in each generation.
Despite full documentation and reference in a review article, no further instances of a familial occurrence of this condition have come to light and this family remains unique.
Within the last year, two sisters in the third generation have presented with small bowel obstruction as a result of identical lesions and have had to undergo surgery.
Case histories
The family tree is shown in the Figure.
The two new patients are referred to as cases 4 and 5.
CASE 4
This woman aged 30 years presented in 1990 with an ileocolic intussusception which required a limited right hemicolectomy.
The head of the intussusception was found to be an ileal polyp just proximal to the ileocaecal valve which measured 4.5 cm with a 1.5 cm stalk.
She had a history of hospital admissions for similar symptoms in 1976, 1983, and 1989 which resolved spontaneously.
CASE 5
This woman was aged 39 years.
She gave a two month history of symptoms typical of intermittent small bowel obstruction before requiring a limited right hemicolectomy.
A polyp, 3 cm in diameter on a 1.5 cm stalk, was found 17 cm from the ileocaecal valve.
Apart from a moderate increase in the white cell count in both patients, the results of routine investigations were normal.
Histological examination showed typical inflammatory fibroid polyps, identical to those seen previously in cases 1, 2, and 3.
Chromosome analysis on peripheral blood from cases 4 and 5, as previously undertaken in cases 2 and 3, showed no abnormality.
Repeated questioning of other family members, including 4th and 5th generations, a bout dietary fads and gastrointestinal problems gave no pointer to a possible aetiology.
Discussion
The number of family members affected now stands at five, and a number of tentative observations can be made.
Clinical expression of the disorder is still confined to the famel line but, for the first time, two siblings of the 3rd generation have developed clinically symptomatic lesions.
No members of the 4th or 5th generations are yet affected, though males and females of the 4th generation have now reached adulthood and will soon reach the youngest age at which the first operation took place in an affected family member.
There are a number of differences between the five cases (Table).
Case 1 was the only patient who had gastric lesions, all lesions since have been ileal.
The age of presentation is earliest in the 3rd generation with one presentation (case 3) at 22 years and a second (case 4) with a history suggesting the presence of a polyp at the age of either 16 or 23 years.
There is an apparent decrease in the number of polyps affecting each family member, but this may not be a valid observation due to the ages of the three daughters affected and the pattern of recurrence over many years (18 years in case 2).
The length of the history in case 4, who had been admitted to hospital with identical symptoms on three previous occasions suggests that either the polyps are extremely slow growing or that they may even regress.
Investigations, notably chromosome analysis of two more affected members, have remained fruitless.
With only four living members of a single affected family, the opportunity to identify the abnormal chromosome by looking for linkage to other phenotypes does not exist, and thus more specific molecular techniques to pinpoint gene abnormalities cannot be undertaken.
However, the pattern of affected family members makes an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance probable, though X linked inheritance cannot be excluded.
The family is a large one, most members are engaged in rural occupations within the same location, and they are not concerned.
Offers of screening by x rays or endoscopy have not been taken up and we can only await further events.
Detection of mRNAs for macrophage products in inflammatory bowel disease by in situ hybridisation
Abstract
In situ hybridisation has been used to detect mRNAs to the mactophage secretory products, lysozyme, interleukin 1β and tumour necrosis factor-α.
Sections of paraformaldehyde fixed, frozen colonoscopic biopsies from patients with ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease or normal controls were hybridised with specific radiolabelled probes and the signal detected by autoradiography.
Lysozyme mRNA expression was more common in ulcerative colitis (22/27) and Crohn's disease (eight of eight) compared with controls (17/27).
Positive cells were found mainly in the subepithelial region in normal colon, while in inflammatory bowel disease they also appeared in the deeper lamina propria.
Immunocytochemistry in parallel sections showed that lysozyme mRNA was expressed only in macrophages or in metaplastic Paneth cells in longstanding inflammatory bowel disease.
Tissue neutrophils did not express the lysozyme mRNA, though they have large stores of the protein.
Tumour necrosis factor mRNA was detected in four of nine controls compared with 11/15 inflammatory bowel disease patients.
For interleukin 1β, three of eight controls were positive compared with 10/ 13 inflammatory bowel disease.
The tumour necrosis factor signal was located mainly in the deeper lamina propria whereas the interleukin 1β was seen in subepithelial macrophages.
These results confirm increased macrophage activation in inflammatory bowel disease and suggest functional heterogeneity within the intestinal macrophage population.
A disturbance in immunoregulatory control has long been suspected to play a major role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease.
This belief is based on the observation of a variety of immune abnormalities, the response to immunosuppressive drugs and the pathology of the lesions.
Macrophages are crucial cells in the immune and inflammatory events ongoing in the intestinal musoca; being scattered just beneath the epithelium, they represent the first line of defence.
They are phagocytic and are able to present antigen to sensitised T cells, they release a number of cytokines, inflammatory mediators, tissue damaging enzymes, and free oxygen radicals.
Previous studies have shown morphological and histochemical heterogeneity of human intestinal macrophages, with a distinct population being prominent in inflammatory bowel disease.
Immunohistochemical studies using monoclonal antibodies have added further information as there is a peculiar pattern of expression of surface antigenic determinants which is not seen in normal colon, infectious colitis, or graft- versus -host disease.
This pattern consists of the presence of cells staining with the 3G8 and RFD9 antibodies.
Functional studies have provided evidence of macrophage activation: isolated mononuclear cells from the colonic mucosa of inflammatory bowel disease patients seem to have enhanced antigen-presenting activity, increased ability to undergo respiratory burst, ability to stimulate immunoglobulin scretion, and to release the specific secretory products, lysozyme and interleukin 1Β.
Using the polymerase chain reaction, increased levels of mRNA for interleukin 1 have recently been shown in homogenates of mucosal biopsies from patients with inflammatory bowel disease, although the results for tumour necrosis factor mRNA are discrepant.
Both functional studies on isolated cells and conventional mRNA analysis on tissue homogenates, however, might generate artefactual changes that arise from tissue handling, cell disaggregation and separation, or in vitro culture.
In situ hybridisation offers a unique means to overcome most of these problems because it is able to detect mRNA sequences within cells and therefore allows precise localisation within histological preparations.
The aim of this study has been the use of in situ hybridisation to detect mRNAs for three specific macrophage products (lysozyme, interleukin 1Β, tumour necrosis factor α) in endoscopic biopsies of patients with ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease.
Lysozyme is a major protein roduct of macrophages, and while it is produced constitutively in tissue culture, it is produced mainly by newly recruited or actively phagocytic cells in vivo.
Thus, expression of lysozyme mRNA in vivo may be considered a marker for inflammatory rather than resident macrophages.
Interleukin 1 and tumour nectosis factor, likewise, are indocued by inflammatory stimuli, particularly bacterial LPSA.
The production of interleukin 1 and tumour necrosis factor is tightly regulated and increased levels of both cytokines can have deleterious effects, including circulatory failure and death.
To assess cytokine production in tissues, it is necessary to localise both protein and mRNA.
Localisation of protein alone may identify not only producing cells, but also target cells and cells which have taken up the protein by endocytosis.
On their own, mRNA levels may also be misleading, as some cytokines (particularly tumour necrosis factor), are regulated post-transcriptionally, with cellular stores of mRNA being maintained without translation into active protein.
For lysozyme, cells containing mRNA actively synthesise lysozyme protein, while other cells (such as mature neutrophils) store pre-formed lysozyme protein in granules, without any mRNA being present.
Methods
TISSUE SPECIMENS
Colonoscopic biopsies were obtained from patients with active or inactive ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, diagnosed by classical clinical, radiological, endoscopic, and histological criteria.
Patients with active disease were mostly being treated with oral corticosteroids and sulphasalazine, whereas those in remission were receiving sulphasalazine alone.
Control colonic tissue was taken from patients undergoing colonscopy for diagnostic purposes, but who had a negative examination.
Histologically normal duodenal tissue was used as positive control for the lysozyme probe, as lysozyme mRNA is strongly expressed in Paneth cells.
Each biopsy was immediately fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in RNAse free phosphate buffered soline for 20 minutes at room temperature or at 4°C overnight.
After fixation, each biopsy was divided into two halves.
The first half was frozen in liquid nitrogen in OCT embedding medium.
Cryostat sections, 5 µm thick, were cut, mounted on poly-L-lysine coated microscope slides, air-dried, postfixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffered soline, rinsed, dehydrated through graded ethanol baths, and stored at -20°C with desiccant, for up to three months.
The second half was processed to paraffin wax and used for conventional immunocytochemistry.
CYTOSPIN PREPARATIONS
Monocytes from healthy volunteers were isolated by adherence to bacteriological petri dishes, after a Ficoll Paque (Pharamacia) sedimentation step, cultured in PRMI 1640 medium at 10 6 /ml concentration for at least four hours and then stimulated with LPS (Sigma) 10 µg/ml.
Viability, as determined by Trypan blue exclusion, always exceeded 90%.
Fluorescence activated cell sorter analysis of cell suspensions showed that 90 (5) % were monocytes.
After two, four, and 18 hours incubation, cells were harvested and cytospin preparations onto poly-L-lysine coated slides were made.
Slides were subsequently processed as for tissue sections.
MOLECULAR PROBES
A 640 base pair long BamHl-Rsal restriction fragment of the lysozyme cDNA was subcloned in both directions into the Hinc II site of the pGEM3 expression vector plasmid (Promega).
Two forms of recombinant plasmids were generated, depending on the orientation of the insert DNA with respect to the phage T7 and SP6 promoters.
3 5 S-labelled riboprobes of high specific activity were prepared by T7 polymerase action on Hind III linearised plasmids, giving sense-strand (negative control) and antisense strand (complementary probe) riboprobes.
Single-stranded 30 base long oligonucleotide probes for tumour necrosis factor α and interleukin 1Β were supplied by British Biotechnology (Oxford, UK).
Probe cocktails, consisting of an equimolar mixture of exon specific probes (exons 3, 4A, and 4B for tumour necrosis factor-α, exons 5, 6, and 7 for interleukin 1Β) were used.
3 2 P-5' end labelling was obtained using the T4 polynucleotide kinase reaction, with a specific activity of 2–3×10 8 µg.
An irrelevant 36-base long oligonucleotide probe, purchased from Dupont (Randomer NEP 550) was used as a negative control.
Probe size and labelling was checked by electrophoresis in urea polyacrylamide denaturing gels.
IN SITU HYBRIDISATION
Riboprobes
In situ hybridisation with the lysozyme RNA probes was carried out with minor modifications of a standard protocol.
Special care was used to avoid RNAse contamination (baked glassware, solutions made up in water treated with diethylpyrocarbonate).
Briefly, slides were rehydrated in water, treated with 0.2 M HCl for 20 minutes at room temperature, rinsed with 10 mM RIS, 1 mM EDTA buffer, then treated with 20 µg/ml proteinase K in TRIS/EDTA buffer for 10 minutes.
Digestion was stopped by incubating the slides with 0.2% glycine in water for 30 seconds.
Slides were subsequently postfixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffered soline for 20 minutes at room temperature, acetylated in 0.25% acetic anhydride in 0.1 M (pH 8) triethanolamine solution for 10 minutes, washed three times in phosphate buffered soline, then dehydrated and air dried for at least one hour.
The hybridisation mixture containing 10 5 cpm/µl of 3 5 S-labelled RNA probe was pipetted onto dry slides and covered with siliconised glass coverslips.
The hybridisation mixture consisted of 50% formamide, 10% dextran sulphate, 0.01% polyvinylpyrrolidone, 1 µg/µl tRNA, 10 mM TRIS pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM pyrophosphate, 10 mM dithiothreitol.
Hybridisation was carried out for 18 hours at 50°C in a humid environment.
After hybridisation, coverslips were removed by incubating the slides in a solution of 50% formamide, 0.01% BSA, 0.01% Ficoll, 0.01% polyvinlypyrrolidone, 10 mM TRIS pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM pyrophosphate, and 10 mM dithiothreitol at 50°C for one hour.
The slides were washed in 0.5 M NaCl, 10 mM TRIS pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA for 15 minutes, then digested with RNAse A at 20 µg/ml in the same buffer for 30 minutes at 37°C.
The slides were rinsed once with the same buffer, then transferred to 2× SSC (20× SSC=3 M NaCl; 0.3 M trisodium citrate) at 45°C for one hour, followed by 0.1× SSC at 60°C for another hour.
The slides were dehydrated through graded ethanol baths with 0.3 M NH 4 -Acetate, air dried and processed for autoradiography.
Oligonucleotide probes
Probes were resuspended at 10 5 cpm/µl in a hybridisation mixture containing 0.8 M NaCl, 30% formamide, 10% dextran sulphate, 0.4 µg/ ml tRNA, 0.02% BSA, polyvinlypyrrolidone, Ficoll, 0.01% pyrophosphate, 5 mM EDTA, 50 mM TRIS.
Hybridisation was performed at 37°C overnight.
Posthybridisation washes were carried out in 4× SSC at 37°C for one hour and 45°C for another hour.
Autoradiography
Dried hybridised slides were dipped in Ilford K5 prewarmed (43°C) liquid emulsion and exposed in the dark at 4°C for four days (RNA probes) or nine days (oligonucleotide probes).
They were developed in Kodak D19 developer at 17°C, counterstained with haematoxylin and eosin and mounted under coverslips in DePeX (BDH).
Immunocytochemistry
Immunocytochemistry was carried out on paraffin embedded tissue sections, using the following antibodies:(a) a rabbit antihuman lysozyme antiserum (DAKO) and (b) a mouse antihuman monoclonal antibody KP1 (kindly provided by Dr D Y Mason), detecting a formalin resistant epitope of the CD68 cluster, a highly glycosylated intracellular protein expressed by most tissue macrophages.
This antibody can be used on paraffin embedded tissue.
The PAP technique was used on tissue sections stained with the antilysozyme antiserum.
Endogenous peroxidase was blocked with hydrogen peroxide in TRIS buffered saline (pH 7.4).
Preparations were incubated with the primary antibody for 60 minutes, rinsed in Tris buffered saline and then incubated with the secondary antibody (mouse anti-rabbit, diluted in Tris buffered saline/normal human serum) for 30 minutes.
After further washing, they were finally incubated with the PAP complex (horseradish peroxidase anti-peroxidase) for 30 minutes.
Peroxidase activity was developed with diaminobenzidine and hydrogen peroxide.
Preparations were counterstained with Harris' haematoxylin, dehydrated and mounted in DPX.
A three stage immunoperoxidase technique was used in specimens stained with the KP1 antibody.
Briefly, after blocking of endogenous peroxidase activity, sections were first incubated with the primary antibody, rinsed, incubated with a peroxidase- conjugated rabbit anti-mouse (diluted in Tris buffered saline/normal human serum), rinsed and incubated with a peroxidase conjugated swine anti-rabbit antibody.
Developing and mounting were performed according to the same protocol as for the PAP procedure.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analysis was performed using x analysis with Yates' correction for small numbers or by Fisher's exact test.
Results
The Table gives the demographic features of the patients studied.
For technical reasons it was not always possible to obtain good results for the three probes on tissue from the same patient.
Thus, results are presented independently for each probe.
LYSOZYME mRNA EXPRESSION
Lysozyme mRNA was investigated in 27 control subjects with histologically normal colonic tissue, in 27 patients with ulcerative colitis (14 active, 13 quiescent) and eight patients with Crohn's disease (six active, two quiescent).
In normal colonic specimens lysozyme mRNA expression was found in cells lying beneath the surface epithelium in 17/27 cases (63%)(Fig 1).
In the remaining 10 control patients, there were occasional positive cells scattered throughout the lamina propria.
In ulcerative colitis lysozyme mRNA positive cells were more common than in controls as expression was found in 22/27 (81%) specimens, though the difference was not statistically significant (with Yates correction: p=0.075, Fisher's exact test, p=0.07).
Lysozyme mRNA expression was not related to histological disease activity, as there was no significant difference between active and inactive ulcerative colitis (lysozyme positive cells in 12 of 14 active ulcerative colitis, 10 of 13 inactive ulcerative colitis).
Lysozyme mRNA positive cells were detected in all sections from the eight patients with Crohn's disease.
In either ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, compared with normal colon, lysozyme positive cells were found not only beneath the epithelium, but also in the deeper lamina propria: positive cells in the deeper lamina propria were observed only in 30% of normal colonic specimens compared to 100% in inflammatory bowel disease (Fisher exact test, p).
Figure 2 illustrates lysozyme mRNA in a colonic biopsy specimen from a patient with longstanding ulcerative colitis.
The signal intensity, evaluated by grain count, was stronger in inflammatory bowel disease, although the difference was again not significant (data not shown).
CONTROLS
All the colonic sections hybridised to the lysozyme sense probe were negative.
Normal duodenal sections provided an excellent positive control, as lysozyme mRNA was strongly expressed in Paneth cells and Brunner's glands.
Occasionally positive cells in the villus tips, compatible with small bowel macrophages, were detected.
The demonstration of lysozyme positive macrophages in the small bowel was achieved by increasing the exposure time to six to seven days whereas positive colonic macrophages could be detected at three to four days.
In all sections the increase in exposure time was associated with a stronger autoradiographic signal but, at the same time, with a higher backgroun staining.
In colonic sections the optimal signal-to-noise ratio was achieved at three to four days.
IMMUNOCYTOCHEMISTRY
In colonic sections lysozyme mRNA expression was found in lamina propria macophages and, in five patients with longstanding inflammatory bowel disease, in metaplastic paneth cells.
Neutrophils did not express the lysozyme signal, though they are known to have large stores of the protein.
To confirm this observation, the phenotype of lysozyme mRNA positive cells was studied by conventional immunocyochemistry in patallel sections.
Expression of the lysozyme protein was found in both polymorphonuclear leucocytes and in lamina propria cells with macrophage morphology.
Lysozyme mRNA, however, was found only in cells staining with the monoclonal antibody KP1, recognising most tissue macrophages.
TUMOUR NECROSIS FACTOR TUMOUR NECROSIS FACTOR A AND INTERLEUKIN 1β mRNA EXPRESSION
Tumour necrosis factor mRNA was expressed in four of nine controls compared with 11/15 inflammatory bowel disease (nine of 12 ulcerative colitis; two of three Crohn's).
For interleukin 1Β mRNA, three of eight controls were positive, compared with 10/13 ulcerative colitis patients (Fig 3).
Positive cells were recognised as lamina propria macrophages, as they expressed the pan macrophage marker CD68, as observed in parallel sections stained with the monoclonal antibody KP1.
Tumour necrosis factor positive cells were located mainly in the deeper lamina propria, whereas the interleukin 1 signal was diffuse, but predominantin subepithelial macrophages.
Epithelial cells showed no expression of tumour necrosis factor or interleukin 1 mRNA.
CONTROLS
To confirm the specificity of the probes, peripheral blood monocytes were also studied before and after incubation with LPS.
ONly very few cells in preparations from unstimulated monocytes expressed tumour necrosis factor or interleukin 1 mRNA, while the number of positive cells and the signal intensity increased significantly in preparations of cells stimulated with LPS.
Maximal tumour necrosis factor mRNA expression was observed after two hours incubation with LPS, with subsequent decline, whereas interleukin 1 mRNA signal increased during prolonged incubation with maximal expression at 18 hours.
All the sections and cytocentrifuge preparations of peripheral blood monocytes hybridised to the irrelevant oligonucleotide probe (Randomer NEP 550) were negative.
The best signal-to-noise ratio, for both tissue sections and cytopsin preparations, was achieved at nine days exposure.
Background staining was always higher using 3 2 P-labelled oligonucleotide probes, however, compared with 3 5 S-labelled riboprobes.
Discussion
Conventional histology, histochemistry, and immuno-histochemistry have revealed that the phenotype of tissue macrophages is extremely heterogenous, being influenced also by changes in the microenvironment.
In vitro studies have also showh the complexity of their secretory repertoire with the identification of a large number of active substances involved in antimicrobial defence, inflammation, immunity, wound healing and tissue modelling.
These findings suggest that macrophage biosynthetic activity is tightly regulated and that distinct subgroups of macrophages may be characterised by their functional secretory profile.
Inflammatory conditions of the gut (whether a result of infection, experimental manipulations or idiopathic) are associated with increased turnover and activation of intestinal macrophages, which represent a large fraction of the total macrophage pool of the body.
Previous observations have suggested that in ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease macrophage activation is associated with increased heterogeneity and the appearance of specialised subpopulations of cells.
Studies on isolated mononuclear cells from the colonic mucosa can be misleading, however, because of the lack of a reliable and efficient technique to purify intestinal macrophages without altering their function.
Using in situ hybridisation, this study has shown that lysozyme mRNA expression may be increased in patients with inflammatory bowel disease compared to controls, as detection of the mRNA was achieved in about 85% of the sections versus 63%, although this difference was not statistically significant.
Furthermore, in inflamed tissue, cells expressing the lysozyme gene were observed not only in the superficial lamina propria, where resident colonic macrophages are usually found, but also in the deeper lamina propria.
This results might have two different interpretations:(i) the recruitment of new populations of cells from the blood stream: or (ii) the activation in situ of certain subsets of tissue macrophages, which do not express the gene constitutively.
Studies using in situ hybridisation in murine tissues have shown marked heterogeneity in lysozyme mRNA expression in resident tissue macrophagesand in experimental infections with bovine gamma globulin and Plasmodium yoelli .
The presence of mRNA for lysozyme in normal colon is compatible with previous suggestions that colonic macrophages are normally activated as a result of the transepithelial passage of bacterial products.
Little information is currently available on the role of interleukin 1 and tumour necrosis factor in inflammatory bowel disease.
The present results show that there may be enhanced expression of tumour necrosis factor α and interleukin 1Β mRNAs in ulcerative colitis, and tumour necrosis factor α mRNA in Crohn's disease, compared with controls.
Interestingly, the pattern of localisation of the two mRNAs is different, because the tumour necrosis factor signal is found mainly in the deeper lamina propria and the interleukin 1 signal mainly beneath the epithelium.
This study cannot conclude with certainty the nature of the cells expressing mRNA for interleukin 1 or tumour necrosis factor, although the majority are probably macrophages.
Thus, these data show functional heterogeneity within the intestinal macrophage population, with the appearance of at least two subsets of cells with a different secretory repertoire.
Mahida et al , using conventional immunohistochemistry, identified unique subsets of macrophages in inflammatory bowel disease, staining with the monoclonal antibodies RFD9 and 3G8. 3G8 positive cells were distributed throughout the inflamed lamina propria but RFD9 positive cells appeared deeper in the lamina propria.
Double labelling studies will be required to show definitely that tumour necrosis factor mRNA and RFD9 antigen are expressed by the same cells.
In conclusion, the use of specific molecular probes and in situ hybridisation allows a functional analysis of tissue macrophages.
Phenotypic studies have previously shown intestinal macrophages to be a heterogeneous population and the present data show functional heterogeneity in inflamed tissue.
These studies will be extended to investigate the expression on mRNA for other immunoregulatory cytokines.
Serum autoantibodies and the diagnosis of type-1 autoimmune hepatitis in Italy: a reappraisal at the light of hepatitis C virus infection
Abstract
Antinuclear antibodies with the homogeneous pattern (ANA-H) and smooth muscle antibodies with antiactin specificity (SMA-AA) are regarded as the serum markers of type-1 autoimmune chronic hepatitis.
Their diagnostic relevance, however, has been questioned recently following the detection of signs of hepatitis C virus infection in autoimmune chronic hepatitis patients.
To further evaluate this point, anti-hepatitis C virus antibodies were sought by two second generation assays (ELISA 2 and RIBA 2) in 100 Italian patients with chronic liver disease of unknown aetiology, including 46 with autoimmune chronic hepatitis and 54 without the above antibodies (cryptogenic CLD).
By ELISA 2, anti-hepatitis C virus.
although significantly prevalent in cryptogenic (83%), were found also in a substantial proportion of autoimmune chronic hepatitis patients (46%)(p), their occurrence was confirmed by RIBA 2 in almost all cases (96% and 86%, respectively).
Autoimmune patients with either ANA-H or SMA-AA exhibited similar anti-hepatitis C virus prevalences (59% and 52%, respectively); by contrast, the eight cases positive for both the autoantibodies were consistently anti-hepatitis C virus negative.
These findings confirm that in countries with high hepatitis C virus circulation (like Italy) an overlap between autoimmune chronic hepatitis and hepatitis C virus infection, reflected by ‘true’ anti-hepatitis C virus antibodies, does occur.
The detection of ANA-H or SMA-AA, in fact, identified chronic liver disease patients with a relatively low prevalence of anti-hepatitis C virus, but does not exclude hepatitis C virus infection.
Positive findings for both ANA-H and MSA-AA, however, is an appropriate marker for hepatitis C virus-free ‘primary’ autoimmune chronic hepatitis.
Antinuclear and smooth muscle antibodies are commonly regarded as the most reliable positive markers of type-1 autoimmune chronic hepatitis in cases of chronic liver disease of unknown aetiology.
Both antibodies are a largely heterogeneous family.
It has been repeatedly reported that smooth muscle antibodies of autoimmune chronic hepatitis are directed to cell actin.
Using immunomorphological techniques, smooth muscle antibodies with antiactin specificity visualise the microfilamentous component of the cell cytoskeleton.
The relevant target antigen of antinuclear antibodies associated with autoimmune chronic hepatitis is unknown, the available information being that it is different from ds-DNA and ‘rheumatological’ extractable nuclear antigens of ‘rheumatic diseases’.
Both reactivities are in fact uncommon in autoimmune chronic hepatitis.
It has been claimed that antinuclear antibodies of autoimmune chronic hepatitis reacts with an antigen which is homogeneously distributed within the nucleus and this gives a ‘homogeneous’ pattern (ANA-H) of positivity by immunofluorescence.
Antibodies specifically reacting with nuclear components of peripheral blood polymorphs have also been described.
A number of clinical and biochemical features (female predominance, associated autoimmune disorders, high serum transaminase values at presentation, HLA-DR3 haplotype) are significantly prevalent in autoimmune chronic hepatitis, but of limited diagnostic value.
Even the favourable response to a course of steroid has some diagnostic use after only two to three months of treatment as an ‘ex juvantibus’ criterion.
Other autoantibodies directed against cytoskeletal antigens differ from actin as well as antinuclear antibodies giving a ‘speckled’ pattern of positivity, are found at a low titre (<) in cryptogenic, ciral, and clcoholic chronic liver disease.
Tests able to identify antibodies directed against peptides of a virus (hepatitis C virus-HCV) responsible for most cases of post-transfusion and comunity acquired non-A, non-B hepatitis have recently become available.
Using the first generation Ortho-Chiron ELISA, which allows detection of antibodies against recombinant non-structural hepatitis C virus peptides, 58% of Italian autoimmune chronic hepatitis cases, defined as reported above — that is, positive for ANA-H and/or SMA-AA — turned out to be also positive for anti hepatitis C virus.
Thus confirming a previous report from Spain.
In order to test the diagnostic relevance of ANA-H and SMA-AA as markers of type-1 autoimmune chronic hepatitis we applied two commercially available second generation tests for detecting anti-hepatitis C virus antibodies: an ELISA and an immunoblot assay (both from Ortho-Chiron), which detect antibodies to non-structural and structural hepatitis C virus recombinant peptides.
As controls, cryptogenic cases of chronic liver disease — that is without ANA-H or SMA-AA, were similarly studied.
Methods
PATIENTS AND SERA
Serum samples from 100 patients with chronic liver disease of unknown aetiology were studied: 46 with autoimmune chronic hepatitis and 54 with cryptogenic chronic liver disease.
The diagnosis of chronic liver disease was made by accepted clinical, serological and histological criteria.
Clinical and biochemical parameters are reported in Table I. Hepatitis B virus infection was excluded on the basis of radioimmunoassay negativity for serological markers (HBsAg, HBeAg, anti HBs, anti HBc, and anti HBe).
In the cases studied alcohol intake was never higher than 50 g/day.
Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency and Wilson disease were excluded by determining serum concentrations of alpha-1 antitrypsin and ceruloplasmin, respectively.
Intake of potentially hepatotoxic drugs, intravenous drug addiction and previous blood transfusions were ruled out in all patients.
All autoimmune patients exhibited serum ANA-H and/or SMA-AA; they were in a different phase of treatment with methylprednisolone at the moment of anti hepatitis C virus testing.
All cryptogenic patients were negative for ANA-H, SMA-AA as well as liver-kidney microsomal antibody.
AUTOANTIBODY TESTING
Sera, diluted 1:40, were tested by immunofluorescence using both cryostat tissue (rat liver, stomach, and kidney) sections and HEp-2 cell cultures (Kallestad, Austin, Texas, USA) as substrates.
Liver sections of rats chronically intoxicated with phalloidin were also used, as previously described.
Antibodies to muscle actin were also searched for by counterimmunoelectrophoresis using rabbit muscle actin as antigen.
Sera were scored as positive for SMA-AA when at least two of the following reactivities were present: kidney peritubular and glomerular positivity, actin cables on HEp-2 cells, counterimmunoelectrophoresis with actin as antigen, positivity of phalloidin treated rat liver cell actin (submembranous deposits of microfilaments at the sinusoidal and biliary portions).
ANA-H were identified on immunomorphological grounds using HEp-2 cells.
ANTI HEPATITIS C VIRUS TESTING
A commercially available ELISA (Ortho HCV ELISA Test System, 2nd generation — ELISA 2) and a recombinant immunblot assay (Chiron RIBA HCV Test System, 2nd generation — RIBA 2) were used to detect anti-hepatitis C virus according to the manufacturer's instructions at a dilution of 1:10 and 1:50, respectively.
The RIBA 2 was applied to ELISA 2 positive sera.
ELISA 2 positive results were divided into cases with optical density values higher or lower than 3 (the upper limit of the ELISA reader used).
Both a qualitative (which peptide was reactive) and semiquantitative (from negative to >) RIBA 2 evaluation were recorded for each non structural (c100–3, c33c, 5–1–1) and the structural (c22–3) peptide.
Sera were stored at -20°C until tested.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analysis was performed using the χ 2 test with or without Yates' correction, the Fisher's exact test and the Wilcoxon's rank-sum test, each applied according to its own indications.
Results
Clinical, biochemical, and histological parameters were similar in cases positive for ANA-H and/or SMA-AA — that it, autoimmune chronic hepatitis cases, and cryptogenic cases, apart from serum gamma-globulin concentrations, significantly higher in the former group (Table I).
Results of ELISA 2 and RIBA 2 anti-hepatitis C virus are reported in Table II.
From its analysis it appears that ELISA anti-hepatitis C virus, although significantly prevalent in cryptogenic chronic liver disease cases (45/54, 83%), were also detected in a substantial proportion of autoimmune chronic hepatitis cases (21/46, 46%).
ELISA optical density values were higher in the cryptogenic group (89% over the upper limit of the ELISA reader) than in the autoimmune chronic hepatitis (67%).
The difference, however, was not statistically significant.
The vast majority of the ELISA 2 positive era was also RIBA 2 positive, apart from 2 sera in the cryptogenic and 3 in the autoimmune group.
Antibodies to c33c were significantly more frequent in the cryptogenic (43/43, 100%) than in the autoimmune RIBA 2 positive patients (eight of 18, 44%; p).
By contrast, antibodies to the other peptides were similarly distributed.
The comparison of the scores of positivity for each RIBA 2 peptide showed significantly higher values in the cryptogenic than the autoimmune group only for c33c and c22–3 (pand p, respectively).
Results of ELISA 2 and RIBA 2 anti-hepatitis C virus prevalence according to the autoantibody pattern (ANA-H, SMA-AA or both) are given in Table III.
By ELISA 2, the prevalence of anti-hepatitis C virus positivity was similar in the subgroups with isolated ANA-H or SMA-AA; by contrast, all the eight patients positive for both SMAA-AA and ANA-H were anti-hepatitis C virus negative.
The three autoimmune cases positive by ELISA 2 and negative by RIVA 2 were all in the SMA-AA subgroup.
The relevant clinical, biochemical, and histological data of autoimmune patients, divided according to the anti-hepatitis C virus and autoantibody status, are reported in Table IV.
From its analysis it appears that the eight anti-hepatitis C virus negative patients with both ANA-H and SMA-AA had significantly higher values of serum gamma globulins than those with either ANA-H or SMA-AA, irrespectively to the anti-hepatitis C virus result.
Moreover, they were all women, had a lower age and higher serum glutamic oxals acetic transminase concentrations.
These differences, however, did not reach statistical significance.
Discussion
Apart from the recognition and prevention of non-A-non-B post transfusion hepatitis, the availability of reliable tests for the demonstration of circulating antibodies to hepatitis C virus peptides has made it possible to address a number of yet unresolved problems as the aetiology of cryptogenic chronic liver disease and the role of hepatitis C virus in cases with other known risk factors (hepatitis B virus, alcohol).
Of particular interest is the relationship between autoimmune chronic hepatitis and hepatitis C virus infection.
This study, carried out in an Italian series of patients accurately selected for the absence of other known aetiologic factors, and the presence of well established serum markers of autoimmunity, confirms previous observations made with a first generation ELISA that a wide overlap between the two above conditions does occur.
Using a second generation ELISA (which allows to detect antibodies to both non-structural and structural peptides), anti-hepatitis C virus prevalence in type-1 autoimmune chronic hepatitis, although significantly lower than that of cryptogenic chronic liver disease cases, was still as high as 46%.
It is pertinent to recall that an even higher anti-hepatitis C virus prevalence has been found in type-2 (liver-kidney microsomal) autoimmune chronic hepatitis.
Moreover, two thirds of the liver-kidney microsomal positive cases had serum hepatitis C virus-RNA, as judged from the positivity of sensitive ‘nested’ PCR.
The fact that most ELISA 2 positive cases here detected, both in autoimmune chronic hepatitis and cryptogenic chronic liver disease, were also reactive by RIBA 2 confirms the true immune nature of the anti-hepatitis C virus result.
It is difficult to interpret the higher RIBA 2 frequency of anti c33c and the higher RIBA 2 scores of both anti c33c and c22–3 antibodies in the cryptogenic group, as information on the temporal sequence and significance of the immune response to each viral peptide is lacking at present.
From the above results it appears that the positivity of either ANA-H or SMA-AA, although significantly associated with signs of marked immune stimulation (higher hypergammaglobulinemia Table I), does not allow to rule out a coexistent hepatitis C virus infection.
Interestingly, however, none of the eight cases with ANA-H and SMA-AA was anti-hepatitis C virus positive by ELISA 2: this was significantly different from that found in cases positive for either reactivity (ANA-H or SMA-AA).
If confirmed in a larger number of cases, this would support the hypothesis that the above autoimmune profile is particularly relevant in the positive diagnosis of autoimmune chronic hepatitis.
In line with this hypothesis, classical features of autoimmune hepatitis were predominant in these eight patients: female sex, young age, high glutamic oxals acetic transminase and gamma globulin levels (Table IV).
In a recent Italian study with first generation anti-hepatitis C virus assays, a complete response to steroid therapy occurred only in autoimmune chronic hepatitis patients negative for anti-hepatitis C virus, as in the cases with both ANA-H and SMA-AA reported here.
A hgh hepatitis C virus circulation (in Italy the prevalence of blood donors positive for anti-hepatitis C virus ranges from 0.68 to 1.38%) could well account for the high prevalence of anti-hepatitis C virus in our series of chronic liver disease with unknown aetiology (66 of 100): of the 66 anti-hepatitis C virus positive cases, however, only 21 were positive for the autoantibodies currently considered as reliable markers of autoimmune hepatitis.
This rules out the possibility that autoantibodies are merely a consequence of hepatitis C virus infection.
In fact, ANA-H and SMA-AA are vitually absent in patientswith post transfusion non-A-non-B hepatitis.
The above discrepancy would be overcome postulating the existence of a genetic predisposition to mount an abnormal autoimmune response, possibly linked to particular HLA alleles (HLA-DR3?), known to be significantly prevalent in autoimmune hepatitis.
HLA typing is now being done in the present series of patients.
According to this hypothesis hepatitis C virus infection would be able to induce hepatitis and, in particular hosts, to trigger an autoimmune response with the release of autoantibodies indistinguishable, at least with the available immunomorphological techniques, from those found in ‘primary’ autoimmune hepatitis.
It is worthwhile to recall that the specificity of the viral attack seems to be another important variable, as ANA-H and SMA-AA are exceedingly rare in chronic liver disease induced by hepatitis B virus, while a peculiar autoantibody profile has been reported in hepatitis D virus chronic liver disease.
Finally, the use of serum autoantibodies in the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis is different according to the different hepatitis C virus circulation in each geographic area: of moderate value in the Mediterranean area, with high hepatitis C virus prevalence, they maintain a definite relevance in areas, such as UK, with low viral impact.
Recurrence of hepatitis B and delta hepatitis after orthotopic liver transplantation
Abstract
The clinical course of 10 liver transplant recipients who had hepatitis B virus (HBV) and five recipients with HBV and D (delta) infection before transplantation is described.
Six patients who underwent eight transplants died.
The estimated one and two year survival in patients with HBV only before transplantation were 74% and 67% respectively.
The estimated one and two year survival in patients with HBV and HDV infection beforehand was 100%.
Graft infection by HBV occurred in 8 of 10 patients infected with HBV only; and in 4 of 5 patients with previous HBV and HDV infection.
There was a widely variable time from transplantation to the appearance of HBV markers in liver or serum, ranging from 6–331 days.
Hepatitis D antigen (HDAg) appeared in three grafts very rapidly after transplantation at 4, 8, and 37 days respectively.
Graft infection by HBV was accompanied by significant liver injury in six allografts in five recipients.
In particular, there was a striking morphological appearance in five infected livers in which the hepatocytes became progressively enlarged and distorted as they accumulated huge amounts of hepatitis B surface and core antigens (HBsAg, HBcAg).
These features were accompanied by pericellular fibrosis and cholestasis but little associated inflammation.
This syndrome carried a poor prognosis.
A gradual progression ot cirrhosis occurred in one additional liver.
Finally, recurrent HBV infection was a principle or a contributing factor in all deaths.
The presence of HBcAg and inflammation in the native liver increased the risk of HBV induced tissue damage in the graft whereas HDV infection in the host liver seemed to reduce the risk of significant HBV induced tissue damage in the allograft.
These data suggest that post transplant HBV infection is accompanied by a variety of changes in the liver allograft, some of which are unique to the transplanted liver and may result in impaired allograft function.
While liver transplantation has become the treatment of choice in the developed world for many forms of serious acute and chronic liver diseases, its role in the management of liver disease caused by hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis D (or delta) virus (HDV) infection remains controversial.
It has been observed that reinfection of the grafted liver by HBV either alone or with HDV is common.
However, the nature and severity of the liver injury associated with graft reinfection is variable.
In this report we review the sequence of changes in liver allografts performed in a series of HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) positive patients, and described the clinical and pathological factors that seem to influence the course of recurrent HBV infection.
Patients and methods
We studied all patients with HBV infection who underwent orthotopic liver transplantation at The University of Michigan Medical Center between June 1987 and October 1989.
These patients were monitored at frequent intervals (1–3 months) by physical examination, measurement of biochemical tests of liver integrity and function, and serological tests for HBV markers.
Our operative and immunosuppressive approach has been described elsewhere.
All patients were managed initially with Minnesota antilymphoblast globulin, methylprednisone, and azathioprine with maintenance triple drug therapy consisting of cyclosporin A, prednisone, and azathioprine.
Acute cellular rejection was treated by short courses of high dose corticosteroids or OKT 3 .
Liver biopsy specimens were taken whenever rejection was suspected clinically and according to a protocol — usually at 7, 14, and 21 days, 6 months, 1, and 2 years.
One hundred and fourteen specimens were available for review, a median of 7 per patient.
Intravenous anti-HBs immunoglobulin Ig (HBIG, Abbott Laboratories) was administered intraoperatively (50–125 cc) in 11 transplants, and in four of these postoperatively (50–150 cc) also, according to a schedule of 10 cc per day.
Six transplants were not given cover by HBIG.
Serum aminotransferase activities and bilirubin concentrations were measured by autoanalyser.
Serum hepatitis B surface antigen was estimated by radioimmunoassay (AUSRIA II, Abbott, North Chicago, IL); hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) was assayed by enzyme linked immunoassay (HBeAg test, Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, IL); and HD antibody (HBDAb) was estimated by ELISA (Abbott, North Chicago, IL).
HBV DNA was estimated in serum by dot-blot hybridisation as previously described.
The minimal level of detection of this assay is 0.1 pg HBV DNA per sample.
Hepatitis C antibody (HCAb) was measured in stored sera using a radioimmunoassay kit (Ortho).
Sections of formalin fixed native livers and liver allograft biopsy specimens were routinely stained with haematoxylin and eosin, trichrome, and periodic acid Schiff (PAS) with diastase.
Immunohistochemical stains for HBcAg and HBsAg were performed using commercially available polyclonal antisera (Dako, Carpinteria, CA) and the avidin-biotin peroxidase complex technique.
HDAg wad etected immunohistochenically using modified technique of Recchia et al .
The parafin embedded specimens were first digested with proteinase K and subsequently coated with 1/100 dilution of anti-delta antibody positive human serum and then with a rabbit anti-human IgG (1/16 diluted, Dako, Accurate Chem).
After this, the specimens were treated with diaminobencidine tetrahydrochloride-hydrogen peroxide mixture and haematoxylin staining was subsequently undertaken.
Liver biopsy samples were read under code by two observers (DMG and HDA) except for HD antigen staining which was read under code by ADB and PM.
Results
The 15 patients studied are described in Table I. Chronic disease was present before transplant in 13, with a median known duration of HBsAg carriage of 48 months.
Two patients presented with an acute syndrome, one of whom was HDV infected.
Since the explanted liver of the latter patient was cirrhotic, it is likely that this represented acute, HDV induced decompensation prceded by clandestine chronic HBsAg carriage.
The source of HBV infection was unknown in eight patients.
The remainder had acquired HBV by intravenous drug use, transfused blood products (including one patient with haemophilia B previously reported), and presumed sexual contact.
No patient had primary hepatocellular carcinoma.
The preoperative HBV and HBD serology and hepatectomy findings are summarised in Table I. All patients had HBsAg in serum, eight were HBeAg positive, and two were HBV DNA positive.
HBsAg was shown immunohistochemically in the hepatectomy specimen from 13 patients; seven native livers were HBcAg positive as well.
When these data were combined and the presence of at least one of the following (serum HBeAg, serum HBV DNA, liver HBcAg) taken to indicate viral replication, markers of viral replication were observed preoperatively in 13 of 15 patients.
There was evidence of HDV infection in five patients, each of whom was positive for HDAb in serum and HDAg in liver.
Eight of the 10 patients with previous HBV infection alone developed serum HBsAg after transplantation.
The median interval from transplantation to the presentation of serum HBsAg positivity was 91 days, range 23–331 (Table II).
Five of these patients who underwent seven transplants died.
Survival at one and two years, as estimated by life table analysis, was 73% and 67% respectively.
In all of these patients, recurrent HBV was a major contributing factor to death, sometimes complicated by other infections or reoperation.
Four of five patients with previous HBV and HDV infections developed serum HBsAg or HBV DNA, or both after transplantation after intervals of 14 days in two patients, and 60 and 90 days in two patients.
HDAg was detected by immunohistochemistry in three grafts at 4, 8, and 37 days respectively after transplantation.
The actuarial survival of patients with both HBV and HDV in their native liver was 100% at one and two years.
All patients who became serum HBsAg positive after transplant, became HBeAg positive irrespective of HDV infection.
Five of 12 patients with HBV infected allografts developed progressive liver damage.
Serial biopsy specimens of the liver allografts in four of these patients showed a sequence beginning with hepatocyte enlargement and induction like changes leading to the formation of rigid hepatocyte cords aligned in parallel (Fig 1A).
HBcAg was usually the first viral antigen to be detected by immunohistochemistry (Fig 1B).
Next, the hepatocytes became considerably enlarged and contained the typical HBV type ground-glass inclusions.
The inclusions were cytoplasmic, eccentric to and sometimes partly surrounding the nucleus, and were composed of finely granular pale material which seemed to retract from the cell membrane, leaving a partial clear zone between membrane and inclusion.
Immunohistochemistry showed that these distorted hepatocytes stained intensely for cytoplasmic HBsAg and cytoplasmic and nuclear HBcAg (Fig 2A, B).
Intracellular and canalicular cholestasis, as well as periportal ductular proliferation always accompanied these cellular changes as the disease progressed.
Despite the striking lobular disorganisation and prominent hepatocellular changes, there was only mild inflammation.
Fibrosis was variable, ranging from subtle, thin periportal and perisinusoidal collagen fibres to diffuse periportal and panlobular pericellular fibrosis (Fig 3).
In two cases there were foci of confluent lobular necrosis and haemorrhage, presumably because of superimposed ischaemia.
All four patients who developed this sequence of biopsy changes died, including one patient in whom this pattern occurred in two allografts.
The median interval from identification of fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis to death or transplantation was 53 days, range 35 to 85 days.
One additional patient with HBV alone before the treatment, rapidly developed HBV graft infection as shown by stainable HBcAg in a biopsy specimen taken only six days after transplantation.
Another biopsy specimen taken 22 days later showed the ‘rigid cord pattern’ described above.
This was followed by a non-inflammatory HBV carrier state at 27 weeks (Fig 4) and a mild persistent hepatitis 33 weeks after transplantation.
Subsequent biopsy specimens taken at 19, 25, and 41 months showed a quiescent cirrhosis with HBcAg and HBsAg in scattered hepatocytes (Fig 5).
He is currently alive 43 months after transplantation.
Seven patients with HBV infected allografts had a mild clinical disease.
Five of these seven patients were also infected with HDV before transplantation, and recurrent HDV was documented in three.
The mild clinical disease corresponded with either a persistent or smouldering lobular hepatitis or a non-inflammatory HBV carrier state.
Serial biopsy specimens in these patients often showed variations in the intensity of inflammation and hepatocyte necrosis.
There was no consistent pattern to the liver enzyme activities which corresponded to the appearance of HBsAg or HBV DNA in serum or HBsAg or HBcAg, or both, in liver.
The reappearance of serum markers of HBV often occurred while serum transaminases activities were at or near normal.
However, two of the patients with HBV and HDV showed a distinct clinical hepatitic syndrome about 12 weeks after transplantation.
Malaise and appreciable increases in serum transaminase activities coincided with a marked increase in the number of hepatocytes staining for HDAg and also the first histological appearance of HBcAg (Fig 6).
In one patient, this was accompanied by a histological pattern of acute viral hepatitis, whereas there was only an exacerbation of mid-lobular hepatitis in the other.
Both patients were given a course of OKT 3 .
This was followed by a decline and then a second smaller peak in serum transaminase activities.
Immunohistochemistry showed persistent HDAg and HBcAg within hepatocytes.
This rebound hepatitis resolved to a plateau of moderately abnormal transaminase activities and histological features of chronic persistent hepatitis and continued staining of hepatocytes for HBsAg, HBcAg, and HDAg without further adjustments in immunosuppression.
Three patients originally infected with HBV alone did not develop serological or biopsy evidence of HBV graft infection at 8, 16, and 17 months after transplantation, respectively.
One of these patients, whose postoperative course was complicated by systemic cytomegalovirus infection, developed smouldering lobular hepatitis seen in biopsy specimens obtained 45, 125, 229, and 240 days after transplant.
Progressive cholestasis accompanied the hepatitis in the final two biopsy specimens.
Testing for serum anti-HCV was not performed.
The patient died of liver and pulmonary failure caused by cytomegalovirus and aspergillosis on day 242.
Another patient developed a persistent hepatitis of unknown aetiology at six months followed by a normal biopsy specimen at 15 months.
The third patient has declined a liver biopsy since day 68 after transplant, at which time the graft showed lobular disorganisation without inflammation.
Patients were stratified according to whether recurrent HBV caused severe, progressive liver injury, including cirrhosis, or mild liver disease (see Table III).
Progressive disease was more common in older recipients and along patients with active inflammation and HBcAg in their native livers.
Progressive disease did not occur in the infected allograft when the corresponding native livers showed quiescent cirrhosis or massive necrosis.
Coinfection of the allograft by HBV and JDV was always associated with a mild disease and prolonged survival.
Eight of 10 patients who received HBIG and 5 of 6 who did not receive HBIG developed serological markers of active HBV infection.
The median duration to the development of HBV markers in serum or liver was 78 days (range 14–331) in patients receiving HBIG compated with 39 days (range 6–219) in those who did not receive HBIG.
The median time to detection of HBV infection was 33 days (range 6–224) in the five patients who received six grafts which developed progressive liver injury (fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis or cirrhosis) compared with 39 days (range 26–331) in seven patients with recurrent HBV associated with mild liver disease.
Sera taken before and after transplantation have been tested retrospectively for anti-HC Ab in 12 patients.
Ten were positive preoperatively and eight postoperatively.
Neither patient who was negative before transplantation developed anti-HC Ab after transplantation.
Discussion
This study describes the clinical events that occur when HBV, with or without HDV, infects the transplanted liver.
Starzl et al reported on liver transplantation in 52 adult patients with HBV infection in whom the 24 month survival was 50% compared with 76% in 744 adult liver recipients with non-malignant disease.
These and other authors have found that recurrence of HBV in the grafted liver is very frequent.
Our experience in a smaller series is almost identical, in that HBV infection occurred in 13 of 16 grafts and death occurred in 5 of 10 patients whose grafts were infected with HBV alone.
Our data show that recurrent HBV infection is accompanied by a variety of disease patterns in the transplanted liver.
One form, which seems unique to the infected allograft, was seen in four of our patients.
Severe rapidly progressive liver disease was associated with the following histopathological features: distorted ground glass hepatocytes laden with HBsAg and HBcAg, cholestasis, a variable degree of fibrosis, and in some cases, lobular necrosis.
This pattern is indistinguishable from ‘fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis’ described by Davies et al , and like them we found it to portend a bad prognosis.
The Pittsburgh group also described a similar constellation of findings and noted that HBV infection seems to progress more rapidly when it recurs in a second allograft.
This was also our experience in one patient in whom ‘fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis’ was seen in the first transplant at 20 weeks and progressed to require retransplantation at 32 weeks.
Thereafter, a similar histological pattern evolved rapidly in the second allograft from which biopsy specimens were taken at 14, 26, and 32 days.
This patient died of liver failure 2 months after the second operation.
We observed a gradual progression to cirrhosis in one HBV infected allograft.
The initial biopsy specimens in that patient also passed through the stages seen in our allografts which eventually developed ‘fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis’— namely hepatocytes in rigid cords and later distorted ground glass hepatocytes.
It is unclear what factors dictate whether an infected liver in which there are early signs of tissue injury will progress to ‘filbrosing cholestatic hepatitis’ or cirrhosis.
The progression to cirrhosis in our patient occurred despite the lack of significant inflammation.
In contrast, many allografts became infected with HBV without developing significant tissue injury.
A benign clinical course was associated with: absence of immunoreactive HBcAg or active cirrhosis in the native liver, as well as the presence of HDAg in the native liver.
These data suggest that the risk of liver damage is greatest in patients with active viral replication before operation.
HDV may be protective by suppressing HBV replication in the native and in the transplanted liver.
Furthermore, we observed a curious biphasic hepatitis beginning approximately 12 weeks after transplantation in two patients coinfected with HBV and HDV which resolved to stable chronic persistent hepatitis.
This acute syndrome coincided with a surge in expression of both HBV and HDV proteins.
One explanation of this phenomenon is that there was an increase in HDV expression which they suppressed HBV expression allowing a stable equilibrium to develop between the two viruses and the liver.
Our data do not allow us determine whether HBIG is deneficial in preventing or ameliorating recurrent HBV.
However, recent evidence suggests that HBIG may reduce the frequency, or extend the time to onset, of recurrent HBV.
Indeed Samuel et al reported that when HBIG was administered on a regular basis in the first two years after liver transplantation to 100 patients who had been serum HBsAg positive, HBsAg reappeared in 22.7% only.
However, since the reappearence rate was much higher (96%) in patients with evidence of active viral replication (serum HBV DNA positive), and since our data would suggest that the severity of injury in the infected allograft is also dependent on the HBV status of the native liver, the efficacy of repeated administration of HBIG deserves to be tested within a randomised controlled trial.
The frequent recurrence of HBV and HDV in liver allografts raises interesting questions about the source of HBV and HDV.
We presume that those patients who manifested HBV in the allograft within day of transplantation acquired it from virus shed into the blood stream before or during the operation.
Similarly, the very short time taken for HDAg to appear in three grafts suggests it was spread perioperatively.
However, in some patients there was a considerable delay before markers for HBV infection were found.
This may be a phenomenon of test sensitivity in which infection of the graft occurred perioperatively in these patients also.
However, in a series of HBsAg positive patients undergoing liver transplantation Feray et al found HBV-DNA genome sequences in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in 7 of 11 liver transplant recipients who were serum HBsAg negative and liver HBV-DNA negative by polymerase chain reaction postoperatively.
Extrahepatic HBV-DNA sequences have been observed in human autopsy specimens including lymph nodes, spleen, kidney, pancreas, brain, and endocrine tissues.
Thus, HBV infected extrahepatic tissues, including periperhap blood mononuclear cells, may be important potential sources for late infection of the graft.
The evidence that HBV infection can cause severe liver damage in liver transplant recipients who are immunosuppressed suggests that cellular immunity may not be the sole mechanism for HBV associated liver injury and agrees with data on HBV infections in other immunosuppressed states.
A common feature that we observed in HBV infected liver transplants was an abundance of distorted ground glass hepatocytes.
These contain HBsAg and both nuclear and cytoplasmic HBcAg, signifying intense viral replication.
One explanation for this unbridled production of HBV proteins is that it is fostered by concurrent mediations, including glucocorticoids and cyclosporin.
Tur-Kaspa et al have identified a glucocorticoid responsive expression enhanced element in the HBV genome.
The effect of cyclosporin on HBV has not been studied, although it is interesting that when cyclosporin was administered to woodchucks who were infected with a related hepadnavirus, it resulted in a significantly more severe hepatitis and sustained viraemia than in non-cyclosporin treated controls.
The increased expression of HBV proteins, especially pre S 1 proteins, in the present patients probably perturbs the process whereby HBsAg is secreted by the infected hepatocyte.
A comparable phenomenon has been described in a transgenic mouse model which produces long segments of HBsAg including pre S 1 proteins and which eventually develops distorted ground glass hepatocytes very similar to thsoe in the present liver transplant recipients.
It is uncertain whether the development of these ground glass hepatocytes is a benign phenomenon or is linked with the progression to liver damage.
In the transgenic mouse model, hepatocellular damage, including multinodular regenerative hyperplasia, raised transaminase activities and eventual tumour formation have been described.
It is of interest, therefore, that de novo development of a hepatoma has been reported in a liver allograft infected with HBV.
An association between hypocholesterolemia and colorectal carinoma in an Irish population
Abstract
A group of 114 Irish patients with primary adenocarcinoma of the large bowel had significantly lower serum cholesterol concentrations than an age and sex matched group drawn from the general population.
The hypocholesterolaemiac trait was manifest in male and female patients.
Rigorous control procedures established that it was neither an artefact of nutritional compromise nor of preoperative bowel preparatory protocols.
The data suggested that the appreciable hypocholesterolaemia observed was not influenced by the pathological stage or degree of differentiation of the tumour.
The incidence of colorectal carnoma differs internationally, the highest rates being observed in the urbanised, affluent societies of the industrialised western world.
The western diet, high in animal fat and low in fibre, has been correlated with an increased incidence of colorectal cancer.
It has been postulated that increased dietary animal fats produce excessive amounts of primary bile salts, which are then subsequently degraded by colonic bacteria to potentially carcinogenic secondary bile salts.
Populations at risk for the development of large bowel cancer are also generally at higher risk for development of coronary heart disease.
Although high serum cholesterol concentrations are predictive of coronary heart disease, controversy exists as to the relation between serum cholesterol and colorectal carcinoma.
While some studies indicate a direct or indeed no relation between the serum cholesterol concentration and large bowel cancer, others indicate an inverse relation.
These conflicting reports may be the results of inherent differences in lipid metabolism between the various populations studied or may be explained by a tendency to report solely on the occurrence of colorectal cancer, rather than the particular degree of differentiation and progression of these tumours when detected.
The Irish population has a known tendency towards raised cholesterol concentrations, and it also has one of the highest mortality rates from colecterol carcinoma in the world.
This study aimed to analyse in detail the serum lipid concentrations in patients with primary colorectal carcinoma drawn from such a population, with an evaluation of the influence of tumour activity on altered serum lipid values.
Methods
A total of 114 consecutive patients (67 men and 47 women) who presented to three Dublin hospitals for elective resection of primary sporadic colorectal carcinomas were included in this study.
All gave informed consent.
The mean (SEM) age for all patients was 66.6 (1.01) years; it was 66.8 (1.3) years for men and 66.4 (1.6) years for women.
All patients underwent bowel preparation and a fasting regimen before operation.
The regimen consisted of a liquid diet for 36 hours, followed by an absolute fast for a further 12 hours.
During the preparatory period a combination of purgation and rectal washouts was performed until the bowel was considered ‘clear’ of gross faecal residue.
Ten ml of venous blood were obtained before surgery.
The clotted sample was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 minutes and the serum separated.
One ml was used for lipid analysis and the remainder for estimations of serum albumin and retinol binding protein concentrations.
The normal laboratory ranges for serum albumin and retinal binding proteins were 35–45 g/l and 1.9- 8.0 mg/dl respectively.
In the assessment of the nutritional status of preoperative patients, the predictive validity of the serum albumin concentration (with its half-life=19 days) is greatly enhanced when combined with a plasma protein with a short half-life, such as retinol binding protein (half-life=2 days).
Relevant preoperative clinical details were recorded as well as routine laboratory investigations (full blood count, hepatic and renal function tests) and radiological assessments (chest radiographs, abdominal computed tomography, and ultrasound scans).
Tumour staging was dependant upon the histological features and the clinical findings at the time of resection.
The Astler and Coller modifications of Dukes's staging were used.
Tumours were assigned stage D if there was any evidence of distant disease spread.
The distribution of the tumours is shown in Table I — 56 patients had tumours confined to the bowel wall or just penetrating it (stage A or B) and the remaining 58 had advanced tumours with either locoregional nodal involvement or distant metastases (stage C or D).
The degree of tumour differentiation was also assessed using standard criteria.
Most tumours 78 (68.4) % were moderately differentiated, 21 (18.4) % were well differentiated, and 15 (13.2) % poorly differentiated (Table I).
To investigate the possibility of bias arising within the serum lipid values as a result of the preoperative bowel preparation and fasting, a further group of 38 patients (13 men, 25 women) with normal colonoscopy findings served as controls.
This control group had no abnormalities known to interfere with serum lipid concentrations, and each patients underwent the same fasting and colonic preparation as the cancer patients.
The mean (SEM) age of the control group was 64.7 (2.2) years (men 61.2 (3.4) years, women: 65.8 (3.2) years), which did not differ significantly from the coleractal cancer group.
Serum was also obtained from a further 23 subjects (10 men, 13 women) who were having benign adenomas removed at laparotomy or colonoscopy.
Eleven (6 men, 5 women) of these subjects had tubular adenomatous polyps, 8 (2 men, 6 women) had tubovillous polyps, and 4 (2 men, 2 women) had villous adenomas.
These patients underwent a bowel preparation and fasting regimen similar to the other patients in this study.
The mean age for men was 63.4 years, and for women 65.5 years.
Serum triglyceride, total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol were measured using kits provided by Boehringer Mannheim GmbH Diagnostica.
Triglycerides were measured as described by Wahlefeld.
Total cholesterol concentrations were estimated using an enzymatic colorimetric method described by Roschlau, while the assay of the HDL cholesterol fraction followed the method of Lopes-Virella.
The LDL cholesterol fraction was calculated indirectly using the Friedewald equation.
As blood lipid concentrations change with age and sex, the values were analysed separately for each sex.
The reference values for our laboratory for blood lipid values used in this study are shown in Table II and were taken from the American based Lipid Research Clinics.
Somewhat comparable standard reference values for an Irish population were available from the ‘Mediscan’ survey of 15171 men.
Mean serum cholesterol values were slightly lower in the American cohorts.
It should be emphasised that, as in all population surveys, ‘normal’ values represent the normal distribution of cholesterol concentrations and not the ‘recommended’or ‘healthy normal’concentration.
Analysis of results was performed using the Research Systems Integrated Data Analysis System developed by Bolt, Beranek, and Newman Inc, Cambridge, MA, USA.
In all cases, probability values less than 0.05 were taken to indicate significant differences.
Results
The mean serum lipid concentrations of the colorectal carcinoma, control, and large bowel polyp groups are shown in Table II.
The serum triglyceride concentrations of the three groups were similar, all falling within the normal range, but mean total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and HDL cholesterol values were significantly lower in the cancer patient group.
Mean cholesterol concentrations were significantly higher in women in each study group.
Table II also show that patients with colorectal polyps have lipip profiles similar to the control subjects.
The mean total cholesterol concentration among women with polyps was significantly higher than that of control subjects.
When compared with the standard reference values accordinly to the patients' age group, the individual serum total cholesterol values for men and women were seen to have a propensity to fall within or below the lower end of the normal range.
Thirty nine men (58.2%) and 23 women (48.9%) with colorectal carcinoma had total cholesterol values below the 5th centile of the normal reference range.
Although colorectal carcinoma patients had evidence of low serum cholesterol concentrations, no further lowering of cholesterol or its two major lipoprotein fractions occurred as the disease process spread.
There were no significant differences in cholesterol concentrations between patients with stage A and B lesions and those with stage C and D lesions (Table III).
Furthermore, there were no differences in observed lipid values between tumours for each Astler Coller stage.
When analysed according to tumour differentiation, no significant differences were found between cholesterol concentrations for any combination of well, moderately, and poorly differentiated tumours (Table III).
Furthermore, there were no significant differences in cholesterol values with change of tumour grade when analysed for stage A and B alone, or for stage C and D alone.
There was no biochemical evidence of the patients being nutritionally compromised — mean serum albumin (38.3 (1.1) g/l) and mean retinol binding protein (2.5 (0.4) mg/dl) values were within the normal range.
These biochemical parameters did not differ according to tumour stage or degree of differentiation.
Further evidence of the nutritional wellbeing of the patients was provided by serum triglyceride values.
Most values (61/67 men (91%) and 44/47 women (93.6%)) fell within the 5th and 95th centile of the reference population.
Discussion
Epidemiological data based upon population studies have indicated a positive association between dietary cholesterol and colorectal cancer.
Furthermore, a strong correlation between the mean concentration of cholesterol in a population and the incidence of coronary heart disease has been noted.
Thus, it would be reasonable to expect that populations with a high mortality rate from coronary heart disease would also exhibit a high mortality rate for colon cancer.
Using WHO national mortality rates for both colonic cancer and coronary heart disease, Rose et al showed a direct relation between these two diseases, and on the basis of this finding anticipated that serum cholesterol values could be used as a predictor of colon cancer.
Contrary to these expectations, Rose found that in a group of 36211 men followed from 5 to 23 years, two thirds of those who developed colon cancer had initial serum cholesterol values below the age sex specific values for each respective cohort.
Since then, numerous studies have analysed the relation between serum cholesterol and large bowel cancer.
Low values have been attributed by some authors to a preclinical effect of the tumour, others have shown that the lowered values predate the detection of cancer by at east five years.
This latter finding implies that the hypocholesterolaemia is unlikely to have been caused by the metabolic effect of an occult tumour.
Other studies have failed to show a relation between serum cholesterol and colorectal carcinoma.
One major prospective study has shown a direct relation in men between serum cholesterl and the incidence of rectal carcinoma alone.
Nevertheless, it is difficult to compare directly these various studies as there are appreciable differences in the range of cholesterol values found, age and ethnic origins of the patients, methodology, and the case distribution of the populations studied.
This Irish study has indicated that most patients with colorectal carcinoma have low serum cholesterol values.
Cholesterol values were in the lower part of the normal range for the 114 cancer patients in the appropriate sex and age matched groups.
About half the patients had concentrations below the lower end of the reference range.
Interestingly, both female as well as male patients exhibited a hypocholesterolaemia, a finding not previously reported among other population groups.
In a similar study conducted in another Dublin hospital, O'Morain et al also described high serum cholesterol values among 57 patients with adenomatous colonic polyps as well as significantly lower serum cholesterol values among 49 patients with colorectal cancer.
It has been reported that serum cholesterol values are similar in samples from fasting and non-fasting subjects.
Because of the rigorous nature of fasting and bowel preparations before surgical resection of tumours, it seemed possible that these procedures could contribute to the hypocholesterolaemiac state.
The finding of normal cholesterol values in the group of patients undergoing similar preparation before colonoscopy, eliminated the preparatory protocol as a contributor to the lowered cholesterol values.
The finding of normal concentrations of albumin, retinol binding protein, and triglyce ide among cancer patients, irrespective of the stage and tumour grade, excludes nutritional wasting as a cause of the hypocholesterolaemia.
In agreement with previous studies, the serum cholesterol concentrations for the patients with colorectal adenomas were similar to, or, as in the case of women, higher than those of the control group.
The cancer subgroup, even those with very early tumours, had significantly lower cholesterol values than the group with polyps alone.
In this study there was no significant difference in serum cholesterol concentrations of total, LDL, and HDL cholesterol in samples taken from patients with early and late disease.
Furthermore, there were no differences in serum cholesterol values in patients with different tumour grades.
If the lowering of serum cholesterol values was the result of tumour activity, obvious differences in serum cholesterol values as the tumours progressed from stage A to stage D, or as they become more de-differentiated would have been expected.
Our findings agree with those of the Honolulu Heart Study which found that the inverse relation between serum cholesterol values and colon cancer was independent of the pathological stage of the carcinoma.
These results are in contrast with the New York Case Control Study which showed that cholesterol values in patients with advanced colorectal carcinomas were significantly different from those of controls; this was not so for early disease.
Our findings suggest that tumour activity is not a major cause of the lowered serum cholesterol values seen in most of our patients.
If the hypocholesterolaemia among colorectal cancer patients is not caused by a metabolic effect of the tumours, how can such a phenomenon be explained?
Upon consideration of the hypothesis that bile constituents and their intracolonic degradation products influence colon carcinogenesis, it has been proposed that subjects with a metabolic predisposition towards lowered serum cholesterol may also have an increased secretion of bile and hence an increased risk of developing colorectal carcinoma.
Thus, the carcinogenic effects of a high consumption of dietary fat may be more readily produced in subjects who maintain lowered cholesterol concentrations by showing an inherently greater conversion rate to bile acids than the rest of the population.
Such a hypothesis could explain the paradoxical inverse relation between serum cholesterol concentrations and colorectal carcinomas detected in certain western, or at least‘westernised’ populations.
The association seen in our study may be the result of a shared phenotype in patients prone to develop the disease.
Alternatively, it may represent a subgroup of people with a genetically different cholesterol metabolism, which under particular dietary or environmental circumstances — for example a high fat, low fibre diet — would indirectly promote colon carcinogenesis.
Future analyses, including a study of the lipid phenotypes of patients with colorectal carcinoma, may yield data in support of such a hypothesis.
In conclusion, Irish patients with colorectal carcinoma exhibit a noticeable hypocholesterolaemia that does not seem to be the result of a compromised nutritional state.
Sclerosing cholangitis associated with multifocal fibrosis: a case report
Abstract
The association of sclerosing cholangitis, retroperitoneal fibrosis, and Riedel's thyroiditis has been reported twice before, and on both occasions the authors successfully used steroids to control the fibrotic process.
A further case of fibrosis with this triad of organ involvement in which a combination of surgery and steroid treatment has arrested disease progression is described.
This suggests an inappropriate immune response in this type of fibrotic overlap syndrome.
Abnormal fibrous tissue overgrowth has long been known to affect a number of widely separate organ systems.
The terms Riedel's thyroiditis, sclerosing cholangitis, retroperitoneal fibrosis, mediastinal fibrosis, and pseudotumour of the orbit reflect the multiple areas affected.
These fibrotic processes are rare and tend to occur in isolation, although a number of overlap syndromes has been reported with multiple organ involvement.
This overlap was first described by Bowlby in 1885, in a necropsy report that commented on a hard infiltrative mass affecting the thyroid and other structures in the neck contiguous with similar tissue throughout the mediastrinum.
Barrett was the first to suggest that these fibrotic conditions were inter-related and probably different manifestations of the same disorder.
Patients in whom fibrosis occurred in a combination of sites, particularly the biliary tree and retroperitoneal area, are well documented in a review by Lillemoe et al .
However, the association of fibrous thyroditis with other sites of fibrosis was not widely noted until 1962 when Hache reported an association with retroperitoneal fibrosis and Woolner an association with sclerosing cholangitis.
A year later Bartholemew noted an association of Riedel's thyroiditis, sclerosing cholangitis, and retroperitoneal fibrosis in the same patient.
Gleeson is the only other author to have documented this pattern of organ involvement.
Both authors used steroids in an attempt to control the disease process, with some success.
We report a further patient with Reidel's thyroiditis, sclerosing cholangitis, and retroperitoneal fibrosis whose condition improved coincident with steroid therapy.
Case report
A 51 year old woman was admitted to another hospital in February 1988 with a two month history of malaise and swelling in the neck.
There was no relevant drug history.
On physical examination she was afebrile but looked hypothyroid with a large, firm, generalised thyroid swelling.
Her blood pressure was normal.
Hypothyroidism was confirmed by a serum thyroid stimulating hormone concentration of more than 50 mU/l (normal range <mU/l) and a thyroxine concentration of 29 nmol/l (70–140 nmol/l).
Thyroid autoantibodies were weakly positive.
Thyroxine replacement treatment was begun with some improvement but by May the goitre had increased in size and began to cause local pressure effects.
Thyroidectomy was performed without problem or need for blood transfusion.
Notes taken at the time of operation commented on the appearances of ‘an anaplastic thyroid carcinoma infiltrating strap muscles anteriorly and carotid sheath posteriorly.
Formal resection was not possible.’
Histology (Fig 1) showed complete effacement of the normal thyroid architecture and its replacement by dense collagenous and inflamed fibrous tissue.
The inflammatory process was seen to extend into adjacent skeletal muscle and was consistent with a diagnosis of Riedel's thyroiditis.
She recovered well and was allowed home on thyroxine replacement treatment.
In July 1988 the patient presented again to the same hospital with a three week history of generalised pruritus, painless jaundice, dark urine, and pale stool.
Physical examination confirmed jaundice and the presence of hepatomegaly.
Results of laboratory studies included bilirubin concentration 156 µmol/l (normal range 3–17 µmol/l), alkaline phosphatase 3000 IU/l (30–300 IU/l), alanine aminotransferase of 179 IU/l (5–35 IU/l), and aspartate aminotransferase activity 147 IU/l (5–35 IU/l).
An endoscopic cholangiogram showed obstruction within the common hepatic duct.
She was then transferred to this centre.
Examination findings were confirmed as was the cholestatic nature of her jaundice, the bilirubin concentration having risen to 243 µmol/l (Fig 2).
Ultrasonography showed dilated intrahepatic ducts, and a percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram was performed (Fig 3) and showed multiple strictures within the biliary tree consistent with sclerosing cholangitis.
A stent was inserted to allow bile drainage.
Histology of the liver showed features of biliary obstruction with fibrous portal expansion, bile ductular proliferation, cholestasis, and occasional bile infarcts.
A few granules of copper-associated protein were deposited in periportal hepatocytes indicating an element of chronic cholestasis.
Appearances were consistent with sclerosing cholangitis, although diagnostic duct lesions were not evident.
Abdominal computed tomography suggested a mass in the head of the pancreas extending to the hilum of the liver.
A laparoscopic biopsy specimen of this mass (Fig 4) showed diffuse infiltration of hilar connective tissue by inflammatory cells and fibroblasts producing a picture similar to that seen in the original thyroid biopsy specimen.
A few bile duct structures were present but there was no evidence of malignancy.
Her jaundice improved with stenting and she was allowed home.
In November 1988 she became unwell again with deepening jaundice (Fig 2) caused by blockage of the stent.
Endoscopic relief was difficult and because malignancy had not been totally excluded a laparotomy was performed.
At operation a large, hard mass surrounding the pancreatic head with extensive infiltration of the hilum of the liver was noted.
There was also extensive fibrous thickening of the retroperitoneum.
Operative biopsy specimens showed features of chronic pancreatitis with fibrosis and chronic inflammation in the retroperitoneal extrapancreatic area but no evidence of neoplasia.
Postoperatively, a normal intravenous urogram was performed and the patient was begun on steroids on an empirical basis (Fig 2).
Her bilirubin concentration, which had begun to fall after stent removal, continued to improve and the steroids were slowly reduced to zero over a period of two months.
At recent review two years after the onset of jaundice she remains well with a normal bilirubin concentration and slightly raised liver enzyme activities.
Discussion
We have described the unusual association of Riedel's thyroiditis, retroperitoneal fibrosis, and sclerosing cholangitis.
In this patient the progression of the disease from presentation was rapid suggesting a malignant process.
No evidence for this could be found, however, with biopsy specimens showing a similar fibrotic inflammatory process affecting a number of different sites.
Whether the biliary obstruction caused by sclerosing cholangitis was self limiting or brought into remission by steroid treatment is unclear.
Initial improvement followed stent insertion and no relapse occurred after stent removal.
Steroids were begun soon after this and in the absence of further relapse it is possible that they have had an effect on the disease.
The observations of Bartholemew and Gleeson support this theory.
Their patients had overlap fibrotic syndromes with biliary obstruction caused by sclerosing cholangitis, and in both cases this was relieved by steroid treatment.
Other workers have also found steroids to be of benefit in fibrotic overlap syndromes, and cyclophosphamide has been used with success to suppress fibrosis affecting the thyroid, face and orbit.
In all these cases extrathyroidal fibrosis, in the retroperitoneal space and around the biliary tree, seemed more sensitive to steroid treatment than thyroiditis, which showed an unpredictable response.
This response to steroids suggests a different disease process to that which occurs when retroperitoneal fibrosis or primary sclerosing cholangitis are found alone where the results of steroid treatment are unpredictable.
The aetiology of these fibrotic conditions is not known but it seems that in overlap conditions immunosuppression is of value in suppressing fibrosis in and around the biliary tree.
This suggests that there may be an inappropriate immune response, but the rarity of the condition currently limits further investigation of this hypothesis.
Gastric B-cell mucosa associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: a clinicopathological study in 56 patients
Abstract
Clinico-pathological features of 56 patients with primary gastric lymphoma were evaluated retrospectively.
All cases were regarded according to a classification of Isaacson et al into high grade and low grade B-cell mucosa associated lymphoid tissue.
A third group of mixed grade was recognised in 11 patients with low grade who also had occasional areas of high grade.
Low grade and mixed grade patients had a 100% actuarial survival at 156 months which was significantly better (p) than that of 52% for patients with high grade disease.
Different treatment methods — surgery, chemotherapy, or a combination of both — did not significantly affect survival.
Low grade tumours occurred mainly in men with a history of several years, and who presented with non-specific gastric symptoms without remarkable exploratory or laboratory findings: most patients were in stage IE-IIE and achieved remission and cure.
High grade can have a shorter history, systemic symptoms, abnormal exploratory and laboratory findings, gastric tumour masses, stage IV disease, and a worse outcome.
The only significant prognostic factors for survival were the type of lymphoma and stage IV disease.
These findings support the Isaacson classification system which separates two extreme groups of gastric lymphomas with different morphology, behaviour, and outcome.
The presence of limited areas of high grade in a specimen showing low grade does not change the outcome but suggests that primary gastric lymphoma forms a continuum between these extreme types.
An important advance in the understanding of extranodal lymphomas has been the description of a specific mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) that is normally present mainly in intestinal and bronchial mucosa.
MALT is also present in other organs, such as the stomach, but only after chronic inflammation.
Lymphomas arising in these specific areas share many histological, phenotypical, and functional properties with normal MALT and exhibit a biological behaviour that differs from that of the nodal lymphomas.
Gastrointestinal lymphoma is uncommon, but gastric lymphoma is the most frequent form and could be a good model for the evaluation of MALT tumour behaviour.
Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate retrospectively the characteristics and outcome of 56 cases of primary gastric lymphoma that have been morphologically reclassified according to recent knowledge of the MALT derived lymphomas.
Methods
In this series, 56 patients with primary gastric lymphoma were evaluated retrospectively.
Only patients who fulfilled the criteria described by Isaacson et al were included.
Patients with secondary involvement of the stomach by non-Hodgkin's lymphoma were therefore excluded.
Thirty four patients were studied at the Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (Madrid), 14 at the Hospital Virgen de la Salud (Toledo) and eight at Hospital Ramon y Cajal (Madrid) between 1963 and 1990.
Clinical data were obtained from their medical histories.
Upper gastrointestinal radiography was performed in 42 patients and endoscopy with biopsy specimens in 48 patients.
Laparotomy was performed for diagnosis or treatment, or both, in 50 cases.
Five of the six patients who had not undergone operation were staged by computed tomography and bone marrow biopsy.
Patients were staged according to the Ann Arbor system.
All specimens from gastrectomy, endoscopy, and bone marrow were routinely processed.
A panel of monoclonal antibodies were used to characterise the gastric lymphoma in all 50 patients who had undergone surgery.
All the cases were classified as B-cell lymphomas with a complete immunophenotype.
All endoscopic biopsy specimens and gastrectomy material were reviewed and classified according to the proposals of Isaacson et al .
A new group, mixed grade B-cell was also included, when an otherwise typical low grade B-cell MALT lymphoma showed focal areas of high grade B-cell MALT lymphoma.
Gastric surgery was the only treatment in 10 patients with low grade, in three patients with mixed grade, and in nine patients with high grade lymphomas.
Adjuvant chemotherapy with CHOP or CHOP-variants was used in three patients with low grade, in four patients with mixed grade, and in 10 patients with high grade disease.
Two patients with low grade, two with mixed grade, and two with high grade were treated exclusively with chemotherapy.
Two patients refused treatment.
A complete remission was defined as the resolution of clinical, radiological, and endoscopic evidence of disease.
A partial remission was considered as a reduction in tumour mass of 50%.
Survival curves of the three histological groups were analysed according to the Kaplan and Meier method and the differences between these curves were calculated with the Mantle test.
Analysis of survival was calculated in only 15 of the 20 patients in the low grade group, in 9 of 11 in the mixed grade group, and in 21 of 25 with high grade lymphomas as 11 patients had either inadequate follow up or not treatment.
The same methods were also used for the analysis of survival in patients treated with surgery, surgery plus chemotherapy, or chemotherapy alone.
Statistical comparisons of means or percentages were performed between sexes, ages, duration of symptoms before diagnosis, symptoms, data obtained from physical examination, laboratory data abnormalities, radiological and endoscopic findings, and the macroscopic appearances in the gastrectomy specimen in the joint low/mixed grade group v those in the high grade group.
In patients who had undergone operation an χ 2 test was performed for the analysis of the possible association with mortality of the following variables: stage I-II v stage IV disease, histological subtype low/mixed grade or high grade, presence or absence of gastric serosal invasion, presence or absence of lymphoma in the margin of resection or contiguous extension of the lymphoma to nearby abdominal organs, or both, and tumour size over or under 10 cm.
In the high grade group, a Cox's multivariate analysis was performed to identify which of the following variables such as age, extension to adjacent organs or serosal invasion, stage and mode of treatment (surgery, chemotherapy, or the combination of both) might be of independent significance in predicting mortality.
Results
The general characteristics of the patients are shown in Table I. Twenty were classified as low grade, 11 as mixed grade, and 25 as high grade.
Men outnumbered women in the low grade/ mixed grade group by a ratio of 2.1.
This ratio was 0.78 in the high grade group.
In the low grade/mixed grade group the mean age was 58 (13) years (range 24 to 75) and in the high grade group it was 58 (15) years (range 23 to 79).
Seventy four per cent of patients were over 51 years old.
The mean duration of symptoms before diagnosis was 30 (73) months in the first group and 7 (9.5) in the second (p=0.08).
In both groups the presenting symptoms that required hospital consultation were mostly ulcer related pain and a change in longstanding chronic symptoms.
Main symptoms at diagnosis were abdominal pain (77% in the low grade/ mixed grade group and 72% in the high grade group), dyspepsia (41% in the low grade/mixed grade and 40% in the high grade group), and upper gastrointestinal bleeding (38% and 36% respectively).
Patients in the low grade/mixed grade group referred to frequent vomiting (48%) and patients in the high grade group had weight loss (72%), anorexia (76%), and general deterioration (48%).
In the physical examination of the low grade/mixed grade group, abdominal tenderness was the only relatively common finding, occurring in 29%, and in 48% physical examination disclosed no abnormality.
In the high grade group, a palpable mass was found in 32%, hepatomegaly in 24%, undernourishment in 16%, and peripheral lymphadenopathy in 20%: no abnormality was found in 28% of these patients.
Routine laboratory investigations were not significantly abnormal in the low grade/ mixed grade group and were, in fact, completely normal in 32% of these patients.
In the high grade group, 48% had raised erythrocyte sedimentation rates, 28% serum lactate dehydrogenase values over 500 U/l, 24% raised alkaline phosphatase activities, 24% low total protein concentrations, and 16% anaemia; only 4% of patients in this group had all determinations within normal ranges.
In the low grade group, 16 of 20 (80%) patients were staged as IE and 4 of 20 (20%) as IIE.
In the mixed grade group 6 of 10 (60%) were staged as IE, 3 of 10 (30%) as IIE, and another case as IV.
One case was not clearly staged.
In the high grade group 9 of 25 (36%) patients were stage IE, 11 of 25 (44%) stage IIE, and 5 of 25 (20%) were stage IV.
Radiological, endoscopic, and macroscopic findings in the gastrectomy specimens are shown in Table II.
The macroscopic pattern found in surgical specimens correlated with the radiological pattern in only 7 of 18 (38%) of the low grade/mixed grade group and in 5 of 16 (31%) of the patients in the high grade group; the patterns correlated with the endoscopic findings in only 8 of 19 (42%) of the low grade/mixed grade group and in 7 of 17 (41%) of the high grade group.
In the gastrectomy specimen an infiltrative/ ulcerative pattern was found in a significant percentage of cases with low grade/mixed grade lymphoma (p) and a large tumour mass in patients with high grade (p).
In the low grade group, all 15 patients achieved complete remission and in the mixed grade group 8 (88.8%) patients achieved complete and 1 (11%) partial remission.
In the high grade group, complete remission was achieved in 12 patients (57%), partial remission in 3 (14%), and there was no response in 6 (28%).
The mean duration of complete remission in the low grade group was 65 (48) months (range 6 to 156) and only 1 of 15 (6.6%) patients relapsed after 48 months.
In the mixed grade group, the mean duration of complete remission was 46 (31) months (range 5 to 88) and no relapse was recorded.
In the high grade group, the mean duration of complete remission was 66 (101) months (range 4–354); 2 of 12 (16.7%) of the patients in complete remission relapsed after 48 months.
Acturial survival in the low and mixed grade groups was 100% at 156 months, significantly better (p) than the 52% survival in the high grade group (Figure).
Only two patients with low grade or mixed grade disease died, but in neither case was the cause related to lymphoma.
However, nine patients in the high grade group died.
Six of these died between 10 to 60 days after surgery.
All these patients had bulky gastric tumours extending to nearby or distant organs and death was due to progressive and uncontrolable disease and was not directly related to surgery.
The two patients who had a late relapse died, and in another patient death was not related to lymphoma.
In the whole series, actuarial survival was not significantly different in patients treated with surgery, surgery plus chemotherapy, or chemotherapy alone.
Higher grade of histological malignancy (p) and stage IV disease (p) were the only variables that influenced mortality.
In the high grade group, none of the variables or different modes of treatment influenced mortality.
In four patients, a second neoplasm was associated with the gastric lymphoma — one had coexisting gastric carcinoma, another a coexisting colonic carcinoma, and a third developed urothelial carcinoma 11 years after treatment with a chemotherapeutic regimen that included cyclophosphamide.
A gastric lymphoma developed in the fourth patient seven years after radiotherapy treatment for Hodgkin's disease.
Discussion
In most series patients with primary gastric lymphoma have been classified according to Rappaport, Kiel, Lukes-Collins, or Working Formulation systems.
These classifications are able to separate groups of nodal lymphomas with a clear correlation between morphological features and clinical behaviour.
However, these classifications cannot successfully be extrapolated to gastrointestinal lymphomas as MALT lymphocytes and their derived lymphomas seem to have a physiology that differs from their nodal counterparts.
In this study, cases have been classified according to the system proposed by Isaacson et al in an attempt to evaluate its reliability in separating different types of gastric lymphoma.
Cases were classified into two grpups of MALT lymphomas: low grade and high grade with or without a low grade component.
However, in a previous report, using morphological, macroscopic and ultrastructural criteria, and immunological markers, we found that 46% of the patients with low grade malignancy had areas with a population of large cells reflecting the presence of a high grade malignant component.
Thus, we have also included a third group, the mixed grade MALT lymphoma already discussed but not included in the initial classification of Isaacson et al .
In this series, 11 cases have been classified as mixed grade, representing a considerable percentage of all cases of B-cell MALT lymphoma (19.6%).
This finding suggests that primary gastric MALT lymphoma forms a continuum with well delineated entities at either end, which have a graded sequence of an increasing amount of large cells.
It is also possible that in this continuum a tumour increases the amount of large cells and develops higher grades of malignancy transforming low grade into high grade as occurs in nodal counterparts.
Actuarial survival in both low grade and mixed grade is excellent, with a 100% probability of survival after 156 months of treatment.
Ths survival is significantly better (p) than that of the patients with high grade lymphoma whose probability of survival is limited to 52%.
This different outcome confirms that the grouping proposed by the Isaacson classification is reliable in terms of prognosis and that the presence of a limited component of high grade in a low grade case has no ominous prognostic significance.
In the whole series there were no differences in survival in the groups treated with chemotherapy, surgery, or the combination of both.
These results and the good overall survival of the low grade and mixed grade groups underline the facts that most of these patients had localised disease, that after achieving complete remission most patients are cured, and that surgery can be a definitive treatment.
However, in the high grade group the disease can present with a bulky gastric tumour extending to nearby or distant organs and can display much more aggressive behaviour which cannot be controlled by surgery.
This presentation implies a very poor prognosis despite treatment, as was the case in six patients in this series.
Relapses in high grade patients also seem to be ominous events as both patients who relapsed have died.
Patients who did not present with bulky or extensive initial disease and who did not relapse after complete remission had a good prognosis, comparable with that of low or mixed grade patients.
In the high grade group in this series, surgery, chemotherapy, or the combination of both, did not influence survival and the effectiveness of the different modes of treatment needs further assessment.
Some authors maintain that effective gastrectomy is essential for cure, while others suggest that surgery alone is insufficient and a combination of chemotherapy and surgery is better.
Others have shown that surgery does not improve the results of chemotherapy or radiotherapy.
Moreover, only two thirds of tumours are resectable at surgery.
Gastrectomy is not devoid of complications, mortality has been reported as being as high as 16% and there is a high incidence of short and long term complications after surgery.
The use of endoscopic biopsy specimens in histopathological diagnosis and of imaging techniques in staging disease extent avoids the need for laparotomy and gastrectomy which consequently can be reserved for a minority of cases.
A recent prospective study of high grade gastric lymphoma found that survival was similar in patients who underwent complete, incomplete, or no surgical therapy before chemotherapy and that the prognostic factors predicting survival were similar to those in patients with nodal lymphoma treated with the same chemotherapy regimen.
This finding supports the view that chemotherapy should be the elective treatment in this group.
Although bleeding and perforation have been feared complications in non-operated patients they have not occurred in this series or in others.
If these results can be confirmed, chemotherapy without gastrectomy should be the treatment of choice for agressive gastric lymphomas.
When the characteristics and the extent of the gastric MALT lymphoma are considered, only the histological grade and stage IV disease (as in all major series) influenced mortality.
Tumour size over 10 cm, presence of disease in the margins of resection, or extension to adjacent organs had no influence.
Neither the classical variables nor the different treatments influenced survival in high grade lymphoma.
These data support the validity of classifying the two different grades of gastric MALT lymphoma.
Clinical findings also support the view that low and mixed grade form a specific group that can be separated from the high grade group.
In both groups, patients were middle aged to elderly, but there is a striking incidence of low grade/mixed grade in men that is not found in the high grade group.
Although in both groups the disease can be either indolent or slowly progressive and most cases had a non-aggressive course, in patients grouped as low grade/mixed grade the disease can last for years and in those grouped as high grade for months only, a difference that is almost significant.
The symptoms are non-specific and not very different in either group, except for the incidence of anorexia, weight loss, and a general malaise in high grade patients.
Reflecting this scarcity of symptoms, physical examination is normal in almost 50% of patients with low grade/ mixed grade and in 28% of those with high grade.
In the high grade group it is common to find a palpable mass, hepatomegaly or splenomegaly, and palpable lymphadenopathy.
Anaemia, raised erythrocyte sedimentation rates, and serum lactate dehydrogenase activities are common findings in high grade, but the analytical findings are normal in up to one third of the patients with low grade/mixed grade.
Although both groups tend to appear as a limited disease, most cases being in stage I-IIE, the morphohistological subtype seems to be a decisive factor in dissemination, as only one case (5%) of low grade/mixed grade compared with 20% of the patients with high grade were classified as stage IV.
Upper gastrointestinal radiography and endoscopy are very sensitive in showing the presence of gastric disease, with infiltrative and and ulcerative patterns in both groups and a tumour pattern only in high grade.
These procedures can detect the disease, but they are not so accurate as the macroscopic study of a surgical specimen in determining the pattern and extension of the tumour.
The correlations between radiology and endoscopy and the surgical specimen were very poor: there was agreement with the surgical specimen in only 31 to 38% and in 41 to 42% respectively.
A final point is the occurrence of non-lymphoid neoplasias in four patients.
This association means that primary gastric MALT lymphoma can develop as a second neoplasm or that other neoplasms can occur in both treated and untreated patients with gastric lymphoma.
Despite the slow non-aggresive course of gastric lymphoma, these patients behave as immunocompromised subjects who may eventually develop immunodeficiency-related secondary neoplasias.
Moreover, a high incidence of gastric adenocarcinomas coexisting (over 60 cases) or following (17 cases) gastric lymphomes have been reported.
This increased incidence of gastric carcinomas seems to be related to local factors.
An increased proliferative capacity of the gastric epithelium next to the areas of MALT derived lymphomas has been postulated (P G Isaacson, personal communication) as a possible mechanism.
Helicobacter pylori infection is associated with an increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma and is also found in 92% of patients with gastric MALT lymphoma, supporting its role as cofactor in the pathogenesis of both diseases.
This finding may explain the eventual synchronous or metachronous occurrence of these two diseases in the same patient.
In summary, the two types low grade/mixed grade and high grade recognised in the Isaacson classification delineate two extreme types of gastric MALT lymphomas that differ in their presentation, clinical behaviour, and response to treatment.
Low grade/mixed grade occur in elderly men with a history extending over several years, non-specific local symptoms, no abnormal exploratory or laboratory findings, a gastric infiltrative/ulcerative pattern, limited stage I-II disease, and with a very good response to treatment and prolonged survival.
On the other hand, although high grade may follow a similar course, in some patients it is associated with systemic symptoms, laboratory and exploratory abnormalities, large tumour masses in the stomach, extensive and disseminated disease, and failure of treatment leading to a poor prognosis.
Magnetic resonance inaging in oncology
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has evolved over the past decade as an important new technique, providing in some circumstances, unique, and in others, additional, information to that obtained with standard investigations.
Its role in oncology is currently under investigation in many centres throughout the world, but even today there are clear indications for its use in the central nervous and musculoskeletal systems.
In other areas, the role of MRI is not yet fully established but it certainly seems to have several advantages with regard to imaging bone marrow malignancy, staging pelvic cancers, and in head and neck tumours.
MRI may also be useful as a problem solving exercise when other imaging methods have failed to resolve a specific clinical problem relating to malignant disease.
MRI has certain advantages over other imaging techniques, in particular computed tomography.
Firstly, the technique does not use x radiation, which is of importance even in patients with malignant disease, as they are now surviving longer and frequently undergo multiple follow up studies.
Secondly, images can be obtained in any plane, which is a significant advantage over the limited cross sectional plane of computed tomography.
Thirdly, the technique has a high contrast resolution which means that tumours are frequently shown with greater clarity than with computed tomography.
The MR signal is derived from energy released from hydrogen nuclei when subjected to a radio frequency pulse within a uniform magnetic field.
The energy released can be measured as relaxation time.
There are two types of relaxation time (T1 and T2), which are based on the sensitivity of the hydrogen ions to their local molecular environment.
The relaxation times of different tissues depend upon their water content (long for fluids, short for solids).
Tumours contain a relatively high water content and therefore have a relatively long T1 and T2 compared with normal soft tissue.
Images can be produced which reflect either T1 weighting, T2 weighting, or a combination of both.
On T1 weighted images tumours have a low signal intensity, appearing dark; on T2 weighted images they have a higher signal and look bright.
New sequences are rapidly being developed — for example, images can now be obtained in which the fat or water component of the tissue is suppressed independently and MRI angiography also shows great promise.
Thus the scope of this new technique is enormous and its technological capabilities are being explored vigorously.
From this brief description it is clear that the information derived from MRI is already significantly greater than that from most of the other imaging techniques.
Intravenous contrast medium (Gadalinium DTPA — Gd DTPA, Schering Health Care Ltd), has added a new dimension to MRI, particularly in the central nervous system.
Gd-DTPA behaves in a manner similar to the iodinated contrast medium used in computed tomography, thus tumours in the brain show enhancement due to destruction of the blood/brain barrier and other organs in the body, such as the liver, show enhancement of normal parenchyma.
MRI has had a major impact on the diagnosis of primary and secondary tumours within the central nervous system.
It was first recognised as of particular value in the diagnosis of posterior fossa lesions, where computed tomograms are frequently degraded by artefact from bone.
The facility to obtain images in the sagittal plane also enables the relationship of tumours to the fourth ventricle to be readily seen.
With rapid improvements in the spatial resolution of MRI systems, its greater sensitivity to pathological change in cerebral tissue has become apparent.
In an ideal world, it would now be the preferred method of evaluating brain pathology unless there were a specific contraindication for example, the presence of ferro-magnetic clips on intracranial vessels.
Supratentorial infiltrating, low grade gliomas are often difficult to identify on computed tomography because they are not associated with significant mass effect and may not enhance with intravenous contrast medium.
The extent of tumour apparent on MRI compared with computed tomography is often surprising.
Also, lesions that are apparently multifocal on computed tomography may clearly be contiguous on MRI, and spread of tumours across the corpus callosum is well demonstrated.
The development of the MRI contrast medium Gd-DTPA has been valuable in delineating the margins of intracranial tumours.
Gd-DTPA is also of value in assessing tumour recurrence after surgery, with the rider that for the first few postoperative months the hypervascular scar tissue does not have a blood/brain barrier and hence enhancement at this stage does not necessarily indicate that residual tumour is present.
MRI has been shown to be more sensitive than computed tomography in demonstrating intracranial metastases, particularly when Gd-DTPA is used.
Metastases usually appear as areas of high signal on T2-weighted images, although metastases from mucinous adenocarcinoma from the gastrointestinal tract may have a low signal.
Demonstration of multiple metastases may be particularly important when planning surgical resection or localised radiotherapy for an apparently solitary metastasis.
Alternatively, it may be important to demonstrate the presence of unsuspected brain metastases in high risk patients when planning management.
Although computed tomography can be as sensitive as MRI in the detection of nodular leptomeningeal tumour, enhanced MRI imaging is more sensitive in the detection of diffuse meningeal enhancement against the inner table of the skull.
MRI is also a sensitive way of detecting nodular or diffuse leptomeningeal carcinomatosis in the spinal canal.
The excellent soft tissue resolution and multiplanar capability of MRI are of particular value in imaging the pituitary fossa, where the relationship of tumours to the optic chiasm and other important surrounding structures can be shown.
Acoustic neuromas and other extra-axial tumours are also visualised optimally on contrast enhanced MRI.
Although computed tomography is still the most widely used method of evaluating the head and neck, the superior demonstration of soft tissue planes with MRI enables more accurate delineation of the extent of head and neck tumours and also helps in differentiating between inflammatory and neoplastic conditions.
Short T1 inversion recovery MRI sequences enable a tumour of the base of skull to be more readily identified by nulling the high signal from bone marrow, and Gd-DTPA is of particular value in the assessment of lesions of the base of skull and sinuses and in assessing intracranial spread of tumours.
Myelography and computed tomography are still widely used in the evaluation of spinal abnormality but MRI is superior and is likely to replace myelography, particularly as it is possible to visualise the spinal cord without introducing intrathecal contrast medium.
Gd-DTPA enhancement of tumour helps to distinguish tumour from the normal spinal cord and a benign syrinx.
The sagittal plane is the most helpful for imaging spinal pathology, supplemented by axial images of the area of abnormality or suspected pathology.
Coronal images are also of value in the assessment of paraspinal masses with an associated intraspinal component.
Before the advent of MRI intramedullary tumours were often difficult to detect on myelography, particularly infiltrating lesions with only minimal expansion of the cord.
Intradural extramedullary metastases from primary intracranial malignancies are also readily identified on contrast enhanced MRI.
The evaluation of spinal cord compression from metastatic bone disease with MRI is another area in which this technique excels.
The patient does not have to be positioned uncomfortably as in myelography and multiple sites of cord compression, which are often not seen on myelography or computed tomographic myelography, can be visualised.
MRI has already made a valuable contribution to the management of patients with musculoskeletal tumours and has become the investigation of choice for staging patients with primary bone tumours.
The technique, however, is of little value in predicting the histological tumour type.
Thus, the distinction between a benign andmalignant lesion may be impossible since signal intensity values are similar for both, and, furthermore, the characteristic patterns of cortical bone destruction and new bone formation cannot be well visualised on MRI.
Plain radiography, with its superior spatial resolution, remains a key investigation in the initial diagnosis of a primary bone tumour.
After initial diagnosis, MRI is the ideal method of demonstrating the extent of bone marrow involvement and the presence and extent of an associated soft tissue mass.
Its multiplanar capability is an added advantage in evaluating musculoskeletal tumours because these frequently develop in the limbs which can be imaged in the longitudinal plane.
Soft tissue sarcomas, although rare, are also very well demonstrated with MRI because of the high contrast between muscle (low signal) and tumour (high signal) on T2 weighted sequences.
In addition, involvement of major neurovascular structures and bone can also be diagnosed with a high degree of accuracy.
As with primary bone tumours, MRI should be regarded as the investigation of choice before surgery for soft tissue sarcoma and is also helpful for monitoring the response to treatment and detecting any recurrence.
Bone marrow imaging is emerging as a very exciting new application fo MRI.
In adults, normal bone marrow contains largely fat and therefore has a high signal.
Tumours within the bone marrow have a low signal and are therefore clearly depicted against a background of fatty marrow.
There is a rapidly growing body of literature supporting the efficacy of MRI for evaluating patients with bone marrow malignancy, and the technique has already been shown to be highly sensitive for detecting bone marrow metastases even in the absence of abnormal pain radiographs, conventional computed tomograms and radionuclide studies.
MRI may also have a useful role in monitoring response and detecting relapse in patients with diffuse bone marrow malignancies such as leukaemia, multiple myeloma, and lymphoma.
At present MRI is not routinely used in clinical practice for assessing bone marrow malignancy, but as scanners become more widely available, there is little doubt that this field will expand into one of the major applications of MRI in oncology.
The use of MRI for staging pelvic cancers has recently increased and as technology advances with the development of surface coils and endoscopic coils, pelvic imaging is likely to become a prominent application.
Numerous studies published over recent years have shown the potential advantages of MRI for staging pelvic tumours.
MRI is likely to become the prefered technique because the internal anatomy of organs such as the uterus, cervix, and prostate, is clearly shown on T2 weighted sequences.
Furthermore, the ability to image in multiple planes is particularly valuable in the pelvis, where extension of a rumour into adjacent structures may not be detected on a cross sectional computed tomogram.
In patients with bladder cance, MRI has a small but significant advantage over computed tomography in assessing the presence of extra vesicle spread.
For example, MRI may show tumour spread beyond the bladder wall in the sagittal or coronal plane which cannot be seem on computed tomography.
MRI may also show early organ invasion which cannot be detected on computed tomogram.
In addition to these advantages, MRI seems to be a reliable method of distinguishing between tumours that affect the deep muscle of the bladder wall and those affecting the superficial layers.
Again, this is a significant advantage over computed tomography which is totally unreliable for staging early tumours.
Computed tomography is a poor technique for staging prostatic cancer and there is now substantial evidence to demonstrate that MRI is significantly better.
Transrectal ultrasound and MRI should therefore be regarded as the techniques of choice for staging prostatic cancer, but as yet there is no firm agreement as to which of these techniques is the most accurate.
The development of endorectal coils for MRI is likely to improve further the results with this technique.
The gynaecological organs are elegantly demonstrated on T2 weighted sequences.
The uterus can be readily distinguished from the cervix and furthermore, the endometrium can be distinguished from the ‘junctional zone’ and myometrium.
Local spread of tumours arising in the cervix or uterus can be much more accurately assed with computed tomography, because of the high contrast between the abnormal tumour and the surrounding normal structures.
Accuracy rates in the region of 80–90% can be achieved for staging both prostatic and cervical cancer with MRI.
The efficacy of MRI for evaluating tumours in the chest is not yet clear.
There are occasions when MRI provides better information than computed tomography, largely because intravenous contrast medium is not required to distinguish vessels from tumour.
In addition, MRI may show extension of the tumour through the chest wall which cannot readily be seen on computed tomogram because of the lack of contrast between the tumour and chest wall muscles.
The multiplanar capability of MRI is also useful for examination of the chest, and of areas such as the branchial plexus and axillae in patients suspected of recurrent breast cancer.
One of the major disadvantages of MRI in the chest is the inability to visualise the lungs, which are simply seen as a signal void.
Thus computed tomography remains the most effective method for diagnosing small pulmonary metastases.
In the abdomen, MRI has not yet found its place in routine clinical practice.
One of the major drawbacks is that no good bowel contrast agent is commercially available and it is therefore frequently difficult to distinguish tumour from loops of bowel.
Furthermore, respiratory and bowel motion cause movement artefacts that frequently degrade the image.
However, the current situation is likely to change over the next few years, as major advances in technology take place.
The liver is the one organ in the abdomen in which MRI has been shown to be slightly better than computed tomography in the detection of focal lesions.
However, MRI is currently used as second line investigation, for example to characterise a known liver lesion seen on computed tomogram rather than for full abdominal staging.
MRI may show involvement of the renal veins and inferior vena cava in renal cell carcinoma and has the advantage over computed tomography of demonstrating the tumour/thrombus not only in the axial but in the coronal plane where the superior and inferior extent of involvement can be clearly shown.
Compared with the wealth of information already available in the assessment of untreated tumours, relatively little attention has yet been given to the role of MRI in monitoring tumour behaviour in response to treatment and detecting relapse.
As with computed tomography, MRI can show changes in tumour volume, but in addition changes in signal intensity of the tumour may also be observed.
For example, soft tissue sarcomas and lymphomatous masses show a reduction in signal on T2 weighted images in response to treatment, and bone tumours may show a mixed response with persistent areas of low signal remaining and areas of high signal developing within the bone marrow.
It is probable that these changes in signal represent areas of necrosis, granulation tissue, and fibrosis but their importance in terms of clinical management and in identifying residual active cancer remains uncertain.
There is some evidence to indicate that MRI is a useful technique for diagnosing tumour recurrence since malignant tumour masses can be distinguished from fibrotic tissue on the basis of signal intensity.
However, small foci of tumour within an area of fibrosis may be undetectable on MRI, which means that the technique cannot be regarded as completely reliable.
MRI has been much slower to develop than computed tomography, but its impact in those areas where it clearly has a substantial advantage has been enormous, namely the central nervous system and the musculoskeletal system.
Furthermore, the value of MRI in other areas of oncology, is beginning to be recognised and there is little doubt that further advances in technology and in the development of new contrast agents will carry MRI into a new era.
IgG-subclass distribution in serum and rectal mucosa of monozygotic twins with or without inflammatory bowel disease
Abstract
Serum samples from 26 monozygotic twin pairs concordant or discordant with regard to inflammatory bowel disease, and rectal biopsies from 42 twins of the same subject group, were examined for IgG subclasses.
They were all compared with normal controls.
Almost all affected twins were in clinical remission.
Paired immunofluorescence staining of the rectal mucosa showed that those with ulcerative colitis had a significantly higher (p) proportion of IgG1 producing mucosal immunocytes than normal controls (78.1% v 55.9%).
Conversely, the IgG2 cell fraction was significantly reduced (15.9% v 34.6%).
Healthy twins from ulcerative colitis pairs tended to show a raised proportion of IgG1 cells and the IgG2 cell fraction was significantly reduced (p).
In discordant ulcerative colitis twin pairs, no difference appeared in the cellular IgG subclass pattern between healthy and affected twins.
Furthermore, the proportion of IgG1 in these healthy and diseased twins showed good correlation (T=0.867).
The results in rectal mucosa of twins with Crohn's disease were widely scattered and affected twins did not differe significantly from normal controls.
Healthy twins, however, showed a marginally raised IgG1 cell proportion, but no correlation was seen between the IgG subclass fractions in discordant Crohn's disease twin pairs.
The serum concentrations of IgG1 and IgG2 did not differ from normal controls in twins of either category.
These results suggested that in ulcerative colitis, the aberrant mucosal production of IgG1 and IgG2 does not depend on active disease, but is apparently at least partially explained by a genetic impact.
Conversely, the mucosal IgG subclass pattern in Crohn's disease appears to be determined mainly by exogeneous variables.
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease are chronic, remitting and relapsing mucosal disorders, collectively known as inflammatory bowel disease.
The aetiology remains unknown, but much circumstantial evidence suggests that immunological mechanisms are involved in the pathogenesis.
The established mucosal lesion in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease is dominated by terminally differentiated B cells appearing as plasma cells and blasts.
In this immunocyte population there is disproportionate expansion of the number of immunoglobulin G (Ig) producing immunocytes in affected areas.
Immunohistochemical studies have shown that the IgG cell fraction is increased up to 30 times, depending on the severity of the lesion.
Furthermore, cultured mononuclear cells isolated from inflammatory bowel disease mucosa spontaneously secrete large amounts of IgG.
These findings have led to the notion that IgG mediated immunopathological processes are of importance.
The subclass composition of an IgG response is of biological significance because of the striking isotype related differences with regard to binding and activation of complement, promotion of phagocytosis, and mediation of antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity.
Our laboratory has recently shown significant disparity between ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease in terms of IgG subclass production in the mucosal lesion; the proportion of IgG1 immunocytes was found to be higher in ulcerative colitis than in Crohn's colitis, while the reverse was true for the IgG2 cell fraction.
These immunohistochemical observations were in good agremeent with results obtained for IgG subclass synthesis revealed by spontaneous release from dispersed intestinal mononuclear cells.
Similar disparity between the two disorders has also been reported for serum IgG subclass concentrations.
The dissimilar IgG subclass distribution between ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease might reflect different antigenic or mitogenic exposures in the gut.
Another possibility is that the genetic regulation of the isotype response is different in the two populations of inflammatory bowel disease patients.
Finally, it might be the result of an interplay between genetic and environmental factors.
The influence of heredity is best studied in genetically identical twins.
We have therefore examined the IgG subclass pattern in rectal immunocytes and in serum of monozygotic twins with or without inflammatory bowel disease.
The study included pairs of twins both concordant and discordant with regard to ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease.
Furthermore, this material offered an opportunity to study the IgG subclass pattern in inactive stages of inflammatory bowel disease because the affected twin were in clinical remission.
A histological normal control material was included for comparison.
Methods
TWINS
The study was approved by the Ethical Committee, Örebro Medical Center Hospital, Örebro.
By matching the Swedish twin registry at the Department of Environmental Hygiene, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, with the central diagnosis register of hospital inpatients at the National Board of Health and Welfare, a population of monozygotic or dizygotic twins of the same sex has been identified.
In our previous study, 34 monozygotic pairs with inflammatory bowel disease were found.
Those who were younger than 75 years with both twin in each pair still alive were invited to participate in a clinical investigation.
Two more recently diagnosed monozygotic pairs with inflammatory bowel disease were also invited.
Fifty three of 66 total individuals agreed to participate.
They constituted 14 pairs with Crohn's disease and 12 pairs with ulcerative colitis.
The zygosity classification of the Swedish Twin Registry was used, which relies on questions on childhood resemblance.
It has proved very accurate; in monozygotic twins a correct classification is obtained in 99% as verified by serological methods.
The distribution of twins in concordant and discordant twin pairs, and the number of twins with an ileostomy, are shown in Table I. Among the 15 twins with ulcerative colitis, the mean age at diagnosis was 27.7 years (range 17–45); the actual study age was 49.1 years (range 24–74).
In the 19 twins with Crohn's disease, the mean age at diagnosis was 28.5 years (range 20–45) and the actual study age 42.9 years (range 34–63).
All patients with ulcerative colitis were in clinical remission and had normal levels of haemoglobin, C-reactive protein, and serum orosomucoid.
Six patients were treated with sulphasalazine and one healthy twin with prednisolone for chronic hepatitis, 5 mg every second day.
Two patients with Crohn's disease had mild diarrhoea and slightly increased C-reactive protein and orosomucoid concentrations.
They were treated with sulphasalazine.
Two patients had severe perianal disease preventing sigmoidoscopy.
The others were inactive and no other therapy was given except vitamins or loperamide.
A thorough interview revealed no symptoms suggestive of inflammatory bowel disease in the healthy twins.
Thehealthy twins have remained healthy for 21.4 years (range 8–40) after the diagnosis of the matching twins who had ulcerative colitis and for 14.9 years (range 7–31) in the twins discordant with those who had Crohn's disease.
Venous blood was obtained from all twins.
After centrifugation, aliquots of serum were frozen at -70°C until analysis.
Furthermore, rectal biopsy specimens were obtained from each twin in whom sigmoidoscopy could be carried out.
In the ulcerative colitis group, 10 of the 14 diseased twins had a rectum available for biopsy.
Rectal biopsy specimens were collected from all 10 healthy ulcerative colitis twins.
In 14 of the 19 diseased Crohn's disease twins, sigmoidoscopy could be performed.
The biopsy from one of the nine healthy Crohn's disease twins turned out to be inadequate for immunohistochemical evaluation.
Because some twin pairs were concordant with regard to inflammatory bowel disease, and rectal biopsy specimens were not available in some diseased twins, biopsy specimens from six healthy twins were unpaired.
They were, however, included in the analysis because, being monozygotic, these twins are genetically identical with those who ultimately developed inflammatory bowel disease.
NORMAL CONTROLS
Normal colonic mucosal specimens were obtained from six men and four women with a mean age of 58.2 years (range 44–70).
This material was collected from macroscopically uninvolved areas of ascending or transverse colon (five), or descending or sigmoid colon (five); the specimens had been surgically resected as a result of colonic carcinoma (eight), polyposis (one), or diverticulitis (one).
Histological evaluation showed no signs of inflammation or dysplasia.
In the study of serum immunoglobulins and serum IgG subclasses, each twin pair had two healthy controls matched for sex and age.
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
Mucosal tissue specimens were extracted in cold phosphate buffered isotonic saline (pH 7.4) for 48 hours before ethanol fixation and paraffin embedding.
Serial sections were cut at 6 µm from each tissue block.
One section was stained with haematoxylin and eosin for histological evaluation.
At least four serial tissue sections, depending on the density of IgG producing cells, were subjected to paired immunofluorescence staining for one of the four IgG subclasses and for total IgG.
Each dewaxed section was first incubated with murine monoclonal antibody (ascites 1:800) to either IgG1 (HP 6070, clone 2C7), IgG2 (HP 6009, clone GOM2), IgG3 (HP 6048, clone CB1-AH7) or IgG4 (HP 6011, clone RJ4) and subsequently with a mix of fluorescein isothiocyanate labelled rabbit antimouse IgG and rhodamine B sulphonyl chloride labelled antihuman IgG.
The sources of monoclonal antibodies, the characteristics of the fluorochrome conjugates, and other details of this two colour staining procedure have been reported previously.
MICROSCOPY AND CELL COUNTING
The sections were evaluated in a Leitz Orthoplan microscope equipped with a Ploem type vertical illuminator with interference filters for selective observation of fluorescein (green) or rhodamine (red) emission (Fig 1).
Immunocytes with distinct cytoplasmic fluorescence were counted using an ×25 immersion objective and an ×10 ocular.
The enumerations were performed by the same investigator (LH) throughout the study.
The intraobserver and interobserver reproducibility showed good correlation and no systematic error was noted for this enumeration method in previous studies.
Although section area and orientation differed among the tissue blocks, the epithelium and lamina propria were easily identified.
Up to five sections were examined for each subclass because of the scarcity of IgG-producing cells in some specimens.
The median number of ‘red’ cells (total IgG population) evaluated for concomitant ‘green’subclass staining per specimen was 223 in controls (range 121–878), 1194 in the ulcerative colitis group (range 246–1964), and 1188 in the Crohn's disease group (range 316- 1952).
The proportion of each subclass was calculated in relation to the total number of IgG producing cells present in the evaluated area of the same section.
The sum of the four subclass proportions in serial sections from each tissue block was usually around 100% (range 94%- 112%).
Variations could probably be ascribed mainly to minor topographical differences in the subclass distribution.
The sum of the subclass medians was for controls 99.7%; for the ulcerative colitis group 101.1%; and for the Crohn's disease group 96.4%.
These figures attested to the high reproducibility of this counting method.
HISTOPATHOLOGICAL EVALUATION
Rectal tissue sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin from all the monozygotic twins were examined by an experienced pathologist with regard to inflammatory changes.
The following variables were evaluated: crypt branching, atrophy, thickening of the epithelial basement membrane and muscularis mucosae, fibrosis and density of inflammatory cell infiltrate.
DETERMINATION OF IMMUNOGLOBULIN CONCENTRATIONS IN SERUM
Total serum IgG, IgA, and IgM were determiend by radial immunodiffusion according to Mancini et al Immunoplates with polyclongal antibodies were purchased from Behringwerke A/S, Germany, and the recommendations by the manufacturer were followed.
The determination of IgG subclasses 1, 2, 3, and 4 were made by radial immunodiffusion with the use of monoclonal antibodies purchased from Seward Laboratories, UK.
The manufacturer's recommendations were followed.
All determinations were done twice with variations between the tests of less than 10%.
STATISTICAL ANALYSES
The twins were divided into four test groups: twin with ulcerative colitis, healthy twins from discordant twin pairs of whom the affected ones had ulcerative colitis, twin with Crohn's disease, and healthy twins from discordant twin pairs of whom the affected ones had Crohn's disease.
Differences in median cellular proportions of the four IgG subclasses among thse groups and in relation to the controls were determined by Wilcoxon's two tailed test for unpaired samples.
Similar comparisons were performed between the inflammatory bowel disease material previously analysed by immunohistochemistry in our laboratory and the present control material.
In six discordant twin pairs with ulcerative colitis, and six discordant twin pairs with Crohn's disease, Wilcoxon's two tailed test for paired samples was used.
Relations between healthy and affected twin with regard to IgG1 and IgG 2 cell proportions in these pairs were estimated by the Kendall rank correlation test.
Serum concentrations of immunoglobulins and IgG subclasses were presented as mean (SD).
Differences between means were tested with Student's t test and pwas considered statistically significant.
Results
SUBCLASS DISTRIBUTION OF IgG PRODUCING CELLS IN INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE TWINS AND NORMAL COLONIC MUCOSA
In general, there were large variations in cellular subclass distribution among individuals, in the inflammatory bowel disease twins and normal controls.
The results for ulcerative colitis twins are compared with controls in Figure 1.
The median proportion of IgG1 immunocytes in twins with ulcerative colitis (78.1%) was significantly higher (p) than in controls (55.9%).
Conversely, the proportion of IgG2 cells was lower (p) in twins with ulcerative colitis (15.9%) than in controls (34.6%).
In discordant twin pairs of whom the diseased twin had ulcerative colitis, the healthy ones tended to have a raised proportion of IgG1 cells (64.6%), and the IgG2 cell fraction was significantly (p=0.05) reduced (19.1%) compared with controls.
In contrast, affected Crohn's disease twins showed a wide scatter of results and did not differ significantly from controls in IgG1 and IgG2 proportions (Fig 2).
Healthy twins from pairs with Crohn's disease nevertheless showed a marginally raised IgG1 percentage (67.4%; p= 0.05).
A trend towards reduced proportions of IgG3 in affected ulcerative colitis twins, and IgG4 in affected Crohn's disease twins was also noted, but this was not statistically significant.
Median proportions of IgG1 and IgG2 cells did not differ between healthy and diseased twins with either ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease.
The influence of the presence or absence of disease, however, might have been masked by the large individual variations in subclass proportions.
The monozygotic twin material consisted of both concordant and discordant twin pairs, and some unpaired healthy twins.
Discordant twin pairs with either ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, in whom data were available for both twins, were therefore analysed further for both inflammatory bowel disease categories; no significant differences in subclass proportions appeared between healthy and diseased twins (Tables II and III).
Furthermore, the proportions of IgG1 cells in healthy and diseased ulcerative colitis twins were well correlated (Fig 3a).
Conversely, no such correlation was found in the discordant Crohn's disease twin pairs (Fig 3b).
The other IgG subclasses were not correlated at the cellular level in either ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease twins.
COMPARISON WITH CELLULAR IgG SUBCLASS DISTRIBUTION IN PREVIOUS INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE STUDY
In our previous immunohistochemical study, the mucosal IgG subclass proportions of 10 ulcerative colitis patients were compared with those of eight Crohn's colitis patients, but no normal counts were available for comparison at that time.
A statistical reevaluation was therefore performed in relation to the present control material.
The proportion of IgG1 cells was significantly raised and that of IgG2 cells reduced (p) for the ulcerative colitis patients, but no differences were found in this respect between Crohn's disease colitis and controls.
HISTOPATHOLOGICAL EVALUATION
Microscopic examination in haematoxylin and eosin stained sections revealed only minor alterations except in one concordant and clinical slightly affected Crohn's disease twin pair in whom overt signs of inflammation were present in both twins.
Their mucosal IgG subclass pattern, however, did not differ consistently from the other Crohn's disease twins.
SERUM CONCENTRATIONS OF IMMUNOGLOBULINS AND IgG SUBCLASSES
The serum concentrations of IgG3 in twins with ulcerative colitis, and of IgG4 in twins with Crohn's disease, were significantly lower than in healthy controls (p=0.02).
Furthermore, IgG3 in ulcerative colitis twins was significantly lower than in diseased or healthy Crohn's disease twins.
There was a tendency towards lower concentration of IgG3 in healthy ulcerative colitis twins compared with both controls and Crohn's disease or healthy Crohn's disease twins.
Other IgG subclasses did not differ from controls, and the serum levels of IgG, IgA, and IgM were similar in the four twin groups and the controls (Table IV).
Discussion
The proportion of IgG1 immunocytes in rectal mucosa was raised, and that of IgG2 decreased, in affected ulcerative colitis twins compared with normal colonic specimens.
This result agrees with that previously obtained for ulcerative colitis in our laboratory, and the median disease related subclass ratios were in fact quite similar in the two studies.
These findings are further in keeping with cultivation studies of mononuclear cells from inflamed ulcerative colitis mucosa which showed preferential spontaneous secretion IgG1 compared with control cells.
Theoretically, the IgG subclass distribution could be different in superficial as opposed to basal lamina propria.
Thus, the variable orientation and size of individual tissue samples might have affected our results.
A large number of cells (mean >cells/specimen) was therefore evaluated to obtain representative results from all part of mucosa, including five sections for each IgG subclass.
The fact that the subclass distribution in the diseased twins was almost identical to previous results in inflammatory bowel disease patients, attests to the reliability of our counting method.
The affected ulcerative colitis twins were in clinical remission at the time of biopsy, and histological evaluation showed no signs of mucosal inflammation.
The actual number of IgG producing cells per mucosal length unit could not be quantified because of problems with the sample orientation.
By performing blind semiquantitive IgG-cell density scoring, however, we did not notice any difference between affected and healthy twins (data not shown).
In the light of previous reports on an association between the number of mucosal IgG producing cells and inflammatory activity, our study suggests that the cellular IgG subclass distribution in ulcerative colitis does not depend on the magnitude of the local IgG response.
The raised IgG1 proportion appears to be disease specific instead and not a reflection of unspecific inflammatory changes.
The tendency of the healthy ulcerative colitis twins to show a raised IgG1 proportion, along with a significantly reduced IgG2 proportion, supports this notion.
The total IgG production in the mucosa was probably not increased in the diseased or healthy ulcerative colitis twins; this could explain the fact that their serum concentrations of IgG1 and IgG2 did not differ from controls, which is in contrast with previous observations in active disease.
There was a tendency towards a lower proportion of IgG3 cells in ulcerative colitis mucosa, along with a significantly decreased serum concentration of IgG3 in ulcerative colitis twins compared with controls.
This has not been found in previous studies.
Further investigations are needed to determine if also this aberration is specific for ulcerative colitis.
It has been suggested that Crohn's disease gives rise to a relatively enhanced production of IgG2 compared with IgG1, but this did not hold true when we compared immunohistochemical data from our present and previous study with controls.
On the contrary, there was a tendency towards a reduced proportion of IgG2 in healthy and affected Crohn's disease twins as well as in the previously analysed Crohn's disease colitis patients with moderate or severe mucosal inflammation.
It rather appeared to be a slight but inconsistent preference for mucosal IgG1 production also in Crohn's disease.
There is no doubt that genetic factors are involved in inflammatory bowel disease, although the influence of heredity might be different in the two diseases.
The genetic impact on the mucosal IgG subclass response could also be different in the two diseases.
in ulcerative colitis, we found that the cellular proportions of IgG1 and IgG2 in healthy twins were somewhere between controls and affected twins; but when comparing healthy and affected twins, no statistically significant differences appeared.
In view of the large individual variations, and also the fact that some twins included were unpaired, the influence of disease might have been more or less masked.
We therefore separately analysed six discordant twin pairs, and found no significant differences between healthy and affected twins.
Therefore, the factor(s) responsible for the enhanced IgG1 response in ulcerative colitis appeared to be present also in healthy twins.
This notion was further supported by the strong correlation revealed for cellular IgG1 proportions in healthy and affected ulcerative colitis twins.
A possible interpretation of these findings is that genetic mechanisms are involved in the regulation of the IgG subclass response.
The switch region associated with the CHγ1 gene may be more efficient in the ulcerative colitis population.
Certain IgG heavy chain markers are associated with the serum concentrations of IgG subclasses.
For example, individuals without the G2 marker n have lower serum concentration of IgG2 than carriers of the G2m (n ).
Another mechanism may be that certain VH genes, directed against antigens which are important to the IgG response in ulcerative colitis, preferentially associate with particular CH genes in the ulcerative colitis population.
Several studies have disclosed relations between IgG markers and IgG subclass serum concentrations against particular antigens.
Interestingly, a recent German study showed an association between ulcerative colitis and Gm 1, -2,10.
Similar genetic mechanisms may be involved in autoimmune diseases in general.
Several studies have disclosed increased serum levels of IgG1 in a number of autoimmune diseases.
The similarity in IgG subclass proportions between healthy and affected ulcerative colitis twins might also reflect stimulation by a particular antigen(s).
Numerous studies have shown IgG antibodies in serum of inflammatory bowel disease patients directed towards cow's milk proteins, bacteria, cytoskeleton and different epithelial cell associated antigens.
The latter antibodies have also been detected in serum of non-affected family members of inflammatory bowel disease patients.
A 40-kD colon specific epithelial membrane glycoprotein bound to IgG have been isolated from ulcerative colitis lesions.
Such tissue bound IgG might predominantely be IgG1 because this subclass has recently shown together with terminal complement complex on the luminal face of the epithelium in ulcerative colitis.
In one study in the United States, certain IgG1 and IgG3 heacy chain markers were found to be associated with Crohn's disease.
Others have not been able to confirm this association.
We found no differences in the median cellular proportions of IgG subclasses between healthy and affected Crohn's disease twins and in the separately analysed discordant twin pairs.
Also in contrast with the ulcerative colitis twins, there was no IgG1 cell correlation between healthy and affected paired twins, and the range in IgG subclass proportions was much larger.
Even concordant Crohn's disease twins affected by the disease usually showed very dissimilar subclass ratios.
This suggested that the mucosal IgG subclass response in Crohn's disease is mainly determined by exogeneous variables.
The data might reflect that many different antigens affect the mucosal immune response pattern in both affected and non-affected Crohn's disease twins.
Conversely, our data strongly suggested a substantial genetic impact on the preferential local IgG1 response in ulcerative colitis.
Ablation of capsaicin sensitive afferent nerves impairs defence but not rapid rapair of rat gastric mucosa
Abstract
Capsaicin sensitive afference neurones have previously been reported to play a prt in gastric mucosal protection.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether these nociceptive neurones strengthen mucosal defence against injury or promote rapid repair of the damaged mucosa, or both.
This hypothesis was examined in a anaesthetised rats whose stomachs were perfused with ethanol (25 or 50% in saline, wt/wt) for 30 minutes.
The gastric mucosa was inspected 0 and 180 minutes after ethanol had been given at the macroscopic, light, and scanning electron microscopic level.
Rapid repair of the ethanol injured gastric mucosa (reduction of deep injury, partial re-epithelialisation of the denuded surface) took place in rats anaesthetised with phenobarbital, but not in those anaesthetised with urethane.
Afferent nerve ablation as a result of treating rats with a neurotoxic dose of capsaicin before the experiment significantly aggravated ethanol induced damage as shown by an increase in the area and depth of the erosions caused by haemorrhaging.
Rapid repair of the injured mucosa, however, as seen in rats anaesthetised with phenobarbital 180 minutes after ethanol was given, was similar in capsaicin and vehicle pretreated animals.
Ablation of capsaicin sensitive afferent neurones was verified by a depletion of calcitonin gene related peptide from the gastric corpus wall.
These findings indicate that nociceptive neurones control mechanisms of defence against acute injury but are not required for rapid repair of injured mucosa.
There is twofold evidence that capsaicin sensitive (nociceptive) afferent neurones affect gastric mucosal protection.
Firstly, ablation of these neurones increases the susceptibility of the rat gastric mucosa to injurious factors such as hydrochloric acid, acetylsalicylic acid, and ethanol.
Secondly, stimulation of capsaicin sensitive neurones in the stomach enhances the resistance of the gastric mucosa against experimentally imposed damage.
The capacity of the gastric mucosa to protect itself from injury is determined by many factors, and aggravation of experimental injury as seen after sensory nerve ablation, may result either from impairment of mucosal defence or retardation of rapid repair or both.
Instrumental in the latter is the process of restitution, by which epithelial continuity is re-established by mucous cells emigrating from the gastric pits.
Capsaicin sensitive afferent neurones may affect both defence and repair mechanisms in the gastric mucosa, because they are sensitive to a variety of noxious stimuli and have been reported to play both a defensive and trophic part in somatic tissues.
The aim of this study, therefore, was to examine whether capsaicin induced ablation of afferent neurones would impede rapid repair of the ethanol damaged rat gastric mucosa.
Methods
ANIMAL PREPATATION
This study was approved by the Ministry of Science and Research of the Republic of Austria on the basis that all animal experiments were carried out under general anaesthesia.
Sprague-Dawley rats, of either sex and 240–280 g body weight, were used.
The animals were deprived of food for 20 hours before the experiments but allowed free access to water.
The rats were anaesthetised either by a subcutaneous injection of urethane (1.5 g/kg) or an intraperitoneal injection of sodium phenobarbital (0.23 g/kg).
The body temperature of the animals was kept at 36–37°C by means of heating lamps.
Saline (0.9% NaCl, wt/wt) was continuously infused into a jugular veing at a rate of 1.5 ml/h to avoid dehydration.
The stomach, exposed by a midline laparotomy, was prepared for continuous perfusion by an inflow cannula inserted through the oesophagus and an outflow cannula inserted through the pylorus.
After flushing the stomachs with 50 ml saline to remove any solid contents, a period of 1 hour was allowed for equilibration during which the stomach was continuously perfused with saline (room temperature) at a rate of 0.7–0.8 ml/min.
Thereafter, the stomach was perfused with ethanol (25 or 50%, wt/wt) in saline to induce the formation of gastric erosions.
For examination of mucosal injury, the stomachs were excised, opened along the greater curvature, pinned flat on a board, and processed for assessment of damage at the gross, light, and scanning electron microscopic level.
TREATMENT WITH CAPSAICIN
Rats were pretreated subcutaneously with a total dose of 125 mg/kg capsaicin 14 days before the experiments.
This dose of capsaicin was given in four injections over two days (first day: 25 mg/kg in the morning and 25 mg/kg in the later afternoon, second day: 25 mg/kg in the morning and 50 mg/kg in the late afternoon).
The control rats received equal volumes of vehicle (2+2+2+4 mg/kg).
All injections of capsaicin and its vehicle were given under ether anaesthesia.
To counteract the respiratory impairment associated with the administration of capsaicin, the rats received an intraperitoneal injection of atropine (0.2 mg/kg), terbutaline (0.2 mg/kg) and aminophylline (20 mg/kg) before the first and third capsaicin or vehicle injection.
The effectiveness of capsaicin pretreatment was assessed by determination of the calcitonin gene related peptide content of the gastric corpus wall, because in the rat stomach this peptide is almost exclusively contained in capsaicin sensitive afferent neurones.
Therefore, a biopsy specimen from macroscopically intact areas of the gastric coprus (full thickness, 100–200 mg wet weight) was excised at the end of a 30 minute perfusion of the stomach with ethanol.
The tissue samples were blotted on filter paper, frozen in liquid nitrogen, weighted, and homogenised in 2 ml of acetic acid (2 N) by ultrasonication.
The homogenates were centrifuged at 3000 g for 15 minuts.
The pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of acetic acid (2 N) and centrifuged again.
The combined supernatants were freeze dried and dissolved in radioimmunoassay buffer, and their calcitonin gene related peptide content was assessed by a specific radioimmunoassay.
EXAMINATION OF HISTOLOGICAL INJURY
Histological injury of the gastric mucosa was assessed by light and scanning electron microscopy.
The excised stomachs were placed in fixative (2.5% glutaraldehyde, 2% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer of pH 7.2).
For scanning electron microscopy, the tissues were left in the fixative for 3 hours at room temperature.
Thereafter, pieces of tissue were cut from the gastric corpus and processed for examination on a scanning electron microscope (DSM 950, Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany).
For light microscopic examination, pieces of tissue from the gastric corpus were left in the fixative for three days at room temperature and, after dehydration in a graded series of ethanol, were embedded in Historesin (LKB, Bromma, Sweden).
Four micrometer sections were cut and stained with a mixture of methylene blue azure II and basic fuchsin.
The sections, which were taken randomly from the gastric corpus and included areas of haemorrhagical damage, were evaluated by an observer unaware of the treatment.
Light microscopic injury was assessed.
The sections were divided lengthwise into 10 µm segments, and the grade of injury was determined for each segment.
Four grades of histological injury were recorded: 0, no damage or damage involving only the surface epithelial cells; I, shallow damage involving up to 10% of the mucosal depth; II, medium damage involving up to 25% of the mucosal depth; and III, deep demage involving >of the mucosal depth.
The section length occupied by the respective injury grades was expressed as a percentage of the total section length.
EXAMINATION OF GROSS INJURY
Gross damage to the gastric glandular mucosa was assessed by computerised planimetry.
The fixed stomachs were photographed, and the area of the glandular mucosa that was covered by visible haemorrhagical lesions was determined by the use of a digitising tablet and the software SigmaScan (Handel Scientific, Corte Madera, CA, USA).
Gross injury was evaluated by an observer unaware of the experimental treatment.
The area covered by gross injury was expressed as a percentage of the area of the glandular mucosa of the rat stomach.
EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOLS
Three sets of experiments were performed.
Common to all experiments was that the stomachs were perfused with ethanol is saline for 30 minutes, after which the rats were divided into two groups.
In one group, the stomachs were immediately excised, while in the other group the stomachs were perfused with saline for 180 minutes after the perfusion of ethanol, and unless stated, before they were processed for assessment of injury.
As rapid rapair (restitution) of injured gastric mucosa takes place only if the damage is non-haemorrhagical, the stomachs were exposed to concentrations of ethanol that caused haemorrhagical damage in less than 10% of the glandular mucosa.
With this experimental design both rapid repair of non-haemorrhagical lesions and any repair of haemorrhagical erosions could be studied.
In the first set of experiments, the stomachs of rats anaesthetised with urethane were perfused with 25% ethanol.
In the second set of experiments, the stomachs of rats anaesthetised with phenobarbital were perfused with either 25% or 50% ethanol.
The effect of gastric perfusion with 50% ethanol in vehicle and capsaicin pretreated rats anaesthetised with phenobarbital was studied in the third set of experiments.
SUBSTANCES AND SOLUTIONS
Aminophylline (Sigma, Deisenhofen, Germany), atropine (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), and terbutaline (gift of Astra, Södertälje, Sweden) were dissolved in saline.
Capsaicin (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) was dissolved in absolute ethanol, followed by addition of Tween 80 and saline, the final concentration being 12.5 mg/ ml capsaicin in 10% ethanol, 10% Tween 80, and 80% saline (vol/vol/vol).
The vehicle solution was prepared in the same manner.
Phenobarbital sodium (Sigma, Deisenhofen, Germany) was dissolved in physiological saline (33 mg/ml), whereas urethane (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) was dissolved in water (25%, wt/wt).
STATISTICS
All data are presented as mean (SEM).
Statistical evaluation of the results was performed by use of Student's t test or one way analysis of variance followed by Duncan's test, where application.
Probability values pwere regarded as significant.
Results
INJURY AND RAPID REPAIR IN RATS ANAESTHETISED BY URETHANE
Perfusion of the stomach with 25% ethanol for 30 minutes led to the formation of grossly visible injury, which covered 8.6 (1.9) % (n=6) of the area of the glandular mucosa, as had been previously reported.
Scanning electron microscopy showed that intragastric ethanol caused a vast ablation of the surface epithelium, thus exposing the basal lamina (Fig 1A).
Light microscopic assessment of the damage showed that, immediately after ethanol perfusion, about 25% of the sections displayed injury of grade 0 whilst about 60% of the sections was covered by superficial damage rated as injury grade I (Fig 2).
Injury grades II and III were present in the remaining portions of the sections (Fig 2).
When after the end of the 30 minute perfusion with ethanol (25%), the stomachs were perfused again with saline for 180 minutes, the extent of damage at the light microscopic level did not change compared with the damage measured immediately after ethanol administration (Fig 2).
Scanning electron microscopy, however, showed dynamic changes at the surface of the injured mucosa.
In two rats whose stomachs were perfused with saline for 15 minutes after ethanol, many areas of the mucosa showed expulsion of damaged portions of the gastric glands (Fig 1B and C).
Typically, the proximal but not distal part of the material extruding from the gastric pits was covered by a basement membrane (Fig 1C).
Similar extrusions were seen in two rats whose stomachs were perfused with saline for 60 minutes after ethanol.
Later (60–180 minutes) the basal lamina became exposed again and no sign of re-epithelialisation was noted 180 minutes after ethanol (Fig 1D).
The lamina propria, however, became swollen so that the regular structure of the lamina pripria was distorted (Fig 1D).
Perfusion of the stomach with saline for four hours failed to cause any mucosal damage at the macroscopic and histological level (n=4).
INJURY AND RAPID REPAIR IN RATS ANAESTHETISED WITH PHENOBARBITAL
A 30 minute gastric perfusion with 25% ethanol failed to cause grossly visible lesions in six rats anaesthetised with phenobarbital, whereas a 30 minute exposure of the stomach to 50% ethanol resulted in formation of gross injury that covered 2.0 (0.6) % (n=6) of the glandular mucosa.
The Table shows the extent of histological injury, which compares the damage seen immediately after ethanol perfusion was stopped with the damage seen 180 minutes after ethanol.
Histological damage was significantly reduced by 180 minutes after ethanol in rats given phenobarbital (Table) compared with rats anaesthetised with urethane (Fig 2).
This was seen by a decrease of injury grades II and III and in an increase of injury grades 0 and I. Another experiment with eight rats showed appreciable repair of the gastric mucosa 1 hour after ethanol (data not shown), but the recovery was less pronounced than that seen 3 hours after ethanol.
INJURY AND RAPID REPAIR IN VEHICLE AND CAPSAICIN PRETREATED RATS ANAESTHETISED WITH PNEOBARBITAL
The gastric susceptibility to ethanol injury did not differe between vehicle pretreated and untreated rats anaesthetised with phenobarbital, as seen from a comparison of histological injury scores (Table and Fig 3).
A 30 minute perfusion of 50% ethanol through the stomach of capsaicin pretreated rats, however, caused significantly more damage than in vehicle pretreated animals.
In capsaicin pretreated rats, gross damage covered 12.0 (2.7) % (n=8) of the glandular mucosa, compared with 1.2 (0.5) % (n=9, p) in vehicle pretreated rats.
The severity of histological injury was also enhanced in capsaicin pretreated animals (Figs 3 and 4A).
In vehicle pretreated rats only about 10% of the sections exhibited histological injury of grade III whereas it was nearly 30% of the sections in capsaicin pretreated animals that was covered by this severe degree of damage (Figs 3 and 4A).
Grade III injury occurred regularly in those areas of the mucosa that showed haemorrhagical damage at the macroscopic level.
Scanning electron microscopy confirmed that ethanol caused a vast ablation of the surface epithelium, an effect that was particularly pronounced in capsaicin pretreated rats (Fig 5A and B).
In certain areas of surface denudiation, damaged cells and cell fragments were still visible inside the gastric pits, whereas in other areas no cells were discernible within the pits (Fig 5A).
When the stomachs were perfused with saline for a period of 180 minutes after ethanol, repair of the gastric mucosa was seen in both vehicle and capsaicin pretreated rats (Fig 3).
The repair process resulted in a reduction of the severity of injury.
As in the rats not pretreated with vehicle or capsaicin (Table), histological injury of grade III had almost disappeared and grade II injury was significantly reduced in vehicle pretreated animals 180 minutes after ethanol (Fig 3).
The decrease in injury grades II and III was accompanied by an increase in grade II injury, whereas grade 0 injury did not significantly change in vehicle pretreated rats (Fig 3).
Thus, there was still widespread damage in the superficial mucosa as seen at the light (Fig 4C) and scanning electron (Fig 5E and F) microscopic level.
The severity of the surface damage, however, was clearly diminished by 180 minutes after ethanol.
Although the basal lamina remained visible at many places, the gastric pits of vehicle pretreated rats were uniformly filled with gastric glands (Figs 5E and F).
A number of cells on the mucosal surface projected lamellipodia into the epithelial gaps (Fig 5F), while some neck cells had mitosis (Fig 4C).
The gastric mucosa of capsaicin pretreated rats showed a similar degree of repair to that of vehicle pretreated animals but, as the initial insult was more severe, recovery seen 180 minutes after ethanol was to the same extent as that in vehicle pretreated rats (Fig 3).
Thus, injury of grade III still covered about 10% of the sections, a percentage that was much higher than that measured in vehicle pretreated animals (Fig 3).
When compared with the damage seen immediately after ethanol perfusion, however, injury grades II and III were reduced appreciably and injury grades 0 and I significantly increased in capsaicin pretreated rats (Fig 3).
There was still widespread damage, however, to the superficial aspects of the mucosa (Fig 4B).
The severity of damage ranged from small islets in which the surface remained completely denuded (Fig 5C) to areas in which the continuity of the surface epithelium was nearly complete (Fig 5D).
As in vehicle pretreated animals, surface cells with lamellipodia and neck cells with mitosis were seen in capsaicin pretreated rats.
The content of calcitonin gene related peptide (0.75 (0.08) pmol/g, b=5) in the gastric corpus wall of capsaicin pretreated rats was reduced by 90% compared with the gastric peptide content in vehicle pretreated animals (7.55 (0.84) pmol/g, n=5, p).
Discussion
The two main findings of this study are that (i) capsaicin sensitive afferent neurones do not seem to have an affect on rapid repair of injured gastric mucosa, although they contribute to the defence against injury, and (ii) anaesthetics can affect the recovery of gastric mucosa from damage.
The second finding is important when ethical and legal considerations require the experiments to be conducted under anaesthesia, as was the case in this study.
In an attempt to validate experimental conditions, when injury and rapid repair of the rat gastric mucosa can be studied under the influence of a longacting anaesthetic, we found that urethane anaesthesia prevents rapid repair of the ethanol damaged rat gastric mucosa within three hours after ethanol.
After sloughing of the damaged cells from the surface of the mucosa, no sign of recovery or re-epithelialisation (restitution) was noted in urethane anaesthetised rats.
It was beyond the scope of this study to enquire into the way by which urethane inhibits mucosal repair processes.
This effect, however, may in some way be related to urethane's cytostatic action and urethane's ability to augment synthesis and release of somatostatin and to reduce gastrin release and acid secretion in the rat stomach.
Therefore, urethane anaesthesia is not suitable for the study of rapid repair of injured gastric mucosa but provides an experimental situation in which formation of gastric mucosal lesions can be examined without interference from rapid restitution processes.
When urethane was replaced by a longacting barbiturate anaesthetic, phenobarbital, progressing restitution and repair of the ethanol damaged gastric mucosa was seen one and three hours after ethanol.
This finding is consistent with other reports showing that restitution of the damaged mucosa takes place in barbiturate anaesthetised rats.
Repair of the injured mucosa in phenobarbital anaesthetised rats was apparrent from the increase in the depth of damage.
Three hours after ethanol, injury had mostly receded to the superficial aspects of the mucosa, and the viability of cells in the neck region of the gastric glands was shown by the occurrence of mitotic divisions.
Areas, in which deeper erosions persisted, were largely identical with those areas which exhibited haemorrhagical damage at the macroscopic level.
In conscious rats restitution of non-haemorrhagical lesions proceeds so quickly that re-epithelialisation of the denuded surface is nearly complete within 1 hour.
This process seems to be slowed down, however, in phenobarbital anaesthetised animals, although distinct features of restitution such as formation of lamellipodia in surface mucous cells and partial re-epithelialisation of the surface are evident three hours after ethanol.
Slowing of restitution is also seen in in vitro conditions.
Ablation of capsaicin sensitive afferent neurones, as verified by a 90% depletion of their marker calcitonin gene related peptide from the gastric wall, resulted in a significant aggravation of ethanol injury.
The finding that area and depth of haemorrhagical erosions was enhanced in capsaicin pretreated rats confirms previous findings at the macroscopic and histological level.
Sensory nerve ablation, however, did not impair rapid recovery from damage, as diminution of deep histological injury and re-epithelialisation of the denuded mucosal surface did not differ between vehicle and capsaicin pretreated rats.
These data show, therefore, that the ability of the gastric mucosa to defend itself against noxious challenges depends on the integrity of its sensory innervation, whereas the rapid repair processes taking place after injury do not require an intact sensory innervation.
Primary afferent neurones sensitive to the neurotoxic action of capsaicin have been characterised as neurones that are sensitive to chemical and other modalties of noxiour stimuli.
These nociceptive neurones seem to help an emergency function in the gastric mucosa as they monitor actual or potential harmful factors and signal for adequate measures of defence.
Prominent among the protective mechanisms that are controlled by nociceptive neurones is the microcirculation of the gastric mucosa.
This is because stimulation of capsaicin sensitive afferent neurones increases gastric mucosal blood flow and ablation of these neurones prevents gastric hyperemia in response to, for example , acid back diffusion.
Whether other mechanisms of defence are also governed by capsaicin sensitive nociceptive neuroens remains to be proved.
Sclerosing cholangitis and biliary tract calculi — primary or secondary?
Abstract
The clinical features of 61 patients with sclerosing cholangitis were reviewed.
This group included 23 patients with biliary tract calculi, commonly considered as excluding the diagnosis of primary sclerosing cholangitis.
The aim of this study was to compare these 23 patients (group A) with 38 patients with sclerosing cholangitis free of calculi (group B).
Both groups had the following features in common:(i) age at presentation,(ii) incidence of inflammatory bowel disease,(iii) extent of radiological disease,(iv) prevalence of HLA-B8 and DR3 haplotype,(v) incidence of cholangiocarcinoma, and (vi) progression to hepatic transplantation (mean follow up 49.9 months).
All patients in group A were symptomatic at diagnosis compared with 23 of the 38 patients (61%) in group B. Recurrent ascending cholangitis occurred in 12 patients in group A (52%) and two patients (5%) in group B. The similarity between the two groups was maintained when the nine patients in group A who developed calculi after sclerisong cholangitis was diagnosed were excluded.
We conclude that choledocholithiasis is part of the psectrum of primary sclerosing cholangitis and that it is not necessary to invoke choledocholithiasis as the initial lesion of the bile ducts in such patients.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis is a chronic inflammatory disorder which results in fibrosis and obliteration of the intrahepatic and/or extrahepatic bile ducts leading to the typical radiological appearance of stricturing and beading of the biliary tree.
The aetiology is unknown, although immunological factors have been implicated.
Between 50% and 75% of cases are associated with inflammatory bowel disease, mostly ulcerative colitis.
Ultimately biliary cirrhosis results and the median survival has been estimated to be 12 years.
The diagnosis of primary sclerosing cholangitis is based on typical clinical, histological, and radiological features.
By conventional criteria, it is excluded by (a) the presence of biliary tract calculi,(b) a history of previous biliary tract surgery, and (c) the presence of a cholangiocarcinoma.
Despite these criteria, patients with biliary tract calculi have been included in several studies of primary sclerosing cholangitis.
We have also encountered a number of patients with the radiological features of sclerosing cholangitis but in whom there were also biliary tract calculi.
The aim of the present study was to review a group of patients in whom sclerosing cholangitis was present.
Twenty three of these patients had, or subsequently developed, intrahepatic and/or extrahepatic bile duct calculi.
The features of these patients were compared with those of patients without calculi.
The results indicate that both groups of patients can be considered to have primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Methods
PATIENTS
Sixty one patients diagnosed as having sclerosing cholangitis were seen between 1984 and 1991 at the Gastroenterology and Liver Centre of the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney.
The diagnosis was made in 57 patients by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and in three by percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography.
In one patient, the diagnosis of sclerosing cholangitis became apparent only after examination of the native liver after hepatic transplantation.
All radiological examinations were reviewed by at least two gastroenterologists and two radiologists.
The date of diagnosis was defined as the point when radiological evidence of intrahepatic and/or extrahepatic duct strictures were first demonstrated.
The patients were divided into two groups based on whether or not biliary tract calculi were present, either at diagnosis or at any stage during the course of their illness.
Their clinical features were compared, as was the extent of disease, the clinical course, and prognosis.
The mean period of follow up was 49.9 months (range 1–192 months).
HLA class I and class II alleles were serologically typed at the Tissue Typing Laboratory, NSW Division, Australian Red Cross Society Blood Transfusion Service using the standard National Institutes of Health test for class I and a modified National Institutes of Health test using immunomagnetic beads for class II.
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody was measured in 31 patients by indirect immunofluorescence.
The substrate used was an alcohol fixed neutrophil rich preparation with patient sera screened at a dilution of 1:20.
Comparisons between the two groups were made using Fisher's exact test.
Results
In 23 patients (group A) biliary tract calculi were present either at the time of diagnosis (14 patients)(Fig 1) or subsequently developed some time after the diagnosis of sclerosing cholangitis had been made (nine patients).
The calculi in these latter nine patients were found at intervals varying from 18 to 156 months (mean 58.7 months) after sclerosing cholangitis had been diagnosed (Fig 2).
In each case, the calculi were found on repeat endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, performed because of recurrent ascending cholangitis (six patients) or progressive liver failure (three patients).
Five of these nine patients had undergone cholecystectomy from three months to 30 years previously, making passage of a stone from the gall bladder an unlikely cause of the biliary tract calculi.
Thirty eight patients (group B) did not have biliary calculi either on diagnosis or during the course of their illness.
Biochemical analysis of calculi was not performed.
The clinical features of the two groups as well as the subgroups in group A — that is, those who had calculi at the time sclerosing cholangitis was diagnosed and those who developed calculi after sclerosing cholangitis was diagnosed, are shown in Table I. Because of the similarities between the two subgroups in group A, they are hereafter referred to as one group.
There were proportionally more women in the group with calculi than in the group without (16 of 23 in group A, 17 of 38 in group B; p=0.04).
The mean age at diagnosis was similar in both groups.
No difference was found in the frequency of associated inflammatory bowel disease: in group A, 12 patients of the 23 (52%) had ulcerative colitis, while in group B, 21 patients (55%) had ulcerative colitis and two (5%) had Crohn's disease.
HLA typing was performed in 13 patients in group A and 14 in group B. HLA-B8 was present in six of 13 patients in group A (46%) and six of 14 (43%) in group B, while HLA-DR3 was found in six patients tested in group A (46%) and five in group B (36%).
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody was measured in 31 patients (12 in group A and 19 in group B).
Of patients in group A, six (50%) had detectable antibody with a perinuclear pattern on immunofluorescent staining compared with three of 19 (16%) in group B. All patients in group A were symptomatic at initial presentation (11 patients hadright upper quadrant pain, eight had cholangitis, two had pruritus, and two had symptoms related to hepatic decompensation).
This was the case whether or not calculi were present at the time.
In contrast, only 23 of the 38 patients in group B (61%) had clinical manifestations of their disease (cholangitis in eight patients, right upper quadrant pain in six patients, pruritus in three patients, and evidence of hepatic decompensation in six patients; p=0.0002).
The remainder were asymptomatic and were being investigated for abnormal liver function tests.
The radiological extent of bile duct disease was similar in the two groups (Table II).
Of the patients in group A, the biliary calculi were present in the intrahepatic ducts in six patients, in both intrahepatic and extrahepatic ducts in a further six and in the extrahepatic ducts alone in 11 patients.
In only three patients were single stones found.
The remaining 20 had multiple biliary calculi of varying size.
Thirteen patients in group A (57%) and seven in group B (18%) had associated cholecystolithiasis, diagnosed either before or at the time of diagnosis of sclerosing cholangitis (p=0.002).
This excess was largely accounted for by women (10/13 in group A v two of seven in group B).
Twelve patients (52%) in group A had recurrent episodes of ascending cholangitis during follow up compared with two patients in group B (5%).
This difference was highly significant (p= 0.00005).
Nineteen patients in group A underwent various therapeutic manoeuvres in an attempt to clear the biliary tree of calculi.
Endoscopic sphincterotomy was performed in 16 patients with successful removal of all calculi in seven.
In a further five, percutaneous removal of residual intrahepatic stones was possible.
Five of these 12 patients had endoscopic insertion of a biliary stent.
A further five underwent percutaneous stent insertion in order to achieve biliary decompression.
Despite these measures, biliary tract calculi recurred in all 12 patients after removal.
Nine patients in group A (39%) and eight patients in group B (21%) underwent hepatic transplantation because of progressive disease (p=0.07; NS).
Uncontrollable intrahepatic sepsis, the result of recurrent calculi, complicated the course of three patients in group A, and was the indication for hepatic transplantation.
Cholangiocarcinoma occurred in three patients in group A (13%) and five patients in group B (13%).
Six deaths occurred in group A (26%) and 10 in group B (26%) during the follow up period.
Three patients in group A died after liver transplantation (one week to 19 months post transplant), two died from postoperative complications after cholexystectomy and one from massive hepatic necrosis of unknown cause.
In group B, four patients died as a result of complications after hepatic transplantation (one week to 18 months post transplantation), four others died of progressive hepatic failure while awaiting transplantation and two died from hepatic tumours.
On histological review, it was felt that these two tumours were more consistent with hepatocellular carcinoma than cholangiocarcinoma.
These two patients have not been included in the analysis of cholangiocarcinomas in the two groups.
Discussion
The findings of this study show that a number of patients with sclerosing cholangitis also have biliary tract calculi.
The similarity of the clinical features, the frequency of associated inflammatory bowel disease, age at diagnosis, and radiological extent of disease all indicate that these patients can be considered to have primary sclerosing cholangitis rather than sclerosing cholangitis secondary to calculi damaging the biliary tree and resulting in stricture formation.
The clinical and radiological features are similar to those reported in other studies of primary sclerosing cholangitis.
In addition, the prevalence of HLA-B8 and DR3 was similar in the two groups although not as high as reported in previous studies of primary sclerosing cholangitis.
The prevalence of HLA-B8, however, was similar to that found in an earlier study of primary sclerosing cholangitis in an Australian population.
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, with a perinuclear pattern on immunofluorescent staining has been reported to have a sensitivity of 65% and specificity of 100% in primary sclerosing cholangitis.
In the present study, such antibody was detectable in six of 12 patients (50%) examined in group A and three of 19 in group B (16%).
Finally, nine patients with typical primary sclerosing cholangitis subsequently developed biliary tract stones after a mean interval of 58.7 months from diagnosis.
The pathogenesis of the calculi found in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis may depend on several factors.
Increased bile lithogenicity is suggested by the significantly higher frequency of cholecystolithiasis in the patients with bile duct stones (57%), which contrasts with the reported prevalence of 10–20% in developed countries.
This would also account for the significantly greater proportion of women in group A, as the incidence of gall stones is higher in women than men and in this study the excess of patients with gall bladder calculi was made up by women.
Biliary stasis would further predispose to the development of stones in the presence of lithogenic bile.
The same is true of recurrent ascending cholangitis.
It could be argued that in the patients with cholecystolithiasis the calculi had passed from the gall bladder into the bile ducts.
Cholecystectomy had been performed for suspected biliary colic 3 months to 30 years previously, however, in five of nine patients who went on to develop biliary tract calculi, discounting this theory.
Further evidence against this is the finding that the occurrence of choledocholithiasis was much higher in patients in group A who underwent cholecystectomy (16/23: 70%) than is generally seen in association with cholecystolithiasis.
Finally, the presence of multiple intrahepatic calculi is not typical of the pattern of biliary calculi seen after cholecystectomy for cholecystolithiasis in patients without primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis complicated by biliary tract calculi were more likely to be symptomatic at presentation than those without calculi.
They were also more prone to recurrent ascending cholangitis, although the radiological extent of their disease is similar.
It would seem reasonable to assume that measures aimed at treating calculi in these patients may reduce the frequency of infection.
Attempts at removing the stones and improving biliary drainage, however, led to a reduction in the number of episodes of cholangitis in only four of 16 patients.
Moreover, calculi returned in all 12 patients in whom they were removed.
This presumably reflects the fact that biliary stasis remains with a nidus of infection already present even after stones are removed.
The recurrence of calculi after removal and the lack of substantial reduction in frequency of cholangitis indicates that there may be little to be gained in many of these patients by multiple manipulations of the biliary tree to achieve clearance.
These procedures carry the risk of introducing further infection into the biliary tree.
Although mean follow up was only 49.9 months, there was no evidence to suggest that removal of stones resulted in any improvement in prognosis.
In fact, there was a trend towards a greater likelihood of requiring hepatic transplantation, although this did not reach statistical significance.
Mortality was not different between the two groups.
In the long term, the use of ursodeoxycholic acid has been reported to be of benefit in primary sclerosing cholangitis, but the mechanism by which ursodeoxycholic acid exerts a beneficial effect is unknown.
The effect of this agent may be a result of its ability to reduce the lithogenicity of bile and it may therefore be of particular benefit in patients with complicating biliary calculi.
In conclusion, the results of this study indicate that biliary tract calculi may complicate the course of otherwise typical primary sclerosing cholangitis and therefore their presence should not necessarily exclude the diagnosis of primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Recurrent ascending cholangitis is significantly more common in this group of patients and calculi should be suspected when this complication or hepatic decompensation develops in a patient with known primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Measures to remove biliary tract calculi can be considered, although from the present study benefit from such procedures only occurred in four of 16 patients and stones recurred in 12 of 12.
Use of cimetidine and other peptic ulcer drugs in Denmark 1977–1990 with analysis of the risk of gastric cancer among cimetidine users
Abstract
The prevalence of use of peptic ulcer drugs in the Danish population is described at two points in time using registrations of applications for reimbursement.
In 1977–81, the prevalence of use of cimetidine was 0.4% in men and 0.2% in women.
In 1989–90, the prevalence of use of peptic ulcer drugs was 1.3% in men and 1.2% in women.
The increase in prevalence was apparent in all age groups, but most pronounced at relatively old age.
The median age of users increased from 55 years in 1977–81 to 63 years in 1989–90.
The data indicated that a third of those who used peptic ulcer drugs in 1977–81 also used these drugs in 1989–90, conditional on surviving this period.
The probability of becoming a longterm user was highest for those who were 50–69 years in 1977–81.
The incidence of gastric cancer was investigated in the cohort of persons who used cimetidine in 1977–81.
An excess risk of gastric cancer was apparent in the first years after start of cimetidine use.
This is thought to reflect a selection bias.
Significantly increased incidence was also observed in women seven years or longer after start of cimetidine use (RR=4.7; 95% CI: 1.7–10.3).
This estimate was, however, based on only six cases, and a similar pattern was no observed in men.
Medical treatment of peptic ulcer diseases has gained widespread use since the introduction of H 2 -receptor blockers in the late 1970s.
Initially, worries were expressed regarding a possible carcinogenic effect of cimetidine, when case reports of gastric carcinoma in cimetidine treated patients appeared.
Epidemiological studies have indeed confirmed an increased occurrence of gastric cancer and other abdominal cancers shortly after start of cimetidine use.
The excess risk levels off in the following years and is undoubtedly the result of selection of patients with an unrecognised malignancy at the time of commencement of peptic ulcer treatment.
It has been debated whether or not to use medical treatment for ulcer like symptoms, without a full diagnostic procedure being performed.
Finally, the safety of longterm maintenance therapy to prevent peptic ulcer recurrence has been discussed but not fully evaluated because barely 15 years have elapsed since their introduction world-wide.
A small Danish study showed that in 1984, maintenance therapy with cimetidine was already common.
A third of all prescriptions for cimetidine were given to patients with unproven peptic ulceration, and furthermore, half of these had used the drug for more than five years.
It has been shown that the therapeutic hypochlorhydria which is the primary action of these drugs is associated with increased gastric bacterial growth, reduction of nitrate to nitrite, and increased concentration of carcinogenic N-nitroso compounds in the gastric juice.
Theoretically, it is possible that longterm use of H 2 receptor blockers, or the even more potent proton pump inhibitors, could lead to an increased risk of gastric cancer.
It is well known that other groups of hypochlorhydric patients — for example, after partial gastrectomy or vagotomy; in chronic atrophic gastritis; in pernicious anaemia — have an increased incidence of gastric cancer.
The experience of partial gastrectomy indicates that the time required for de novo growth of gastric carcinoma is about 15 years.
If therapeutic hypochlorhydria is carcinogenic to the stomach, gastric cancer associated with cimetidine use in 1977 should only begin to appear by now.
The present paper describes the prevalence of cimetidine use in the Danish population in the years after its introduction in 1977, and the prevalence of use of peptic ulcer drugs some 10 years later in 1989–90.
We attempt to describe also the prevalence of longterm use of peptic ulcer drugs and the epidemiologic risk factors for longterm use in Denmark.
A cohort study of gastric cancer incidence among cimetidine users previously published is extended with additional three years of observation.
The maximum duration of follow up of the cohort is now 11 years.
Methods
CIMETIDINE
Cimetidine was introduced as a prescription drug in Denmark in 1977 and was accepted for general reimbursement in 1981.
In the period 1977–81, reimbursement of the drug required an individual application from the physician in charge of the patient to the National Board of Health.
A registry of these applications for cimetidine use during 1977–81 is available.
The material consisting of 16739 patients who were given the drug for duodenal ulcer, gastric ulcer, gastritis/duodenitis or coexisting duodenal and gastric ulcer, and had neither a history of gastric surgery, nor a history of cancer, has been described previously.
In 1989, it was decided to change peptic ulcer drugs containing cimetidine, ranitidine or sucralfate in general use from prescription drugs to over the counter distribution.
At the same time, the general reimbursement was cancelled for all peptic ulcer drugs.
This meant that reimbursement again required an individual application to the National Board of Health.
During 1989–90, 63648 users had their applications granted.
The registration of the 1977–81 users consists of the CPR-number (a 10-digit identifier unique to every Danish citizen), date of approval, diagnosis, and method of diagnosis.
The registration of the 1989–90 users consists of CPR-number, date of approval, and type of drug.
The 1977–81 material is thought to be essentially complete, except for the exclusion of 12% who had a previous history of malignancy or had undergone gastric surgery or who were given the drug for another diagnosis than a peptic ulcer related disease.
The completeness of the 1989–90 material is more difficult to evaluate because the drugs in this period were available over the counter.
The National Board of Health estimates that the use of peptic ulcer drugs without application for partial compensation amounts to some 10% of the total use.
The prevalence of cimetidine use around 1979 — that is, the proportion of the population using cimetidine anytime in the period 1977–81 — was calculated in 10 year age groups using population data of 1 January 1980, and the prevalence of use of ulcer drugs around 1989 was similarly calculated using population data of 1 January 1990.
It was not attempted to correct the estimated prevalences for the under registration of ulcer drug users by probably 10%.
Longterm use of ulcer drugs was described by linking the list of users in 1977–81 who survived 1 January 1989 to the list of users in 1989–90 by the CPR number.
The linked dataset was tabulated by age at application in 1977–81, by sex, diagnosis, and method of diagnosis in order to evaluate potential risk factors for becoming a longterm user, conditional on surviving to 1989.
Multivariate analysis was carried out by unconditional logistic regression analysis.
Finally, extended follow up for gastric cancer incidence among the 1977–81 users of cimetidine was undertaken by record linkage with The Danish Registry of Deaths and The Danish Cancer Registry.
The latter is presently complete up to 1987, and the maximum duration of follow-up is now 11 years.
Cancer incidence in the 1977–81 cohort was compared with cancer incidence in the Danish population as a whole by the use of indirect standardisation for age and period.
Ninety five per cent confidence intervals for the relative risk was calculated using exact probabilities.
Results
In 1977–81, the prevalence of cimetidine use in the Danish population was 0.42% in men and 0.23% in women (Table I).
The highest prevalence was seen in the 50–69 age group: 0.9% in men, 0.5% in women.
Ten years later, the use of peptic ulcer drugs was 1.27% and 1.21% in men and women, respectively (Table II).
An increase in prevalence of use was seen in all age groups, and the age of users had shifted towards older age.
The prevalence of use in 1989–90 was highest in men in their 80s (4.41%) and in women in their 70s (3.64%).
Of the 16739 users in 1977–81, 12938 (77%) survived to 1989.
Of the survivors, 4168 (32%) were again applying for partial reimbursement of the cost of ulcer drugs in 1989–90 (Table III).
Longterm use was most frequent among those who were in their 50s and 60s in 1977–81 (37%).
Among the longterm users, the majority of the 1989–90 applications were for H 2 -receptor blockers (88%).
Omeprazole (6%) and other drugs (mainly antacids, bismuth subcitrate and sucralfate)(6%) were less commonly applied for.
The pattern of use of different drugs among all applicants in 1989–90 were 80% H 2 -receptor blocks, 7% omeprazole and 13% other drugs.
Analysis of risk factors for longterm use did not reveal any strong determinants other than age (Table IV).
The highest risk of becoming a longterm user was seen for those aged 50–69 years in 1977–81.
No effect was seen for sex.
The probability of becoming a longterm user was higher for duodenal ulcer patients than for gastric ulcer patients, and higher for those who had the initial diagnoses based on a radiographic examination rather than endoscopy.
The relative risk of gastric cancer in cimetidine users decreased among men from 8.1 in the first year of follow up to a non-significant 1.3 7–11 years after first use of cimetidine (Table V).
In women, however, the data suggested an increased risk of gastric cancer after seven years where the relative risk was 4.7 (1.7–10.3) after an initial decrease from 12.6 in the first year to 1.9 4–7 years after start of cimetidine use.
Discussion
The increase in prevalence of medical treatment for peptic ulcer diseaes is apparent.
The prevalence of use increased more than two-fold from around 1979 to around 1989.
Because of the chronic nature of peptic ulcer diseases, it is likely that a person on medical treatment around 1979 and again around 1989 has used ulcer drugs for a large part of the intermediate period.
The data thus show that a large proportion (30–40%) of those who begin this treatment may become longterm users.
Because of the incompleteness of the material (described above) all quoted prevalences are probably underestimated by around 10%.
The Danish data show that the potent proton pump inhibitor omeprazole is being common used (up to 10%), especially among the younger longterm users.
The shift in age distribution from a median age at 55 years in the 1977–81 users to 63 years in the 1989–90 users is perhaps the most impostant finding of the present study.
Not only does the use of peptic ulcer drugs increase, but the drugs are increasingly being used by the oldest users in the population.
A slight shift in the age distribution would be expected because of the increasing prevalence of non-operated peptic ulcer patients in the population.
Similarly, the increasing use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may have caused an increasing number of peptic ulcer cases in the older age groups.
These effects can hardly explain a shift in median age from 55 years to 63 years in only a decade, however.
A smaller part of the total use of peptic ulcer drugs are being prescribed for diseases other than peptic ulcer — for example, oesophagitis and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
Compared with peptic ulcer, these diseases are rare and not particularly prevalent among the oldest in the population.
The most important change in the pattern of use of peptic ulcer drugs (especially H 2 -receptor blockers) is probably that the drugs are increasingly being used to treat non-ulcer dyspepsia and other unspecific gastrointestinal discomfort for which H 2 -receptor blockers are of little value.
An initial diagnosis of duodenal ulcer and the method of diagnosis being a radiographic examination seems to increase the risk of becoming a longterm user of ulcer drugs.
Taking age into account does not lead to estimates closer to unity, and hence the effects can not be attributed to confounding.
It may be that the effect of diagnosis is real and that duodenal ulcer is more persistent than gastric ulcer, or it may be that a higher proportion of gastric ulcer patients have been operated upon in the time between the two periods of registrations of drug use.
Regarding the method of diagnosis, it is hard to imagine that the apparent effect is real.
It may be that different subgroups of patients with differences in prognosis have been selected into the two diagnostic procedures.
The follow up for morbidity of gastric cancer shows increased risks in the years after starting cimetidine treatment.
This phenomenon has been discussed above and is not because of the carcinogenic effect of cimetidine but undoubtedly reflects that some patients with gastric cancer were thought to have peptic ulcer and therefore treated with cimetidine.
If cimetidine (or the hypochlorhydric condition it creates) as in fact carcinogenic to the gastric mucosa, gastric cancer incidence should be expected to increase only after a period of time after initiation of treatment.
The pattern seen among women suggests the possibility of such an effect, but the low number of cases occurring seven years after start of cimetidine use or longer (only six) and the absence of any effect in men speak against the interpretation of the association as being casual.
Clearly, the situation warrants further follow up for cancer morbidity in this cohort.
Splenic function in alcoholic liver disease
Abstract
Splenic function was assessed in 42 patients with alcoholic liver disease by counting the percentage of erythroxytes with indentations or pits, seen by differential interference contrast microscopy.
These pits represent cellular debris normal removed by the spleen.
The findings were compared with 42 age and sex matched controls.
Mean (SEM) pitted red cell counts in the patients was 2.7 (0.4) % and in the controls 0.7 (0.07) % (p).
In all of the eight reformed drinkers (five with biopsy proven cirrhosis), cell counts were normal.
Six patients with alcoholic liver disease had had serious infections within the past year.
Of these, one had had a recent pneumococcal pneumonia and another of the patients died from overwhelming pneumococcal septicaemia.
Both of these patients had evidence of functional hyposplenism as judged by high pitted erythrocyte counts.
A total of 18 patients were considered to have pitted red cell counts above the normal, and 11 of these had proven cirrhosis and/or gross ascites.
This study is the first to show the presence of functionsl hyposplenism in alcoholic liver disease and provides further evidence of the predisposition that these patients have to infection.
At present, it is unclear whether the hyposplenism is a direct toxic effect of alcohol or the result of cirrhosis; further studies are warranted.
Functional hyposplenism, that is reduced splenic function in the presence of the spleen is recognised to occur in a number of conditions including inflammatory bowel disease, coeliac disease, sickle cell anaemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, thyrotoxicosis, amyloid, and in old age.
Such individuals, as in patients who have undergone splenectomy are predisposed to infections and overwhelming sepsis.
Severe hyposplenism, splenectomy or splenic atrophy may be reflected by the presence in the peripheral blood film of Howell Jolly bodies, acanthocytes and target cells.
Lesser degrees of hyposplenism can be detected by other techniques including the clearance of isotopically labelled heated erythrocytes or differential interference contrast microscopy.
In the latter technique, splenic function is assessed by counting the percentage of erythrocytes with indentations or pits normally removed by the spleen.
Electron microscopy has shown these pits to be vacuoles containing ferritin, haemoglobin and mitochondrial remnants.
The technique is easier, quicker and more convenient than the clearance of isotopically labelled red cells.
It has been shown to correlate well with the assessment of splenic function by other methods in patients with treated adult coeliac disease and in such cases there is a correlation between splenic function and splenic volume computed from scintiscans after injection of radiolabelled heat damaged red cells or 9 9 m Tc labelled sulphur colloid.
There is, however, a reversible component to splenic hypofunction that is unrelated to changes in spleen size in both untreated coeliac disease or active inflammatory bowel disease and this may also apply in alcoholic liver disease.
In addition, functional hyposplenism may occur in the presence of ‘haematological’ hypersplenism and/or splenomegaly, the so called ineffective splenic mass described by Steinberg.
Patients with liver disease may be susceptible to infection, particularly when this is secondary to alcohol abuse.
In this group there is often impairment of cellular and humoral defences against infection but there is little information on splenic function.
The aim of the present study was therefore to assess splenic function in chronic alcoholics, and to see whether functional hyposplenism might be a contributory factor in their predisposition to infection.
Methods
PATIENTS
Forty two patients with alcohol induced liver disease were studied with a mean age of 51 years (range 30–78, 14 women).
Fifteen patients had biopsy proven cirrhosis and two had alcoholic hepatitis and fatty liver.
Seventeen patients had gross abdominal ascites requiring diuretic therapy and/or abdominal paracentesis.
Those patients who had not had liver biopsies had had significantly abnormal liver function tests and/or ultrasound or isotopic scanning evidence of liver disease.
Eight patients were ‘reformed’ drinkers having abstained from alcohol for a duration ranging from two months to several years and five of this group had biopsy proven cirrhosis.
Six patients were found from their medical records to have had serious infections either during the current admission or within the previous two years while drinking heavily.
One had had pneumoccocal pneumonia and another pneumococcal septicaemia (this patient subsequently died).
One patient had recently finished a course of treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis.
All patients with abdominal ascites underwent diagnostic paracententesis.
The patient group was compared with results from 42 age (two years) and sex matched controls.
Controls were drawn from either members of staff or ward patients who had suffered a myocardial infarction.
All subjects gave informed consent.
Patients or controls with a history of diseases in which hyposplenism has been reported were excluded (coeliac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, thyrotoxicosis, rheumatoid arthritis and connective tissue diseases including systemic lupus erythematosus).
ASSESSMENT OF SPLENIC FUNCTION
Evidence for hyposplenism was sought from an examinatio of the peripheral blood film in each patient.
Splenic function was assessed by counting the number of erythrocyte indentations or pits using the method described by Corazza.
A single drop of fresh blood was added to 0.5 ml 3% glutaraldehyde at pH 7.4 in a plastic tube and mixed.
One drop of the erythrocyte preparation was examined under oil emersion using a Zeiss Axioskop mocroscope fitted for differential interference contrast microscopy, at a magnification of ×1000.
For each sample, 1000 erythrocytes were counted and the percentage of cells with one or more pits noted.
Normal values are less than 2%.
All samples were analysed by a single observer (AFM) without knowledge of the patients medical history.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Wilcoxon's signed-rank test was used to compare results from the alcohol group with control subjects.
Results
There was no microbiological evidence of bacterial peritonitis in any of the 17 patients with abdominal ascites.
Six patients had had previous infections and each of these was drinking heavily.
Two (cases 5 and 7, Table) had pneumococcal infection (one with pneumonia and the other with pneumococcal septicaemia who subsequently died).
These two patients, together with a third (case 3, Table) with sepsis from a klebsiella urinary tract infection had high pitted erythrocyte counts consistent with functional hyposplenism (Table).
Of the remaining three patients who had had infections but normal pitted cell counts, one had recently finished a course of treatment for pulmonary tuberculosis and a fifth had culture negative pneumonia.
The sixth patient was treated with broad spectrum parenteral antibiotics for a swinging pyrexia and leucocytosis after variceal sclerotherapy although all cultures were negative.
Nine patients had target cells on a blood film but none had evidence of Howell Jolly bodies.
The mean (SEM) percentage of pits in the alcohol group was 2.7 (0.4) % and 18 patients had values greater than 2%.
Of these the blood film often revealed erythrocytes with multiple pits unlike in the control group where this was unusual.
The percentage of red cells with pits or indentations in the control group was 0.7 (0.07) %.
This was significantly less than in the alcohol group (p).
Figure 1 illustrates the spread of results for the alcoholics and the controls.
The highest count in the alcohol group was 14.8% in a chronic alcoholic aged 49 years who had been drinking heavily since the age of 15 years.
Figure 2 shows the blood film of the patient with the highest number of pits when viewed under differential interference contrast microscopy.
Of the 15 patients with biopsy proven alcohol induced cirrhosis, six had abnormal pitted erythrocyte counts.
None of the reformed drinkers (five with biopsy proven cirrhosis), who had abstained from alcohol for at least two months had raised values.
At the time of sampling, all those with high values indicating functional hyposplenism were drinking heavily and 11 of these had gross abdominal ascites.
Of those patients presenting with gross ascites with normal pitted red cell counts, three were reformed rather than current drinkers.
Figure 3 shows a comparison of pitted erythrocyte counts in the current drinkers compared with the ‘reformed’ group.
The Table lists the clinical and haematological status of the 18 patients with high pitted red cell counts.
Of the 14 women studied, nine had high pitted red cell counts and the majority of the group had ascites.
The presence of macrocytosis was a common finding.
Although a reticulocyte count was not measured as a routine, there was little evidence of polychromasia on the blood films.
In nine patients, the blood film had revealed target cells and of these five had high pit counts.
Hypersplenism was noted in four patients, two of whom had palpable splenomegaly.
This ‘hypersplenic hyposplenism’ suggested that in this group splenic function had little to do with spleen size.
The haematopathological status of this group did not reliably differentiate them from the ‘reformed drinkers’.
Discussion
Although only an indirect method of assessing splenic function, the measurement of pitted erythrocyte counts has been shown to correlate well with other measurements of splenic function, albeit in particular circumstances such as treated coeliac disease.
While it does not necessarily imply that defective pitting is associated with defective immunological activity, using the technique of differential interference contrast microscopy, this study has highlighted the existence of functional hyposplenism in alcoholic liver disease and suggests that defective splenic function may be an additional mechanism involved in the susceptibility of this group of patients to infection.
The method that we have used to detect splenic hypofunction is linked to changes in the red cell membrane.
This may be particularly important when one considers the potentially complex and multiple haematological abnormalities in alcoholic liver disease, including blood loss, macrocytosis, haemolysis, and sideroblastic change.
In patients with young cell populations, Holroyde and Gardner found more membrane indentations or pits in immature erythrocytes, particularly reticulocytes.
Others have suggested that in patients with a high reticulocytosis there might be a backlog of new cells awaiting clearance and ‘depitting’ by the spleen, the so called‘overload syndrome’.
As heavy, active drinkers are more likely to have a faster turnover of erythrocytes than reformed drinkers this might be put forward as a reason why our reformed drinkers did not have high pitted red cell counts.
Though we did not measure reticulocyte counts in our patients there was no evidence from the blood films of significant reticulocytosis or polychromasia and it seems unlikely that this explanation might have contributed to our results.
There are several possible explanations for the finding of functional hyposplenism in this group of patients with alcoholic liver disease.
All the patients with high pitted cell counts were currently drinking and none of the eight reformed drinkers (five with biopsy proven cirrhosis) had abnormal counts.
This points to a toxic effect of the alcohol itself.
As yet, we do not have the evidence that long term abstinence improves splenic function.
An alternative explanation is that liver disease itself might be a major factor but we have not found high pitted red cell counts in patients with chronic active hepatitis or primary biliary cirrhosis (Muller and Toghill, unpublished observations).
Spleen size may play a vital role but other reports have shown that this relates poorly with function and indeed two of the current series had palpable splenomegaly and functional hyposplenism.
Portal hypertension may be important in determining the microcirculatory flow in the splenic pulp.
Unfortunately, we do not know the precise site of the depitting process within the spleen.
Traditionally it has been assumed that this is at the interendothelial slits where the red cells enter the venous sinuses from the reticuloendothelial meshwork.
Portal hypertension with stasis and pooling of blood in the reticuloendothelial meshwork may interfere with this process.
No single clear explanation emerges to explain the high pitted counts in alcoholic liver disease and it is likely to be multifactorial.
Wyke has previously discussed why alcoholics get infections.
Explanations for their increased susceptibility include the impairment of humoral and cellular host defences, defective reticuloendothelial phagocytic function and impaired complement activity.
As in patients who have undergone splenectomy, alcoholics have a predisposition to pneumococcal infection and two of the current group had had pneumococcal disease,(both with evidence of functional hyposplenism) with one dying from overwhelming septicaemia.
The risk of postoperative infections in patients in which a diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease had not been established preoperatively had also been shown to be high.
The Sheffield group has shown similar postoperative complications, together with disseminated intravascular coagulation in patients with inflammatory bowel disease undergoing surgery who were found to have defective splenic function as assessed by the clearance of heat damaged erythrocytes.
Preoperative identification of such patients is important and any suspicion of infection with underlying hyposplenism should be promptly treated with parenteral antibiotics.
Because of the high risk of Gram positive infections (unrealted to invasive procedures such as abdominal paracentesis) and in particular pneumococcal infection there may be an indication to give this group of patients pneumococcal vaccination.
Previous work has shown that alcoholics were able to mount an adequate antibody response to pneumococcal polysaccharide antigen.
This is the first reported study to show convincingly the presence of functional hyposplenism in patients with alcoholic liver disease.
It seems highly likely that this contributes to their increased risk of infection.
Non-invasive diagnosis of portal vein occlusion by radionuclide angiography
Abstract
The accuracy of non-invasive radionuclide angiography in detecting portal vein occlusion was assessed in 61 patients — 10 with portal vein occlusion confirmed by conventional portography, 25 with chronic liver disease and a patent portal vein (mild=12, severe=13), and 26 with normal liver function who served as controls.
The median percentage portal venous flow for the portal vein occlusion group was 8% (range 1–30)(consistent with negligible flow) compared with 78% (52–87) for control subjects (p) and 68% (61–80) and 49% (23–59) respectively for patients with mild and severe liver disease (pand p).
At a portal venous inflow of <, the proceedure had a specificity of 100% and sensitivity of 90% in diagnosing portal vein occlusion.
Non-invasive radionuclide angiography provides a safe and accurate screening method for evaluating portal vein patence on occlusion in the investigation of portal hypertension or before liver transplantation.
Complete or partial occlusion of the portal vein is a common cause of portal hypertension in childhood.
In adults, portal vein occlusion (PVO) may complicate chronic liver disease but more frequently results from intra-abdominal sepsis, neoplasia, or a thrombotic disorder.
In many cases, however, no aetiological factor is found.
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage is the commonest clinical presentation, while the presence of ascites and encephalopathy usually indicate associated liver dysfunction.
Early recognition of the condition is important since management may differ from that of cirrhosis, particularly if portacaval surgery is considered.
PVO is a contraindication to liver transplantation and after transplantation, thrombosis of the portal vein (or hepatic artery) is a recognised cause of graft dysfunction.
Consequently, defining the patency or occlusion of the portal venous system is equally important in pretransplant assessment and in post-transplant graft dysfunction.
At present, the accurate diagnosis of PVO requires either arterial portography or splenoportography, both of which are invasive radiological proceedures that may have complications, particularly in patients with a coagulopathy.
A reliable non-invasive diagnostic technique would represent a considerable advance.
Recent reports have advocated either ultrasonography or computer tomography.
The application of radionuclide angiography in assessing portal vein patency or occlusion has received limited attention.
We have previously described a new non-invasive dynamic hepatic scintigraphic technique to define the portal venous and hepatic arterial contributions to total liver perfusion.
More recent in vivo animal studies provide experimental evidence to validate this technique.
Preliminary use of this method in a small number of patients successfully detected PVO.
The present study aimed to assess the accuracy of this technique in the diagnosis of PVO in a larger cohort of patients.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
Three groups of patients were included in this investigation (Table I).
Group 1: patients with PVO (Table II)
Ten patients (5 men and 5 women) with a mean age of 47 years (range 21–72) were assessed.
The diagnosis of PVO was confirmed in each case by conventional arterial portography or splenoportography with additional conclusive evidence from laparotomy and post mortem examination in two cases (see Table II).
In three patients there was coexisting liver disease and in one of these patients (patient 9), the PVO was associated with the development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Pancreatitis (patient 3) and polycythaemia rubra vera (PRV)(patient 6), accounted for two other cases while no cause was evident in the remaining five patients (idiopathic).
Group 2: patients with chronic liver disease without PVO
This group comprised 25 patients (12 men and 13 women) with a mean age of 51 years (range 30–74), all of whom had documented chronic liver disease (clinical, biochemical, and histological criteria) with patient portal vein as shown radiologically.
The aetiological factors for the liver disease included alcohol (n=19), chronic active hepatitis (n=3), Wilson's disease (n=2), and haemochromatosis (n=1).
Twenty of the patients had portal hypertension, shown by the presence of endoscopically proved oesophageal varices, with or without splenomegaly.
The patients were classified according to the severity of liver disease using the modified Child's-Pugh score into two groups: mild disease with a Child-Pugh score of <(n=12) and severe disease with a score of >(n=13).
Group 3: normal control subjects
There were 26 control subjects (14 men and 12 women) with a mean age of 54 years (range 25- 78) none of whom had any clinical, biochemical, or radiological evidence of liver disease or extrahepatic portal hypertension.
These patients were undergoing cardiac, bone, or cerebral isotope scanning and dynamic liver scintigraphy could be incorporated without unnecessary additional exposure to radionuclides.
Written informed consent was obtained from each patient before the study.
METHODS
The technique of dynamic hepatic radionuclide angiography has been described previously in detail.
In brief, fasting patients were positioned supine beneath a large field of view gamma camera (General Electric, Maxi II).
After a 5 minute resting period, in patients with PVT or liver disease, 370 mbq (10 mCi) of 9 9 m Tc pertechnetate were administered by bolus peripheral intravenous injection followed rapidly by a 30 ml saline flush to ensure rapid transit of the radionuclide into the heart.
In control subjects, 555–740 MBq (15–20 mCi) of 9 9 m Tc labelled human albumin, methylene diphosphonate, or glucoheptonate were administered in a similar manner.
Computer image acquisition began at the onset of the injection.
Images were acquired onto a 64×64 word matrix at a rate of 0.5 seconds/image for 100 seconds and stored on an A 2 computer system for subsequent analysis (Medical Data Systems, Ann Arbor, MI, USA).
The procedure takes approximately 3 minutes to complete.
Preliminary data analysis involved a summation of the initial 30 images to form a composite image outlining the arterial phase of tracer transit through the hepatobiliary system.
Regions of interest (ROIs) were drawn over the liver, spleen, lungs, and left kidney ensuring that the liver ROI excluded the descending aorta and right kidney (Fig 1).
The ROIs were then used to generate time-activity curves (TACs).
Because of interference from the right lung into the liver ROI, a correction factor was applied to take account of this ‘cross-talk’, resulting in a corrected liver TAC (Fig 1).
Deconvolution analysis of the TACs was used to improve separation of the arterial and portal venous phases of total liver blood flow.
In addition, this method takes account of tracer recirculation and therefore allows analysis of the deconvoluted curves by area under the curve as a measure of blood flow.
The liver, spleen, and left kidney TACs were deconvoluted with the lung curve using a modified fast Fourier transform technique as described by Juni et al .
If the assumption is made on an anatomical basis, that blood flow through the splenic artery has a similar pattern to hepatic arterial flow, then the splenic TAC can be used as a model for hepatic arterial flow.
In order to compensate for differences in absolute flow and in attenuation by overlying tissues, the splenic TAC was multiplied by a constant so that the upslope of the splenic TAC overlies the early segment of the total liver TAC (Fig 2).
Thus, the modified splenic TAC approximates to the hepatic arterial TAC.
The liver and modified splenic TAC are then integrated to yield the areas under the curve, A L and A S , respectively (Fig 2).
The hepatic arterial component (% HA) was calculated from the formula: % HA=A S /A L ×100 and the portal venous component (% PV) determined as: % PV=100-% HA.
Recent in vivo experimental animal studies have validated this deconvolutional technique to define % HA and % PV by dynamic radiouclide angiography.
The results are expressed as % HA and % PV and are shown as median (range).
Specificity and sensitivity values were calculated and statistical analysis was performed using the Mann-Whitney U test for non-parametric data.
pwas taken as the level of significance.
Results
Table III outlines the individual values for % HA flow and % PV flow in each of the 10 patients with PVO (group 1).
The % PV flow in group 1 was 8.6% (range 1–30), which reflects negliable portal venous inflow to the liver.
When the three patients with coexisting cavernous transformation of the portal vein were excluded, the calculated % PV was further reduced to 3% (range 1–10).
Only the three patients with cavernous transformation had a % PV flow of more than 10% (11%, 18%, and 30% respectively)(Table III).
Figure 3 illustrates the differences in % PV flow between the patients with PVO and the two control groups (2 and 3).
The % PV flow for control subjects (group 3) was 78% (range, 53- 86) which is consistent with known physiological estimates.
In group 2, a progressive reduction in the % PV contribution with increasing severity of liver disease was observed, from 68% in patients with mild disease (range 61–80)(pv controls) to 49% in the group with severe disease (range 22–61)(pv controls).
In two patients with decompensated cirrhosis (Child-Pugh score C 12, the % PV flow was 23% and 28%, respectively.
The % PV flow was significantly reduced in the PVO group when compared with both control groups 2 and 3 (pv controls, pv mild, and pv severe liver disease (Fig 3)).
For a % PV flow of 20% or less, the specificity and sensitivity of this procedure in accurately detecting PVO were 100% and 90%, respectively.
At a % PV flow of 30% or less, the specificity was reduced to 85% while the sensitivity was increased to 100%
Discussion
Confirmation of portal vein patency or occlusion relies predominantly upon venous phase arterial portography or splenoportography, both invasive and time consuming radiological procedures that may have complications.
Several investigators have attempted to define the portal venous and hepatic arterial contributions to total liver blood flow by non-invasive means including ultrasound and radionuclide angiography.
The degree of portasystemic shunting in cirrhosis has also been examined by scintigraphy, however per rectal administration of the radionuclide is required.
The present investigation is the first report of radionuclide angiography specifically used to assess the patency/occlusion of the portal venous system.
We have shown that the % PV flow in all the patients with PVO was 8.6% with a range of 1 to 30%, indicating that blood flow to the liver may become almost entirely dependant upon the hepatic artery.
Furthermore, when the patients with cavernous transformation are excluded, the observed portal venous input to the liver becomes negligible (<).
Defining occlusion of the portal vein as a % PV flow of 20% or less, the technique is highly specific and sensitive.
The results indicate therefore that this radionuclide technique accurately detects occlusion to portal venous inflow to the liver, particularly in patients without coexisting cavernous transformation.
Another report also demonstrated the absence of any significent portal venous flow in two patients in whom portal vein thrombosis was subsequently confirmed at necropsy.
There are two circumstances that may potentially reduce the diagnostic accuracy of this technique.
Firstly, the presence of a cavernous transformation or ‘cavernoma’ represents the development of multiple periportal collateral channels in order to bypass the obstruction within the portal vein.
Consequently, this provides a potential route for portal venous blood to reach the liver.
The % PV flow observed in the three patients with cavernous transformation included in the present study ranged from 11% up to 30%.
In these circumstances, the sensitivity of this method of detecting portal vein occlusion may be diminished.
Nevertheless, only one patient with documented PVO in the present study had a % PV flow of greater than 20%.
Secondly, a major reduction in portal venous inflow to the liver associated with reversed (caudal) blood flow, may occur in the absence of obstruction within the portal venous system, as observed in two of the patients with decompensated alcoholic cirrhosis with % PV flows of 28% and 23% respectively (Fig 3).
Consequently, % PV flow values of between 20 and 30% fall within what might be termed a diagnostic ‘grey area’.
It seems appropriate at the present time, therefore, that the suspicion of PVI, particularly in patients with decompensated liver disease as indicated by the presence of an appreciably reduced portal blood flow, needs to be confirmed by conventional arterial portography.
Nevertheless, at a % PV flow of below 20%, radionuclide angiography allowed a clear distinction to be made between patients with a patient and obstructed portal venous system.
In conclusion, this study shows that non-invasive radionuclide angiography is of benefit in screening for obstruction within the portal vein as part of the preliminary investigation of portal hypertension and chronic liver disease or during the assessment for liver transplantation.
This method may also be helpful in confirming the patency/pcclusion of a portacaval shunt.
The proceedure is safe and inexpensive.
Further evauation of radionuclide angiography in comparison with other non-invasive methods (ultrasound, computer tomography, and nuclear magnetic resonance) and conventional arterial portography merits consideration.
Liver disease in a district hospital remote from a transplant centre: a study of admissions and deaths
Abstract
The profile of liver disease admissions and associated deaths in a district general hospital was studied to determine whether patients with end stage liver disease are appropriately referred for consideration of liver transplantation.
Admission details were provided by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS) and their accuracy was assessed by case note analysis.
According to OPCS, 77 patients with liver disease were admitted on 113 occasions between 1 January 1987 and 31 December 1989.
The case notes of 74 (86%) were retrieved and examined.
Only 64 (86%) had primary liver disease.
Twenty four (31%) died of liver failure.
Alcohol was the aetiological agent in two thirds.
According to accepted criteria, 11 patients were suitable for liver transplant assessment but only three had been referred to a transplant centre.
Of the remaining eight, five died during the study period.
Two of three patients referred died without transplantation: one underwent transplant and survived.
There is discrepancy between OPCS data and true disease aetiologies, with approximately 40% under reporting of alcoholic liver disease.
If this population is representative of the situation nationally, substantial numbers of patients with end stage liver disease might benefit from liver transplantation, but are not referred to a centre.
Liver transplantation has been gaining increasing support as a means of treating chronic end stage liver disease and fulminant hepatic failure.
Improved survival and excellent rehabilitation subsequent to liver transplantation have led to rapid and considerable expansion of the transplant programme in the United Kingdom and elsewhere.
Indications for liver transplantation have changed.
For example, long term results in patients with cholangiocarcinoma and hepatitis B infection have been disappointing, because of a high rate of disease recurrence.
In contrast, selected patients with alcoholic liver disease frequently fare well and are likely to represent an increasing population of transplant candidates.
The guidelines are now more precisely defined and have been described in detail elsewhere.
It has proved difficult to determine how many patients in the UK might benefit from liver transplantation.
This information is of great importance in planning national transplant services.
One method of assessing need is to use mortality statistics collected by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS).
However, even if the ascribed causes of death are correct, these data do not indicate those patients who are potential transplant candidates.
To try to decide how many patients might be suitable for transplantation, an audit was performed of admissions ot a district general hospital of patients with end stage liver disease.
This also enabled us to examine the accuracy of OPCS data concerning the diagnosis of liver disease.
Methods
The hospital was selected because it is remote from a transplant centre and its geographical location dictates that virtually all medical emergencies and outpatient referrals are sent there.
The hospital has four consultant physicians, one with a special interest in gastroenterology.
The area served by the hospital, situated in South Wales, has a static population of 180000, comprising both urban and rural communities.
After permission had been obtained for access to medical records, the OPCS provided details of all admissions to this hospital with various liver diseases (diagnoses listed int Table I) for the three years from 1 January 1987 (the most recent dates available).
Case records were retrieved and examined to established if these patients would have been suitable for transplant assessment, either on the basis of poor quality of life or expected survival, in the absence of transplantation, of less than one year.
Clinical indications included encephalopathy, recurrent variceal haemorrhage unresponsive to therapy, repeated episodes of bacterial peritonitis or intractable ascites.
Biochemical parameters included a serum albumin concentration of less than 25 g/l in non-cholestatic cirrhosis, or a bilirubin value of 180 µmol/l in cholestatic liver disease.
In alcoholic liver disease, transplant assessment was considered appropriate in the case of sustained abstinence following medical advice.
Notes were scrutinised for evidence that these criteria had been fulfilled.
In addition, the accuracy of individual OPCS recorded diagnoses was reviewed.
Results
The OPCS data showed that 77 patients had been admitted because of liver disease on a total of 113 occasions during the study period.
All but three sets of casenotes (96%) were retrieved.
The OPCS diagnoses for the three patients with untraced records were cholangitis (1), alcoholic liver disease (1), and pancreatic carcinoma with hepatorenal syndrome (1).
The latter two patients had died.
The remaining 74 sets of case records were reviewed (Figure).
These patients were not necessarily under the care of the consultant with an interest in gastroenterology.
Sixty four (86%) could be clearly categorised as suffering from liver disease.
The remaining 10 patients (14%) seemed to have suffered primarily from non-hepatic disease (carcinomatosis (4), congestive cardiac failure (1), cholelithiasis (2), and septicaemia (3)).
All 10 patients died.
Table II shows the disease aetiologies of those 64 patients with liver disease.
During the study period, 24 (38%) of these died.
Alcohol was the cause of liver disease in 16 (67%) of the 24 who died and in 26 (65%) of the 40 patients still alive at the end of the study.
Table III shows the numbers of admissions for alcohol related disease according to the OPCS data and compares these with the diagnoses in the case notes.
The OPCS recorded that 42 of 110 (38%) admissions were alcohol related whereas review of the notes showed figures of 72 (65%).
Conversely, OPCS recorded that 68 admissions were not related to alcohol and review of notes showed that only 38 (35%) admissions fell into this category.
The same pattern of misclassification was present for each year studied.
In 50% of the misclassified cases the error was to have recorded alcoholic cirrhosis (international classification of disease coding (ICD) 571.2) as ICD 571.5 (cirrhosis — no mention of alcohol).
The other erroneous or incomplete classifications were 571.6 (3%), 571.9 (17%), 572.2 (10%), 572.8 (10%), 573.9 (7%), and 155.0 (3%)(see the Figure for codings).
According to our criteria for transplantation, 11 potential transplant candidates were identified from detailed study of case notes (Figure).
Of these, seven had died and four were living.
Of the seven who were dead, two had been referred for consideration of liver transplantation.
One had severe acute alcoholic hepatitis and had continued to drink despite medical advice to the contrary.
He did not therefore undergo transplant.
The second had primary biliary cirrhosis and died from a variceal bleed while under review.
Of the five potential transplant candidates who had not been referred and who had died, two suffered hepatocellular carcinoma (diagnosed during routine monitoring in both instances, one with no further imaging, one with imaging showing tumour localised to the liver) and three had cryptogenic cirrhosis (one of these three patients was referred to a regional unit but not to a transplant unit).
Of the four transplant candidates who were alive at the end of the study period, one with primary biliary cirrhosis had been referred and had received a liver transplant.
Of the three patients not referred, one had cryptogenic cirrhosis and two had primary biliary cirrhosis.
The reasons for non-referral were not given in the notes.
Fifty three patients were not considered to be potential transplant candidates.
Seventeen of these had died — 15 with alcoholic liver disease (14 not abstinent, one abstinent patient in whom coexistent disease excluded transplantation), and two patients aged 73 and 86 years with cryptogenic cirrhosis were not fit for transplantation.
Of the 36 patients who were alive at the end of the study period and who were not considered for liver transplant, 26 had alcoholic liver disease (25 not abstinent, one abstinent, but with ischaemic heart disease) and three had primary biliary cirrhosis (in two of these advanced disease was manifest but one had additional psychiatric disease and one advanced cardiopulmonary disease).
Three patients had abnormal liver function tests, two had ingested non-fatal paracetamol overdoses, one had acute hepatitis B infection, and one had early primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Discussion
We found that although up to 11 (17%) patients admitted with liver disease to a district general hospital over a three year period might reasonably have been considered for liver transplantation, only three (5%) were actually referred.
The only significant change in criteria for transplantion during the study period was the greater acceptance of alcoholic liver disease as an indication.
None of the patients with alcoholic liver disease who were not referred fulfilled the current criteria, however, since they were not abstinent.
Longterm survival in patients who undergo transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma tends to be shorter than in patients transplanted for cirrhosis, because of disease recurrence.
It is noted that the diagnosis in two of the patients who died was hepatocellular carcinoma and it may be that referral of these patients was precluded because of this.
However, liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma still has a place in carefully selected patients.
There are inevitable difficulties inherent in a study of this nature.
The number of case notes assessed may underestimate the actual number of patients with liver disease, since recognition of cases is dependent upon admissions being classified within the OPCS codes searched, and patients misclassified would not be identified.
Some patients with chronic liver disease may have been followed up as outpatients and may not have been admitted to hospital during the study period and, thus, these too would not have been identified.
Conversely, patients considered to be appropriate candidates but not teferred for transplant, may have had detailed discussion with their physician and declined referral, without mention of this in the casenotes.
Despite the above difficulties, our results suggest that a significant proportion of potential transplant candidates is not being referred for transplant assessment.
If this population is representative of the UK nationally, a substantial number of patients dying from end stage liver disease is being denied the option of liver transplantation because they are not referred for assessment.
OPCS data recording alcoholic liver disease seem to be very inaccurate.
In the three year period under review, 72 admissions resulted from alcoholic liver disease, yet only 42 were recorded as such.
OPCS data record only 35% of deaths from liver disease in Wales as being alcohol related, yet in our district hospital sample 67% proved to be related to alcohol.
It seems likely that there is a similar under recording of alcoholic liver disease in the United Kingdom as a whole.
Table III shows the proportions of cases of alcoholic and non-alcoholic liver disease recorded.
An apparentrise (almost exclusively in the category ICD 571.3) in alcoholic liver disease has taken place since 1984, probably reflecting a change in legislation.
Since July 1984, death from alcoholism has not had to be reported to the coroner.
We suggest that there is still widespread under reporting of alcoholic liver disease, with the greater rather than the lesser proportion of chronic liver disease deaths being alcohol related.
The inaccuracy of OPCS data almost certainly reflects inadequate disease coding in hospitals.
In conclusion, this study highlights the fact that some patients are not being referred for consideration for liver transplantation when this might be life saving.
It is important that gastroenterologists have a clear knowledge of the criteria for transplant assessment.
OPCS data have been shown to represent inaccurately the distribution of alcoholic liver disease.
Greater emphasis should be placed on clinical coding detail.
Serum antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies in inflammatory bowel disease are mainly associated with ulcerative colitis.
A correlation study between perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies and clinical parameters, medical, and surgical treatment
Abstract
Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies have recently been demonstrated in the seaa of patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
Three hundred and sixty six sera obtained from 120 patients with ulcerative colitis, 105 patients suffering from Crohn's disease and 49 non-inflammatory bowel disease controls were tested in two laboratories, using an indirect immunofluorescence assay.
In addition, a fixed-neutrophil enzyme linked immunoadsorbent assay (ELISA) was evaluated in one of the two laboratories.
The results in the immunofluorescence test showed a high degree of correlation between the two laboratories (Kappa coefficient=0.8).
Ninety five of the 120 (79%) Ulcerative colitis patients had a positive test whereas only 14 of the 105 (13%) patients with Crohn's disease were positive.
Sera from four patients suffering from primary sclerosing cholangitis were positive as well as four of the 45 control sera (9%).
The sensitivity of the perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody immunofluorescence test for the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis was 0.75 with a specificity of 0.88 and a positive predictive value of 0.88 (all sera).
In the ELISA technique 37 of 94 ulcerative colitis sera and one of the 68 Crohn's disease sera were ositive.
Only one of the patients suffering from primary sclerosing cholangitis reacted positively (32 non-inflammatory bowel disease sera tested).
The ELISA technique had a high specificity (0.97), but a low sensitivity (0.39).
There was no relation of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in ulcerative colitis patients or in Crohn's disease patients with disease activity, duration of illness, localisation, extent of disease, previous bowel operations or medical treatment.
The clinical significance of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positive and negative subsets in both groups of patients thus remains unexplained.
Our study confirms that determination of serum antineutrophil cytoplasmatic antibodies in patients with inflammatory bowel disease may differentiate ulcerative colitis from Crohn's disease.
further immunological studies are needed to explain the absence of these antibodies in a subset of ulcerative colitis patients and their role in the pathogenesis of the disease.
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease belong to the group of idiopathic inflammatory bowel diseases and could theoretically be extremes of the same disease.
It is more likely, however, that they are fundamentally different.
With regard to the diagnosis in approximately 10% of inflammatory bowel disease patients with colonic involvement a definite distinction cannot be made.
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies are used in diagnosing vasculitic diseases.
In these diseases the related antigens are enzymes in the granules of neutrophils.
Also in patients with inflammatory bowel disease antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies have been detected.
The fluorescence pattern of inflammatory bowel disease associated antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies is characteristically perinuclear (Fig 1).
It has been agreed to call these antibodies perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies to differentiate them from the classical cANCA present in Wegener's granulomatosis.
Saxon et al reported that IgG perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies could be detected in the sera of the majority of patients with ulcerative colitis and in a much smaller percentage of the sera of patients with Crohn's disease.
We showed equivalent results in a large group of European patietns (n=274) using an indirect immunofluorescent technique.
In the present study we have determined the sensitivity and specificity of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies as measured either by immunofluorescence or fixed neutrophil ELISA tests.
In addition, we have investigated the possible relation of the presence or absence of these antibodies with clinical and biochemical parameters, disease activity and extent of disease, and medical or surgical treatment.
Methods
STUDY POPULATION AND SERUM SPECIMENS
Three hundred and sixty six serum samples were obtained from 274 unrelated patients attending the departments of Gastroenterology and Internal Medicine over a nine month period.
The diagnosis of ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease was based on conventional clinicopathologic criteria according to those described by Lennard-Jones et al .
We excluded 12 patients because no definite diagnosis of ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease could be made at the time of testing.
Sera from patients positive for antinuclear antibodies were also excluded (15% in ulcerative colitis; 8.5% in Crohn's disease).
One hundred and twenty ulcerative colitis patients, 105 Crohn's disease patients and 49 controls were studied.
The mean age was 40 years, an equal male/female distribution was found.
Control subjects were patients from the same outpatient clinics, matched for sex and age to the inflammatory bowel disease patients without evidence of inflammatory bowel disease.
In this particular control group nine patients suffered from diarrhoea, 15 patients had spastic colon, 10 suffered from gastritis, one patient had Wegener's granulomatosis, in 10 patients we diagnosed diverticulosis and five had carcinoma of different origin.
The disease activity in Crohn's disease was assessed using the CDAI according to Best et al and van Hees et al and in ulcerative colitis the Sutherland score was used.
The patient's disease activity ranged from mild to severe at the time of serum collection.
In ulcerative colitis, 114 patients scored 0–3, 33 scored 4–7, 16 scored 8–10, and nine patients over 10 at the time of serum collection (0=quiet; 12=very severe disease activity)
All sera were stored at -12°C until assay.
Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody screening was performed in a blind prospective transversal setting.
One hundred and seventy two serum samples from 120 patients suffering from ulcerative colitis, 145 from 105 Crohn's disease patients, and 49 control sera were tested in two laboratories.
From 84 patients (37 suffering from ulcerative colitis and 47 from Crohn's disease) sera were collected at different timepoints for follow up of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody reactivity in relation to clinical parameters.
INDIRECT IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE ASSAY
The standard antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies indirect immunofluorescence assay was performed in two laboratories (Central Laboratory of the Netherlands Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service and Immunohaematological Laboratory of the Free University Hospital).
In short, human peripheral blood neutrophils were smeared on eight well Nutacon slides and fixed in 96% ethanol (15 minutes 4°C).
Slides were incubated with 1:16 diluted patient's sera and stained with fluorescein conjugated rabbit antihuman IgG antibodies.
The slides were evaluated by fluorescence microscopy.
Depending on brightness of immunofluorescence staining pattern, the reactions were graded into negative (-), weak (+), positive (++), and strong positive (+++).
FIXED NEUTROPHIL ELISA TECHNIQUE
According to the technique described by Saxon et al microtitre plates were coated with a monolayer of granulocytes, fixed in methanol, and air dried.
Sera were tested at a 1:40 dilution and bound antibody was detected with alkaline phosphatase conjugated goat antihuman gamma chain specific antibody. 3 SD above the mean of the negative controls was considered positive.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
To meaure interobserver variation of indirect immunofluorescence testing of the 366 sera Cohen's kappa coeficient was used.
Kappa coefficients above 0.75 signify excellent agreement.
Sensitivity was defined as the ratio of true positives to true positives plus false negatives; specificity as that of true negatives to true negatives plus false positives; positive predictive value as that of true positives to true positives and false positives, and negative predictive value as that of true negatives to true negatives plus false negatives.
To measure associations, Pearson's correlation coefficient was used.
Results
INTERLABORATORY CORRELATION OF THE PERINUCLEAR ANTINEUTROPHIL CYTOPLASMIC ANTIBODY IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE TEST
The same immunofluorescence test procedure for the determination of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in the serum of patients and controls was followed in two independent laboratories.
Reproducability in these laboratories showed an interlaboratory variation maximal up to 14% (177 sera perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positive, 129 sera perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody negative in both laboratories; 48 sera different scored), thus excellent agreement was shown (kappa score 0.80).
COMPARISON OF PERINUCLEAR ANTINEUTROPHIL CYTOPLASMIC ANTIBODY MEASUREMENTS BY INDIRECT IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE ASSAY AND ELISA AND THEIR VALUE IN THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
In the indirect immunofluorescence assay method the sensitivity of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies for ulcerative colitis was 0.75 and the specificity 0.88; using the ELISA technique our figures were 0.39 and 0.97 respectively (Fig 2).
For ulcerative colitis, the positive predictive value of a positive perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody test in the indirect immunofluorescence assay was 0.88, the negative predictive value of a negative perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody test was 0.75.
The Table gives the exact correlation between ELISA and indirect immunofluorescence assay results in the ELISA tested subgroup.
Only 14 out of 105 Crohn's disease patients showed perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody reactivity by indirect immunofluorescence assay.
In the ELISA technique only one of 68 Crohn's disease patients was positive for perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies.
In contrast, sera from all patients suffering from primary sclerosing cholangitis show a bright 3+ staining in the indirect immunofluorescence assay.
The ELISA technique proved far less sensitive for identification of ulcerative colitis patients in inflammatory bowel disease but showed a higher specificity than did the indirect immunofluorescence assay.
RELATIONSHIP OF PERINUCLEAR ANTINEUTROPHIL CYTOPLASMIC ANTIBODIES WITH DISEASE ACTIVITY, HAEMATOLOGICAL, BIOCHEMICAL PARAMETERS, EXTENT, AND EFFECT OF TREATMENT IN ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Disease activity was assessed in 120 ulcerative colitis patients based on the criteria as outlined by Sutherland et al .
In a longitudinal study of 37 patients a significant difference in activity index before and after treatment was observed, irrespective of the kind of treatment — for example, corticosteroids, 5 ASA, SASP, or surgery.
The activity index ranging from 0–12 decreased 3.2 points on average (p=0.0046, Student's t test for paired observations).
No significant relationship was found between positivity of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and ulcerative colitis activity.
Furthermore, all patients that were perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positive before treatment remained positive after treatment, and no apparent decrease in staining intensity was noted.
A positive correlation was found between disease activity and the number of peripheral blood leucocytes (r=0.44; p).
A significant negative correlation was observed between disease activity and haematological and biochemical parameters, in particular haemoglobin (r=-0.271; p=0.004), serum albumin (r= -0.486; p) and total serum protein (r=-0.450; p).
These haematological and biochemical parameters, however, were not related to the presence of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody reactivity, except for a negative correlation between the presence of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and serum albumin concentration (r=-0.215; p=0.031).
No difference in fluorescence intensity level (1–3) nor difference in percentage of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positive patients among patients suffering from proctitis (n=13), proctosigmoiditis (n=56), and pancolitis (n=38) was found.
In patients with ulcerative colitis who underwent a total (nine) or subtotal (five) colectomy the percentage of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positivity remained unchanged regardless of the time passed after colectomy (maximum duration of follow up was over 20 years).
Discussion
It has been shown that the perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody indirect immunofluorescence test may help to differentiate between Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis in inflammatory bowel disease patients.
In a large blinded study done in two independent laboratories we confirmed the presence of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies by the indirect immunofluorescence test in 79% of ulcerative colitis patients whereas only 13% of Crohn's disease patients and 9% of the control group were positive (means from two laboratories).
In contrast with the results of Saxon et al our indirect immunofluorescence assay results showed greater sensitivity and a similar specificity compared with the ELISA test.
The indirect immunofluorescence assay is suitable for clinical investigation of patients with inflammatory bowel disease: results are reproducible and correlate will in independent laboratories.
Our resultsconfirm the presence of a perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody negative subgroup of ulcerative colitis patients.
These patients often had clinically, endoscopically, and histologically active disease.
They were indistinguishable from perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positive ulcerative colitis patients (Fig 3).
No satisfactory explanation can be given as to why our ELISA results differ from Saxon et al .
Itis unlikely that the methodology is responsible, because a similar protocol was used.
Although we used +3 SD above the mean of negative controls as cut off level for positivity in comparison to the +2 SD used by Saxon et al this alone cannot explain the differences.
The different source of the neutrophils used in the assay may result in the recognition of different antigens, although Saxon et al showed no significant difference in binding with the neutrophils taken from eight normal subjects.
The use of a different (European) donor pool can account for the difference.
No correlation was found between perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positivity and localisation or extent of ulcerative colitis.
In contrast with the close relationship of levels of vasculitis associated antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, no correlation was observed between perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody level and disease activity in inflammatory bowel disease.
(Procto-) colectomy did not result in disappearance of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, during a follow up period ranging between two months and two years (mean nine months).
Antibodies could still be demonstrated in one patient 20 years after a proctocolectomy.
The reaction of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody titre to medication (corticosteroids or mesalazine) is controversial.
Disappearance of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies after treatment with corticosteroids has been reported in a small number of patients.
In a group of 37 ulcerative colitis patients, however, no effect of medication was found.
The pathophysiological importance of the ulcerative colitis associated perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies is still poorly understood.
Evidence has accumulated that several autoimmune phenomena are present in ulcerative colitis patients.
Possibly, HLA heterogeneity or the presence of other not yet identified immunogenetic markers may be responsible for the existence of a perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positive and negative subgroup in ulcerative colitis.
The presence of perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in unaffected family members of ulcerative colitis patients favours this view.
Of particular interest is the observation that primary sclerosing cholangitis patients are also perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody positive.
Possibly, ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis associated neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies recognise the same antigen(s).
In the past, autoantibodies that have been most consistently detected in inflammatory bowel disease are those reactive to colonic cells and lymphocytes.
In our study autoantibodies detected in ulcerative colitis are not only directed towards neutrophils, but also to a very small percentage of monocytes (Ellerbroek et al ; submitted).
No reaction with the antigen(s) recognised by vasculitis associated antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies — that is myeloperoxidase, elastase, or proteinase 3, could be demonstrated.
In conclusion, our study confirms that perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies are indeed demonstrable in the large majority of ulcerative colitis patients.
Therefore, antibody determination may have a place in the clinical decision making of inflammatory bowel disease patients, since positivity provides strong arguments for the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis.
Clinical and pathological spectrum of coeliac disease — active, silent, latent, potential
Currently recognised forms of gluten sensitive enteropathy
Within the framework of the current definition (a permanent gluten sensitive enteropathy), clinical, pathological, epidemiological, and immunological approaches are revealing several forms of coeliac disease.
In so called active coeliac disease, malabsorption, and nutritional deficiences range from profound to minimal; clinically silent coeliac disease is being increasingly recognised — for example, in family studies.
Pathologically there is also a degree of heterogeneity.
Descriptive terms such as‘flat mucosa’, or ‘subtotal villus atrophy’, are the pathologist's shorthand for a cluster of features (villus, crypt sizes, epithelial cell damage, intraepithelial and lamina propria lymphoid cell infiltrates) which together characterise the enteropathy of coeliac disease.
Quantitative histology and computerised image analysis have shown that these features occur in a continuum, with the flat lesion at one end of the spectrum and a mucosa with normal villus and crypt architecture, but an abnormally high density or count of villus intraepithelial lymphocytes, at the other.
The latter would be reported as normal by most clinical pathologists.
This fact is important when the evidence for the existence of latent coeliac disease is reviewed.
This term should only be applied to patients who fulfil the following conditions:(i) have a normal jejunal biopsy while taking a normal diet;(ii) at some other time, before or since, have had a flat jejunal biopsy which recovers on a gluten free diet.
The suggestion that there might be a ‘precoeliac’ state was first made by Weinstein who described two patients with dermatitis herpetiformis and normal jejunal biopsies in whom typical coeliac like enteropathy developed some weeks after 20 g gluten was added to their already gluten containing diet.
Two studies from the United Kingdon have confirmed this observation and the concept is supported by case reports of coeliac patients in whom, by chance, a jejunal biopsy has previously been taken and reported as normal.
Subtle pathological and immunological abnormalities in some latent coeliacs
If full morphometric analysis were to show changes at the mild end of the spectrum of coeliac like enteropathy in the original biopsies (as has been reported in two such patients) this would require that the descriptive term in these cases be revised from latent to low grade or mild gluten sensitive enteropathy.
Furthermore, it would greatly facilitate research and clinical management of such patients if there was a means of identifying them, more widely available and less technically demanding than computerised image analysis.
Coeliacs whose intestinal lesions have resolved on a gluten free diet and whose jejunal biopsies are classified as ‘normal’ for diagnostic purposes may still express subtle pathological or immunological abnormalities similar to those of untreated coeliacs.
These abnormalities include a high count of villus; increased gamma/delta T cell receptor expression by intraepithelial lymphocytes; abnormal jejunal permeability; and high concentrations of IgM antigliadin antibody, other IgM class antibodies, and IgA antigliadin antibody (the ‘coeliac like intestinal antibody’ pattern) in specimens of jejunal fluid and whole gut lavage fluid.
One approach to the recognition of potential latent or low grade coeliacs is by studies of intraepithelial lymphocyte T cells expressing gamma/delta receptors.
This presents logistic problems, as the relevant immunohistochemical studies must be done on frozen sections, but positive results have been reported in a single case of latent coeliac disease detected during family studies in Finland.
We recently reported that the characteristic coeliac like intestinal antibody pattern of intestinal fluid antibodies also occurs in dermatitis herpetiformis patients without enteropathy, a group of patients in whom it is likely that all or most are in fact latent coeliacs.
Similar studies of intestinal antibodies might facilitate the detection of latent coeliac disease in other situations.
Two stage model of coeliac disease
We have proposed a two stage model of gluten sensitive enteropathy, latent and fully expressed.
This derived from the confluence of several lines of clinical and experimental work and can be stated as follows: induction of a state of inappropriate immunity (hypersensitivity) to gliadin is a relatively frequent occurrence, genetically restricted.
The effects of abnormal interaction between the immune system and gluten may be expressed not only in gut (coeliac disease) and skin (dermatitis herpetiformis), but also in the mouth (recurrent aphthae), kidneys (IgA nephropathy) and joints (some arthritides).
Within the intestinal mucosa, expression of T cell mediated immunity to gliadin in the gut occurs across a spectrum of histological and functional abnormalities.
The minimal lesion may appear histologically normal, or as a virtually normal biopsy with a high count of villus intraepithelial lymphocytes; the fully expressed lesion is a flat mucosa with crypt hyperplasia, typical of coeliac disease.
Studies in mice showed that immunological sensitisation to gliadin does not trigger the development of a T cell mediated lesion of the intestine when the diet contains gluten.
Additional factors, such as those occurring during intestinal anaphylaxis or a graft- versus -host reaction, where necessary.
Enhanced antigen presentation, recruitment of specific T cells in the mucosa, up-regulation of the expression of class II antigens and failure of suppression, are all candidate mechanisms for the effects observed.
By analogy, although mucosal immunological sensitisation is an invariable feature of coeliac disease, it is not the precipitating factor for the expression of the full intestinal lesion; a second factor drives the enteropathy from minimal (latent) to overt, either by immunological mechanisms or by direct ancillary effects on enterocytes.
Candidate factors include an episode of hyperpermeability, nutrient deficiency, increased dietary gluten, impaired intraluminal digestion of ingested gluten, adjuvant effects of intestinal infection and a non-HLA associated gene.
Significance of a high count of intraepithelial lymphocytes
In animal work on delayed type hypersensitivity in rodent intestine, a rise in the count of villus intraepithelial lymphocytes was a sensitive and early feature of the expression of mucosal delayed type hypersensitivity and is induced by signals from activated lamina propria CD4 T cells.
By analogy, in clinical practice a high count of intraepithelial lymphocytes in an architecturally normal small bowel biopsy will also imply a state of T cell activation, either antigen driven — for example, gluten, giardia, histocompatibility antigens — or as a result of abberrant mucosal immunoregulation (as in some theories of the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease).
There is now a substantial body of evidence that the expression of gluten hypersensitivity as enteropathy may be minimal, measurable only if a count of intraepithelial lymphocytes is performed.
An accepted name for this type of pathology is needed, such as‘high density intraepithelial lymphocyte enteropathy’.
This must be clearly differentiated from various other forms of non-coeliac enteropathy, such as that of HIV infection.
Further work will show how a high count of intraepithelial lymphocytes relates to gamme delta intraepithelial lymphocytes counts, and whether these are merely sensitive indices of mucosal delayed type hypersensitivity expression, and all associated with production of IL2 and gamma interferon, or whether high density of intraepithelial lymphocytes, the unusual up regulation of IgM and/or gamma delta T cell numbers are independent factors, perhaps genetically determined, relevant to the induction of a state of aberrant immunity to gluten, and thus directly to the pathogenesis of coeliac disease.
Clinical importance of an extension of the pathological criteria for coeliac disease
We have recently assessed the frequency of the coeliac like intestinal antibody pattern, a candidate marker of latent coeliac disease, in patients referred for diagnostic small bowel biopsy.
Studies of jejunal fluid revealed the coeliac like intestinal antibody pattern in 16 of 98 non-coeliac cases, of whom six also had a high count of intraepithelial lymphocytes (Arranz and Ferguson, submitted).
If further research shows that some of these patients are clinically gluten sensitive (and we already have some evidence to support this), then by implication, the previous definition of coeliac disease (a flat mucosa) may have excluded up to half of symptomatic patients, referred for jejunal biopsy, who would benefit clinically from a gluten free diet.
The present pathological description of coeliac disease may need to be revised and treatment with a gluten free diet (carefully monitored) offered to symptomatic patients with minor forms of enteropathy.
Only rarely, and usually by chance — for example, previous biopsy in a research investigation — does a patient fulfil criteria for latent coeliac disease.
A more generally applicable expression is needed to describe people who should have the diagnosis of latent or low grade coeliac disease considered — such as those with high intraepithelial lymphocyte count, positive coeliac like intestinal antibody pattern, high gamma delta expression of intraepithelial lymphocytes, relatives of coeliacs, IgA deficient individuals.
The term ‘potential coeliac disease’ is proposed.
Effect of acute hyperglycaemia on gall bladder contraction induced by cholecystokinin in humans
Abstract
This study examined the effect of acute hyperglycaemia, induced by intravenous glucose, on gall bladder motility.
Six healthy volunteers were studied in random order on three occasions during normoglycaemia and hyperglycaemia with blood glucose concentrations stabilised at 8 and 15 mmol/l.
Gall bladder volumes, measured with ultrasonography, were studied before and during infusion of stepwise increasing doses of cholecystokinin (CCK-33; 0.25, 0.5, and 1.0 IDU.kg -1 .
h -1 ).
Each dose was given for 30 minutes.
Pancreatic polypeptide (PP) secretion was determined as an indirect measure of cholinergic tone.
Infusion of CCK-33 resulted in significant dose dependent reductions in gall bladder volume in all three experiments.
Compared with normoglycaemia the gall bladder contraction was significantly (p) reduced during infusion of 0.25 and 0.5 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 CCK-33 in the 8 mmol/l hyperglycaemic experiment, and during infusion of 0.25, 0.5, and 1.0 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 CCK-33 in the 15 mmol hyperglycaemic experiment.
During hyperglycaemia basal plasma PP concentrations and PP secretion in response to CCK-33 were significantly (p) reduced.
It is concluded that blood glucose concentrations affect gall bladder motility, that an acute hyperglycaemia at 8 and 15 mmol/l reduces the gall bladder responsiveness to CCK-33 in a dose dependent manner, and that hyperglycaemia reduces basal and CCK-33 stimulated plasma PP concentrations, suggesting impaired cholinergic activity during hyperglycaemia.
Recently several studies have emphasised the importance of serum glucose concentrations in the regulation of gastrointestinal function.
In healthy subjects hyperglycaemia induced by intravenous infusion of glucose reduces gastric emptying of solid and liduid meals, gastric acid secretion, and pancreatic secretion.
Little is known, however, about the effect of hyperglycaemia on gall bladder motility.
It has been suggested that hyperglycaemia reduces gastrointestinal function through inhibition of the vagal cholinergic system.
This study was undertaken to investigate the influence of hyperglucaemia on gall bladder motility.
Gall bladder contraction in response to infusion of graded doses of cholecystokinin (CCK-33) was measured during normoglycaemia and during acute hyperglycaemia with blood glucose concentrations stabilised at 8 and 15 mmol/l.
A second aim of the study was to examine the tone of the cholinergic system during hyperglycaemia.
This was accomplished indirectly by measuring pancreatic polypeptide (PP) secretion, which is known to be dependent on cholinergic tone and reduced during hyperglycaemia in healthy subjects.
Materials and methods
SUBJECTS
Six healthy young men (aged 24–32) partitipated in the study.
None was taking chronic medication or had a history of gastrointestinal disease, surgery, or diabetes mellitus.
Informed consent was obtained from each person and the protocol was approved by the ethics committee of Leiden University Hospital.
EQUIPMENT
Gall bladder volumes, measured by real time ultrasonography (Technicare, 3.5 MHz transducer), were calculated by the sum of cylinders method with a computerised system.
In this method the longitudinal scan of the gall bladder is divided into series of cylinders of equal height, with diameters perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the gall bladder image.
The uncorrected volume is the sum of volumes of these separate cylinders.
To correct for the displacement of the longitudinal image of the gall bladder from the central axis, a correction factor is calculated from the longitudinal and transversal scans of the gall bladder.
Gall bladder volume is calculated by multiplication of the uncorrected bolume by the square of the correction factor.
The mean of two measurements was used for further analysis.
The assumptions and the mathematical formula used to calculate gall bladder volume have been described and validated previously by Everson et al and Hopman et al .
TEST PROCEDURE
Each subject participated in three experiments performed in random order, with an interval of at least seven days between each.
In the three experiments the subjects were either normoglycaemic or hyperglycaemic with blood glucose concentrations stabilised at 8 or 15 mmol/l.
All experiments were started at 0900 after an overnight fast.
An intravenous cannula was inserted into an antecubital vein of one arm for blood sampling.
A second intravenous line was positioned in the antecubital vein of the other arm for infusions of 20% glucoseand 0.9% saline.
An acute hyperglycaemia at 8 or 15 mmol/l was obtained with a modified glucose clamp technique.
The acute rise in blood glucose concentrations was induced by an intravenous bolus injection of a glucose 20% solution 45 minutes before the start of CCK-33 infusion.
The amount of glucose given was calculated from body weight.
After a bolus injection the rate of glucose infusion was adjusted to maintain a blood glucose concentration of about 8 or 15 mmol/l according to the protocol.
Serum glucose concentrations were measured every 2.5 to five minutes by the glucose oxidase method (Beckman glucose analyser, Beckman Instruments).
At zero minutes a continuous intravenous infusion of CCK-33 (Ferring, Malmo, Sweden) was started.
Cholecystokinin was given in stepwise increasing doses of 0.25 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 , 0.5 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 , and 1.0 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 .
Each dose was for 30 minutes.
Previous studies have shown that during infusions of 0.25, 0.5, and 1.0 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 plasma cholecystokinin (CCK) concentrations correspond with plasma CCK concentrations measured after ingestion of a light, normal, and fatty meal.
Gall bladder images were taken in duplicate every 15 minutes at -60, -45, -30, -15, 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 75, and 90 minutes.
Blood samples for measurement of PP, CCK, and insulin were drawn each time a gall bladder image was taken.
Plasma Pp concentrations were measured by a sensitive and specific radioimmunoassay as described previously.
Plasma CCK was measured by a sensitive and specific radioimmunoassay with antibody T204.
This antibody binds to all carboxy terminal CCK peptides containing the suphated tryosyl region.
The detection limit of the assay was 0.5 pmol/l plasma.
The within assay variation ranged from 4.6% to 11.5% and the between assay variation from 11.3% to 26.1%.
Plasma insulin was measured by radioimmunoassay as described previously.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are expressed as mean (SEM).
The integrated incremental PP secretion in response to CCK-33 infusion was determined by calculating the area under the plasma concentration-time curve after subtraction of the basal value.
Gall bladder volumes are expressed in cm 3 or as percentages, considering the gall bladder volume at the start of the infusion of CCK-33 as 100% (zero minutes).
Data were analysed for the significance of differences by analysis of variance (ANOVA).
When this indicated a probability of less than 0.05 for the null hypothesis Student-Newman-Keuls analyses were performed to determine which values differed significantly.
The significance level was set at p.
Results
SERUM GLUCOSE CONCENTRATIONS
Fasting serum glucose concentrations in the normo and hyperglycaemic experiments were 5.1 (0.3) mmol/l, 5.0 (0.7) mmol/l, and 5.0 (0.3) mmol/l respectively.
Figure 1 shows mean serum glucose concentrations reached during clamping.
PLASMA INSULIN CONCENTRATIONS
Fasting plasma insulin concentrations were not significantly different between the three experiments (Fig 2).
In the normoglycaemic experiment no significant changes in plasma insulin were found during infusion of CCK-33.
After initiating the hyperglycaemic clamp at -45 minutes, plasma insulin concentrations increased significantly (p) starting from -30 minutes in the 8 and 15 mmol/l glucose clamps.
At the end of the 15 mmol/l glucose clamp plasma insulin concentrations of 212 (45) mU/l were reached.
GALL BLADDER VOLUMES
Basal gall bladder volumes were not significantly different between the three experiments (28 (8) cm 3 (normoglycaemia), 29 (9) cm 3 (8 mmol/l hyperglycaemia), and 29 (9) cm 3 (15 mmol/l hyperglycaemia)).
Infusion of 0.25, 0.5, and 1.0 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 CCK-33 resulted in significant reductions in gall bladder volumes from 100% to 70% (3%)(p), 34% (7%)(p), and 8% (3%)(p) during normoglycaemia, from 100% to 84% (3%)(p), 45% (4%)(p), and 10% (2%)(p) during the 8 mmol/l glucose clamp, and from 100% to 91% during the 15 mmol/l glucose clamp (Fig 3).
During the 15 mmol/l hyperglycaemia gall bladder contraction was significantly reduced (p) from 30 to 90 minutes compared with normoglycaemia and from 45 to 90 minutes compared with the 8 mmol/l glucose clamp experiment.
during the 8 mmol/l hyperglycaemia gall bladder contraction was significantly reduced at 30, 45, and 60 minutes compared with normoglycaemia.
PLASMA CCK CONCENTRATIONS
Fasting plasma CCK concentrations were not significantly different between the three experiments (Table I).
Infusion of 0.25, 0.5, and 1.0 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 CCK-33 resulted in significant (p) increases in plasma CCK concentrations over baseline in all experiments.
The plasma CCK concentrations in response to infusion of graded doses of CCK-33 were not significantly different between the three experiments.
PLASMA PANCREATIC POLYPEPTIDE CONCENTRATIONS
Fasting plasma PP concentrations were not significantly different between the three experiments (17 (2) pmol/l (normoglycaemia), 17 (2) pmol/l (8 mmol/l hyperglucaemia), and 19 (2) pmol (15 mmol/l hyperglycaemia)).
From -45 to zero minutes no significant changes in PP concentration were found during normoglycaemia whereas after initiating hyperglycaemia, plasma PP concentrations decreased significantly (p) both during the 8 and 15 mmol/l glucose clamp.
At 0 minutes mean plasma PP concentrations were 17 (2) pmol/l (normoglycaemia), 13 (1) pmol/l (8 mmol/l hyperglycaemia), and 12 (1) pmol/l (15 mmol/l hyperglycaemia).
Infusion of CCK-33 from IDU kg -1 .
h -1 to -1.0 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 resulted in significant (p) increases in plasma PP in the normoglycaemic and 8 mmol/l hyperglycaemic experiments whereas during the 15 mmol/l hyperglycaemic experiment plasma PP concentrations increased significantly only during infusion of 1.0 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 CCK-33.
Compared with normoglycaemia, during the 15 mmol/l hyperglycaemia the integrated incremental PP secretion in response to CCK-33 was significantly reduced during infusion of 0.25, 0.5, and 1.0 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 CCK-33 (Fig 4).
During the 8 mmol/l hyperglycaemia the integrated PP secretion in response to CCK-33 was significantly (p) reduced compared with normoglycaemia during infusion of 0.25 and 0.5 IDU kg -1 .
h -1 .
Discussion
The results of this study indicate that in healthy humans, gall bladder motility induced by CCK-33 is related to blood glucose concentrations.
During an acute hyperglycaemia of 8 and 15 mmol/l the gall bladder contraction in response to CCK-33 was inhibited in a dose dependent manner.
In several studies it has been suggested that gastrointestinal function is related to blood glucose concentrations.
During an acute hyperglycaemia induced by intravenous infusion of glucose, gastric emptying, gastric acid secretion and pancreatic enzyme secretion are reduced in healthy subjects.
McGregor et al have shown that dextrose given intravenously inhibits meal stimulated intraduodenal bilirubin output.
It is not known from that study, however, whether the reduction in intraduodenal bilirubin output resulted from hyperglycaemia induced alterations in gastric emptying of the meal, alterations in endogenous CCK secretion, or alterations in the responsiveness of the gall bladder to CCK.
Unfortunately, in several of the studies that analysed the effect of intravenous glucose on gastrointestinal function, serum glucose concentrations have not been reported.
Also, serum glucose concentrations may vary considerably during a constant infusion of blucose due to insulin secretion.
To accurately determine the effect of hyperglycaemia on gastrointestinal function we think it is essential to stabilise serum glucose concentrations as in the present study by glucose clamp techniques.
In recent years it has been possible to study the mechanisms involved in the regulation postprandial gall bladder motility in detail because of the development of sensitive and specific radioimmunoassays for measurement of CCK and the availability of ultrasonography and cholescintigraphy as non-invasive methods to measure human gall bladder motility.
Two findings point to an important role of CCK in the regulation of postprandial gall bladder motility.
Firstly, after eating a meal gall bladder contraction is closely related to plasma CCK concentrations.
Secondly, intravenous infusion of CCK to plasma concentrations comparable with those found after meals induces similar gall bladder contraction.
By stimulating gall bladder contraction in our study through infusion of CCK-33 instead of meal ingestion wer precluded the influences of alterations in gastric emptying and endogenous secretion of CCK on gall bladder motility induced by hyperglycaemia.
Infusion of stepwise increasing doses of CCK-33 in our experiments resulted in dose dependent increments in plasma CCK, corresponding to plasma CCK concentrations found after ingestion of a light, normal, and fatty meal.
Plasma CCK concentrations reached during infusion of CCK-33 were in the same range in the three experiments, thus excluding the possibility that differences in gall bladder contraction between the hyperglycaemic and normoglycaemic experiments are related to differences in plasma CCK concentrations.
The mechanism responsible for the inhibitory action of hyperglycaemia on gall bladder motility is not known.
It is possible that metabolic, hormonal, or neural changes secondary to hyperglycaemia, rather than glucose itself, modulate gastrointestinal function.
For instance, high glucose concentrations stimulate insulin secretion in healthy volunteers and hyperinsulinemia affects gastrointestinal function.
Previous studies have shown, however, that insulin exerts a stimulatory, rather than an inhibitory effect on intestinal motility.
Furthermore, in type I diabetic patients, hyperglycaemia redyces gastric emptying indicating that insulin is not responsible for the inhibitory effect of hyperglyucaemia on gastrointestinal function.
Several arguments are in favour of an inhibitory effect of hyperglycarmia on gall bladder motility by suppressing activity of the vagal cholinergic system.
Firstly, the effect of CCK on the gall bladder in vivo is dependent on vagal cholinergic activity.
Cholinergic blockade with atropine reduces contractile responses of the gall bladder to CCK, and action similar to the effect of hyperglycaemia on gall bladder contraction induced by CCK.
Secondly, it has been shown in animals that infusion of glucose supresses vagal nerve activity.
Thirdly, in our study hyperglycaemia significantly reduced basal and CCK-33 stimulated PP concentrations.
The release of PP from the pancreas is known to be under cholinergic control.
Although CCK is a physiological stimulus of PP secretion in humans the effect of CCK on PP secretion is abolished by atropine, indicating that the cholinergic system regulates CCK induced PP secretion.
Fourtly, hyperglycaemia is known to suppress PP secretion through inhibition of cholinergic activity as the inhibitory effect of hyperglycaemia on PP secretion is blunted after truncal vagotomy.
Based on these findings it is postulated that hyperglycaemia affects gall bladder motility, at least in part, through inhibition of cholinergic activity.
It is not known whether in patients with diabetes mellitus, as in healthy subjects, the gall bladder sensitivity to CCK is influenced by serum glucose concentrations.
A reduced gall bladder emptying in response to a meal and to infusion of CCK-33 has been reported in such patients.
This has been associated with the presence of autonomic neuropathy as in diabetic patients without neuropathy the gall bladder contraction in response to CCK is not different from that in healthy subjects.
No significant correlation has been found between impaired gall bladder emptying and overall diabetic control as determined by the percentage of total haemoglobin present as glycated haemoglobin.
It remains to be established whether in diabetic patients gall bladder motility is dependent on actual serum glucose concentrations.
In conclusion blod glucose concentrations affect gall bladder motility in healthy subjects, an acute hyperglycaemia at 8 and 15 mmol/l dose-dependently reduces the gall bladder sensitivity to CCK-33, and hyperglycaemia reduces basal and CCK-33 stimulated plasma PP concentrations, suggesting impaired cholinergic activity during hyperglycaemia.
Deoxycholate is an important releaser of peptide YY and enteroglucagon from the human colon
Abstract
Peptide YY (PYY) and enteroglucagon are hormonal peptides found in endocrine cells of the distal intestinal mucosa.
Although it is known that plasma concentrations of both peptides increase in response to feeding, the mechanism by which ingested food causes release of colonic hormones is not understood.
The release of PYY and enteroglucagon was measured in response to intraluminal stimuli in 176 patients having investigative colonoscopy.
Introduction of air, saline (isotonic and hypertonic), glucose (isotonic and hypertonic), oleic acid (without bile salts), and casein hydrolysate all failed to release PYY but glucose caused a small but significant increase in enteroglycagon concentrations.
In contrast with the lack of effect of nutrients, infusion of deoxycholic acid produced a rapid and marked dose responsive increase in plasma PYY concentrations when introduced into the sigmoid colon.
PYY release was statistically significant at doses between 3.3 mM to 30 mM; for example 10 mM deoxycholate caused a sixfold increase in plasma PYY concentrations.
Infusion of 10 mM deoxycholate into the transverse colon or caecum produced an increase PYY that was similar to the responses in the sigmoid colon.
There was also a significant release of enteroglycagon in response to infusion of this bile salt into the sigmoid colon at doses between 3.3 mM and 30 mM.
The enteroglycagon response to 10 mM deoxycholate was similar in all three colonic regions.
When oleic acid was added to deoxycholate as an emulsion, the release of PYY and enteroglucagon was similar to that seen with the bile salt alone.
These findings suggest that bile salts may play an important part in the control of colonic endocrine function and may explain the increased circulating concentrations of colonic regulatory peptides that are seen in malabsorption states and after small bowel resection in humans.
Peptide YY (PYY) and enteroglucagon are regulatory peptides found in the endocrine cells of the mucosa of the distal intesting.
Several reports have showed the coexistence of these two peptides in the same endocrine cell type, which has been named the L cell.
The genes producing these peptides are quite distinct but it is not clear whether both peptides are produced in all L cells, as dual localisation is only seen in a proportion of them.
Indeed, tissue concentrations of enteroglucagon are highest in the terminal ileum, with smaller concentrations in the colonic mucosa, whereas by contrast PYY content increases distally with highest concentrations in the rectosigmoid region.
Concentrations of PYY and enteroglucagon increase in response to feeding and the amount of increase in both hormones reflects meal size and content.
Ingested fat and carbohydrate seem to be the most potent stimuli for these two peptides, and fatty acids introduced into the small intestinal lumen elicit an appreciable response.
When nutrients pass rapidly through the alimentary tract, as in the postgastrectomy dumping syndrome, there is a very rapid and appreciable release of both PYY and enteroglucagon.
Similarly, circulating concentrations of both peptides are increased in conditions associated with malabsorption, such as sprue, or after small bowel resection.
In the healthy and intact gastrointestinal tract, it is unlikely that substantial amounts of unabsorbed nutrients ever reach the colon in humans, and it is therefore likely that some other mechanism exists for the release of hormonal peptides from this region.
This study was designed to investigate the release of PYY and enteroglucagon, in response to a variety of intraluminal stimuli introduced endoscopically, to identify the mechanism for release of these colonic hormones in humans.
Methods
Studies were undertaken in 176 male patients who were having investigational colonoscopy and who were found to have a normal colon.
In general, patients included in the study were either being screened because of guaiac positive stools, other symptoms of colonic disease, or for family history of colonic cancer, or as a follow up examination in patients with previous colonic polyps.
Patients with abnormal findings at endoscopy or who had had previous surgery were excluded from the study.
In particular, no patients with inflammatory bowel disease or cancer were studied.
Informed consent was obtained from all participants, and the study had approval from the institutional human ethics committee.
All patients received a traditional two day bowel preparation and were given clear liquids during this time.
Patients drank a bottle of magnesium citrate each night and also received tap water enemas until the return was clear.
If necessary, patients also received enemas the morning of the procedure.
After an overnight fast of at least 10 hours, an 18 gauge catheter was placed in an antecubital vein for blood sampling.
This was kept patent with heparinised isotonic saline (10 units/ml 0.85% saline).
All colonoscopies were performed under the supervision of an experienced endoscopist.
The position of the colonoscope was judged by topographical landmarks.
The caecum was considered to be reached only if the light of the instrument was seen in the right lower quadrant, the base of the appendix was visualised, and the ileocaecal valve was seen.
Similarly, the transverse colon was recognised by its characteristic triangular folds and the sigmoid colon by its circular folds.
Infusions into the transverse colon were performed with the colonscope about 10 cm proximal to the splenic flexure, while those into the sigmoid colon were done with the colonoscope about 10 cm proximal to the rectosigmoid junction.
In an additional group of subjects (n=4), the endoscope was passed through the ileocaecal valve into the terminal ileum for perfusion of oleic acid (24%).
Fluoroscopy was not used.
In circumstances where the topography was not clear, patients received only sigmoid colon infusions.
This was done particularly in patients where it was difficult to confidently identify the caecum.
Examination was begun without sedation.
Patients were given meperidine (Demerol) or diazepam (Valium), or both intravenously if they experienced discomfort.
Of the 176 patients who took part in the study, 67 received no drugs during endoscopy, 49 received Valium (mean dose 5.4 mg, range 2.5–10.0), 18 Demerol (mean dose 27 mg, range 10–50), and 42 Valium (mean dose 5.7 mg, range 2.5–10.0) and Demerol (mean dose 38 mg, range 10–100).
Neither atropine nor glucagon were used in any of the patients.
No antifoaming agents were used in the irrigation fluid.
One blood sample was taken before endoscopy and the patients then had a colonoscopy to the caecum.
After their diagnostic procedure the colonoscope was positioned at site of infusion and a second blood sample collected.
After a 10 minute period, a third blood sample was taken and 200 ml of the air or respective test solution was introduced into the colon by steady infusion over a 10 minute period (20 ml/min).
The test solutions were prepared in emulsion form by vigorous agitation of the components before administration.
Test agents were infused through the biopsy channel of the colonoscope (F10I 133 cm, Olympus).
The lumen was kept constantly in view so that the position of the instrument did not change.
Further blood samples were collected at 10, 20, and 30 minutes after the start of the infusion.
After the last sample was collected, the colonoscope was removed and the patient allowed to recover from the procedure.
Only one test was conducted in each patient.
Patients were randomly allocated to groups for each test substance.
Table I shows the number of subjects who received each test substance, mean age, and the site of colonic infusion.
Blood samples were collected into chilled tubes containing sodium EDTA (2 mg/ml) and aprotinin (Novo 400 KIU/ ml).
Tubes were centrifuged within 15 minutes, and the plasma was decanted and stored at -20°C for subsequent radioimmunoassay.
Plasma PYY and enteroglucagon concentrations were measured by well characterised radioimmunoassays, which have previously been described in detail.
Briefly, PYY was measured using an antibody (Y21) raised to pure unconjugated PYY.
The antibody is N terminally directed and shows no significant cross reaction with the related peptides, pancreatic polypeptide, and neuropeptide Y. Antiserum at a dilution of 1:160000 bound approximately 50% of the 1 fmol monoiodo-PYY, which was used as tracer.
The tracer, prepared by conventional chloramine T oxidation, was purified using isocratic reverse phase high pressure liquid chromatography.
The assay detected changes between adjacent samples of 0.4 fmol/tube (equivalent to 2.0 pM in plasma) with 95% confidence (ID 5 ; 8 fmol PYY/tube).
Enteroglucagon was measured using an antibody (R59), which fully recognises pancreatic glucagon and enteroglucagon, the antibody being N terminally directed.
Pancreatic glucagon concentrations were measured using a specific C terminal antiserum (RCS5).
Enteroglucagon concentrations were therefore derived by subtracting pancreatic glucagon concentrations from the total glucagon concentrations measured with R59.
The assays show no significant cross reaction with other related peptides (secretin, VIP, PHI, GRF, and GIP) and detected changes between adjacent samples of 0.2 fmol/tube with 95% confidence (equivalent to 1 pM enteroglucagon in plasma).
The ID 5 of R59 for glicentin and glucagon are 4.4 fmol/tube and 4.6 fmol/tube respectively.
The ID 5 of RCS5 for glucagon is 3.5 fmol/tube.
Monoiodo-glucagon was prepared and purified as described above for PYY.
Statistical analysis of incremental hormone responses after test stimuli was carried out by two way analysis of variance (ANOVA), with substance and site as the two factors.
The incremental area under the curve was calculated for the 30 minute period of stimulation in each individual patient by the trapezoid method, after subtraction of the mean basal for that patient.
Planned comparisons of means of incremental areas were carried out using the multivariate general linear hypothesis to determine the substances that caused a significant increase in PYY and enteroglucagon concentrations from basal.
The dose effects of deoxycholate on the incremental responses of PYY and enteroglucagon were analysed by one way ANOVA, with significant individual dose effects determined by the multivariate general linear hypothesis.
The dose effects of deoxycholate on the incremental responses of PYY and enteroglucagon were further analysed by linear regression analysis.
Results
Although the subjects could sense that the infusions were taking place, these were all tolerated well withoutsignificant side effects.
Plasma PYY and enteroglucagon concentrations after air insufflation and intracolonic perfusion with saline, glucose, oleic acid, and amino acids (casein hydrolysate) are shown in Tables II and III respectively.
There was no significant increase in concentration of either peptide after intracolonic infusion of any of these test substances, either given as isotonic or hypertonic solutions, except for a small effect of glucose on enteroglucagon concentrations.
In contrast infusion of 10 mM deoxycholate caused an appreciable rise in circulating PPY and enteroglucagon concentrations (Figs 1 and 2).
There were no significant differences in plasma PYY or enteroglucagon concentrations between patients who received sedation and those who received non (data not shown).
Because of the two factor experimental design (substance and site), two way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was carried out on the incremental hormone responses after the test stimuli.
ANOVA showed a significant main effect of substance for PYY (F 4 ,8 7 =119.5, p) and for enteroglucagon (F 4 ,8 7 =19.4, p), but not for site.
Analysis of the effect of individual test substances showed that PYY was released significantly by deoxycholate (PYY incremental response (SEM) 36.7 (3.6) pmol/l/ min, F 1 ,8 7 =602.7, p) but not by any of the other test substances.
Enteroglucagon was also released significantly by deoxycholate (incremental response 9.8 (1.6) pmol/l/min, F 1 ,8 7 =131.1, p) and glucose (5% glucose: incremental response 4.3 (0.6) pmol/l/ min, F 1 ,8 7 =28.8, p; 20% glucose: incremental response 3.1 (0.4) pmol/l/min, F 1 ,8 7 =15.2, p), but not by casein or oleate.
The incremental integrated release of PYY and enteroglucagon stimulated by infusion of deoxycholate into the sigmoid colon was dose dependent (Fig 3 and 4).
A statistically significant release of PYY was seen only with the three highest doses of deoxycholate (3.3 mM: incremental response 32.3 (9.1) pmol/l/min, F 1 ,1 9 = 18.9, p; 10.0 mM: incremental response 46.4 (7.7) pmol/l/min, F 1 ,1 9 =33.4, p=0.00001; 30.0 mM: incremental response 46.4 (7.1) pmol/ l/min, F 1 ,1 9 =28.1, p=0.00004)(Fig 3).
Similarly, statistically significant incremental responses of enteroglucagon to deoxycholate were found only for the three highest doses (3.3 mM: incremental response 4.9 (1.2) pmol/l/min, F 1 ,1 9 =6.8, p; 10.0 mM: incremental response 10.7 (3.4) pmol/l/min, F 1 ,1 9 =27.8, p= 0.00004; 30 mM: incremental response 10.1 (1.6) pmol/l/min, F 1 ,1 9 =20.9, p=0.0002)(Fig 4).
The dose response areas under the curve were further analysed by linear regression analysis, which showed dose dependent effect for PYY (F1,21, p=0.009) and enteroglucagon (F1,21, p=0.001).
When a high dose of oleic acid (24%) was emulsified with 10 mM deoxycholate, there was no significant difference in the magnitude of the PYY or enteroglucagon response from that seen with bile salt perfused alone (Tables II and III respectively).
Infusion of 200 ml oleic acid (24%) into the terminal ileum of four patients was without significant effect on plasma PYY and enteroglucagon concentrations.
PYY concentrations were 15.5 (4.4) pM before the infusion and 16.8 (5.8) pM 20 minutes after the infusion began.
Enteroglucagon concentrations were 17.3 (1.5) pM pre-infusion and 13.8 (4.0) pM 20 minutes after the infusion began.
Discussion
High concentrations of PYY and enteroglucagon are found in the colonic mucosa of humans and other species.
The potent effects, particularly of PYY, on proximal gastrointestinal function would suggest an important hormonal role for these colonic peptides.
The mechanism by which they are released after the ingestion of food is, however, not understood.
It is perhaps surprising that circulating concentrations of both peptides rise within 15 minutes after eating.
Even if this early rise reflects release from the distal small intestine, it would seem too rapid to be as a result of the presence of unabsorbed nutrients.
The secretion of these hormonal peptides, particularly from the colon, is therefore likely to entail other mechanisms.
This study suggests that bile salt stimulation of the open type endocrine cells (L cells) containing these peptides may represent such a mechanism.
Indeed, the reported release of PYY and enteroglucagon by fat in the small bowel may be accounted for by the effects of the bile salts with which the fat was suspended.
It should be noted that in the dog PYY release has been seen in response to intracolonic oleic acid in the absence of bile salts.
In these studies, however, the rise in PYY concentrations was not detectable until the end of a one hour infusion of oleate in the colon, and the highest PYY concentrations were not seen until one hour after the infusion had finished.
In contrast, intraduodenal oleate caused a substantial release of PYY at 30 minutes which reached a peak during the infusion at 60 minutes.
These findings of a late response of PYY to intracolonic oleate suggest an indirect mechanism, rather than stimulation of the enteric endocrine cells directly by the luminal contents.
Infusion of oleic acid into the ileoanal pouch in humans had no effect on circulating PYY concentrations, although a similar infusion did increase the PYY response to an oral mixed meal in these patients.
Thus, species differences may exist in the mechanism of release of this peptide.
Furthermore, studies in the isolated perfused rabbit colon have failed to show release of PYY by oleic acid, although this stimulus released enteroglucagon, and bile salts caused an appreciable increase in PYY concentrations.
Oleic acid administration, at different doses, had no more effect on PYY release than the bile salt alone.
The concentration range of deoxycholate used in these studies spans that normally found within the colonic lumen.
Deoxycholate is the most abundant bile salt in the human colon and concentrations of 3.5 (0.5) mM have been reported in normal human stool.
Furthermore, the higher concentrations used in this study reflect total bile salt concentrations in human colon.
The concentrations of nutrients used in these studies are substantially higher than those which would normally be seen in the colonic lumen.
It was felt that high concentrations would be more likely to cause direct stimulation of the enteric endocrine cells and thus to be effective.
Additionally, it has been reported that circulating PYY concentrations are raised in patients with malabsorption and it was possible that high colonic fatty acid concentrations may be responsible for this exaggerated PYY release.
The oleic acid concentrations used are in the range encountered in patients with steatorrhea.
It is unlikely that low concentrations of nutrients would cause PYY release when high concentrations are without effect.
The magnitude of the rise in circulating PYY concentrations after deoxycholate perfusion in the human colon was similar to the rise reported after a normal meal.
In healthy subjects the rise in plasma PYY was 4 (1) pM after a 530 calorie breakfast, 24 (5) after a 1200 calorie meal, and 49 (10) after ingestion of a large dinner.
These rises were similar in magnitude to the effects of intracolonic deoxycholate in this study.
The magnitude of the enteroglucagon response elicited by deoxycholate was similar to that reported for a test breakfast, measured using the same assay system.
The release of colonic regulatory peptides by bile salts does make physiological sense.
PYY slows gastric emptying and mouth to caecum transit in humans, and there is considerable circumstantial evidence to suggest that enteroglucagon is trophic to the small intestinal musoca.
Release of these peptides by bile salts would thus tend to slow transit and increase absorptive mucosal surface area and would therefore lead to increased bile salt absorption in the terminal ileum.
Thus a bile salt dependent release mechanism could represent a sensitive and important mechanism for controlling intestinal absorption by motor function and mucosal growth.
The large increases in plasma concentrations of PYY and enteroglucagon that accompany such conditions as sprue or short bowel syndrome may represent an important adaptive response to malabsorption.
It is likely, however, that factors other than bile salts are responsible for the massive rise in PYY and enteroglucagon that accompany coeliac sprue as bile salt malabsorption is not a feature of that disease.
Finally, manipulation of this potent release mechanism for PYY may ultimately prove to be clinically useful in patients who would benefit from slower intestinal transit, including patients with short bowel syndrome or major colonic resection.
Dieulafoy's disease: endoscopic treatment and follow up
Abstract
The findings from 480 patients who had emergency endoscopy for acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding of non-variceal origin at our institution were analysed.
Twenty eight patients (5.8%) had a Dieulafoy lesion.
In 27 patients (96.4%) bleeding could be successfully managed by injection of norepinephrine and polidocanol, in repeated sessions if needed.
Two patients had to be treated surgically: one because of uncontrollable bleeding from the Dieulafoy lesion and one despite endoscopic control of the bleeding Dieulafoy lesion because of a concomitant bleeding from an anastomosal ulcer after gastric resection.
Three patients died during hospital stay from causes unrelated to bleeding from Dieulafoy lesion.
Out of the 25 patients discharged from the hospital 21 treated by endoscopy and two treated with surgery were followed up for a mean of 28.3 and 22.5 months, respectively.
Twenty endoscopically treated patients (95%) had no recurrence of Dieulafoy's bleeding.
One patient experienced severe rebleeding from the original site after a transient endoscopically fonfirmed complete disappearance.
He had emergency operation without a further attempt to control bleeding by endoscopy.
It is concluded that bleeding from Dieulafoy's disease can be successfully managed by endoscopic injection treatment.
The longterm outcome is favourable.
Dieulafoy's disease is a well known entity characterised by a bleeding or clot bearing artery protruding into the intestinal lumen without surrounding ulceration.
It may occur anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract but is predominantly located in the gastro-oesophageal junction and in the stomach along the lesser curvature.
The Figure shows the typical histological picture of a Dieulafoy lesion.
Aneurysmas, atherosclerosis or vasculitis are generally absent.
The incidence of Dieulafoy's lesions among patients with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding varies from 0.5% to 14%, mainly depending upon selection criteria.
There is a general consensus that the disease is ‘underdiagnosed rather than truly rare’ as the lesion may be very discrete and needs a high degree of suspicion to be detected.
The disease used to be fatal frequently because of the non-visualisation of the vessel and ‘blind’ gastric resection with recurrent haemorrhage postoperatively.
By endoscopy the nature of the bleeding site can be identified and the operation planned accordingly.
Furthermore, the possibility of endoscopic intervention adds a new perspective to the management of Dieulafoy's disease.
The definitive treatment is still controversial.
Some advocate primary endoscopic intervention, reserving the surgical option for failures.
Others prefer primary surgical intervention, assuming a high risk of recurrence, and see primary endoscopic treatment as an alternative in patients with a high operative risk only.
The aim of our study was to assess the efficacy and longterm effectiveness of treatment with endoscopy in Dieulafoy's disease.
Materials and methods
From January 1984 to October 1991, 480 patients with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding of non-variceal origin were admitted to our gastroenterology department.
After basic life support all patients had emergency endoscopy.
Twenty eight patients (5.8%) had Dieulafoy's disease.
In all patients an attempt was made to treat the lesion by injection of up to 10 ml epinephrine (1:10000) and up to 6 ml 1% polidocanol.
The injection was usually performed at different sites around the vessel and directly into the vessel.
Adherent clots had to be removed in nine cases to prove the nature of the lesion.
To achieve optimal diagnostic accuracy all initial diagnostic and interventional endoscopies were done or supervised by very experienced members of the staff and virtually all patients were re-examined after the initial interventional endoscopy.
Where there was rebleeding, endoscopic treatment was repeated.
If repeated endoscopic attempts failed, emergency operation was performed.
All patients were treated with H2 receptor antagonists after the procedure.
Each patient was evaluated as to sex, age, past medical history, use of drugs, alcohol abuse, haemoglobin values at entry, blood replacement, additional endoscopic findings, bleeding type, localisation of the lesion, and the final outcome.
Follow up data could be obtained from 23 of the 25 patients discharged from the hospital either directly from the patients or by interviewing their physicians.
Standard statistical methods were performed using Student's unpaired t test and χ 2 analysis.
Results
AGE AND SEX
The Dieulafoy group consisted of 22 men (78.6%) and six women (21.4%).
The mean age (SD) was 61.7 years (25–90 years (15.043)).
There was no statistical age difference between the Dieulafoy group and patients with bleeding ulcers of the stomach (n=100; 61.7 v 63.3years, p=0.67).
The sex distribution, however, showed statistically more male patients in the Dieulafoy group (p=0.04).
MEDICAL HISTORY, TREATMENT/DRUGS BEFORE ADMISSION
Table I lists the age and sex distribution, medical history, alcohol consumption, and concomitant treatment of the patient population.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND BLEEDING HISTORY
In 21 patients Dieulafoy's lesions presented with sudden and massive gastric bleeding with haematemesis and melaena.
Seven patients suffered from melaena alone.
On admission the mean haemoglobin value was 9.2 mg% (2.16 gm%).
There was a mean requirement of 6.6 units of blood (5.1 U).
Patients with concomitant alcoholic hepatopathy/cirrhosis presented with a mean haemoglobin value of 10.1 f% (1.5 g%).
In 23 cases, no previous bleeding episodes were known.
Three patients had a history of previous bleeding from ulcers of the duodenum or stomach, one patient experienced anastomosal bleeding with a history of gastric resection, one patient had a Dieulafoy's lesion treated conservatively in another hospital with recurrent bleeding episodes within one year before admission.
ENDOSCOPIC FINDINGS AND TREATMENT
In 24 patients (86%) the Dieulafoy disease was located within the stomach; in 17 patients (61%) it was found at the classic site within 6 cm from the gastroesophageal junction (in eight cases near the lesser curve, in two near the greater curve, in three on the anterior wall, in two on the posterior wall, and in two in a hiatus hernia immediately below the oesphageal-gastric junction); in five patients in the corpus; and in two patients proximal from the anastomosis after gastric resection.
Four further bleeding sites (14%) were detected in the duodenum (see Table II).
All patients were treated endoscopically by injection treatment (one with combined use of heater probe), whether they were actively bleeding or not.
Nineteen patients (68%) were actively bleeding during emergency endoscopy.
In 15 cases endoscopic treatment was successful after one treatment session, in two cases after the second, and in one case after the third.
One patient had to have emergency operation because of uncontrollable bleeding.
None of the nine patients with an adherent clot at first examination developed major rebleeding.
Overall, endoscopic treatment was successful in 27 patients (96%) during the initial hospital period.
One patient had elective surgical revision despite bleeding control for a concomitant bleeding anastomosal ulcer after gastric resection.
Another patient experienced a recurrence of Dieulafoy's lesion half a year after an initially successful endoscopic approach and had surgical intervention without a further endoscopic attempt (histologically proved case of Dieulafoy's disease, see the Figure).
Interestingly, a control endoscopy six weeks after the initial successful injection treatment showed a healed mucosal defect with no visible vessel left.
Other endoscopic findings included one case with anastomosal bleeding (history of gastric resection), three cases with oesophageal varices, one of which was combined with fundic varices (all without signs of recent haemorrhage), four cases with oesophagitis, two cases with non-bleeding duodenal (one with combined gastric ulcers), and two cases with gastric ulcers.
Endoscopic diagnosis of Dieulafoy's lesion was made in 23 cases (82%) in the first, in four (14%) in the second, and in one case (4%) in the third endoscopic session.
The main reason for repeated endoscopies was poor visualisation because of large amounts of blood in the stomach or wide areas of adherent haematin.
Concomitant treatment consisted of H2 antagonists in all cases.
PATHOLOGICAL EXAMINATION
Pathological examination of the resected specimens in two cases showed the typical appearance of Dieulafoy's lesion.
In one further case with concomitant gastric ulcer bleeding the specimen was not checked histologically for Dieulafoy's disease.
COMPLICATIONS AND DEATH
Three patients died during the hospital stay because of diseases unrelated to Dieulafoy's disease (pulmonary embolism, septicaemia, and pneumonia with multiorgan failure).
One patient experienced a bleeding episode associated with a treatment induced ulcer 10 days after the initial treatment, which was successfully treated with another injection.
None of the other patients had serious complications otherwise.
LATE CLINICAL RESULTS
Of the 25 patients discharged either after surgical (two cases) and endoscopic (23 cases) treatment, 23 could be followed up either by direct contact or by information obtained from their physicians.
Twenty two patients have hitherto not suffered from recurrence of Dieulafoy's bleeding.
As mentioned above, one patient experienced severe rebleeding six months after initial successful sclerotherapy and has had no rebleeding after emergency operation until now (four months).
Out of these, 10 patients died of causes unrelated to Dieulafoy lesion bleeding with a mean follow up of 13.8 months (minimum: 2 months, maximum 54 months).
Of the four patients with alcoholic hepatopathy/hepatic cirrhosis, one has recovered (follow up: 41 months) and three have died (two in hepatic coma, the other with lethal oesophageal variceal bleeding; mean follow up five months).
The follow up periods ranged from 2 to 80 months with a mean of 28.3 months in the endoscopically (n=21) and 22.5 in the surgically (n=2) treated group.
Discussion
With the advent of diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopy the management of Dieulafoy's disease has been directed towards a more careful surgical intervention on the one hand and successful bleeding control by injection treatment on the other hand.
In daily practice as well as in the recent studies Dieulafoy lesion is diagnosed most often by endoscopy.
Although not randomised and with a small number of histopathologically confirmed cases, we believe, that the large number of patients in our study successfully managed by injection treatment alone favours a primary encoscopic approach towards Dieulafoy's disease.
It must be emphasised, however, that an experienced endoscopist is necessary, as Dieulafoy's disease can easily be overlooked or concomitant lesions, such as ulcers or varices, may wrongly be considered responsible for the bleeding episode.
Our diagnostic efficiency is shown by a diagnostic yield in the first endoscopic session of 82%; further sessions were needed in the rest of patients mainly because of non-removable blood clots.
Three patients had repeated unsuccessful diagnostic endoscopies or angiographies in referring hospitals.
We therefore believe, that in unclear cases of severe upper gastrointestinal bleeding a vigorous attempt should be made to identify the lesion to avoid unnecessary surgery.
Furthermore close study is mandatory to detect rebleeding after treatment.
With regard to the differential diagnosis to clot covered lesions mimicking Dieulafoy lesion and fundic varices, we strictly applied the diagnosis to a vessel without surrounding ulceration after removal of the clot.
No Dieulafoy lesion was found in the fundus and anaemia was not so pronounced in the patients with alcoholic hepatopathy/cirrhosis to lead to a confusion with bleeding fundic varices.
In our patients, no endoscopic findings suggestive of stress ulcers were seen.
In 61% the lesion was found at the classic site within 6 cm of the gastro-oesophageal junction, mostly near the lesser curve.
Similar to other reports we also identified Dieulafoy's lesion in the duodenum.
The effectiveness of the endoscopic treatment is supported by our high incidence of bleeding arrest in 95% of actively bleeding lesions.
In this group three cases had repeated but eventually successful therapeutic endoscopies.
There were no rebleeding episodes in the group which were not actively bleeding after the first treatment.
In the series of Pointner there seems to be fewer episodes of rebleeding using a combined regimen of injection treatment and electrocoagulation than with either procedure alone.
The optimal regimen is not clearly established and should be studied in a randomised trial.
Our treatment success rate lies within other authors' experience with local endoscopic treatment, reporting success rates ranging from 82 (1) to 100%, with much shorter study periods, however.
Interestingly, one patient experienced recurrence of Dieulafoy's lesion at the identical site half a year after successful treatment and with healing proved endoscopically.
Because of this case and because of the studies of the supporters of primary surgical intervention an objection, until now, was the rather short follow up periods of the larger series.
Our study with a mean follow up period of 28.3 months (range 2–80) clearly shows the longterm effectiveness of endoscopic treatment of Dieulafoy's lesion.
Dieulafoy's lesion is a disease of mainly middle aged and elderly male patients.
Our results with a mean age of 61.7 and a more pronounced male predominance of nearly 1:5 are in agreement with former findings.
As a result of restricting our study to non-variceal bleeding and a high referral rate from other hospitals there is a seemingly high incidence of Dieulafoy's lesion in our patients.
Therefore, our data cannot show the true incidence.
Clinically, 21 patients presented with sudden and massive haematemesis and melaena and seven patients with melaena alone.
The severity of the bleeding is manifested by the number of blood units required (average 6.6 units, minimum 2; maximum 26 units).
The pathogenesis of Dieulafoy's disease is still unclear.
There is a calibre persistency of some arteries instead of a regular reduction in size before the vessels penetrate the layers of the intestinal wall.
Disagreement exists with respect to the further pathogenetic steps that lead to rupture of the vessel.
Perhaps additional factors such as alcoholism, chronic gastritis, and chronic use of drugs are responsible in some cases.
In our series alcohol abuse is found in 25%, salicylates and non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug use in 39% and concurrent peptic disease in 11%.
As there are no control groups described so far, the causes of the disease remain speculative.
Interestingly, there was no statistical age difference between patients diagnosed as having Dieulafoy's type of bleeding and patients with diagnosed bleeding ulcers of the stomach.
On the other hand, there was a significantly higher proportion of men among patients with Dieulafoy's disease than among those with bleeding ulcers of the stomach.
Whether the same average onset of gastric ulcer and Dieulafoy's type of bleeding is merely coincidential or suggests some common pathophysiological cause remains to be answered.
The fact that in three cases concomitant gastric ulcers were found should not discourage the endoscopist to look for further possible bleeding sites despite a seemingly obvious source of bleeding.
While some authors have reported a frequent history of peptic ulcer disease, data on concomitant peptic ulcer disease are lacking, mainly because in most studies this question was not studied specifically.
The medical histories of our patients show a high incidence of concomitant or past diseases with only two patients having an absolutely unremarkable history.
Some authors have also described significant concurrent morbidity or remarkable past medical history, while others have described the ‘typical patient’ with Dieulafoy's lesion to have an unremarkable past medical history.
On the basis of our experience and the conflicting findings reported we feel a ‘typical patient’ syndrome for Dieulafoy's disease remains speculative.
In summary, we conclude that endoscopic injection treatment is safe and effective and is the first choice in the management of Dieulafoy's disease with excellent longterm results.
Surgery should only be considered if primary endoscopic treatment fails.
Colonic manometry in children with chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction
Abstract
Pressure changes were evaluated in the transverse, descending, and rectosigmoid colon of 30 children with chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
Twenty two had severe lifelong constipation and eight had symptoms suggesting a motility disorder exclusively of the upper gastrointestinal tract.
Based on prior antroduodenal manometry, 24 children were diagnosed as having a neuropathic and six a myopathic form of intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
On the day of study, endoscopy was used to place a manometry catheter into the transverse colon and intraluminal pressure was recorded for more than four hours.
After a baseline recording, we gave a meal to assess the gastrocolonic response.
Colonic contractions were noted in 24 children.
The six children with no colonic contractions had a hollow visceral myopathy and constipation.
In the children with colonic contractions, fasting motility did not differentiate children with and without constipation.
After the meal, in all eight children without constipation there was (1) an increase in motility index (3.2 (SEM 0.3) mm Hg/min basal v 8.4 (SEM 1.1) mm Hg/min postprandial; p), and (2) at least one high amplitude propagated contraction (HAPC).
In the 16 constipated children with colonic contractions the motility index did not significantly increase after the meal (2.1 (SEM 0.3) mm Hg/min basal v 3.1 (SEM 0.4) mm Hg/ min postprandial) and 12 of them had no HAPCs (pv group without constipation).
In summary, in children with a clinical diagnosis of chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction, constipation is associated with absence of HAPCs, and the gastrocolonic response or with total absence of colonic contractions.
It is concluded that studies of colonic manometry are feasible in children and may document discrete abnormalities in those with intestinal pseudo-obstruction with colonic involvement.
Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIP) is a heterogeneous group of disorders that vary in cause, severity, course, and response to treatment.
Pathophysiology of the various subtypes of CIP is only now being elucidated.
There is a wide range of abnormalities of gastric, small intestinal, and colonic myoelectric activity and contractions, and in nerve and muscle histopathology.
To diagnose and intervene appropriately it is often necessary to be able to evaluate the complete gastrointestinal tract.
Osophageal, anorectal, and antroduodenal manometry are diagnostic tools in many paediatric centres, but little is known about colonic manometry.
Previous study of colonic pressures in paediatric patients has been limited mainly to the rectosigmoid area, because of relative inaccessibility of the proximal colon.
Information concerning motility of the entire colon has been obtained by indirect measures such as the movement of radioopaque markers or barium to assess colonic transit time.
Newer techniques provide more specific and often complementary information about colon, ie transit and motor activity.
Manometry, electromyography, and scintiscanning have been used in adults in the investigation of colon motility but only recently have these been extended to the study of paediatric patients.
The aim of our study was to clarify the pathophysiology of constipation in children with CIP and to correlate abnormal motility patterns with distinctive clinical presentations or pathology.
Methods
Before each study informed consent was obtained from a parent, and assent was obtained from any subject seven years of age or older.
SUBJECTS
Thirty children, 1.1 to 11.6 years of age (mean age 4.1 years, 18 female), were referred by paediatric gastroenterologists for evaluation of severe symptoms unresponsive to conventional management (Table I).
Duration of symptoms was at least one year in every patient (mean 3.7 years).
All the patients carried a diagnosis of chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction based on recurrent symptoms of bowel obstruction without physical lesion.
Before colon manometry, all underwent antroduodenal manometry to discriminate between disorders of myopathic or neuropathic origin.
Nine patients had a diagnosis based on a small bowel full thickness biopsy (Table II).
From these studies, it was established that 24 children had a neuropathy (mean age 4.4 years) and six a myopathy (mean age 3.2 years).
Eight of the children with neuropathy did not have constipation, diarhoea, or any other symptoms of colonic disease (mean age 4.5 years).
STUDY DESIGN AND INSTRUMENTATION
We prescribed a clear liquid diet for all children during the 48 hours before study.
On the day before study, the patients underwent a preparation for colonoscopy, designed for each patient on the basis of the patient's age, symptoms, and ability to tolerate lavage solutions.
We infused a balanced electrolyte solution (Colyte, Reed, and Carnick, Piscataway, NJ) through a pre-existing gastrostomy or through a nasogastric tube in those able to tolerate enteral feedings.
We used enemas when it was not possible to utilise the enteral lavage.
No additional colonic preparation was used on the morning of the study, and the patients fasted for at least five hours before colonoscopy.
On the day of the study a colonoscopy was performed with minimal air insufflation and minimal sedation (midazolam (0.05 mg/kg) intravenously).
After reaching the mid-transverse colon, a soft tipped teflon biliary guidewire (length 480 cm, diameter 0.052 cm; Wilson-Cook, Wilson-Salem, NC) was inserted through the colonoscope.
The guidewire was positioned in the transverse or ascending colon and the colonscope was withdrawn, leaving the guidewire in position.
A seven lumen manometric catheter, with recording orifices radially oriented and spaced 15 cm apart (Arndorfer Medical Specialities, Greendale, Wis), was then advanced over the guidewire.
The guidewire was removed and the catheter taped to the patient's thigh.
The subjects were placed supine under a gamma camera and we waited at least one hour to allow the patients to recover from the procedure.
The position of the manometric catheter was confirmed on the persistence oscilloscope of the gamma camera by introducing into the catheter, via the proximal recording orifice, 2 ml of 0.9% NaCl solution containing 4 MBq (0.1 mCi) of 9 9 m Tc DTPA.
This marker remained in the catheter until it was removed by aspiration after confirmation that the recording sites were in the distal half of the transverse colon, the splenic flexure, the descending colon, the sigmoid colon, and the rectum.
The catheters were continuously perfused at 0.1 ml/min with distilled water by a low compliance capillary system (Arndorfer Medical Specialties).
Pressure was transmitted to tranducers (Statham P231A, Statham Instruments, Oxnard, CA) and recorded on a rectilinear recorder (Beckman R611, Beckman Instruments, Inc, Fullerton, CA) and on a personal computer system.
After at least 120 minutes of fasting recording, the patients were fed.
The complex liquid meal was designed for each patient on the basis of age and current mode of nutritional support.
In those enterally fed (n=18) we gave 240 ml of whole milk or infant formula.
In those on parenteral nutrition (n=12) we gave the maximum amount of milk the patients were able to ingest without symptoms, and at the end of the test we emptied the gastric content via their gastrostomies.
The minimum volume given to each patient was 90 ml.
The two groups of constipated and non-constipated children received a simiar amount of milk (190 (10) ml v 210 (13) ml respectively).
Each subject's upper body was tilted slightly to provide comfortable drinking.
Each subject was asked to consume the meal in less than 10 minutes.
We recorded motility for at least 90 minutes after the meal.
STUDY EVALUATION
Motor activity
A colonic motility index was calculated with a compterised programme, by measuring the area under the pressure records for the 60 minute period immediately preceding and the 60 minute period immediately after completion of the meal.
The motility index was expressed as mm Hg/ min.
The motility indices obtained from the different recording sites were averaged to obtain only one basal and one postprandial motility index for each patient.
Only contractions greater than 5 mm Hg were included in the analysis.
Patterns of colonic motor contractions were identified visually.
Movement artefacts gave rapid fluctuations that occurred simultaneously at all recording sites and were easily differentiated from colonic contractions and discarded from analysis.
Non-propagating contractions were defined as contractions that did not propagate at least 15 cm between the recording ports.
Propagating contractions were those that appeared at adjacent recording sites within 30 seconds of each other.
These were defined as antegrade or retrograde based on their aborad or orad propagation respectively.
High amplitude propagated contractions (HAPCs) were defined as contractions with amplitude of at least 100 mm Hg in at least two recording sites, propagating for at least 30 cm (over three or more recording sites).
Statistical analysis
The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to compare the differences between motility index during the baseline period and postprandial period.
A χ 2 test was used to compare percentage of children with and without HAPCs in the different groups of patients.
Results are expressed as mean (SEM).
Results
Table III summarises the results.
Twenty two patients had colonic contractions during fasting and after the meal.
Two children had contractions only after feeding.
In six subjects there were no contractions during the entire study.
Sixteen children had both propagated and non-propagated contractions, one had only propagated contractions and the other seven only non-propagated contractions.
Retrograde contractions were recorded in four constipated and in one non-constipated patient.
HAPCs (Fig 1) constituted 57% of the propagated contractions.
When HAPCs were excluded fromthe propagated contractions there was no difference in the percentage of propagated and non-propagated contractions in the group of patients with and without constipation.
In 65% of episodes, HAPCs were associated with the passage of flatus, or stool, or both.
In most cases, HAPCs began from the most proximal recording site and migrated to the sigmoid region.
Only 21% of HAPCs propagated to the rectum.
Mean speed of propagation of the HAPCs was 0.9 (0.3) cm/s (range 0.5–2.2 cm/s).
All eight children in the non-constipated group had contractions in both fasting and fed states.
The postprandial colonic motility index increased significantly, when compared to basal values, in this group of children (3.2 (0.3) mm Hg/min basal v 8.4 (1.1) mm Hg/min postprandial, p).
There was no correlation between volume or caloric content of the meal (analysed as ml/kg and Kcal/kg) given to the patient and the increase of his postprandial motility index.
All non-constipated subjects had HAPCs within 30 minutes after beginning the meal.
They averaged 3.6 HAPCs during the first 60 minutes after the meal (range 1–12).
Three of eight subjects also had HAPCs during fasting.
Postprandial HAPCs were found only in four of 16 subjects with neuropathic disorders, a significant decrease compared with the non-constipated group (p)(Fig 1).
No patient with neuropathy had HAPCs during fasting.
There was no difference in the speed of HAPCs between patients with neuropathy and non-constipated patients.
The presence of HAPCs had a 67% predictive value for not having constipation and the absence of HAPCs had a 100% predictive value for having constipation.
There were no manometric features in the fasting motility that differentiated the patients without constipation from those with neuropathy and constipation.
By contrast with the non-constipated subjects, the patients with neuropathic constipation had no significant increase in their postprandial motility index (2.1 (0.3) mm Hg/min basal v 3.1 (0.4) mm Hg/min postprandial, NS).
A twofold increase in motility index after the meal was present in two patients with neuropathy and in all non-constipated patients (2/16 v 8/8, p).
Although four patients with neuropathy and constipation had HAPCs and two had a two fold increase in motility index after the meal, no patient with neuropathy had both these features.
The six children with myopathy had no contractions at any time.
Therefore their motility index was zero before and after the meal.
The absence of contractions throughout the entire study distinguished subjects with myopathy from the non-constipated group and from the patients with neuropathy.
Two patients in the non-constipated group had, during fasting, a rectal motor complex (RMC), a cluster of contractions at a rate of 7–9/ min found only in the rectum (Fig 3).
There were no adverse events during the studies.
Discussion
In this study we investigated colonic motility in children with chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
We divided the study population into two groups: subjects with symptoms suggestive of involvement of the entire gastrointestinal tract, and subjects with disease limited to the stomach and small intestine.
All the children had physiology of their upper tract involvement clarified by antroduodenal motility studies and in some cases by full thickness surgical biopsies.
Both methods differentiate myopathic from neuropathic pseudo-obstruction.
We assumed no colonic involvement in the patients without constipation.
Although this group of non-constipated patients does not constitute a truly normal population, a history of regular bowel movements, an increase in the motility index after a meal, and the presence of HAPCs suggest normal colon motility.
These same characteristics were found in children with functional faecal retention, a condition common in the school age child, in which physiology of the colon is believed to be normal and constipation results from retentive behaviour by a child who is afraid of painful defecation.
In CIP oesophageal manometry is abnormal in more than 50% of children, antroduodenal manometry is abnormal in virtually all, but anorectal manometry is normal.
Thus until this study there was no clear explanation for constipation in CIP.
Finding what we believe to be normal colon motility in children without constipation and abnormal upper gastrointestinal motility suggests that in some children CIP does not involve the colon.
We used a standardised manometric technique for measurement of luminal pressures.
This technique has been utilised successfully in adults to elucidate the pathophysiology of constipation, diarrhoea, and as a clinical test to determine the severity of colonic motility disorder in symptomatic patients.
The absence of a repetitive, frequent, easily recognisable motor pattern in the colon may be one of the reasons for the lack of data on colon motor activity in paediatric patients.
The interdigestive cycle of motor activity, or migrating motor complex, starts from the lower oesophagus and migrates but ends in the terminal ileum.
Recently, a rectal motor complex that is not synchronous with or related to the migrating motor complex was reported.
We found rectal motor complexes in two children.
We chose to place the manometric catheter into the transverse colon.
As the splenic flexure is an anatomical region easily reached and identified by an experienced endoscopist, we found easy access to this region and then advanced either the endoscope or the guidewire into the transverse colon.
In this way all the procedures were short in duration and were performed with minimal sedation.
Because there is little motor activity in the healthy colon during sleep, sedation was minimised and we waited until the patient was awake before starting the testing.
After the catheter placement, we used a radioactive marker to delineate the catheter position and recording sites.
Eating is an important stimulus for colonic motility in healthy human subjects.
Healthy adults exhibit an increase in colon motility beginning 20 to 40 minutes after a meal, known as the gastrocolonic response.
In this study, most of the patients with severe constipation failed to increase their motility index after eating.
In adults the gastrocolonic response is absent in the early stages of progressive systemic sclerosis.
Absence of the gastrocolonic resp-onse may be an indicator for disease, as well as a contributing factor in the pathogenesis of symptoms.
Although a gastrocolonic response might be documented by placing a catheter in the sigmoid colon, it should be noted that many HAPCs do not propagate to the distal colon and would be missed by studies of the sigmoid and rectum alone.
The presence of HAPCs was suggestive of normal colonic function; HAPCs were found after meals in all non-constipated subjects, but not in patients with myopathy or in most patients with neuropathy.
The visual identification of HAPCs was easy because of their high amplitude (which did not overlap with the other contractions) and their unequivocal propagation over at least three recording sites.
Often one HAPC was followed by other HAPCs at three to four minute intervals in the postprandial period.
This is in accord with data previously reported in normal adults.
We found a much higher number of HAPCs in children than previously reported in adults.
It is possible that the highly artificial experimental condition could hav eplayed a part in increasing the number of HAPCs.
The absence of normal colonic content, the water infusion through the manometry catheter, and the presence of a semirigid foreign body could have triggered more HAPCs than would be recorded in an undisturbed bowel.
It is also possible that an increased number of HAPCs correlates with the increased number of bowel movements commonly found in infants and children.
The HAPCs are thought to be the manometric equivalent of the mass movements seen during radiological studies although not all HAPCs are associated with mass movements.
It is not clear what initiates HAPCs.
There is some evidence that HAPCs can be induced by distension of the lumen or by luminal irritants such as olive oil and bisacodyl.
In the evaluation of CIP in childhood, colon manometry complements the radiopaque marker test.
The last often reveals the site of functional obstruction and can differentiate among colonic inertia, hindgut dysfunction, and outlet obstruction.
Manometry distinguishes between myopathy, neuropathy, and normal colonic function.
There were no contractions recorded from children with myopathy.
We assume that contractions were totally absent or failed to occlude the intestinal lumen.
It is possible that a dilated colon would generate only very low amplitude contractions that are not distinguished during manometric studies.
In colonic neuropathies contractions were present, but their gastrocolonic response was absent and there were fewer HAPCs.
Scintigraphy is a less invasive approach to the study of bowel motility than manometry.
It allows the study of regional transit of solids in the unprepared human colon without the need for colon intubation.
There are limitations to the use of scintigraphy in children with pseudo-obstruction, such as the very long transit time for orally ingested capsules to reach the colon, the impossibility of peroral cannulation of the right colon, and the poor patient cooperation with lying quietly under a gamma camera.
Also, scintigraphy may not differentiate clearly between neuropathy and myopathy.
In conclusion, colonic manometry is a safe and effective means to evaluate colonic motility in children with CIP.
Colon manometry could be used as a diagnostic tool in selected patients to clarify the pathophysiology of severe clonic motor disorders.
Management of common bile duct stricture caused by chronic pancreatitis with metal mesh self expandable stents
Abstract
Twenty patients with chronic pancreatitis and signs of biliary obstruction were treated by endoscopic placement of self expandable metal mesh stents, and followed up prospectively.
Eleven had been treated previously with plastic endoprostheses.
All had persistent cholestasis, seven patients had jaundice, and three overt cholangitis.
Endoscopic stent placement was successful in all cases.
No early clinical complication was seen and cholestaris, jaundice or cholangitis rapidly resolved in all patients.
Mean follow up was 33 months (range 24 to 42 months) and consisted of clinical evaluation, ultrasonography, and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).
In 18 patients, successive ERCPs and cholangioscopies have shown that the metal mesh initially embeds in the bile duct wall and is rapidly covered by a continuous membrane by three months.
The stent lumen remained patent and functional throughout the follow up period except in two patients who developed epithelial hyperplasia within the stent resulting in recurrent biliary obstruction, three and six months after placement.
They were treated endoscopically with standard plastic stens with one of these patients ultimately requiring surgical drainage.
No patient free of clinical or radiological signs of epithelial hyperplasia after six months developed obstruction later.
This new treatment could become an effective alternative to surgical biliary diversion if further controlled follow up studies confirm the initial impression that self expandable metal mesh stents offer a low morbidity alternative for longterm biliary drainage in chronic pancreatitis without the inconvenience associated with plastic stents.
About 20% of patients with chronic pancreatitis (CP) develop common bile duct (CBD) stenosis and subsequent cholestasis or jaundice.
As biliary obstruction can lead to secondary biliary cirrhosis or recurrent episodes of cholangitis, surgical treatment has been recommended for stricture associated with persistent cholestasis.
Endoscopic biliary drainage using large plastic stents, is an alternative to surgery in the management of these patients, and can rapidly resolve cholestasis, jaundice, and cholangitis.
Longterm results of biliary stenting, however, have been disappointing because stent clogging or migration are responsible for significant morbidity.
For this reason, close monitoring of these patients is required, with stent replacement when necessary.
Moreover, a true recalibration of the biliary stenosis after longterm plastic stenting is rarely achieved even after insertion of multiple 10 French plastic stents.
Also, surgical morbidity related to biliary drainage remains high in these alcoholic and often debilitated patients.
Accordingly, it is reasonable to continue the search for alternative treatments that provide equivalent or better results with lower morbidity.
Self expandable steel braided endoprostheses were first used for the treatment of vascular and urological benign strictures, with good clinical results.
Since then these stents have been used in bile ducts for malignant obstructive jaundice and are placed either percutaneously or endoscopically.
Their use in malignant strictures provides immediate drainage, avoiding the early complications encountered with plastic stents.
The longterm results are impaired, however, by turmoral overgrowth or more frequently by ingrowth through the metallic mesh into the stent, resulting in recurrent jaundice or cholangitis.
As ingrowth and subsequent reocclusion seems to be tumour related, we studied this new treatment method in patients with severe CP and benign symptomatic biliary stricture.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
Between June 1989 and January 1991, 20 patients with CP (mean age: 45 (27–61) years, four women, 16 men), and with signs of persistent biliary obstruction associated with CBD stricture were treated by endoscopic placement of self expandable metallic stents (Wallstent, Schneider SA, Bülach, Switzerland).
All but one were alcoholics.
Eleven of them had been treated previously with size 10 French plastic stents for a mean duration of 15 (2–36) months.
Plastic stents were replaced by metallic stents only in case of clogging or dislodgement.
Formal consent for this new type of treatment was obtained from each patient and the study conformed to our institution's guidelines concerning medical ethics.
Stenosis discovered during ERCP without persistent cholestasis, was not considered an indication for stenting.
The initial indication was, in all cases, CBD stricture associated with at least persistent cholestasis (alkaline phosphatase concentrations greater than twice the normal values for more than three months and not decreasing for more than two weeks).
Seven patients also had jaundice (mean bilirubin values 46 (20–142) mg/l) and three had overt cholangitis at the time of stent placement.
The mean duration of the disease from first diagnosis to the time of first biliary stent placement was 65 months (range 5–180).
Four patients had cholestasis and stricture at the time of the first diagnostic procedure.
Five patients had had previous surgery of the pancreas (3 lateral pancreaticojejunostomies, 2 tail pancreatectomies and 1 cyst-jejunostomy).
TECHNIQUE (FIG 1)
The technique of endoscopic placement of biliary metal mesh stents has been described.
Briefly, after diagnostic ERCP, endoscopic sphincterotomy is carried out with a long nose sphincterotome.
A gude wire is impacted into the intrahepatic ducts, through the stenosis.
The stent carrying double membrane catheter is passed over this guide wire.
The proximal end of the stent is adjusted to be level with the papillary orifice.
The insertion catheter is then pressurised with contrast medium to 75 mm Hg to separate the two membranes.
The outer layer is then progressively withdrawn to permit stent expansion.
Proximal realignment remains possible as long as the stent is not completely opened.
The delivery catheter is then removed and a final opacification of the CBD is performed to assess the quality of drainage.
A 34 mm long stent was used in all cases.
The internal diameter becomes 10 mm after full expansion.
This length was adapted to the intrapancreatic choledocus leaving the proximal common bile duct free.
The stent covered the entire stricture in each case and, as only the distal intrapancreatic portion of the CBD was stented with this unremovable material, it should not interfere with a possible future hepaticojejunostomy or choledocoduodenostomy.
No dilatation was performed before or after insertion of the metal mesh stent whose complete expansion is spontaneously achieved after five days.
This was seen in the first five patients treated, by serial cholangiographies through indwelling nasobiliary catheters.
FOLLOW UP
Patients were prospectively evaluated one month after stenting, by clinical examination, laboratory tests, ultrasonography, and ERCP.
Thereafter, ultrasonography and laboratory tests were done every three months and ERCP every six months, during the two first years of follow up.
These examinations were done on an ambulatory basis and patients were readmitted only in case of recurrent cholestasis or cholangitis.
All the patients were seen in consultation and laboratory tests performed at the end of the presently reported follow up.
Results
CBD strictures corresponded to the type I of Caroli and Nora in 11 cases and type III in nine cases.
The morphological appearance of the pancreatitis at ERCP consisted, in all cases, of a distal stricture of the main pancreatic duct with upstream dilatation with or without pancreatic calculi.
We identify this morphology as types IV and V pancreatitis in our classification, these being nearly always encountered in cases of CBD stenosis in our experience.
Two patients had pancreas divisum.
It should be noted that 18 of these patients also had therapeutic endoscopy of the pancreas with the aim at restoring the patency of the pancreatic duct (pancreatic sphincterotomy, extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, with or without stent placement in the main pancreatic duct).
IMMEDIATE
ERCP was successful in all patients and in each case the stent was inserted in the CBD by the endoscopic route, during the same session; there were no sphincterotomy related complications.
We encountered two technical complications: one stent was badly positioned and was left too proximally because of a technical problem during insertion.
It was immediately removed with a snare and replaced with a new one.
Another stent seemed, after six months, to be impacted in the CBD at the site of a sharp angulation.
Clinically no problem was seen but we preferred to place a second stent, more proximally, overlapping the first one, to correct this angulation.
There were no problems of early clogging or dislodgement.
Cholestasis, cholangitis, and jaundice resolved quickly (Fig 2) in all but one patient who continued despite adequate drainage to have slight and persistent cholestasis.
Liver biopsy showed that this patient already had secondary biliary cirrhosis.
LATE
The mean follow up after common bile duct stenting is now 33 months, ranging from 24 to 42 months and is more than two years in all patients (Table, Fig 3).
Eighteen patients have now been followed up for 33 (24–42) months without any biliary problems.
Follow up ERCPs (in all patients) and cholangioscopies (in five patients) have shown the metal mesh to be embedded in the bile duct wall with thickened mucosa growing between the struts of the stent.
At six months, the struts were usually buried by the mucosa, giving the impression of a continuous ‘membrane’ lining the stent.
Its thickness is about 2 mm and the CBD lumen remains largely patent inside the stent (Fig 1).
Two patients (10%) developed epithelial hyperplasia within the stent resulting in recurrent cholestasis for one and jaundice for the other, three and six months after stent placement, respectively (Fig 4).
A second self expanding stent was inserted into the first stent in each case without longterm success, as obstruction occurred again after three months in both.
We then placed two plastic 10 French stents through the metallic stent.
One of these patients (Table; patient 15) required a later hepaticojejunostomy, which was performed without any problem related to the stent in place.
All patients (90%) who were free of obstruction from hyperplasia six months after implantation, remained asymptomatic subsequently.
The two patients who developed stent occlusion as a result of hyperplasia, already had abnormal hyperplasia one month after stenting.
No difference in clinical or morphological features, or both were found in these two patients, compared with the others.
Biopsies performed within the stents showed hyperplastic papillary mucosa covered by biliary or intestinal epithelium.
The microscopic appearance was similar in the two patients with abnormal hyperplasia.
Discussion
Persistent CBD stricture requires treatment when accompanied by a prolonged rise in serum alkaline phosphatase concentration.
This is an extremely valuable marker of significant biliary obstruction, which may lead to the development of hepatic damage and secondary biliary cirrhosis.
In our experience, CBD stricture is seen at ERCP in 30% of patients with severe CP and is associated with persistent cholestasis, jaundice, or cholangitis in 9%.
In published reports, biliary tract obstruction is the primary indication for surgery in about 10% of patients with CP.
In addition, some patients having an operation aimed primarily at relieving pancreatic duct obstruction or resecting a diseased pancreas are also found to have an element of biliary tract obstruction requiring surgical drainage.
Our initial experience of CBD drainage in CP with plastic stents was somewhat disappointing.
Placement of large bore plastic biliary stents was a good initial treatment for cholangitis or jaundice when present.
Longterm results, however, were unsatisfactory because of clogging or dislodgement, and required frequent replacement, which is not acceptable to these often young patients.
Our opinion at that time was that permanent endoscopic biliary drainage in CP should be reserved for patients whose poor clinical condition made an operation unsuitable.
Self expandable biliary stents have been used for palliative treatment of malignant biliary strictures.
All the published results available at this time show that this new material is easy to place and avoids most of the early stent related complications — that is, early clogging or dislodgement.
The internal diameter of these stents is 10 mm, which is three times the diameter of the largest plastic stents.
To our knowledge, early clogging or dislodgement has not been reported.
The initial enthusiasm concerning longterm patency of these stents in malignancies, however, has diminished because of frequent obstruction because of tumour ingrowth through the metallic struts, or tumour overgrowth.
As obstruction in these cases is because of the tumoral process itself, we postulated that their longterm patency in benign biliary strictures was likely to be better.
This was suggested by a report of the preliminary results of mesh stent implantation in postsurgical biliary stenosis.
With an average follow up of eight months, no cases of reobstruction were seen in seven patients.
These results are, however, probably too optimistic as a few cases of reocclusion by hyperplasia through the mesh have been reported with metallic stents placed either percutaneously or endoscopically (C Liguory, personal communication) for postsurgical CBD strictures.
We chose to treat patients with CP associated biliary strictures with these devices for two reasons.
The first is that we have a large number of patients with a good follow up in our institution and we are reluctant to propose surgery only for biliary diversion when there isnot yet an indication for pancreatic drainage, as repeated surgery is associated with higher morbidity.
The second is that the CBD stricture is always distal allowing for the use of comparatively short (34 mm) mesh stents.
Indeed, as these stents are not removable and because we are treating patients with benign disease, we did not want to compromise a potential surgical biliary diversion.
As the stent is left in the distal part of the CBD, a future hepaticojejunostomy or choledochoduodenostomy still remains possible as was shown in one of our patients.
The potential for malignant transformation at the site of implantation as a result of chronic irritation from the metal remains a theoretical problem worthy of consideration.
Clearly, this study cannot provide a definitive answer.
Surgeons, however, have used metallic implants such as clips and automatic sutures for a long time without any such complication reported.
It seems therefore that implanted metal despite a potential to induce fibrosis or inflammation, has not been responsible for malignancy.
Also reassuring are animal studies in which these stents have shown excellent biological tolerance and no dysplastic changes have been noted.
Ninety per cent of stents remain patent at three years and when abnormal hyperplasia occurs, resulting in stent occlusion, it occurs during the first six months.
Two of our 20 patients required further biliary drainage.
Epithelial hyperplasia is a constant finding in the presence of these stents, probably resulting from mechanical irritation.
The reason why it becomes more pronounced in some patients remains unanswered.
In the two cases of reobstruction, the pattern mimicked the previous stricture, suggesting that the radial force exerted by the mesh on the wall may have led to deeper embedding of the mesh where the stricture was tight or may have provoked more important hyperplasia, or both.
This may partially explain the better results seen here compared with those obtained with metal stents in postsurgical strictures.
In these cases, the stricture is short and tight and the radial force exerted by the individual wires at the level of the stricture is therefore higher.
The lower end of the stent must be level with the papilla to avoid the presence of metallic mesh within the duodenum and must extend over the entire stricture.
In the event of misplacement, as we saw in one patient, immediate removal is possible.
Where there is sharp angulation of the CBD, the upper part of the stent should be 1 cm above or 1 cm below the angulation, but not at the point of angulation itself, to avoid impaction of the metallic mesh in the CBD wall and possibly further impaired drainage.
Within a month of placement, the metallic mesh embeds into the bile duct wall and, after three months, the struts are buried by the mucosa, giving the impression of a continuous membrane covering the inner stent.
This finding is comparable with animal studies, where implantation of metal stents is followed by mucosal hyperplasia through the space between the struts, which finally are buried by the mucosa.
This finding is suggestive of destruction of the original mucosal layer during expansion with subsequent healing and proliferation.
‘Clogging’ of these stents by material comparable with the one seen in plastic stents has not been seen, probably because of both a larger diameter of the lumen and the nature of the stent's inner lining after re-epithelialisation.
Longer follow up and possibly controlled clinical trials are needed to determine if metal stents have the potential to become the first choice treatment for persistent, symptomatic CP associated biliary stricture.
This study suggests, however, that these may be a satisfactory low morbidity alternative to biliary surgery providing efficient prolonged biliary drainage, without the usual complications and discomfort associated with plastic stents.
Detection of subclinical autonomic neuropathy in constipated patients using a sweat test
Abstract
Chronic idiopathic constipation may be the result of an autonomic neuropathy.
This hypothesis was tested in 23 constipated patients and 17 age matched controls, using the acetylcholine sweat spot test devised to test autonomic integrity is diabetes.
Acetylcholine (0.01%) was injected in the dorsum of the foot painted with a mixture of starch and iodine.
Active sweat glands appeared on the surface of the skin as small black dots which were photographed and counted, using a grid with 60 subaeras.
Two measurements were made: the number of dots per unit subarea (sweat spot test score) and the % number of abnormal subareas (with less than six spots).
These two parameters were correlated.
The median sweat spot test score was 9.53 in patients and 13.92 in controls (p=0.0001), the receiver operating characteristic curve showing that a score of 12 delimited normal and abnormal subjects.
Increasing age was correlated with a low score in patients, probably because of prolonged symptoms.
Seventy per cent of patients and one control had a borderline or abnormal number of subareas.
These results suggest that idiopathic constipation is associated with a degree of autonomic denervation.
The sweat spot test is an easy, inexpensive method to test this hypothesis and should have a place in the clinical assessment of slow transit constipated patients.
An intact autonomic nervous supply to the bowel is essential for normal function.
Damage to one of both branches of the autonomic nervous system as a result of trauma, neoplasia, diabetes, infectious diseases, or neuronal degenerative diseases frequently leads to various gut motility (and secretory) problems, the most common being chronic constipation.
For many patients with severe chronic constipation no cause can be found, hence the condition is labelled as idiopathic.
Chronic idiopathic constipation, however, is often associated with other motility disturbances involving multiple organs, suggesting an underlying systemic disease of the autonomic nervous system.
Previous attempts to detect an early autonomic neuropathy in these patients, based on the conventional cardiovascular tests suggested by Ewing and Clark, have given inconsistent results, probably because of their poor sensitivity and specificity.
Sympathetic denervation has also been assessed by investigating sweating ability in patients with unexplained gut dysmotility using the thermoregulatory sweat test and quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test.
These tests require complex procedures, however, and specialised equipment which are not always readily available.
A new test of autonomic integrity, the acetylcholine sweat spot test.
has recently been claimed to be more sensitive than conventional tests, and realiable for quantification of the severity of autonomic nervous system damage.
The aim of this study is to investigate whether a subclinical impairment of the autonomic nervous system is present in patients with slow transit idiopathic constipation, and whether it has a possible role in the pathogenesis of this motility disorder.
Methods
PATIENTS
Twenty three patients (21 women, median age 42 years, range 28 to 78) with severe chronic idiopathic constipation entered the study.
Severe chronic constipatiown was defined as constipation without bowel obstruction, lasting for more than 18 months, not responding to high fibre diets, with less than two bowel movements per week and without an alternating bowel habit (diarrhoea and constipation).
Each patient had a proctometrogram to exclude Hirshsprung's disease and an integrated dynamic defecography to identify anismus or other relevant anorectal abnormalities.
A radiopaque marker test showed that all patients had delayed colonic transit, which was confirmed in 11 patients by a radioisotope transit study.
Nine patients had a partial or total colectomy for constipation before this study.
CONTROLS
Seventeen age matched healthy volunteers (12 women, median age 42 years, range 28–69) served as controls.
The exclusion criteria for the selection of controls were constipation or other gastrointestinal problems.
The acetylcholine sweat spot test was carried out injecting 0.1 ml of a 1% solution of acetylcholine (Miochol — CooperVision Ltd, Southampton, UK) intradermally using a 25 gauge needle in a marked area of the dorsum of the foot which had previously been painted with a 2% alcholic iodine solution and a suspension of maize starch in arachis oil (100 g in 100 ml).
The reaction between sweat, iodine, and starch could be seen about four to five minutes later as fine black dots corresponding to functioning sweat glands (Fig 1).
The marked skin area was photographed and the number of dots counted from a projected negative magnified 10 times on a screen using a 20×20 cm grid (64 subareas) centred on the injection site.
The number of dots included in each 2.5×2.5 cm subarea of the grid were counted, excluding the four central subareas around the site of injection.
The dots touching the upper and left side borders of each subarea were counted while those on the lower and right side were ignored.
For 21 subjects (16 patients and five controls) the count was made at different times by three independent observers, two of whom were unaware of the diagnosis.
The final value obtained for statistical analysis corresponded to the median of the three observed values for each patient.
The test took about 10 minutes to complete and counting the dots on the photo required 10 to 20 minutes.
As suggested by Ryder and coworkers the occurrence of five (8.3%) or more subareas with less than six dots was chosen as the criterion for abnormality.
The mean number of dots/subarea (sweat spot test score) was also recorded for each subject.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The Mann-Whitney U test was used in the comparison of the sweat spot test scores between patients and controls, and Fisher's exact test for the analysis of abnormal subareas.
The effect of a confounding factor such as age, and the relationship betweenm the number of abnormal subareas and the sweat spot test score were analysed using the Spearman correlation coefficient (rho) with correction for ties.
The reliability of the method was also investigated by measuring the level of agreement between observers using the K-statistic.
The subjects were allotted to three arbitrarily defined categories for both the sweat spot test score (>, 11–9.5, <) and the percentage number of abnormal subareas (0, 0–0.033, >).
This was believed necessary, because random agreement between three observers for only two categories — that is, normal/abnormal — is very likely to occur, making results difficult to evaluate.
The sensitivity, specificity, and efficiency of the sweat spot test were calculated for both the sweat spot test score and the percentage number of abnormal subareas, and receiver operating characteristic curves were drawn for both parameters.
Results
The median sweat spot test score in patients (9.53, range 1.20 to 13.4) was significantly lower than in controls (median 13.92, range 9.95 to 21.5, p=0.0001, Fig 2).
In controls the distribution of dots on the skin surface appeared to be uniform (Fig 1) whereas patients had a more piatchy distribution (Fig 3).
There was no significant difference in age between the group of 23 patients (median age 42, range 28–78) and the 17 controls (median age 42, range 28–69).
In the control group there was no correlation between age and the sweat spot test score while in patients there was a moderate but significant negative correlation, older patients having a lower sweat spot test score (rho=0.45, p=0.035, Spearman correlation coefficient).
The number of abnormal subareas — that is, those subareas containing fewer than six dots — were also analysed for differences between the two groups.
Because of blurring of the photographic image caused by focusing difficulties in some subjects, the number of subareas where counting was possible was less than the maximum of 60.
In order to compare the number of abnormal subareas observed in the two groups the results were normalised.
According to Ryder's classification, the presence of abnormal subareas of 0.083 (five of 60) or higher was considered to show a degree of autonomic impairment.
A result of two to four abnormal subareas (0.033–0.067) were defined as being borderline.
Eleven of 23 patients and none of the controls had more than 0.083 abnormal subareas (p, Fisher's exact test).
Five patients and one control fell into the borderline category.
The Spearman correlation test showed a significant correlation (p=0.0001, rho=-0.85) between the number of abnormal subareas and the sweat spot test score for all subjects (Fig 4).
When the patients were analysed as a separate group, the correlation between the sweat spot test score and the % number of abnormal subareas was also significant (p=0.0001, rho= -0.91).
In the 21 subjects in whom the number of seat glands were counted by three independent observers, the correlation between their observations were assessed.
The K value was 0.81 (z=11.83, p) for the agreement on the sweat spot test score and 0.78 (z=10.65, p) for the agreement on the abnormal subareas.
The receiver operating characteristic curve is illustrated in Figure 5.
The highest efficiency (83%) occurs with an sweat spot test score of 12 for the demarcation of normal from abnormal subjects (sensitivity 0.83, specificity 0.82).
For the abnormal subareas the highest efficiency was with a percentage of abnormal areas of 0.033 or more (sensitivity 0.65, specificity 1.0).
Discussion
The aetiology of chronic idiopathic constipation is uncertain, and attempts to cure it have given poor results.
Surgical treatment of severe chronic constipation not responding to medication had an inconsistent and unsatisfactory outcome, resulting sometimes in intractable diarrhoea requiring a definitive terminal ileostomy or in persistence of abdominal pain, bloating, and discomfort.
The mechanisms underlying constipation have been investigated.
Involvement of endogenous opioids and their receptors in the regulation of colonic transit was proposed by Kreek but further investigation failed to confirm this.
The observation that most of the patients with chronic idiopathic constipation, like the population in our study, are women, has suggested the possible role of a disturbed hormonal environment in the pathogenesis but these findings have not been substantiated.
Psychological factors have also been indicated as a possible cause for some cases of idiopathic constipation, but there is no strong evidence to support this.
Degeneration of intrinsic enteric neurones has also been suggested as a possible cause, but it might be the secondary result of long lasting bowel distension and laxative abuse.
Impairment of the autonomic nervous system was proposed as a cause of bowel motility dysfunction as early as 1928.
The observation that constipation is frequently associated with other subclinical or clinically evident motility disorders of the bladder, oesophagus, ileum and that it is a common bowel disturbance in diseases involving the autonomic nervous system suggests the existence of a relationship between autonomic neuropathy and constipation.
An early neuropathy may be present without major disturbances such as orthostatic hypotension, impotence or urinary incontinence, but it may be enough to disturb the fine regulation of gut motility, causing slow transit constipation.
The cardiovascular tests conventionally used for detecting sympathetic autonomic neuropathy may not be adequate to detect a mild, otherwise asymptomatic neuropathy.
Impairment of sweating is associated with various manifestations of autonomic neuropathy with and without the presence of other symptoms such as postural hypotension.
Sweat regulation has been used as a test of autonomic nervous system function in diabetics since 1942.
Camilleri and Fealey, recently using the thermoregulatory test and a quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test, showed in eight patients with gastrointestinal proglems that an idiopathic autonomic denervation may be an aertiological factor in non-organic intestinal dysmotility.
All these patients had patchy anhidrosis and two had positive cardiovascular tests.
INTERPRETATION OF THE SWEAT SPOT TEST RESPONSE
The intradermal injection of acetylcholine is effective in stimulating sweat glands because acetylcholine, and not noradrenaline, is the post ganglionic sympathetic neurotransmitter in sudomotor fibres.
In the presence of exogenous acetylcholine a normal sweat response should therefore be expected even if nerve degeneration precludes adequate transmitter release.
Normal response to the test, however, still depends on an intact nerve supply.
Acetylcholine is known to be cotransmitted with vasoactive intestinal polypeptide at the synapse between the sympathetic nerve and the sweat gland, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide probably being responsible for the local vasodilation which is necessary for a normal sweat response.
We suggest that the presence of acetylcholine alone will not provide an adequate stimulus for the sweat response in the event of nerve degeneration, as the full response requires the combined action of both transmitters, provided that the receptors remain intact after nerve degeneration.
There is no evidence to suggest that sweat glands and their receptors remain unchanged after nerve degeneration.
In fact, the sweating response to acetylcholine is reported to diminish gradually (one to two years) after denervation.
It is, therefore, possible that in the presence of an autonomic neuropathy of long duration the number of working sweat glands decreases and their distribution becomes irregular.
In the original sweat spot test the foot was chosen because, impairment being more likely to occur in longer nerve fibres, the lower extremities would be the first to be involved in diabetic autonomic neuropathy.
Although this theory has not been tested in other forms of autonomic neuropathy, we have assumed that the same holds true in cases where constipation was associated to a degree of autonomic neuropathy.
The sensitivity of the sweat spot test derived from the receiver operating characteristic curve is rather low at 83%.
The most likely explanation is that these constipated patients are a heterogeneous group including patients without autonomic nervous system dysfunction, whose loss of peristaltic activity might instead be the result of intrinsic nerve damage or other motility disorder.
A score of 12 on the sweat spot test response appears to be the delimiting number between normal and abnormal subjects in this population.
The curve for abnormal subareas has a limited sensitivity, but the specificity is high at 1, for a scoring of 3% of abnormal subareas, which is the demarcation set by Ryder as a departure from normality.
This study suggests some degree of idiopathic autonomic denervation in patients with slow transit constipation.
As with Ryder's findings in diabetics with autonomic neuropathy, most patients with slow transit constipation had a patchy anhidrosis and a number of working glands significantly below normal controls.
In these patients, even when the number of glands was normal, their distribution was not uniform.
The significant decrease in sweat spot test score with increasing age would indicate that age is an influential factor in the response to the sweat spot test.
There is a reported reduction both in the number of active sweat glands and in the secretory output of each gland with increasing age, a phenomenon which is not the result of a failure of the autonomic control of sweating but partly to trophic changes which occur with age in human skin.
The correlation observed between age and loss of sweating ability, however, is only significant in subjects who are more than 70 years old, and only one of our patients was over 70.
In the present study, controls were matched for age with the patient group, and as with Ryder's normal subjects, no relationship was shown between age and sweat spot test score in the control group.
The decrease in spot density with age observed in patients with constipation is not therefore an age related factor, but is most probably related to the duration of the symptoms as most had been constipated for many years.
The loss of sudomotor function seen in constipated patients in this study would at first indicate a degree of impairment of the sympathetic nervous system which would result in the loss of inhibitory tone on gut smooth muscle.
This would consequently lead to increased motility because parasympathetic activity would be unopposed by diminished sympathetic activity.
Increased motility does not necessarily result in increased propulsion, however.
Constipating drugs such as opioids increase motility while inhibiting propulsive activity, and abnormal hypermotility patterns have been reported to occur in the irritable bowel syndrome and constipation.
We can speculate that increased excitability of the smooth muscle in the bowel because of failure of the inhibitory sympathetic modulation of parasympathetic activity could result in increased mixing and segmental activity of the colon with impaired coordination of peristaltic activity.
If an autonomic neuropathy is present, it is unlikely that a selective sympathetic impairment would occur in the presence of normal parasympathetic function.
The decreased sweating function and slow transit constipation seen in our patients could be a consequence of a mild cholinergic dysautonomia, rather than a sign of a more prominent sympathetic failure.
Several reports of extreme cases of selective cholinergic dysautonomia identify ileus (or constipation) and loss of sweating as two of the symptoms experienced by those patients.
The extreme complexity of the enteric nervous system with its non adrenergic non-cholinergic neurones and its connections with the autonomic nervous system and higher neural centres precludes a simple explanation for the effects of autonomic neuropathy on constipation.
In conclusion, idiopathic constipation may well be an early manifestation of an otherwise asymptomatic systemic neuropathy.
The acetylcholine sweat spot test is an easy, inexpensive, time saving test for detecting autonomic neuropathy.
It is reliable for the quantification of the severity of nerve damage and deserves a place in routine clinical assessment of slow transit constipated patients.
Inappropriate expression of blood group antigens on biliary and colonic epithelia in primary sclerosing cholangitis
Abstract
The distribution of carbohydrate antigens of the ABO, Lewis and Kell systems was examined in biliary and colonic epithelial of 11 patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) using a panel of 11 monoclonal antibodies.
Controls consisted of 27 liver biopsy specimens (11 normal, six alcoholic liver disease, five extrahepatic obstruction, and five primary biliary cirrhosis) and 24 colonic biopsy specimens (six normal, four Crohn's disease, and 14 ulcerative colitis).
There was inappropriate staining with anti-A (four of six, 66%) and anti-B (nine of 11, 81%) in biliary epithelium of PSC patients compared with normal and disease controls.
Expression of Lewis antigens was increased in patients with cholestatic liver disease.
Ninety one per cent of PSC patients showed a similar pattern of inappropriate staining by anti-A and anti-B antibodies in colonic epithelium compared with 33% of normal and 42% of inflammatory bowel disease controls.
There is inappropriate expression of A and B carbohydrate antigens in biliary and colonic epithelium in PSC.
Whether these oncofetal antigens are implicated in the pathogenesis of this condition is discussed.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disease that often progresses to cirrhosis and death from liver failure or cholangiocarcinoma.2 The aetiology is unknown but evidence suggests that immunological mechanisms may be important in the pathogenesis.
There is an association with the HLA-B8-DR3 haplotyoe, which is associated with other organ specific autoimmune diseases.
In PSC, abnormalities in lymphocyte subsets exist in peripheral blood, there is enhanced autoreactivity of suppressor/cytotoxic T cells from peripheral blood to class II major histocompatability antigens, and aberrant expression of class II antigens on biliary epithelium has been found.
Activated T cells have been shown to be associated with bile duct desctruction.
Abnormalities in humoral immunity, include circulating immune complexes, reduced clearance of immune complexes, and increased complement metabolism have been detected.
Further evidence of immune mediation has come from the finding of circulating, non-organ specific and organ specific antibodies.
PSC is associated with inflammatory bowel disease in between 50 and 75% of cases.
It has been established that the characteristic pattern of expression of certain carbohydrate antigens, including those of the ABO and Lewis systems, is altered in bowel neoplasms, and similar abnormalities have also been shown in ulcerative colitis.
There has recently been interest in the pattern of distribution of these antigens in the biliary epithelium in both normal and diseased livers.
The differential expression of these antigens in the biliary tree, coupled with the known change in their pattern of expression in inflammatory bowel disease, led us to investigate their expression in the biliary and colonic mucosa of patients with PSC.
Since changes in blood group antigen expression in the colon are associated with dysplasia and may be useful in screening for the development of colorectal carcinoma, we were particularly interested to look for a similar association between inappropriate expression of blood group antigens in the biliary tree and biliary dysplasia and cholangiocarcinoma.
Patients and methods
Thirty eight liver biopsy specimens were examined using a panel of 11 monoclonal antibodies raised against carbohydrate antigens of the ABO, Lewis and Kell blood groups.
Eleven patients with PSC were studied.
All had ulcerative colitis that affected the whole colon.
The diagnosis of PSC was established by standard criteria — that is, by persistently abnormal liver enzyme activities, liver histology, and ERCP changes.
The histological grading of the PSC biopsy specimens is shown in Table I. Controls included five normal biopsy specimens, six specimens showing alcoholic liver disease, five extrahepatic obstruction, and five primary biliary cirrhosis.
Clinical details are given in Table I.
Formalin fixed, wax embedded sections were deparaffinised and rehydrated in xylene and ethanol.
The monoclonal antibodies were applied by a three stage indirect immunoperoxidase technique described elsewhere.
The source, immunoglobulin subclass, and dilution of antibody used are shown in Table II.
The dilutions used were those previously established as exhibiting the best ratio of staining to background.
Sections were examined and scored ‘blind’ by two experienced observers, using a scoring system that ranged from negative, through intermediate, to strongly positive (+++).
The distribution of staining (luminal/ cytoplasmic, focal/general) was also noted.
As a further control, an IgG antibody to an unrelated determinant in human liver and colon was used to stain 36 sections of human colon to ensure that there was no non-specific binding of IgG (data not shown).
Unrelated IgM antibodies were not used since most of the blood group monoclonal antibodies used are IgM and several gave completely negative staining, making non-specific binding very unlikely.
The expression of the same carbohydrate antigens was then studied in the colonic epithelium of the 11 patients with PSC.
All 11 patients had ulcerative colitis diagnosed on clinical and colonoscopic criteria, with inflammation affecting the whole colon in all.
for this part of the study controls comprised six normal colonic biopsy specimens and 18 biopsy specimens from inflammatory bowel disease patients (14 with ulcerative colitis and four with Crohn's disease).
Liver function tests were persistently normal in controls, and they were therefore presumed not to have PSC.
ERCP was not performed in these patients.
NEURAMINIDASE TREATMENT
Sections from five patients that were found to show inappropriate expression of blood group antigens in liver and colon were treated with neuraminidase using established protocols in an attempt to see whether digestion of sialic acid residues would abolish staining.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Mean bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase values in PSC patients and both normal and disease controls were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test for non-parametric data.
Results
LIVER HISTOLOGY
Tables III and IV show the distribution of staining with anti-ABH and Lewis antibodies in biliary epithelia and hepatocytes in 38 liver biopsy specimens.
Inappropriate expression of A and B antigens was observed in specimens from PSC patients compared with normal liver biopsy specimens and tissues from other disease groups.
In particular, four of six (66%) blook group O patients showed evidence of inappropriate biliary expression of A antigen (Fig 1(A)).
Two of these also showed some (graded +) staining of hepatocytes.
Nine of 11 (81%) PSC patients showed inappropriate biliary expression of blood group B antigen, seven being graded as + and two as —(Fig 1(B)).
Seven of this group also showed some staining in hepatocytes: four were graded as + and three as -.
The biliary staining was diffuse and cytoplasmic and involved small and large bile ducts in all portal tracts.
In 27 normal and disease control biopsy specimens, one (3.7%) showed very weak inappropriate biliary staining by anti-A antibodies and three (11%) by anti-B antibodies (Table III).
There was no significant difference between PSC and control groups in the frequency of blood groups (O, 45% v 37%; A, 54% v 51%) or in liver function tests undertaken at the time of liver biopsy.
In the 27 normal and disease control biopsy specimens, three (11.1%; one group A, two group O) showed (very weak) staining of hepatocytes with anti-A antibody and six (22%; three group A, two group O, one group AB), showed (weak) staining with anti-B, which was focal in two of the cases.
By contrast, hepatocytes in 28 of 35 specimens (80%) and biliary cells in 21 of 35 (60%) showed positive staining with anti-H antibody.
There was little difference in the intensity of staining of hepatocytes compared with biliary cells with anti-H antibody except in the PSC group where staining was most intense in the hepatocytes.
Table IV shows the result of staining with anti-Lewis antibodies.
Biopsy specimens from cholestatic disease groups (that is, extrahepatic obstruction, primary biliary cirrhosis, and PSC) tended to show stronger expression of Lewis antigens, and especially of Lewis b, than specimens from normal or alcoholic patients.
In specimens from normal or alcoholic patients, expression of Lewis antigens was mainly in small bile ducts and showed a predominantly luminal pattern, while in the cholestatic disease groups, expression was mainly cytoplasmic and was seen in small and large ducts (Fig 1(C) and (D)).
COLONIC HISTOLOGY
Table V shows the results of staining of colonic biopsy specimens with the same monoclonal antibodies in the 11 PSC patients.
The five blood group A patients show thenormal pattern of expression of the A antigen in the proximal colon but loss distal to the splenic flexure.
The six group O patients all show a consistent pattern of inappropriate staining with anti-A (Fig 2(A)).
This is graded as + in five (focal in two) and — in one.
Ten of 11 PSC patients show inappropriate staining with anti-B antibody (Fig 2(B).
This was consistently graded + in all six group O patients, but was focal in three of the four positive group A patients.
The two patients in whom B antigen was not expressed in the biliary epithelium showed B antigen in colonic epithelium, although this was focal in only one.
Lewis a antiben was expressed uniformly throughout the colon.
The expression of Lewis b in the colon was weaker than that observed in the biliary epithelium in almost all patients.
In the normal colonic biopsy specimens (n= 6), two patients showed inappropriate staining (graded as +) with anti-B antibodies.
Both patients were blood group O. These patients also showed some staining with anti-A antibodies (one was graded + and one -).
H antigen was expressed to a varying degree in all biopsy specimens but was weaker in the distal colon.
Lewis a was expressed throughout the colon but expression of Lewis b was less noticeable in the distal colon (Table VI).
Control colonic biopsy specimens were also taken from 18 patients with inflammatory bowel disease (14 with ulcerative colitis and four Crohn's disease).
Six of the 14 with ulcerative colitis (three from group A and three group O) showed some evidence of inappropriate B antigen expression, but in three of these expression was focal, and in another dysplasia was present.
In a fifth, B antigen was expressed strongly in the descending colon, but only weakly in the splenic flexure and the sigmoid colon which suggests that it might have been artefactual.
Of the six ulcerative colitis patients who showed inappropriate staining to anti-B, the three with blood group O also showed some positivity to anti-A, although this was only focal.
One of four patients with Crohn's disease showed inappropriate B antigen expression as well as inappropriate A antigen expression: in both cases the expression was focal.
Lewis a expression was seen throughout the colon, while Lewis B was expressed more strongly in the proximal than distal colon.
Inappropriate staining with antibodies to blood group antigens was therefore seen in the colonic mucosa of 10 of 11 (91%) of PSC patients and in two of six (33%) normal controls and seven of 18 (42%) of disease controls.
NEURAMINIDASE TREATMENT
Treatment of tissue sections with neuraminidase had no significant effect on the expression of Lewis or ABO antigens in the liver or colon.
Discussion
These results show that there is inappropriate staining by antibodies to blood group antigens in the biliary epithelium of most PSC patients compared with normal and disease controls, and that similar inappropriate staining is seen in the colonic epithelium.
In colonic biopsy specimens from normal and colitic controls inappropriate staining is less evident.
Expression of both ABH and Lewis antigens in normal bile ducts, but Lewis antigens only in the smaller bile ductules has been described previousy.
In both chronic and alcoholic hepatitis there is not only a quantitative change in proliferating bile ductules, with both lewis antigens more strongly expressed, but also a qualitative change with expression of a sialylated form of the antigen that is not seen in normal ductules.
We found little staining with anti-A antibodies in the biliary epithelium of the normal and disease control groups, although the H antibodies stained the biliary epithelium well.
We also saw appreciable hepatocyte staining with the anti-H antibody (Table VI) which has not been found previously.
The inappropriate expression of A and especially B antigens in biliary epithelia in PSC is generally accompanied by a similar expression in hepatocytes (Fig 2).
Our finding of increased staining with Lewis antibodies in cholestatic diseases with proliferation of bile ducts, agrees with that of Jinno et al .
The uniform staining with anti-Lewis a throughout the colon, the proximal to distal gradient of anti-Lewis b staining, and the weaker staining with anti-Lewis b than that observed in the biliary epithelium also agree with previous reports.
The biochemical pathways underlying precursor and product relationships in the ABO and Lewis blood group systems are complex and not completely understood.
They are shown schematically in Figure 3.
It is possible that our finding of inappropriate staining with anti-B, and to a lesser extent anti-A, antibodies reflects non-specific binding of the antibodies to carbohydrate epitopes in biliary cells and hepatocytes, although this seems unlikely as it is not seen in other cells.
In patients with blood group A, circulating anti-B antibody will bind to B antigen in the liver and lead to decreased detection of this epitope by the mouse anti-B antibody.
While we found increased expression of blood group B antigen in the patients studied, the levels might be even higher without this possible blocking effect.
Some of the antibodies we used were studied at the international workshop on blood group antibodies at Paris, 1987.
Synthetic oligosacharides coupled to cristalline silica were used as solid immunoabsorbants to assess the degree of inhibition of antibody mediated agglutination.
The B antibodies 16818–2 and BRIC 86 were inhibited by oligosaccharides involving a fucose attached to Β galactose, but not to linear disaccharides or to trisaccharides without the attached fucose.
Similarly, one of the antibodies in the anti-A reagent, 15719, is not inhibited by the Forssman disaccharide or trisaccharide, involving N-acetylgalactosamine instead of galactose in the Β position.
These studies on the fine specificity of structures recognised by blood group antibodies do not completely rule out the possibility that a different epitope could be recognised by the antibodies in the livers and colons of PSC patients.
A more likely explanation, however, is that there is a genuine increase in the activity of the enzymes producing the A and B antigens, namely alpha 1,3 N-acetylgalactoseaminyltransferase and alpha 1,3 galactose transferase.
Figure 3 shows how these enzymes both use the same substrate, the type 1 H chain.
A further enzyme, alpha 1,4 fucosyltransferase, can also act on this substrate to produce the Lewis b antigen but acts on a different substrate to produce the Lewis a antigen.
This study has shown that staining with anti-Lewis a and b antibodies is increased in patients with PSC and other cholestatic diseases compared with normal and alcoholic patients.
This may represent either increased synthesis of the type 1 chain precursor or activation of the Le and Se genes.
In addition, however, there is inappropriate staining with antibodies to A and B antigens in PSC compared with other diseases.
Whether there is upregulation of the genes that produce these antigens or merely a change in expression on the cell surface has not been investigated: in situ hybridisation should provide an answer to this question.
In this context, a recent report that the well documented neoexpression of ABH and Lewis b antigens in colonic cancer is mediated by a higher expression of the enzyme alpha 2 fucosyltransferase may be relevant.
Why should the expression of these carbonhydrate antigens in biliary epithelium be altered in PSC?
Several reports show a change in these and related carbohydrate antigens in inflammatory bowel disease.3 They have been shown to have a characteristic temporal and regional expression in the human embryonic and fetal colon.
In the adult colon A, B, H, and Le b disappear from the distal colon but persist in the proximal colon, while Le a is expressed uniformly throughout the colon.
In cancer, these antigens may reappear in tumours derived from epithelial cells that expressed the antigen only during fetal development, or they may disappear in tumours arising from epithelial cells that normally express the antigen.
They are therefore classes as oncofetal antigens.
A recent study found that 32 of 51 (63%) patients with ulcerative colitis showed some alteration of ABO expression, either re-expression or deletion.
Incompatible ABO expression, although seen in only 6% of patients, seemed to be associated with dysplasia or cancer somewhere in the colon.
This raises the question of whether the high incidence of incompatible blood group antigen expression in PSC may be a marker for developing dysplasia and malignancy in the biliary tract, bearing in mind the well established association between PSC and cholangiocarcinoma.
Neoexpression of ABH and Lewis blood group antigens had been shown in human hepatocellular carcinomas.
It is also possible that patients with inflammatory bowel disease and aberrant expression of blood group antigens in colonic and biliary epithelium are at risk of developing extraintestinal manifestations such as PSC.
To test this, biliary epithelium of inflammatory bowel disease patients without PSC needs to be examined.
Other workers have shown increased expression of the carbohydrate antigen sialyl Lewis X in chronic hepatitis, with an intensity that seems to mirror the severity of the disease, and the same antigen may be associated with tumour.
Sialyl Lewis X is in fact an isomer of sialylated Lewis a, except that the terminal disaccharide of the precursor molecule has a different structure (class 2).
The biosynthesis of type 2 chains seems to be regulated differently to type 1 chains, however, because Lewis X, the type 2 isomer of Lewis a, is not present to any extent in normal rectum.
Thus, it may be the enzymes that work on the synthesis of the type 2 chain core structure that are involved in the abnormal expression of sialyl Lewis X.
We have shown that there is inappropriate staining with antibodies to carbohydrate blood group antigens in both biliary and colonic epithelium of patients with PSC compared with normal and disease controls.
Other reports also suggest that in this disease there are circulating antibodies against antigens common to biliary and colonic epithelia.
Given the presence of circulating antibodies in at least some of our patients (for example anti-A and anti-B in blood group O patients) this study raises the question of whether a change in cell surface antigens, presumably in the form of one or more carbohydrate epitopes affecting both colon and liver, plays a part in the pathogenesis of this condition.
Serum 7χ 2 -hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one concentrations in the evaluation of bile acid malabsorption in patients with diarrhoea: correlation to SeHCAT test
Abstract
The synthesis of bile acids is regulated by a homeostatic mechanism in which bile acids returning to the liver from the intestine inhibit their own synthesis.
Serum concentrations of the bile acid intermediate 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one reflect the rate of bile acid synthesis whereas bile acid malabsorption can be determined by the SeHCAT test.
The present study was done to evaluate the correlation between the two tests in humans.
Twenty eight patients with chronic diarrhoea were included in the study.
Fasting serum was collected for the determination of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one, and on the same day the γ emitting bile acid analogue SeHCAT was given orally and its fractional catabolic rate assessed by repeated external counting over the upper abdomen during the next seven days.
There was a highly significant positive correlation between the two tests (R s =0.80m p).
The results show a close relation between intestinal loss and hepatic synthesis of bile acids and imply that analysis of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one in serum should now be evaluated as a possible convenient method for assessing bile acid malabsorption in patients with diarrhoea.
Bile acids are necessary for the absorption of dietary fats and cholesterol from the intestine.
They are produced in the liver from cholesterol, stored in the gall bladder, and are excreted into the intestine during meals.
More than 95% of the bile acids are then reabsorbed, the major portion by active uptake in the distal ileum.
Malabsorption of bile acids can induce diarrhoea, a symptom common to many intestinal diseases.
In recent years, the SeHCAT test has been used for the determination of bile acid malabsorption.
Selenium-75 homocholic acid taurine (SeHCAT) is a synthetic analogue of the natural conjugated bile acid taurocholic acid with the γ emitting Se in the side chain.
SeHCAT, which is resistant to deconjugation by intestinal bacteria, otherwise behaves like taurocholic acid with regard to enterohepatic cyling, hepatic handling, active absorption from the terminal ileum, faecal excretion, and overall turnover in the enterohepatic circulation.
The rate of synthesis of bile acids is determined by a homeostatic mechanism regulated by the amount of bile acids returning to the liver from the intestine (negative feed back).
Thus patients with significant bile acid malabsorption can be expected to have an increased production of bile acids.
Cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase is considered to catalyse the rate limiting reaction in the biosynthesis of bile acids, converting cholesterol into 7α-hydroxycholesterol.
This sterol is then converted into bile acids via the intermediate 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one (fig 1).
Recent studies have shown that plasma concentrations of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one reflect the cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase activity and bile acid production in the human liver.
The aim of this study was to determine whether there is any correlation between the serum concentration of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one and the result of the SeHCAT test.
If so, analysis of serum 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one may eventually be used to identify bile acid malabsorption in humans.
Methods
PATIENTS AND CONTROLS
The study comprised 28 patients with diarrhoea who were consecutively referred for the SeHCAT test (table).
All of the patients had undergone extensive investigations to evaluate their intestinal function.
After a basal clinical and laboratory evaluation excluding heart, kidney, and liver disease, they were followed closely as outpatients and allowed to continue their normal diet.
Any antidiarrhoeal drugs were stopped at least three days before the SeHCAT test.
On the morning of the SeHCAT test the patients had been fasting overnight.
Blood samples were taken, and after centrifugation serum was separated and stored at -20°C until analysed for 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one.
Twenty nine (19 male, 10 female) normal healthy subjects served as controls for the SeHCAT test and 20 (10 male, 10 female) were studied for comparison of serum 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one concentration.
A basal clinical and laboratory evaluation was done in all subjects to exclude heart, liver, kidney, thyroid disease, and diabetes.
Informed consent to participate in the study was obtained from each patient and control, and the protocol was approved by the ethics committee at Huddinge University Hospital.
SeHCAT TEST
A capsule of SeHCAT (10 µCi, Amersham International) was given orally with a drink of water and the initial count rate (100% value) was measured three hours after the intake of isotope (day 0), by an uncollimated gamma camera (Porta Camera, General Electric Nuclear Medical ApS, Horsholm, Denmark).
The measurements were repeated on days 2, 4, and 7 after the administration of the capsule and the fractional catabolic rate (FCR) of the SeHCAT was calculated.
Further details of the method have been given in a recent paper.
7α-Hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one was analysed as described previously.
Briefly, serum (1 ml) was diluted with two volumes of isotonic saline and extracted on a small column of octadecysilane bonded silica at 64°C.
After a wash with water and 65% aqueous methanol, 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one was eluted with hexane: chloroform, 95:5 (v/v).
Analysis was performed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) on a column (250×4.5 mm) of LiChrospher (Hibar, Si 100, 5 µm, Merck-Darmstadt) connected to a UV detector (254 nm) with hexane:isopropanol, 95:5 (v/v) as the mobile phase.
3 H Labelled 25-hydroxyvitamin D 3 added before extraction and determined in the effluent from the HPLC column, served to correct for losses and differences in injection volumes.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Correlations were evaluated by the calculation of Spearman's correlation coefficient (R s ).
Results
Patients included in the present study had diarrhoea that in some cases was of long duration.
They had all been extensively studied to evaluate the cause of their diarrhoea and the possibility of bile acid malabsorption was studied by the SeHCAT test.
The result of the SeHCAT test was then compared with the serum concentration of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one.
The table summarises the clinical data and results.
There was a wide range of SeHCAT fractional catabolic rates, with 15 patients displaying abnormal values indicating bile acid malabsorption.
Twelve patients had both a pathological SeHCAT test and an increased serum concentration of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one.
Thirteen patients showed a normal SeHCAT test, and 11 of these had normal concentrations of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one.
Thus three patients (16, 17, 18) had borderline pathological SeHCAT tests but normal 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one concentrations, and two patients (4, 11) with normal SeHCAT tests displayed a slightly increased concentration of the bile acid intermediate.
There was a highly significant positive correlation (R s =0.80, p; fig 2) between the two tests.
Ten of the patients were cholecystectomised, five of whom had additional intestinal pathology.
For the cholecystectomised patients without intestinal pathology, three (2, 9, 12) had normal SeHCAT elimination and 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one values whereas two (22, 23) had bile acid malabsorption and a slight increase in bile acid synthesis as measured by the bile acid intermediate.
Twelve of the patients, including 10 with pathological SeHCAT results, were treated with cholestyramine.
Eight responded well whereas four patients including the two with normal SeHCAT values did not respond.
The other two patients who did not show a positive response had lymphocytic colitis (patient 25) and extensive ileal resection (patient 28).
Discussion
Bile acid malabsorption may be involved in the development of chronic diarrhoea in disorders of the terminal ileum, ileal resected patients, and in several clinical conditions including postcholecystectomy, post vagotomy, and functional and idiopathic diarrhoea.
The dihydroxy bile acids, chenodeoxycholic acid and deoxycholic acid, increase intestinal motility and induce net water and electrolyte secretion.
In recent years, the SeHCAT test has been widely used to investigate bile acid malabsorption.
This test is simple and avoids intubation or faecal collection as necessary in other tests.
The elimination of the isotope from the body measured externally by the gamma camera reflects the fractional catabolic rate of the bile acids.
Liver disease may, however, interfere with the SeHCAT results.
Furthermore, the interpretation of the SeHCAT test may be influenced by the presence of bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine.
On the other hand, the serum concentration of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one reflects the bile acid synthesis.
In previous studies it was shown that the serum concentration increases in conditions where there is bile acid loss — for example, after ileal resection and cholestyramine treatment, and decreases where there is decreased bile acid synthesis — for example , in cirrhosis of the liver.
In this study we found a good agreement between the two tests, particularly considering the fact that they measure two different variables — namely, bile acid losses and bile acid synthesis.
The advantages in determining serum 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one concentration are that it is an even simpler method, that only a serum sample is needed, that no radioactivity needs to be used, and that it is less time consuming.
There were a few discrepancies in the results.
It has previously been found that an enhanced bile acid loss may also be the consequence of diarrhoea and increased intestinal transit itself, and bile acid malabsorption is not often likely to be the primary cause of the diarrhoea.
It could so happen that slight bile acid malabsorption may or may not affect bile acid synthesis.
It is also possible that small intestinal overgrowth with deconjugating bacteria was present in some cases, which could counteract a concomitant effect of ileal dysfunction on bile acid synthesis.
Such phenomena may have been present in three of our patints, in whom a slight bile acid malabsorption was found with the SeHCAT test, but in whom there was no increase in bile acid synthesis by the liver.
On the other hand, the SeHCAT value corresponds to a seven day elimination of bile acids, whereas the concentration of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one only reflects the synthesis at a certain time.
As the concentration of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one can vary during the day and acute increases have been found, a better correlation may have been obtained if a serum sample had been taken at more than one occasion from each patient.
Such diurnal variations may possibly explain why two of the patients showed increased bile acid synthesis but normal SeHCAT values.
As substantial interindividual differences in synthesis of bile acids exist, it may be expected that the SeHCAT test could be more sensitive in evaluation of ileal uptake, especially in the borderline case.
At any rate, there were no discrepancies among the patients showing grossly abnormal values for either test.
Both the tests showed similar results in the cholecystectomised patients.
Bile acid malabsorption and increased synthesis of bile acids were even detected in cholecystectomised patients without intestinal pathology.
Contrary to what had been suggested by a previous report, the SeHCAT test may thus be of value also in cholecystectomised patients.
In conclusion, there was a strong positive correlation between circulating concentrations of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one and values obtained with the SeHCAT test in patients with diarrhoea.
This suggests that the determination of the serum concentration of 7α-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one may be useful for the assessment of bile acid malabsorption in such patients.
Future prospective studies should now evaluate the clinical relevance of this method, which, through its analytical simplicity and limited patient efforts, should be open to wide use.
