Increased production of luminol enhanced chemiluminescence by the inflamed colonic mucosa in patients with ulcerative colitis
Abstract
Reactive oxygen species have been implicated as mediators of inflammation in ulcerative colitis.
Chemiluminescence is a reliable means of estimating reactive oxygen species in biological media.
Increased reactive oxygen species values in the inflamed colonic mucosa in rats were seen by chemiluminescence.
The aims of the study were to find out if chemiluminescence is raised in the colonic mucosa of patients with ulcerative colitis and correlates with disease activity, and to elucidate the sources of the chemiluminescence.
It was found that reactive oxygen species, as measured by the chemiluminescence technique, are raised in inflamed colonic mucosa and correlates with symptom score, sigmoidoscopic score, disease activity, and activity of the neutrophil enzyme myeloperoxidase.
Chemiluminescence was inhibited by a myeloperoxidase inhibitor (azide) and an H 2 O 2 scavenger (catalase) but not by allopurinol, an inhibitor of the enzyme xanthine oxidase.
Chemiluminescence was also inhibited by indomethacin, but this did not seem to be related to inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase.
These findings suggest that a likely cellular source of reactive oxygen species in the inflamed colon of patients with ulcerative colitis is the neutrophil and that myeloperoxidase conversion of H 2 O 2 to hypochlorous acid, contributes to the chemiluminescence signal and possibly, to the tissue injury.
Neither cyclo-oxygenase nor lipoxygenase seem to play a part in sources for the chemiluminescence.
Although the cause of ulcerative colitis is unclear, some information is available on its pathophysiology, including several proposed mediators of the inflammation and tissue injury in this disease.
Among such factors are the group of chemicals known as reactive oxygen species that are final common mediators of inflammation and tissue injury in general, and are also thought to play a part in ulcerative colitis.
Chemiluminescence is a simple, sensitive, and reproducible technique that can be used to estimate reactive oxygen species in biological media.
Using chemiluminescence produced by cells and extracts, several investigators have showed the role of reactive oxygen species in different disorders.
In contrast, reports on the use of this technique for tissue reactive oxygen species are very limited.
Using luminol enhanced chemiluminescence of colonic mucosa, we and Simmonds et al have recently shown that reactive oxygen species values are raised in the inflamed colonic mucosa in patients with ulcerative colitis.
These reports followed our earlier study in which we reported similar findings in animals with experimentally induced colonic inflammation.
One potential source for the increased values of reactive oxygen species in inflammatory bowel disease is the neutrophil.
These cells infiltrate into the colonic mucosa and are abundant during the active phase of colitis.
Neutrophils are capable of producing superoxide and a cascade of various reactive oxygen species leading to H 2 O 2 and then, through the myeloperoxidase reaction, to hypochlorous acid.
A second possible source of reactive oxygen species is the xanthine oxidase pathway in colonocytes that also produces superoxide anions by conversion of xanthine/hypoxanthine to uric acid.
A third possible source of superoxide anions and H 2 O 2 is the oxidation of arachidonic acid through either the lipoxygenase reaction (producing leukotrienes) or the cyclo-oxygenase reaction (producing prostaglandins).
This superoxide could then be metabolised further to other reactive oxygen species either in colonocytes or in neutrophils.
Accordingly, the aims of this study were (1) to confirm our previous preliminary finding that chemiluminescence is increased in colonic tissue from humans with active colitis,(2) to determine the cellular and biochemical sources of this chemiluminescence,(3) to identify the particular reactive oxygen species species involved, and (4) to find out if mucosal chemiluminescence is a reliable index of disease activity.
Methods
DESCRIPTION OF SUBJECT POPULATION
The study population consisted of 11 men and 16 women who were not pregnant with a mean age of 41 (range 21 to 70).
All had a diagnosis of ulcerative colitis confirmed by air contrast barium enema, sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy, with previous rectal or colonoscopic biopsies.
Patients with active colitis had clinical symptoms of urgency, loose stools, abdominal pain, and blood in the stool.
These patients were receiving no treatment at the time of mucosal biopsy.
Patients with inactive colitis had no urgency or rectal bleeding and had normal sigmoidoscopic findings.
Their usual drugs, which were either sulfasalazine or oral 5-aminosalicylicacid (5-ASA), were stopped at least 48 hours before mucosal biopsy specimens were taken.
Patients had no cardiac, renal, hepatic, endocrine or metabolic disease — only ulcerative colitis and its sequelae.
Before enrollment into the study, all patients had stopped taking prednisone for at least three weeks, immunosuppressive drugs for at least three months, and sulfasalazine and oral 5-ASA for at least 48 hours.
The control population consisted of 14 volunteer subjects (nine men, five women) with mean age of 44 (range 22 to 72) each of whom had a colon oscopic examination with normal results.
These subjects had an examination for evaluation of occult blood, positive stools or for screening for colon cancer, or both.
To clarify whether the effects of indomethacin were through cyclo-oxygenase, we obtained colonic pinch biopsy specimens from an additional group of six patients with ulcerative colitis for an indomethacin dose response assay.
These studies were approved by the Institutional Review Board for the Protection of Human Subjects at Loyola University Medical Center.
All subjects had voluntarily given written informed consent before the start of the study.
ASSESSMENT OF DISEASE ACTIVITY BY SYMPTOM RATING AND SIGMOIDOSCOPY
Symptoms — Symptoms were graded according to the presence and severity of diarrhoea (0=formed stool; 1=occasional liquid stool; 2= mostly liquid stool; 3=all liquid stool), rectal bleeding (0=no blood; 1=blood with occasional stools; 2=blood with most stools; 3=blood with all stools), abdominal pain (0=none; 1=pain that does not interfere with day to day activities; 2=pain that interferes with day to day activities; 3=incapacitating pain), and urgency (0=no urgency; 1=urgency with occasional stools; 2= urgency with most stools; 3=urgency with all stools).
Sigmoidoscopy — Sigmoidoscopic examination was performed using an Olympus CF-Type P10S flexible sigmoidoscope without sedation.
Mucosal abnormality was graded on a scale of 0 to 3 (0=normal mucosa with no friability; 1= erythematous granular mucosa with pinpoint friability; 2=coarse ulceration or pinpoint ulceration with spontaneous or induced friability; 3=gross ulceration with spontaneous haemorrhage).
Three ‘pinch’ mucosal biopsy specimens were obtained from each patient at 15 to 25 cm from the anus.
Some patients had a repeat biopsy so that more than one in vitro agent could be evaluated.
Disease actvity index was the sum of the symptom score plus the sigmoidoscopy score.
The minimum possible score was 0, the maximum, 15.
CHEMILUMINESCENCE STUDIES
Luminol enhanced chemiluminescence was used to estimate values of reactive oxygen species as previously described by us.
Light was detected by an EMI 9813B photomultiplier in an EMI FACT 50 MK III cooler, cooled to -20°C and operated at 1375 volts.
Single photon pulses were detected with an EMI APED amplifier discriminator (Thorn EMI, Ruislip, England), and these pulses were recorded with a frequency counter.
The photomultiplier was operated in the single photon counting mode.
Biopsy colonic mucosal samples were suspended in 2 ml of oxygenated Krebs-Ringer solution.
The tissue suspension was mixed with the incubation mixture (0.1 M NaCl, 0.05 M phosphate, 0.04 mM luminol, pH 7.6), transferred to 12 mm×75 mm test tubes (total volume=2 ml), and placed in the chemiluminescence spectrophotometer where light production was measured for 1 minute.
At this point various drugs or vehicles were added to the incubation media.
Drugs included azide (100 uM), catalase (2 ug/tube), MK886 (1.1 uM) or indomethacin (100 uM).
Chemiluminescence was again measured for 1 minute.
For the allopurinol studies, a pH value of 11 was required to ensure solubilisation of the drug.
Therefore, we obtained additional mucosal biopsy specimens, divided the tissue samples in half, and placed each half in a Krebs-Ringer solution having a pH 11, one with and one without allopurinol (100 uM).
This was important as alkaline pH values can by themselves increase chemiluminescence.
Suspensions were incubated for 5 minutes at 37°C.
Thereafter, tissues were quickly washed and placed in a mixture containing luminol (pH=7.6) and photons were counted for 1 minute.
The total protein content of the tube was evaluated by the Bradford protein method.
The chemiluminescence data are expressed as cpm per mg protein.
Luminol enhanced chemiluminescence produced by neutrophils and induced by formyl-methionyl-leucyl-proline (FMLP) was also measured in a suspension of neutrophils obtained from control subjects.
The effect of different concentrations of indomethacin (12.5 to 100 uM) on chemiluminescence was determined.
Firstly, neutrophils were freshly prepared in a standard manner as previously described.
Neutrophils (1×10 cells) were then added to tubes containing vehicle or indomethacin (0 to 100 uM) in a total volume of 3 mL.
Formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (FMLP, 0.1 uM) or vehicle was then added.
Lastly, luminol (final concentration=0.4 uM) was added.
Chemiluminescence rates were measured for 1 minute using the same Thorn/ EMI photon counting, chemiluminescence monitor noted above.
Luminol enhanced chemiluminescence induced by the addition of hypochlorous acid to an aquaeous buffer was measured and the effect of indomethacin (100 uM) was determined.
Briefly, 0.5 mL water was placed in a series of test tubes.
For control experiments, 0.1 mL vehicle (ethanol) was then added, followed by 0.9 mL of luminol (4 uM).
Otherwise, 0.1 mL indomethacin dissolved in ethanol was added to a final concentration of 100 uM.
Lastly, sodium hypochlorite (Aldrich) was rapidly and directly added to the measuring chamber using an automatic dispenser, diluting it to a final concentration of 7 uM.
These producers were carried out in a darkened room.
Chemiluminescence was monitored for 10 seconds by the same apparatus described above.
MEASUREMENT OF MYELOPEROXIDASE ACTIVITY IN COLONIC TISSUE
Tissue samples were assessed biochemically for the neutrophil marker enzyme, myeloperoxidase, using the method of Krawisz et al .
Tissue samples were homogenised in 50 mM KH 2 PO 4 /K 2 HPO 4 buffer (pH 6.0) and sonicated (30 seconds) in an ice water bath.
After centrifugation (20000 g ) for 10 minutes at 4°C, the supernatant was discarded and 50 mM KH 2 PO 4 /K 2 HPO 4 buffer containing 0.5% hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide was added to the pellet.
The mixture was homogenised for 30 seconds, diluted with 50 mM K 2 HPO 4 /hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (1 g/ 5 ml), and sonicated for 30 seconds in an ice bath.
The enzyme activities were determined spectrophotometrically.
The enzymatic reaction was started by mixing the sample (0.1 ml) with 2.9 ml of 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 6.0) containing 0.167 mg/ml o-dianisidine dihydrochloride and 0.0005% hydrogen peroxide.
The change in absorbance at 460 nm was measured with a Beckman DU 7 spectrophotometer (Beckman Instruments, Fullerton, CA).
Data are expressed as the change in absorbance (460 nm) between 0 and 2 minutes.
Myeloperoxidase activity data are presented as units per mg protein.
STATISTICAL ANALYSES
For chemiluminescence, the Student's t test was used to detect statistically significant differences between groups.
When the effects of drugs were assessed, a Student paired t test was used.
Correlation data were analysed using the Spearman rank correlation method.
Data are presented as mean (SEM).
A result was considered statistically significant if p≤0.05.
Results
Luminol enhancee chemiluminescence was significantly raised in inflamed mucosa from patients with ulcerative colitis (Fig 1).
The chemiluminescence signal significantly correlated with the severity of colitis as assessed by sigmoidoscopic score (Fig 2A), symptom score (Fig 2B) or disease activity index (Fig 2C).
Sigmoidoscopic and symptom scores also showed a significant correlation with each other(r=0.91).
As expected, mucosal myeloperoxidase activity, an index of mucosal neutrophil infiltration, was also raised in patients with colitis (Fig 3).
Myeloperoxidase activity correlated significantly with disease activity (Fig 4) and with chemiluminescence (Fig 5).
To determine the contribution of myeloperoxidase in mucosal chemiluminescence, an inhibitor of myeloperoxidase activity, azide, was added to the colonic mucosal preparation in vitro.
Azide significantly inhibited (-76%) the chemiluminescence signal (Fig 6).
To determine the contribution of H 2 O 2 , Catalase, a scavenger of H 2 O 2 , which is the substrate for the myeloperoxidase reaction, was added.
Catalase also inhibited (-78%) chemiluminescence (Fig 6).
By contrast, the lipoxygenase inhibitor, MK886, did not significantly affect chemiluminescence (Fig 6).
Also, allopurinol, an inhibitor of xanthine oxidase did not significantly affect chemiluminescence (Fig 6).
A cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor, indomethacin, also significantly decreased the chemiluminescence signal but the magnitude (-34%) was substantially less than the effects of either azide or catalase (Fig 6).
To find out if indomethacin inhibited chemiluminescence through its ability to inhibit the cyclo-oxygenase enzyme or its ability to scavenge oxygen free radicals, a dose response experiment was done.
Indomethacin, at doses that are known to inhibit cyclo-oxygenase, failed to inhibit chemiluminescence production by the inflamed colonic mucosa (Fig 7).
Furthermore, we evaluated the effect of indomethacin on chemiluminescence production by neutrophil after stimulation by FMLP, a system that is not dependent on cyclo-oxygenase.
We showed that indomethacin, dose dependently, inhibited chemiluminescence elicited by stimulation of a suspension of neutrophils by FMLP (Fig 8).
To discover if the inhibitory effect of indomethacin is because of its ability to scavenge HOCl, we evaluated the effect of indomethacin on HOCl production.
Indomethacin, at 100 uM, significantly inhibited chemiluminescence produced by addition of HOCl in the presence of luminol.
The mean cpm in control tubes was 96588 (n=4, SEM= 14117).
The mean counts when indomethacin was present was 39417 (n=4, SEM=13255).
Indomethacin thus elicited a 61% decrease in chemiluminescence (p=0.011).
Discussion
The most disabling feature of ulcerative colitis, a chronic relapsing disease, is episodic acute exacerbation.
During these periods, there is an association between acute inflammation (presence of neutrophils), tissue injury, and signs and symptoms of active disease.
During intervals of remission, subjects are asymptomatic despite the fact that the mucosa is not entirely normal and the putative causal factor(s) are still present.
Hence, identification and characterisation of the mediators that lead to the acute inflammation and tissue injury could have a significant impact on clinical management of patients with colitis.
Among the putative mediators are reactive oxygen species.
Reactive oxygen species seem to play a part in inflammation and tissue injury in a number of diseases and have recently been implicated in the inflammation and tissue injury in the gastrointestinal tract.
Additionally, drugs widely used for the treatment of ulcerative colitis such as sulfasalazine and 5-ASA are known to be potent anti-reactive oxygen species agents.
This study presents evidence, based on chemiluminescence data, that further suggests that reactive oxygen species play a part in ulcerative colitis.
We showed that luminol enhanced chemiluminescence from colonic mucosa biopsy specimens is increased in patients with ulcerative colitis.
Our finding is similar to that of Simmonds et al who also showed an increase in chemiluminescence in ulcerative colitis.
This increase in chemiluminescence is not specific to ulcerative colitis in itself as we have also shown that inflammation of the colon from other causes will also increase chemiluminescence.
For example, we showed that colonic inflammation induced in rats by acetic acid or by mitomycin-c is also associated with an increase in chemiluminescence.
Additionally, Simmonds et al showed increased chemiluminescence in the inflamed colonic mucosa of patients with Crohn's disease.
This study that shows a positive correlation between chemiluminescence and disease activity (sigmoidoscopy, symptoms) suggests that reactive oxygen species play a part in the severity of the inflammation and tissue injury in ulcerative colitis.
Our data suggest, then, that chemiluminescence may be useful as a new marker when determination of the disease activity of ulcerative colitis is desired.
This study confirms our initial preliminary report on increased chemiluminescence in ulcerative colitis in humans and the work of Simmonds et al , as they too showed a positive correlation between chemiluminescence and disease activity even though they based disease activity solely on sigmoidoscopy score.
Information on the cellular and biochemical sources of reactive oxygen species would be useful as this could lead to a specific target or targets for development of new treatment methods.
Although the source of the light production giving rise to the chemiluminescence signal cannot be determined definitively, our present data and data from Simmonds et al suggest that increases in reactive oxygen species generated by neutrophils are in fact an important source.
Our findings that (1) myeloperoxidase activity correlates with disease activity and (2) azide — at a concentration that selectively inhibits myeloperoxidase — inhibits chemiluminescence, suggest that the neutrophils are an important cellular source of the chemiluminescence.
These findings are consistent with the data of Simmonds et al although they used myeloperoxidase staining rather than measurement of myeloperoxidase activity, and the concentration of azide they used was 10-fold higher than concentrations that are believed to be specific for myeloperoxidase inhibition and thus may have been somewhat non-selective.
Whatever the cellular origin of the chemiluminescence, it is also important to identify the biochemical reaction(s) that produce the precursors for the myeloperoxidase reaction that produces hypochlorous acid.
It is generally accepted that superoxide anion is most frequently the initial reactive oxygen species that results in production of a cascade of other reactive oxygen species such as hydroxyl radical, H 2 O 2 , and hypochlorous acid.
These three reactive oxygen species are believed to be responsible for tissue injury.
One possible source for superoxide is the xanthine/xanthine oxidase reaction.
This reaction has been implicated in the generation of reactive oxygen species in ischemic reperfusion injury, a mechanism which has been recently postulated for inflammatory bowel disease.
Our data do not support the idea that the xanthine/ xanthine oxidase pathway plays a part in ulcerative colitis as allopurinol, in concentrations known to inhibit xanthine oxidase activity, did not affect chemiluminescence.
Another possible source of superoxide anion is the oxidation of arachadonic acid by the lipoxygenase or cyclo-oxygenase pathways.
It is well known that products of the cyclo-oxygenase reaction, prostaglandins, and of the lipoxygenase reaction, leukotrienes, are increased in inflammatory bowel disease.
It is postulated that the deleterious effect of these reactions and their products is, at least in part, through their ability to generate reactive oxygen species.
We now show that indomethacin, a cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor, at 100 uM decreases chemilumine scence.
This finding suggests that the cyclo-oxygenase pathway could be an important contributor to the production of reactive oxygen species in the inflamed mucosa.
As indomethacin is also known to be an reactive oxygen species scavenger, however, its effect may be independent of its inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase.
Indeed, indomethacin failed to inhibit chemiluminescence when added in vitro to colonic biopsy specimens at concentrations below 100 uM despite a maximum inhibition at 0.08 uM of cyclo-oxygenase in cell free systems.
Moreover, we showed that indomethacin inhibited chemiluminescence elicited by stimulation of a suspension of neutrophils by FMLP, a system in which oxygen free radicals are not though to derive from the cyclo-oxygenase reaction.
Furthermore, PGE type compounds have been shown to be effective inhibitors of FMLP activated human neutrophils, making it even more unlikely that indomethacin induced inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase underlies the ability of indomethacin to attenuate FMLP induced chemiluminescence from neutrophils.
Hence, our data strongly suggest that the inhibiting effects of indomethacin is not through cyclo-oxygenase inhibition.
Cyclo-oxygenase pathway does not seem to significantly contribute to chemiluminescence production by the inflamed mucosa.
Finally, we showed that indomethacin at a concentration of 100 uM significantly inhibited the chemiluminescence produced chemically by the interaction of hypochlorous acid with luminol.
These data together show that indomethacin scavenges oxygen free radicals.
Although it was initially believed that lowering mucosal prostaglandin values in ulcerative colitis would be therapeutic, and that the beneficial effect of therapeutic agents sulfasalazine and 5-ASA analogues is through their ability to inhibit cyclo-oxygenase, it isnow believed that a simple decrease in prostaglandins does not elicit a beneficial effect in ulcerative colitis and may even be harmful.
This conclusion is based on the fact that potent prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors such as indomethacin not only do not improve ulcerative colitis, but also can worsen the disease activity, implying that prostaglandins have some protective or repair ability, or both.
These data suggest that, although high values of reactive oxygen species may be harmful or injurious, compounds such as indomethacin, which effectively decrease both reactive oxygen species and prostaglandins, may not be beneficial in the treatment of ulcerative colitis.
Another possible source of superoxide anion is oxidation of arachadonic acid by lipoxygenase.
Our data, which show thatleukotriene inhibitors do not decrease chemiluminescence, suggest that the lipoxygenase pathway does not significantly contribute to the production of reactive oxygen species by the inflamed colonic mucosa.
The known clinical benefit of leukotriene inhibitors in ulcerative colitis, however, could still be due to their ability to indirectly decrease tissue reactive oxygen species.
For example, it is know that leukotrienes are potent chemotactic compounds.
If, as we believe, the main source of mucosal reactive oxygen species in inflammation is the neutrophil, then leukotriene synthesis inhibitors could prevent aggregation of neutrophils in the mucosa, thus decreasing reactive oxygen species and tissue injury.
We conclude that (1) reactive oxygen species are generated in increased amounts in inflamed mucosa in patients with ulcerative colitis;(2) these increased values of reactive oxygen species may be an important contributor to the tissue injury in ulcerative colitis;(3) the most likely cellular source of reactive oxygen species in ulcerative colitis is the neutrophil;(4) a likely culprit in the tissue injury is a product of the myeloperoxidase reaction, namely hypochlorous acid;(5) arachadonic acid pathways, including cyclo-oxygenase and lipoxygenase, probably do not significantly contribute to production of reactive oxygen species by the inflamed mucosa.
p53 expression and K-ras mutation in colorectal adenomas
Abstract
The frequency of p53 overexpression and K-ras codon 12 mutation was investigated in a series of colorectal adenomas. p53 was detected by immunohistochemistry in only 5% of tumours, whereas K-ras mutation was found in eight of 30 adenomas examined.
In vitro, mutant p53 and ras genes cooperate to transform primary rat cells into a tumourigenic cell line.
The presence of both p53 overexpression and K-ras mutation in a benign tubulovillous polyp in the present series suggests that in vivo this combination of events is insufficient to cause malignant transformation of a large bowel adenoma.
A range of genetic alterations have recently been described in colorectal cancer and its benign precursor, the large bowel adenoma.
Some of these changes seem to occur at an early stage of the neoplastic process.
Hypomethylation of DNA, chromosome 5q deletion, and mutations in the newly identified MCC and APC genes have been identified in both adenomas and carinomas suggesting that these are early events in the adenoma-carcinoma sequence.
Conversely, deletions affecting the DCC locus on chromosome 18q and deletions in the region of the p53 gene on 16p are found preferentially in carcinomas and therefore seem to be involved in the later stages of large bowel tumourigenesis. p53 gene mutation or deletion seems to be an important and common event not only in colorectal carcinogenesis but also in many other human tumours.
Raised p53 has been described in 44% to 67% of large bowel cancers, 36% of breast carcinomas, and 70% of lung tumours, as well as in malignant gliomas, bladder carcinoma, oesophageal carcinoma, ovarian carcinoma, and mesothelioma.
In a previous study we described overexpression of the p53 protein in 42% of 52 colorectal carcinomas, with the immunohistochemical detection of p53 as a marker of gene mutation.
The validity of this approach has been borne out by other studies combining immunocytochemistry with DNA sequencing that have found accumulation of protein to be invariably associated with the presence of a mutant p53 allele.
p53 mutants are well known to be capable of cellular immortalisation, and act as nuclear oncogenes in a manner similar to c-myc.
This action of the mutant protein is by contrast with the recently established tumour suppressor activity of the wild type protein.
As well as transformation of established 3T3 cells, p53 will also cooperate with mutant ras genes to transform primary rat cells.
In at least one study transformed cells harbouring mutant p53 and ras genes were capable of growing in syngeneic laboratory animals, eventually leading to their death.
Because point mutations in K-rase and p53 are common events in colorectal carcinoma, occurring in up to 40% and 67% of tumours, it would be of interest to determine whether p53 and K-ras also cooperate in vivo to produce invasive carcinoma.
The aim of the present study therefore was to investigate the frequency with which p53 is overexpressed in large bowel adenomas; to define which, if any, of these adenomas also contain a mutant K-rase gene; and to relate these findings to the presence of malignant change.
Materials and methods
SAMPLES
Fresh tissue was available from 38 sporadic adenomas (33 patients), together with two small tubular adenomas from a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).
Fifteen of the sporadic adenomas were less than 2 cm in size, 16 were greater than or equal to 2 cm in size, and seven had undergone focal malignant transformation, characterised by invasion of neoplastic epithelium through the muscularis mucosae.
In the case of malignant polyps only adenomatous mucosa distant from the invasive tumour was selected for analysis.
One of us (NS) classified and graded the adenomas according to criteria described by Konishi and Morson.
p53 IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
Immunohistochemistry for p53 was performed with a standard technique previously described.
Briefly, 4 µm thick frozen sections were fixed in acetone at 4°C for 15 minutes, washed in total body solute, and incubated successively with primary anti-p53 antibody, biotinylated rabbit anti-mouse immunoglobulin, and streptavidin peroxidase.
Antibody binding was visualised with amino-ethylcarbazole.
All 40 adenomas were incubated with Pab 421 and 1801, monoclonal antibodies raised against different epitopes found on both wild type and mutant p53 protein.
Sixteen specimens were also stained with Pab 240, a novel antibody that binds specifically to the mutant conformation.
Each set of sections included a positive colorectal carcinoma control, and a negative control in which the primary antibody was omitted.
K-RAS MUTATION ANALYSIS
Point mutations in the first two base pairs of K-ras codon 12 were sought by a method previously described, and modified from the non-radioactive restriction enzyme technique of Jiang et al .
Mutations in codons 13 and 61 that occur much less often in large bowel tumours were not analysed in this preliminary study.
Thirty adenomas were examined.
DNA for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was extracted from sections of fresh tissue immediately adjacent to those used for immunohistochemistry.
Three to five 10 µm sections were incubated with 2 mg/ml proteinase K and 1% sodium dodecyl sulphate for 3 days at 37°C.
The sample was then extracted twice with an equal volume of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (24:1).
After ethanol precipitation of the aqueous phase at -20°C DNA was recovered by centrifugation, dried, and resuspended in distilled water.
With primers described by Jiang et al and synthesised on an Applied Biosystems DNA synthesiser a 157 bp fragment of the K-ras gene was amplified containing codon 12.
Details of the polymerase chain reaction are given in a previous publication.
A negative control containing water instead of DNA was included in each reaction.
The amplified sequence was visualised on a 2% ethidium bromide stained GTG agarose gel (FMC Bioproducts, Rockland ME, USA) before proceeding to restriction enzyme digestion.
Sixteen microlitres of the amplified PCR product was digested with BstN1 in a total volume of 25 µl under conditions recommended by the suppliers (Bioehringer, Mannheim UK, Lewes, Sussex).
The digestions were incubated at 60°C overnight and the products analysed on a 3% ethidium bromide stained Nu sieve agarose gel (FMC Bioproducts).
Each digestion included a positive colorectal carcinoma or adenoma control known to contain a mutation at codon 12.
Results
Only two out of 38 sporadic adenomas were found to overexpress p53 protein.
One of these was a 2 cm diameter tubulovillous adenoma exhibiting severe dysplasia, and the other was an 8 cm diameter villous adenoma that had undergone focal malignant change.
Unfortunately fresh tissue was not available from the carcinoma, and therefore it was impossible to say whether it also contained a p53 gene mutation.
Staining in the two polyps was nuclear and postive with all three p53 antibodies, confirming the presence of a mutant protein phenotype.
The distribution of staining was more heterogenous than that previously described in carcinomas with several areas of the polyp failing to express detectable levels of p53 protein.
Figure 1 shows the strong nuclear staining seen in one of these adenomas.
Neither of the two 0.5 cm diameter FAP adenomas overexpressed p53.
K-ras codon 12 mutations were found in a total of eight out of 30 sporadic adenomas examined.
Figure 2 shows a typical BstN1 digest containing examples of both mutant and wild type K-rase alleles.
Mutations were notably more frequent in larger adenomas, in adenomas that had undergone focal malignant transformation, and in adenomas exhibiting severe dysplasia (table).
Of particular interest was the coexistence of a mutant K-ras allele and p53 overexpression in the 2 cm tubulovillous polyp described earlier.
By contrast the single malignant polyp identified as expressing a mutant type p53 protein did not seem to contain a mutation at codon 12 of the K-ras gene, although obviously we cannot current exclude the presence of codon 13 or 61 mutations.
Discussion
Overexpression and mutation of the p53 gene is now well described in large bowel cancer.
There are few reports, however, of p53 gene alterations in the precursor adenoma.
Van den Berg et al studied 74 adenomas, including 12 FAP polyps, and found that 10% of the sporadic and 17% of the FAP adenomas overexpressed p53.
No clear relation was found with degree of dysplasia, and no information was given pertaining to size or presence of malignant change.
Napier et al described p53 staining in one of 11 (9%) adenomas, Rodrigues et al in none out of 10, and Campo et al found increased expression in two out of 18 adenomas (11%).
More recently Shaw et al have sequenced exons 5, 6, and 7 of the p53 gene in 19 polyps without finding any mutations whereas Baker et al reported point mutations in 10% of 19 adenomas retaining both p53 alleles.
Our finding in the present study that only 5% of sporadic adenomas express detectable levels of p53 protein is clearly in line with the results of these other workers, and the use of three different anti-p53 antibodies including ‘mutant specific’ Pab 240, provides further evidence that the protein detected is a mutant form.
The use of immunohistochemical staining as a marker of point mutation has been critically reviewed by Wyndord-Thomas.
Although inconsistencies clearly exist, most studies of large bowel tumours show a very strong correlation between immunocytochemical positivity and p53 mutation.
Rodrigues et al found six of six colorectal cancer cell lines overexpressing p53 to contain a point mutation, and Purdie et al described complete agreement between staining with Pab 240 and presence of a mutation in 12 primary large bowel cancers.
It is of interest that the positive tumours in the present series were both ‘large’ polyps 2 cm in size, and that one had undergone focal malignant transformation.
The rarity of p53 gene mutation in adenomas and its prevalence in carcinomas, suggests that p53 mutation is one of the late events in the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, occurring either at the adenoma carcinoma interface or during progression of established cancers.
This distribution of p53 gene mutation between adenomas and carcinomas mirrors that of chromosome 17p deletion, believed to signal loss of a wild type p53 allele.
Inactivation of one p53 allele by mutation, and the other by deletion, may be important for colorectal carcinogenesis in the same way that deletion of the Rb gene is necessary for the development of retinoblastoma.
This interpretation is supported by the demonstration of tumour suppressor activity of wild type p53 in at least two in vitro systems, and the finding that reintroduction of the wild type p53 gene into a colorectal carcinoma cell line with one p53 gene mutated and the other deleted, results in suppression of growth.
K-ras gene mutations, by contrast with p53, clearly occur at an earlier stage in the neoplastic sequence.
Vogelstein et al have described ras mutations in 12% of sporadic adenomas <cm in size, 20% of tumours 1 to 2 cm in size, 100% of adenomas >cm, and in 60% of adenomas that contain a carcinoma.
Other workers have found ras gene mutations in between 39% and 47% of colorectal cancers.
Our results closely resemble those of Vogelstein et al with a higher prevalence of mutant K-ras genes in larger adenomas, adenomas harbouring cancer, and adenomas exhibiting severe dysplasia.
A particularly interesting finding was that of a benign tubulovillous polyp that contained both a mutant K-ras and a p53 allele.
In vitro ras and p53 mutants cooperate to transform primary rat cells into cells capable of lethal tumourigenesis.
This does not seem to be the case in vivo, at least in the colorectum.
Our findings suggest that this combination is insufficient on its own to cause an adenoma to become malignant.
Supporting evidence for the non-cooperation of p53 and K-ras in colorectal tumourigenesis comes from our own finding and that of others that the frequency with which p53 and K-ras mutants are found together in large bowel cancers is only that to be expected by chance.
If this combination of mutations were of biological significance preferential selection of cells with the double mutant phenotype might be expected, leading to clonal expansion of the mutant population.
Another piece of evidence that p53 and K-rase do not cooperate in large bowel epithelium is the finding of ras mutation accompanied by p53 overexpression in an adenoma cell line, isolated by Dr C Paraskevas (personal communication).
It may be that deletion of the remaining wild type p53 allele is also required before mutant p53 and K-rase exert their cooperative effect.
In conclusion, we have shown that p53 mutation, as indicated by overexpression of the protein and immunoreactivity with Pab 240, is an uncommon event in adenomas compared with colorectal carcinomas.
K-ras codon 12 mutation, however, is much more common and seems to be related to size and degree of dysplasia.
Unlike the situation in vitro, in vivo the combination of K-ras and p53 mutation seems to be insufficient to cause malignant change in a large bowel tumour.
The critical event which determines malignancy in the adenoma-carcinoma sequence therefore remains unclear.
Further definition of the in vivo interaction between p53 mutation, p53 deletion and K-ras mutation is urgently required.
Serological diagnosis of Helicobacter pylori — evaluation of four tests in the presence of absence of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Abstract
The host's humoral immune response to Helicobacter pylori has been used in the diagnosis of active infection with these organisms.
Several commercial tests are available but there are few and unconfirmed reports of their efficacy.
This study aimed to assess and compare the efficacy of the following H pylori serological tests in patients treated or not treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID): Pyloriset latex, Helico-G, Biolab Malakit, and Bio-Rad GAP Test IgG.
Venous blood was tested at random in 124 patients, 64 of whom had received NSAID and 60 who had not.
H pylori IgG antibodies were detected by latex agglutination (Pyloriset), or by ELISA (the remaining tests).
Endoscopic gastric antral biopsy specimens were also obtained for urease activity, culture, and histology.
Detection of H pylori by at least two of these was considered as a true positive, and its absence in all biopsy specimens as a true negative.
The sensitivity values in the presence (or absence) of NSAID were: Pyloriset Latex, 59 (60) %; Helico-G, 79 (74) %; Biolab Malakit, 85 (81) %; and Bio-Rad GAP Test IgG, 100 (95) %.
The respective specificity values were: 50 (71) %, 47 (59) %, 50 (65) %, and 30 (29) %.
The Bio-Rad GAP Test IgG has the highest sensitivity and the lowest specificity values regardless of NSAID intake.
The sensitivity of the other tests, however, is less than that of the standard biopsy related tests and their specificity is even lower in chronic NSAID users.
It is realised increasingly that the systemic immune reponse to Helicobacter pylori infection confers no protection against the organisms, and its presence is of diagnostic value only.
Several methods have been used to detect this response, including agglutination, complement fixation, and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
The low cost and convenience of these techniques encouraged some workers to recommend their use in the diagnosis and management of H pylori associated ulcers, without the need for endoscopy.
Because of their diagnostic and therapeutic importance, increasing numbers of commercial serological tests are being introduced.
The validity of these tests, however, has been assessed by few and unconfirmed studies, in patients who were not taking NSAID, and direct comparison between them has been lacking.
Recent evidence indicates that the prevalence of NSAID related ulcers is higher in those infected with H pylori (which emphasises the need for accurate diagnosis of this infection in these patients) and that the specificity of some serological tests can be influenced by NSAID.
This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of four newly introduced commercial tests (Pyloriset, Latex; Helico-G; Bolab Malakit; and Bio-Rad GAP Test IgG) in diagnosing H pylori in patients with or without a history of chronic NSAID intake.
Patients and methods
Patients with adult rheumatoid arthritis (the NSAID group) were recruited from the rheumatology outpatient clinic provided they had taken their NSAID for at least 4 weeks.
The rest of the patients were recruited from the gastroenterology outpatient clinic, where they had presented with transient or persistent abdominal complaints.
They were excluded if they had been treated with steroids, cytotoxic drugs, antibiotics, anti-ulcer drugs, or if they had had gastroduodenal surgery.
Venous blood (10 ml) was taken for serology tests and patients underwent endoscopy at random using 4–6 mg midazolam for secation, afterhaving given informed consent.
A total of four gastric antral biopsy specimens were taken for histology (two specimens), culture (one specimen), and CLO test (one specimen).
Ulcers were also biopsied to exclude malignancy.
H pylori was identified by culture and histology as previously described.
The classification of gastritis was according to the Whitehead system modified to include the newly described entities of lymphocytic and chemical gastritis.
The CLO test (Delta-West Ltd, Bentley, Western Australia) was carried out by placing the antral biopsy specimen into the gel pellet, and reviewing the slide for the positive red colour at 3 and 24 hours.
The Pyloriset Latex (Orion Diagnostica, Finland) and the Helico-G (Porton Cambridge, Maidenhead, UK) tests were carried out according to the manufacturers's instructions and ad recently described.
The Pyloriset detects IgG antibodies by agglutination, using Latex particles coated with acid extracted antigen of H pylori .
The Helico-G test uses an ELISA to measure IgG antibodies directed against H pylori cell membrane derived antigen.
An ELISA was also used to detect IgG antibodies against two more partially purified antigens:H pylori urease antigen, by Biolab Malakit (Biolab, Limal, Belgium), and H pylori outer membrane antigen, by Bio-Rad GAP test IgG,(Bio-Rad Chemical Division, Richmond, Ca, USA).
Both tests were also carried out according to the manufacturers' instructions.
With the Biolab Malakit test, the diluted samples and controls were incubated in microwells precoated with H pylori antigens at 37°C for 45 minutes to form an H pylori antigen-antibody complex.
The unbound components were washed off.
An anti-IgG coupled peroxidase conjugate was then added and incubated.
The unbound conjugate was washed off, a substrate was added and incubated, and the reaction was finally stopped with NaOH.
The absorbance was read at 405 nm, with the intensity of the green colours being proportional to the amount of anti- H pylori antibodies in the sample.
A sample was considered positive for H pylori of its optical density was higher than the limit of the normal value, specified by the manufacturer.
In the Bio-Rad GAP test, 100 µl of standards, controls, and diluted patient samples were pipetted into the relevant nicrowells, and incubated for 60 minutes at 25°C.
The contents were then discarded, the wells were washed with the wash buffer solution and blotted on a paper towel.
Anti-IgG enzyme conjugate solution was added to the wells, incubated for 30 minutes, washed, and freshly prepared substrate was added before incubating the plate in the dark for 10 minutes.
Stop solution was added after blue colour development, and the absorbance was read at 450 nm.
A standard curve was constructed, and a sample was considered positive for H pylori if its antibody concentration was greater than 17 units.
A true positive was defined as a patient who had H pylori identified by at least two of the biopsy related tests (histology, culture, and CLO tests), while a true negative was one who did not have H pylori diagnosed by any of these tests.
Patients were excluded when H pylori was found by only one of the three biopsy related tests.
Sensitivity was defined as the frequency of a positive test in all subjects with H pylori infection, and specificity was the frequency of a negative test in those without the infection.
Statistical analyses were performed with χ 2 and McNemar's tests, with correction for multiple comparisons where appropriate.
All specimens carried code numbers and were assessed under randomised conditions.
The study was approved by the local ethics committee.
Results
Four of the 128 patients studied were excluded because H pylori was identified in histological specimens only and could not be confirmed by culture or CLO test.
The remaining 124 patients entered the final analysis: 64 took NSAID and 60 did not.
The demographic details of the patients are shown in Table I. The groups were comparable for age, smoking, and drinking habits but those not treated with NSAID were more likely to have abdominal complaints.
The median duration of NSAID intake was 2.5 years.
Table II shows the prevalence of H pylori , as detected by the various tests, in patients with histological and endoscopic abnormalities.
Chronic superficial gastritis was the commonest histological abnormality regardless of NSAID intake; similar numbers of patients with this abnormality, who were also postive for H pylori , wre identified by Helico-G and Biolab Malakit compared with the standard (or biopsy related) tests.
However, Pyloriset Latex identified the lowest number and the Bio-Rad GAP test diagnosed the highest number of patients with both H pylori and chronic superficial gastritis.
Chemical gastritis was found more commonly in patients taking NSAID:H pylori organisms were seen in only one of nine patients, using the standard test, but there were six seropositive cases with this histological entity using Bio-Rad test, and five seropositive patients using the remaining three tests.
In addition, a total of 19 (29%) patients treated with NSAID were found to have peptic ulcers, compared with seven (11%) patients who were not taking NSAID.
Erosion were found only in patients taking NSAID.
The overall efficacy of the serological tests in diagnosing H pylori infection is shown in Table III and Figures 1 and 2.
The Helico-G and Biolab Malakit tests had a similar efficacy.
The Bio-Rad GAPR Test, however, had the highest number of true and false positives and, as a result, the highest sensitivity and the lowest specificity regardless of NSAID intake.
The specificity of the Pyloriset Latex, Helico-G, and Biolab Malakit tests was lower in the NSAID users.
Pyloriset Latex had the lowest sensitivity and highest specificity in patients not taking NSAID.
It is also worth noting that the prevalence of H pylori in patients treated with NSAID was 34 of 64 (53%) compated with 43 of 60 (72%)(p) in patients not taking NSAID, using the standard tests (see Table III).
The differences did not reach statistical significance when the findings of the serological tests were compared in the presence or absence of NSAID.
H pylori was identified in the gastric biopsy specimens of six of 17 (35%) rheumatoid patients receiving long term gold injections plus NSAID, which is only two subjects less than the expected prevalence in such a subgroup had they taken NSAID only; this did not change the overall statistical analyses of the study.
Discussion
This study shows that the sensitivity and specificity of three commercial serological tests (Pyloriset Latex, Helico-G, and Biolab Malakit) are lower than those of the standard biopsy related tests (culture, histology, and CLO test).
The specificity values of the above serological tests are also lower in patients receiving long term NSAID.
The sensitivity of a fourth serological test, Bio-Rad GAP Test IgG, is identical to that of the standard tests but its specificity is significantly lower.
Several factors have recently been identified as being capable of influencing the performance of H pylori serological tests: these include the patients' age, histological findings,H pylori antigens, and, as suggested by this study, NSAID intake.
H pylori infection and seropositivity have been shown to increase with age, although the immunological responses, in general, may be reduced in the elderly.
Age is unlikely to have influenced the findings or the conclusions of our study, because all the tests and comparisons were carried out on the same group of patients.
Patients with certain histological abnormalities may be seropositive for H pylori despite the failure to identify the organisms in their gastric biopsy specimens.
This is particularly true for cases of chemical gastritis, as shown by this study and by others, and may explain, at least partly, the reduced specificity of serology in NSAID patients, who have a higher prevalence of chemical gastritis.
Similar findings have also been reported in patients with chronic atrophic gastritis, Which suggests that they have been infected with H pylori at some point in their lives.
Atrophic gastritis was found in three of our patients and is therefore unlikely to have been an important factor in our study.
However, it is worth noting that our findings refer to the presence of H pylori in the antrum, the commonest site of such infection, and atrophy of the gastric body of our patients cannot, therefore, be excluded.
The development of serological assays for antibody responses to H pylori antigens has been complicated by the fact that H pylori organisms share antigens with other bacterial species, such as Campylobacter jejuni .
A relatively high frequency of false positive and false negative results has been observed in studies using whole extracts of H pylori as antigens.
More recently, higher sensitivity and specificity values have been reported when antibodies were raised against certain components of H pylori organisms such as partially purified urease enzyme or high molecular weight cell associated proteins, and the 25 kDa antigen of H pylori .
Another factor that needs to be considered is the fate of the antibody titres once their formation has been triggered by one or more of H pylori antigens.
It has been suggested that a considerable number of healthy people previously infected with H pylori might remain seropositive despite the spontaneous elimination of the organisms.
This supports the hypothesis that H pylori colonisation is a dynamic process with an active phase of infection and subsequent elimination of the bacteria in at least a proportion of infected people.
Long term serological surveillance studies have also found that in most patients without H pylori infection, 12 months after anti- H pylori therapy, both specific IgA and specific IgG antibody values were lower but had not yet returned to the normal range.
These observations, like chemical gastritis, might also help us understand the low specificity of our tests, especially in patients treated with NSAID, who have a low prevalence of H pylori .
Very few studies have evaluated the serological tests described in our study.
Despite being directed against relatively specific components of H pylori , their sensitivity (excluding that of Bio-Rad GAP Test) and their specificity values are lower than some of the recently published data.
Our findings with respect to Pyloriset Latex are similar to those of another report, but lower than the values described by another study, fr unexplained reasons.
The sensitivity and specficity of Helico-G in our study are also comparable with those of another, but it is worth noting that some workers had to modify the manufacturer's instructions in order to improve the performance of this test.
Some authors have reported high sensitivity and specificity values for an ELISA test which, like Biolab Malakit, detects antibodies against partially purified urease antigen.
However, the same test had been used by another group of workers who found that 25 of 124 (20%) patients studied were seropositive for H pylori despite the absence of the organisms in their gastric biopsy specimens; 20 of the 25 false positive cases had atrophic gastritis.
The sensitivity of Bio-Rad GAP Test IgG described in our study is almost identical to that found by another groups, but the lower specificity could be explained by one or more of the following: their reliance on histology as a standard, which might be difficult to interpret in the presence of very few organisms; the exclusion from their study of patients with chronic superficial or atrophic gastritis in whom H pylori was not identified, thus reducing the number of true negatives; the relatively high number of cases of chemical gastritis in their H pylori negative group without specifying whether these patients had been treated with NSAID; and the presence in their H pylori positive group of chronic atrophic gastritis in 117 of 160 (73%), which may have been paralleled by a rise in the number of false positive cases.
The lower specificity of Pyloriset Latex, Helico-G, and Biolab Malakit tests in NSAID patients could be explained by the presence of chemical gastritis and the low prevalence of H pylori in these patients, as found by this study and by thers.
The latter could be related to the impairment, by NSAID, of the gastric nucus layer, which is considered the natural habitat of H pylori organisms.
However, when these bacteria persist in the presence of NSAID, it has been suggested that the damaging effects of NSAID may become intensified.
Threfore, accurate diagnosis of H pylori in these patients is at least as important as it is in patients not taking NSAID.
In conclusion, this study has evaluated the efficacy of four commercial serological tests in comparison with standard biopsy related tests.
Despite its high sensitivity, the Bio-Rad GAP Test IgG has been found to have low specificity.
The Pyloriset Latex, Helico-G, and Biolab Malakit tests all had relatively low sensitivity and specificity, the latter being even lower in the presence of NSAID.
These results could be related to the histological findings, the dynamic nature of H pylori infection, the types of the antigens tested, NSAID intake, or some weaknesses in the manufacturers' instructions.
These factors have to be considered in order to improve the reliability of serodiagnosis because of the potential advantages of these methods in identifying active H pylori infection.
Acid, motility and, ulcers: A comparison of cisapride with placebo in the prevention of duodenal ulcer relapse
Abstract
In a single centre double blind study of 66 patients, the value of cisapride (10 mg twice daily) was compared with pacebo in the prevention of duodenal ulcer relapse.
Patients who remained ulcer free attended for clinical review every two months and had a mandatory endoscopy at 0, 4, 8, and 12 months or if symptoms suggestive of ulcer recurrence developed.
The 12 month crude relapse rates (that underestimate the probability of ulcer recurrence) showed that cisapride was superior to placebo (34% (11/32) relapsed on cisapride v 68% (23/34) on placebo, p=0.007).
This finding was confirmed using lifetable analysis, with a 35% reduction (95% confidence intervals 10–59%, p) in the proportion of ulcer relapses in patients who had received cisapride compared with those treated with placebo.
These results are similar to those reported in maintenance trials of H 2 receptor antagonists analysed by the same method.
Drug related adverse clinical events were mainly trivia, but led to three patients on cisapride and one on placebo withdrawing from the trial.
Although duodenal ulcers (DU) rarely form in patients with achlorhydria, the widely held belief that all patients with duodenal ulcer disease secrete excessive amounts of acid is incorrect.
About two thirds of DU patients have normal values of stimulated gastric secretion.
It therefore follows that the therapeutic success of drugs that reduce gastric secretion might be explained if DU resulted from duodenal rather than gastric hyperacidity, possibly as a result of inadequate clearance of even normal amounts of acid from the bulb.
We have suggested that properly coordinated motility might be of crucial importance in promoting acid clearance, and could therefore be an unrecognised factor in the pathogenesis of duodenal ulceration.
If this hypothesis was correct, drugs that modulate upper gastrointestinal motility may have a role in the treatment of DU patients.
Nearly 20 years ago, Moshal presented data from a controlled trial that investigated the value of metoclopramide in the prevention of duodenal ulcer symptoms.
Although maintenance treatment with metoclopramide significantly reduced the crude relapse rate of ulcer symptoms compared with placebo, Moshal's work (which was published shortly before the first placebo controlled trial of an H 2 receptor antagonist), has largely been forgotten.
The aim of our study was to find out if the more potent prokinetic drug cisapride could prevent duodenal ulcer relapse.
Cisapride (Prepulsid, Janssen Pharmaceutica, Beerse, Belgium) stimulates coordinated upper gastrointestinal motility particularly in patients with disordered motor patterns.
Cisapride does not affect gastric secretion either in animals or man.
Patients and methods
Patients aged between 18 and 75 years presenting to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield with duodenal ulceration were treated medically and had an endoscopy to confirm ulcer healing.
They were then immediately entered into a single centre double blind trial in which they were randomised to receive either oral cisapride 10 mg twice daily or an identical placebo tablet for up to 55 weeks.
Ulceration associated with the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or steroids was excluded from the study, as were patients with a high alcohol intake (>U/ week), or a history of surgery or drug use which might interfere with gastric secretion or motility.
Patients with severe cardiorespiratory, renal, hepatic, neurological, or malignant disease were also excluded, together with women of childbearing age not using a reliable means of contraception.
Patients were reviewed every two months and the duodenum inspected endoscopically at the beginning of the trial, at approximately 4, 8, and 12 months, and if the patient developed recurrent dyspepsia that persisted after three days of simple antacid treatment (Maalox, maximum 30 tablets per month).
Treatment failure was defined as evidence by endoscopy of a recurrent duodenal ulcer crater.
At each visit, any unused tablets were returned to check on compliance and a new prescription issued.
Adequate compliance was defined as ingestion of at least 70% of the tablets prescribed.
This study received approval from our local Ethical Committee and all patients provided written, informed consent.
STATISTICAL METHODS
Lifetable analysis — In a study of this kind, it is rarely possible to follow up every patient until they either relapse or successfully complete the trial.
To overcome this difficulty, the estimated cumulative proportion of ulcers relapsing on each treatment was calculated using life tables and the log rank test as described by Peto et al because this method uses the actual duration of the ulcer free period for each patient and allows any censored data to be incorporated into the calculation up to the point at which the patient drops out of the trial.
In addition, as the efficacy of a drug can only be assessed accurately when viewed within the context of the associated placebo response, we also calculated the difference between the estimated proportion of patients who had relapsed on each treatment at 26, 38, 51, and 55 weeks, together with the 95% confidence interval for this difference.
The 51 week interval was chosen because there were insufficient (n) patients remaining beyond this time to allow accurate statistical analysis (see below).
The 55 week interval represents the longest time that any patient remained in the trial.
Crude analysis — The crude percentage of patients whose ulcers had relapsed was also calculated to allow a comparison with some previously published trials, although it sould be stressed that this method underestimates the true relapse time.
Crude relapse rates were calculated for each treatment using the method suggested by Kuirata,(100×number of relapses detected in 12 months, divided by the number recruited) and were compared using a χ 2 test.
Results
Of the 68 patients entered, two were retrospectively excluded from analysis: one patient had an incompletely healed ulcer at the time of entry, and the other had a substantial prepyloric ulcer associated with small duodenal erosions.
Thirty two of the remaining patients were randomised to receive cisapride, and 34 to receive placebo.
PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS
Patients randomised to each treatment were well matched for age, sex, smoking habit, alcohol intake, the duration of their previous dyspeptic symptoms, and their previous responsiveness to medical treatment (Table I).
Most acute ulcers had been healed by H 2 receptor antagonists, and only one patient (randomised to placebo) had received bismuth subcitrate before entering the trial.
Three patients (two randomised to cisapride) had originally presented with large or multiple chronic duodenal ulcers associated with small solitary areas of slough on either the incisura or in the prepyloric region.
A check on the number of tablets returned at each visit showed that all patients took at least 70% of the tablets prescribed, and that the median (interquartile range) number of antacid tablets consumed per week was similar in both groups (cisapride 2.2 (0.1–5.7); placebo 1.9 (0.3–3.6): p=0.76, Mann-Whitney U test).
WITHDRAWALS
In addition to the two patients excluded from analysis, another 13 patients were withdrawn from the study (Table II).
Three failed to comply with the protocol restrictions; one patient continued to use H 2 receptor antagonists until she was withdrawn three days after entry and another was unable to keep his alcohol consumption below 40 U/week; a third (asymptomatic) patient withdrew her consent within a month of randomisation.
In addition, 10 patients were withdrawn because they either defaulted from follow up (n=3), all had moved away from the Sheffield area), or because they developed an adverse clinical event (n=7) which led to a change in their treatment (Table III).
The reported occurrence of minor drug related symptoms — that is, not severe enough to warrant withdrawal from the study), was similar in each group (Table III).
Ten of 13 patients withdrawn were inthe group receiving cisapride (Table II).
ULCER RECURRENCE
Of the 34 recurrent duodenal ulcers detected, 23 (68%) occurred in patients taking placebo, most recurrences being picked up at the scheduled 4, 8, and 12 month endoscopies (15/23 placebo, 7/11 cisapride).
Interestingly, although relapse on maintenance cisapride was almost invariably symptomatic (10/11), one third (8/23) of the placebo relapses were silent.
The crude 12 month relapse rate was lower in patients treated with cisapride (11/32, 34%) compared with those who received placebo (23/34, 68% (χ 2 =7.306, p= 0.007)).
It should be emphasised, however, that the crude rate is probably an underestmate of the true proportion of recurrent ulcers, because it assumes that patients who were withdrawn (and therefore not followed up endoscopically for the entire 12 months) did not develop an ulcer relapse.
A more accurate analysis of ulcer recurrence can be derived using lifetable analysis.
Maintenance treatment with cisapride was associated with a significant increase in ulcer free survival at week 38 (Table IV), and a 35% increase in ulcer free survival at week 51 (estimated proportion relapsing on placebo=72% (95% CI 55–88%)v cisapride=37% (95% CI 19–55%), p)).
The particularly wide 95% confidence interval, however, for the difference between the percentage of cisapride and placebo treated patients estimated to remain ulcer free at 55 weeks (Table IV), reflects the inherent inaccuracy of this portion of the survival curve when the number of patients remaining was so small.
The figure illustrates the cumulative ulcer free survival curves of patients randomised to each drug.
As stated earlier, it is easy to misinterpret the unreliable later part of the curve (for example, the sharp decrease in the estimated ulcer free survival of patients treated with cisapride that occurred at week 52 resulted from a single ulcer recurrence).
To avoid this kind of error, survival analysis was truncated at week 51, the point at which an adequate number (n) of patients were still present.
Lifetable analysis of the truncated survival curve (which excludes one placebo and one cisapride recurrence) also indicates that patients taking cisapride were less likely to develop a recurrent ulcer over the study period than those receiving placebo (χ 2 =3.673, p=0.055 log rank test).
Discussion
The results of this single centre pilot study show that maintenance treatment with cisapride 10 mg twice daily can reduce the likelihood of duodenal ulcer relapse.
Lifetable analysis shows that 37% (95% CI 19–55%) of patients receiving cisapride are liable to develop a recurrent ulcer after 51 weeks of treatment, compared with 72% (95% CI 55–88%) of those randomised to placebo,(complete separate of 95% confidence intervals).
This estimated rate of ulcer recurrence is similar to that reported in lifetable analyses of other maintenance trials using both cimetidine 400 mg once daily (median annual recurrence reported=31%, range 21–55%) and ranitidine 150 mg once daily (median annual recurrence reported=35%, range 18–49%).
Although other reports of maintenance treatment with H 2 receptor antagonists have yielded superior results (15- 39% annual recurrence), these studies only reported crude relapse rates (which underestimate the true rate of ulcer recurrence), or contained extraordinary inconsistencies in the presentation and interpretation of the trial data.
A direct comparison of the relative efficacy of ulcer maintenance drugs is hampered by discrepancies in the reported frequency of placebo related ulcer relapses, presumably because of geographical variation in the aggressiveness of duodenal ulcer disease.
To overcome this problem, it is necessary to view the apparent success of an active drug in the context of the parallel placebo response.
After 51 weeks of treatment, cisapride reduced the likelihood of duodenal ulcer relapse by 35% (95% CI 10–59%) compared with placebo (p).
Comparable data from H 2 receptor antagonist maintenance trials are limited, but would seem to be similar for both cimitidine 400 mg once daily (estimated reduction in DU relapse rate compared with placebo ranges from 26% to 37%), ranitidine 150 mg once daily (estimated reductions of 24%. 39% and 48%) and famotidine 20–40 mg once daily (estimated 32–34% reduction in relapse rate).
Most ulcer maintenance trials, including this study, contain several potential methodological weaknesses that merit further discussion.
Firstly, because patients who developed recurrent dyspepsia had another endoscopy before their next scheduled endoscopy, an unacceptable degree of bias could be introduced if the ulcer relapse rates associated with two drugs were identical, but relapses on one treatment resulted in more severe symptoms than those on the other.
As some H 2 receptor antagonist maintenance trials have reported a greater proportion of symptomatic ulcer recurrences in patients randomised to placebo, it would be easy to overestimate the placebo relapse rate.
Secondly, the definition of treatment failure, which included both symptomatic and asymptomatic relapses needs to be discussed.
It has been argued that the detection rate of asymptomatic recurrences depends on the frequency of scheduled endoscopic examinations, and that infrequent endoscopy might allow some asymptomatic ulcers to reheal without being detected.
If, as intimated earlier, the proportion of asymptomatic recurrences was greater in the active treatment group, this could also lead to bias, and underestimation of the frequency of cisapride recurrences relative to placebo.
Although worthy of consideration, we feel that neither of these objections challenge the conclusions of this study.
Endoscopic surveillance of treated and untreated asymptomatic ulcers has indicated that 75% persist unhealed over many months, and so it is unlikely that an endoscopy every four months would have missed many.
Moreover, the proportion of ulcer recurrences detected at unscheduled endoscopies was the same in cisapride and placebo treated patients (35–36%) and in contrast with the H 2 receptor antagonist maintenance trials.
Symptomatic recurrence in this study was particularly common in the group randomised to cisapride, not placebo.
If anything, this would suggest that we actually overestimated the frequency of cisapride relapses, and underestimated the placebo relapse rate.
One group of investigators have argued that the inclusion of asymptomatic recurrences in the analysis of ulcer relapse trials should be discouraged, because these silent ulcers are clinically irrelevant; however, such optimism (based on findings made in a small group of patients with asymptomatic ulceration followed up for between 1 and 13 months) is probably misguided, because one third of DU patients presenting with perforation and up to 60% admitted with haematemesis/or melaena, or both do not give a history of previous ulcer pain.
In the absence of any significant anti-secretory effects, it seems likely that the beneficial action of cisapride reported in this study results from its prokinetic qualities, which might enhance the clearance of acidic gastric effluent from the bulb, and thereby reduce its duration of contact with the duodenal mucosa.
Our finding that patients with healed duodenal ulcers have disordered patterns of antroduodenal motility, which could promote sequestration of acid within the bulb, provides indirect support for this hypothesis, as do preliminary reports that cisapride 10 mg three times daily reduces 24 h intraduodenal acidity in healthy volunteers without affecting gastric pH.
Cisapride is also thought to exert an inhibitory effect on the possum sphincter of oddi, and might thereby enhance bile flow into the duodenum.
Despite the current interest in the pathogenic potential of Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ), the question of whether or not motility and cisapride effect H pylori colonisation has not been resolved, although sketchy data are available that show that patients with dyspepsia infected with the organism have more rapid gastric emptying than healthy H pylori negative controls.
The close relation between acid and duodenal ulceration was recognised in the early part of this century, and until recently, attempts to provide a cure for peptic ulcer disease have focused almost exclusively on the development of drugs and surgical procedures that inhibit or abolish gastric secretion, even though contemporary findings show that only 20–50% of DU patients actually secrete excessive amounts of acid.
It is becoming increasingly apparent that drugs, which act through mechanisms other than acid inhibition, can control duodenal ulcer disease as effectively as H 2 receptor atagonists; the findings of this study suggest that stimulation of normal gastroduodenal motility (and thus acid clearance from the bulb) may be an important mechanism in this respect, but one which has received scant attention to date.
The percutaneous rotary lithotrite: a new approach to the treatment of symptomatic cholecystolithiasis
Abstract
This report evaluates the use of a new device for descruction of gall stones, the Kensey-Nash Lithotrite (Baxter Corporation, California, USA).
The principle of the instrument is that of a liquidiser with an impeller that emulsifies stones.
Twenty five patients were treated; 13 patients were considered unfit for conventional treatment (complex group) and 12 elected to have the procedure (non-complex group).
In the complex group nine patients were treated under local anaesthesia.
Only six of the 13 patients had a clear gall bladder at the end of the first procedure, but after further treatments that included cholecystoscopy, endoscopic sphincterotomy, and percutaneous cholecystolithotomy 11 patients had a gall bladder free of stones.
The morbidity was high, mainly due to pain and bile leaks, causing prolonged stays in hospital (median 18 days).
In the non-complex group six patients had the procedure performed under local anaesthaesia.
Ten patients had the stones removed at cholecystoscopy.
Despite good clearance, the morbidity was high, with eight emergency admissions on account of complications and a prolonged duration of stay (median 13 days).
In conclusion the technique is effective, but the morbidity is high.
Further development is required if this technique is to be included in the alternative treatments for the management of gall stones.
The introduction of laparoscopic cholecystectomy has changed the approach to the treatment of symptomatic gall stones.
Three remains a group of patients, however, who are either unsuitable for general anaesthaeisia because of medical contraindications or who wish to conserve their gall bladders.
Existing conservative treatments all have their limitations.
This report evaluates the use of a new device, the Kensey-Nash Lithotrite, for gall stone destruction.
The principle is that of a liquidiser, a rapidly rotating impeller (30000 rpm) within a confined space filled with a liquid creates a vortex that sucks solid material on to the impeller, which pulverises the solid.
A fine mud is produced, and this is aspirated from the gall bladder.
The apparatus is introduced into the gall bladder through a small (12 French) percutaneous tract under local anaesthesia and intravenous sedation/analgesia.
A prototype has been used successfully on human gall stones introduced into swine gall bladders.
Initial clinical results have been reported for 10 patients.
The procedure was successful in nine; complications included bile leakage, and one patient developed phlegmonous cholecystitis necessitating cholecystectomy.
At three to six weeks after the procedure stones or fragment aggregates were present in six patients.
At follow up(median of 28 (range six to 52) weeks three patients had fragment aggregates and one patient an intact calculus.
It was considered that many of these problems were related to inexperience in the management of stones within a retained gall bladder.
As a result of the considerable experience with percutaneous cholecystolithotomy, it was thought that these problems could be rapidly solved and the technique established to replace percutaneous cholecystolithotomy as it could be performed under local anaesthaesia by the transhepatic route and a postprocedural drain could be avoided.
Our initial experience is described.
Patients
Twenty five patients who were referred on account of characteristic biliary symptoms and were known to have gall stones on the basis of previous ultrasound examinations were accepted for treatment by the rotary lithotrite.
Thirteen patients were referred as they had been considered unsuitable for conventional cholecystectomy on account of various coexistent medical diseases (complex group, table I), and 12 patients were referred as they had requested minimally invasive treatment for their gall bladder disease or specifically wished their gall bladder to be preserved (non-complex group, table II).
A detailed ultrasound assessment was undertaken before the procedure to determine:(a ) the position of the gall bladder to ensure that it was suitable for safe percutaneous puncture;(b ) the size and stone load of the gall bladder to ensure that there was adequate working space for the lithotrite and that a vortex could be achieved; and (c ) the function of the gall bladder by use of a standard fat stimulus.
Contraindications to the procedure included stones greater than 3 cm in diameter or limited working space within the gall bladder, either because of a small volume (<ml) or a large stone load (>of gall bladder volume).
Gall bladders that contracted after a fatty stimulus were preferred, as previous experience suggests that stasis is likely to lead to recurrent stone formation.
The median number of stones treated was three (range one to 20) with a median size of 9 mm (range 5–28 mm).
Gall bladder contractility was present in 16 patients before the procedure.
Patients were admitted the evening before the procedure with the plan of discharging the patient on the second or third day after the procedure with the drain from the gall bladder eitherspigotted or, if pain occurred, discharging into a bag as in the procedure of percutaneous cholecystolithotomy.
The patient returned 10 to 12 days after the procedure for a tubogram to assess the presence or absence of stones in the gall bladder and the patency of the cystic and common bile ducts.
The patient was discharged the day after.
All patients received ursodeoxycholic acid (5 mg/kg/day) and chenodeoxycholic acid (7 mg/kg/day) for a period of at least three months after the procedure as previous experience with percutaneous cholecystolithotripsy had suggested that this helped to remove the fragments noted at the review examination.
Patients were followed up for six months with ultrasound and assessment of symptoms.
The rotary lithotrite consists of a central rotating metal impeller surrounded by a basket of metal prongs mounted on a catheter (fig 1).
Rotation of the impeller to speeds of 30000 rpm generates a vortex that sucks the gall stones into the basket, on to the impeller where the stones are reduced to a fine sediment (fig 2).
The metal basket holds the gall bladder mucosa clear of the impeller.
The whole apparatus is collapsed down for introduction into and removal from the gall bladder via a 12 French introducer sheath.
The procedure is performed with the patient supine on a fluorescopy table with continuous blood pressure, cardiac, and oximetry monitoring.
Prophylactic intravenous antibiotics (8 g mezlocillin daily) were given for 24 hours.
Patients received either a general anaesthetic or intravenous sediation (diazemuls), analgesic (pethidine), and local anaesthetic (20 ml 2% lignocaine) injected subcutaneously and long the percutaneous tract.
Initially the gall bladder was opacified with contrast (half strength Conray 280) injected through a 22 G spinal needle introduced into the gall bladder under ultrasound guidance.
With a combination of ultrasound and fluoroscopic guidance the definitive puncture with an 18 G longdwell needle (Becton-Dickinson) was performed.
Either a transhepatic, subhepatic, or transperitoneal route could be used.
The transhepatic route was used in 15 and the transperitoneal in 10 patients.
A 0.035 inch Lunderquist wire with a 3.5 cm floppy tip (Wilson Cook, Europe) was introduced through the longdwell sheath and the tip positioned in the proximal cystic duct.
The percutaneous tract was dilated with 6–8 French teflon dilators (Wilson Cook, europe) and then 9–12 French telescopic metal dilators (Olympus, Keymed) introduced in a coaxial fashion.
The dilators were removed and the introducer sheath inserted into the gall bladder and secured by inflating a small (1 ml) baloon or by deploying a helical plastic anchor.
After removal of the guidewire the lithotrite was introduced in its collapsed form through the sheath and once within the gall bladder the lithotrite basket was opened and locked in the open position.
Before starting rotation of the impeller the lithotrite was gently rotated under fluoroscopy to ensure that it was free of the gal bladder wall.
Rotation of the impeller was commenced at 5000 rpm and gradually increased to a maximum of 30000 rpm.
Continuous saline infusion through a side port of the lithotrite was maintained throughout to keep the gall bladder distended.
The procedure was monitored by fluorescopy.
Ultrasound monitoring was not possible as impeller rotation generated multiple tiny bubbles that produced a diffuse intraluminal echogenicity.
Initially the impact of stones on the impeller was palpable by the operator, but asstones were reduced to a fine sediment the impacts ceased.
Rotation was continued until the gall bladder was clear on fluoroscopy and no impacts had been felt for five minutes.
As much sediment as possible was then aspirated.
At the end of the procedure a 10 or 12 French Cope loop drainage catheter (Cook Urological) was left in the gall bladder on free drainage.
At the time of the return visit, a cholecystoscopy was performed with a 10 or 12 French prototype flexible cholecystoscope (Olympus, XCHF, Keymed) with a 3 French working channel.
This procedure was undertaken by passing a guidewire down the drainage catheter under radiological control.
The drain was then removed and the cholecystoscope passed over the guidewire into the lumen of the gall bladder.
Provided no stones were found and the patency of the ducts was confirmed with contrast studies, the cholecystoscope was withdrawn and the tract allowed to close.
If stones were found at cholecystoscopy, the stones were removed under vision with a basket (prototype: Olympus, Keymed) passed through the cholecystoscope.
Results
COMPLEX GROUP
Thirteen patients were referred for this treatment as they were considered unsuitable for conventional cholecystectomy either on account of age (n=4, range 79–86 years) or serious medical problems (n=9, range 72–78 years) including one patient (X) who was on the waiting list for a heart transplant.
Nine patients had the procedure under local anaesthesia.
In five of these the procedure was carried out in stages with tract dilation and limited rotation times on account of local discomfort.
There was considerable variation in the tolerance to the procedure with one patient able to accept a 52 minute rotation time.
Only six of the 13 patients had a clear gall bladder at the end of the first procedure.
One patient had stones cleared at a third stage, two patients had the remaining fragments removed at cholecystoscopy, and one patient by percutaneous cholecystolithotomy.
One patient had a combined cholecystoscopy and endoscopic sphincterotomy to clear stones from the gall bladder and bile duct, leaving two patients with a failed clearance, one of whom is without symptoms (patient IV).
The other had continued pain that was eventually successfully managed by a laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
The ideal inpatient stay was two admissions of three and two days; no patient achieved this ideal, with the patient nearest spending four days in hospital on the first occasion, the delay in discharge being due to severe pain.
The median number of admissions was two (range one to four) and the median duration of stay was 18 (range six to 34) days.
No patient in this group could be considered to have had a successful and uneventful procedure.
The major problem was that these were ill patients in whom the slightest disturbance caused a major exacerbation of their underlying medical condition.
The most common problem was pain, often due to subhepatic bile collections, or difficulties with track or drainage tubes.
Particular technical problems were the fracture and retention of a prong in two patients, presumably due to the prong impinging on the impeller.
Skilled cholecystoscopy (ARH) retrieved the situation by extracting the prong in both cases.
A particularly difficult problem is the passage of fragments down the cystic duct; provided these fragments pass into the common bile duct endoscopic sphincterotomy successfully manages the situation (patient VII, XI), but if the stone remains in the cystic duct removal can be impossible as even the smallest scope or basket will not dislodge the stone (patient XII).
One patient (patient VIII), however, had a stone successfully manipulated from the cystic duct into the gall bladder where the stone was fragmented at subsequent lithotripsy.
A large stone can provide a technical problem particular if hard; in patient XIII the lithotrite cored a hole in a 28 mm stone, which did not break up and required subsequent cholecystoscopy and contact lithotripsy followed by a second rotary lithotripsy procedure.
A septate gall bladder provided a particular problem in that the lower chamber was cleared, but despite a repeat procedure, manipulation of the lithotrite into the upper chamber was not accomplished; clearance was achieved by percutaneous cholecystolithotomy as a further procedure (patient XIII).
NON-COMPLEX GROUP
It had been anticipated that this group of fit and well motivated patients would have fared better, and allowed full assessment of the advantages of this technique, particularly as the patients were younger, median age 63 (range 33–77) and fitter (lower ASA grade).
Six patients agreed to have the procedure performed under local anaesthaeia and six opted for general anaesthaesia.
As they were fitter all had the procedure in one stage and withstood up to 52 minutes rotation time (patient VIII).
Ten of the 12 patients had a successful clearance of the gall bladder, with the procedure described in all these patients as technically very easy.
Both patients who had stones retained at the end of the procedure had satisfactory clearance at cholecystoscopy.
The median number of admissions was two, but in this group of patients, there were eight emergency admissions on account of complications, accountingfor the prolonged duration of stay (median 13 (range three to 24) days).
The cause of the emergency admissions and prolonged stay was not due to the procedure itself, but due to pain, which was invariably related to bile leaks that occurred late in the course of the recovery.
Initially these were missed on ultrasound, and only shown on careful computed tomography scanning as the fluid was not localised in the right upper quadrant.
Most resolved with simple conservative treatment and antibiotics but some required the insertion of percutaneous drains (patient X, XI) or simple aspiration (patients I and III).
Patient XII was managed by an endoscopic sphincterotomy after percutaneous drainage of the collection.
One patient was admitted to another hospital (patient VII), and despite good conservative management failed to resolve rapidly.
Thus the surgeon, after discussion, decided to undertake cholecystectomy and confirmed a gall bladder perforation; this patient subsequently did well.
PERCUTANEOUS FLEXIBLE CHOLECYSTOSCOPY
Percutaneous flexible cholecystoscopy was performed on 19 patients on or after the 10th postprocedural day.
The gall bladder mucosa seemed normal in 16 patients; in two there was evidence of chronic inflammation, and in one patient the gall bladder was acutely inflammed.
In no patient was there evidence of perforation, even in those in whom bile collections were found.
Of particular note was the therapeutic value of the cholecystoscopy: in the complex group two prongs and several stones were removed (complete clearance in patient II), and in the non-complex group complete clearance was achieved in two patients (IV and V).
Follow-up data are available in 18 patients between three and six months after the procedure.
Eleven patients have remained free of stones throughout; two patients with fragments noted at three months were clear at six months after continued oral bile acid treatment.
Four patients have developed recurrent stones, one of whom has had a laparoscopic cholecystectomy, a second who is about to have a laparoscopic procedure, and two who are free of symptoms.
The 18th patient is symptom free after the cholecystectomy performed for a bile leak.
Gall bladder contractility was present in nine of the 10 patients at follow up; in two of these patients a non-contractile gall bladder had become contractile and in one patient, gall bladder contractility had been lost.
The remaining six patients are free of symptoms, but have not attended for ultrasound examination.
The seventh patient (patient X: complex group) died on the 60th postprocedural day on account of a further exacerbation of his cardiac failure.
Discussion
No new procedure is without technical problems, which account for the phenomenon of the learning curve that occurs with all new technical treatments.
The importance of assessment, after it has been established that the technique achieves what it has set out to do (phase I), is to determine that the technique is safe, effective, and worthy of further trial (phase II).
Of importance at this stage is whether the technique merits wider and detailed comparative trials or is to good that such trials are not justified on ethical considerations or is so good that patient pressure is such that carefully controlled trials cannot be mounted (phase III).
The objective of this report is to assess whether an experience with 25 patients justifies further development of the apparatus, and a move to a phase III trial.
The experience reported suggests that the method is effective in that at the end of the rotary lithotrite procedures 17 patients had a gall bladder clear of stones, and with subsequent proceduressuch as cholecystoscopy, endoscopic sphincterotomy, and percutaneous cholecystolithotomy all but two patients had stones cleared from the biliary system.
Nevertheless, this was only achieved as a consequence of complex and sophisticated technology inappropriate to the management of a common condition for which there are simpler alternative treatments.
For instance, the small diameter flexible cholecystoscopes are still at an early stage of development giving limited vewsof the gall bladder, and require experience to manipulate and perform direct contact lithotripsy.
Retrieval of stones, fragments, or prongs is difficult as the working channel within the scope is narrow and allows only limited instrumentation.
The complications, which occurred in all patients apart from two who achieved the protocol, could be overcome, and no early deaths were recorded in a high risk group of patients, but pain and bile leakage were major problems.
The pain was difficult to understand, but could be severe, occurring in the absence of obvious leakage of bile or other complication.
The cause of the pain was attributed to gall bladder irritability, as it resembled the patients' original attacks of biliary colic; yet on cholecystoscopy at or after 10 days only one patient had appreciable mucosal inflammatory change.
Nevertheless, microscopic examination of the gall bladder does show significant submucosal disruption (Cuschieri, personal communication).
The high incidence of biliary leakage could not be easily explained.
The transhepatic route was used in 15 patients and the transperitoneal route in 10 patients.
The first was used initially to prevent leakage, but was abandoned in favour of the transperitoneal route to achieve a better vortex and easier stone fragmentation.
Leakage occurred with equal frequency in both groups.
It is possible that this leakage was caused by minute perforations of the gall bladder allowing transudation of bile, that healed by the time of cholecystoscopy.
Certainly the surgeon who performed the cholecystectomy on day 12 after the procedure was sure that he had found aperforation in the gall bladder seperate from the puncture site.
A second cause for the leakage was misadventure with the tract from the skin to the gall bladder.
Modern siliconised tubes are less irritant than the old rubber catheters with the consequence that the walling off of the tract from the peritoneal cavity by fibrous tissue is less effective and more prone to leakage.
To have left the tube and drain in place for 14–21 days would have been ideal but less acceptable to the patient.
Unfortunately, no effective gall bladder plug has been developed despite considerable research in this field.
Our experience with percutaneous cholecystolithotomy followed an identical learning curve; it was not until the first 50 procedures had been performed that a routine was established and the technical proglems overcome.
For instance access to the gall bladder was lost in one patient, a well described problem and the absence of a safety guide wire meant that greater care with the track had to be exercised.
Difficulties determining whether or not the gall bladder was clear of stones were encountered; indeed, four patients were thought to be free of stones at the end of the procedure only to have fragments found on the 10th day.
Floroscopy in these circumstances has been previously reported to be inaccurate, detection of impacts on the lithotrite also proved to be inaccurate, and ultrasound immediately after the procedure was non-contributory, showing diffuse echogenicity throughout the gall bladder lumen.
this appearance has been explained by multiple tiny bubbles produced by rotation of the impeller.
For this reason cholecystoscopy seems likely to be a permanent part of this procedure as it is necessary to confirm gall bladder clearance and to remove very small stones left behind after the lithotrite procedure.
The objective of a phase II type study is to determine whether this procedure is a useful addition to those already available for treating gall stones.
The answer to this question lies in the complex problem of whether there is ever a role for retaining the gall bladder in the presence of stones, and whether it is the gall bladder that is the cause of the stones such that recurrence of stones is inevitable.
On the other hand, the loss of the gall bladder reservoir, the increase in gastro-oesophageal reflux, and the possible relation with cholonic neoplasia suggest that young patients who develop gall stones in relation to a particular episode — for example, pregnancy — may be better served by preservation of the gall bladder.
The other group in whom gall bladder preservation is preferable are the old, the ill, and the high risk patients such as those described in the complex group.
Patients presenting with an acute cholecystitis can be treated with immediate improvement by percutaneous drainage.
To complete the procedure at a later date underlocal anaesthesia seems appropriate and in line with the modern concepts of minimally invasive surgery.
If it is accepted that there is a role, though admittedly limited, for managing gall stone disease by preservation of the gall bladder, should the rotary lithotrite be the method of choice?
Technically it has an advantage over percutaneous cholecystolithotomy in that it requires a tract only 12 French in diameter as opposed to 30 French.
The use of dissolution agents such as methyl- t -butylether or similar substances with or without computer controlled pumps have similar problems to those encountered in this study.
Thus the rotary lithotrite could have a role in the management of gall stones if the problems encountered can be overcome.
To overcome these problems, further experience and development is necessary.
The company involved (Baxter Corporation, California, USA) chose to test the instrument in multiple centres, such that no centre gained great experience and all encountered problems similar to those described in this paper.
Problems relating to the instrument were rapidly overcome.
After prongs were retained in two patients modifications were made to the instrument.
Other modifications were made to simplify insertion and use of the machine.
Yet, problems related to patients could not be modified, and undoubtedly further study is required to define for how long and at what speed the impeller can be rotated without microscopic damage to the gall bladder in vivo.
Studies are required to determine the best drainage catheter to use after the procedure and how long that catheter should be left in sit to provide easy and safe access for the cholecystoscope.
The hope is that an outpatient procedure under local anaesthaesia might be achieved with this procedure, with preservaton of the gall bladder.
Such an outcome would require continued development, which in terms of the return on the capital investment would either mean an instrument too expensive to use or the absence of a treatment modality.
In conclusion, this study shows that the rotary litotrite achieves stone emulsification with clearance of stones from the gall bladder, but much further work is necessary to overcome the complications found in the study before a true assessment of the technique can be made.
Effects of dietary calcium and phosphate on the intestinal interactions between calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids
Abstract
Luminal free fatty acids and bile acids may damage the colonic epithelium and stimulate proliferation, which may increase the risk of colon cancer.
It has been suggsted that only soluble calcium ions precipitate fatty acids and bile acids, thus reducing their lytic activity.
Consequently, precipitation of luminal calcium by dietary phosphate should inhibit these effects.
To evaluate the proposed antagonistic effects of dietary calcium and phosphate, we studied the intestinal interactions between calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids in rats fed purified diets that differed only in the concentrations of calcium and phosphate.
Increased dietary calcium drastically decreased the solubility of fatty acids in the ileum, colon, and faeces, as well as the solubility of bile acids in the colon and faeces.
Although dietary calcium strongly increased the total faecal fatty acid concentration and hardly affected the total faecal bile acid concentration, the bile acid concentrations in faecal water were drastically decreased by dietary calcium.
Consequently, the lytic activity of faecal water was decreased.
Dietary phosphate did not interfere with these intestinal effects of calcium.
These results indicate that dietary phosphate does not inhibit the protective effects of dietary calcium on luminal solubility and the lytic activity of fatty and bile acids.
Epidemiological studies indicate that the incidence of colon cancer is positively correlated with the dietary intake of fat, and negatively correlated with the intake of calcium.
To explain these associations it has been hypothesised that dietary fat increases the colonic concentrations of soluble free fatty acids and secondary bile acids.
These hydrophobic surfactantsmay damage colonic epithelial cells and consequently stimulate the proliferation of colonic crypt cells, which may increase the risk of colon cancer.
With regard to the protective effects of dietary calcium, Newmark et al hypothesised that soluble calcium (Ca + ) in the intestinal lumen precipitates fatty acids and bile acids and thus prevents their lytic effects on colonic epithelium.
They suggested that dietary phosphate inhibits this protective effect of calcium, because phosphate will also bind luminal calcium ions and thus reduce the amount of calcium available for fatty acid and bile acid precipitation.
The protective effects of dietary calcium on the lytic activity of faecal water and on colonic proliferation have been ascertained in many rodent and human studies.
However, the mechanism of these protective effects as well as the proposed inhibitory effect of phosphate have hardly been studied in vivo.
Only Hu et al reported recently that phsophate inhibits the protective effects of calcium on epithelial proliferation caused by intrarectally instilled deoxycholate. their study design, however, precluded the normal physiological interactions between dietary calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids in the small and large intestine.
In vitro experiments performed in our laboratory have shown that the lytic activity of bile acids increases in the presence of Ca + and decreases when phosphate is added.
This inhibition is caused by the formation of insoluble precipitates of calcium, phosphate, and bile acid micelles.
It should be noted that these in vitro results are contrast with the hypothesis mentioned above.
Because phosphate is approximately equimolar to calcium in animal diets and is in molar excess of calcium in human diets, quantification of the intestinal interactions between calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids in vivo is relevant for a proper evaluation of the effects of dietary calcium and phosphate.
Therefore, in the present study these interactions were studied in a strictly controlled experiment with rats, using dietary calcium and phosphate concentrations which mimic their concentrations in animal and human diets.
In addition, to determine the dietary effects on the cytolytic potency of the intestinal contents, luminal lytic activity was measured as lysis of erythrocytes by faecal water.
Methods
ANIMALS AND DIETS
Eight week old female outbred Wistar rats (Laboratory Animal Center of the Wageningen Agricultural University) were housed individually.
For 2 weeks, eight groups of six rats each were fed purified diets, differing only in the concentrations of calcium and phosphate.
The basal diet contained (per kg) 200 g casein (acid casein, DMV Veghel, The Netherlands), 471 g dextrose, 20 g cellulose, 35 g mineral mix, 10 g vitamin mix, 180 g palm oil, 20 g corn oil, and 10 g cholesterol.
Cholesterol was added to increase the intestinal concentration of bile acids, because dietary cholesterol stimulates bile acid synthesis in rats.
Because of the presence of casein, a phosphorylated protein, this basal diet contained 50 µmol/g phosphate.
Varying amounts of CaCO 3 and NaH 2 PO 4 /KH 2 PO 4 (25, 75, and 225 µmol/g) were added to the basal diet in exchange for washed sand.
These concentrations were chosen to cover a wide range around the recommended dietary concentration of 130 µmol/g CaHPO 4 in the standard AIN-76 diet.
The diets were balanced for sodium and potassium (final concentrations 125 and 100 µmol/g) with Na 2 CO 3 and K 2 CO 3 respectively.
Dietary concentrations of other minerals and of vitamins were according to the AIN-76 recommendations.
Diets and water were supplied ad libitum.
Food consumption was recorded every 3 days and the animals were weighed weekly.
Faeces were collected quantitatively from days 11 to 14.
The interactions between calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids in the distal small intestine as well as in the colon were studied in detail in the groups with the lowest and the highest concentrations of dietary calcium and phosphate.
Rats fed the low calcium (25 µmol/g) and phosphate (75 µmol/g) control diet or this diet supplemented with either 200 µmol/g calcium or 200 µmol/g calcium and phosphate were killed by decapitation on day 14 between 10.00 and 12.00 am.
The distal third part of the small intestine (ileum) and the colon were excised and their contents collected.
TREATMENT OF ILEAL, COLONIC, AND FAECAL SAMPLES
Ileal contents were incubated in a shaking waterbath (5 minutes at 37°C) and subsequently centrifuged for 10 minutes at 15000 g (Eppendorf 5415).
Supernatant was stored at -20°C until further use and the pellet was freeze dried.
Colonic contents and faeces were freeze dried.
Colonic and faecal water were prepared by reconstituting freeze dried samples with double distilled water to respectively 20% and 35% dry weight, to mimic the conditions in the proximal and distal colon.
After homogenisation, the samples were incubated in a shaking waterbath (1 hour at 37°C), followed by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 15000 g .
The supernatant was stored at -20°C until further use.
Using this procedure, faecal water from freeze dried faeces in control experiments did not differ from faecal water prepared from fresh faeces with regard to concentrations of calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids and with regard to lytic activity.
ANALYSES
After dry ashing of the freeze dried samples, total calcium was measured using an atomic absorption spectophotometer (Model 1100, Perkin-Elmer Corp, Norwalk, CT, USA) and total phosphate was measured as described by Fiske and Subbarow.
Supernatants were acidified with trichloroacetic acid (final concentration 5% w/v) and analysed for calcium and phosphate as described above.
Total and soluble fatty acids were determined as follows.
Freeze dried samples and supernatants were acidified with HCl (final concentration 4 M) and fatty acids were subsequently extracted three times with 5 volumes of diethyl ether.
After evaporation of diethyl ether, fatty acids were resolubilised in ethanol and quantified using a colorimetric enzymatic assay (NEFA-C, Wako Chemicals, Neuss, Germany).
In control experiments this extraction procedure resulted in >recovery of added fatty acids.
Total bile acids were extracted from freeze dried samples with a t-butanol/water mixture (1:1, v/v), as described previously.
Extracts and supernatants were assayed for bile acids using a fluorimetric enzymatic assay (Sterognost 3α-flu, Nycomed AS, Oslo, Norway).
DETERMINATION OF LYTIC ACTIVITY
Human erythrocytes were isolated and washed as described by Coleman et al .
Increasing volumes of faecal water (0–160 µl) were mixed with 154 mM NaCl to a total volume of 160 µl.
After preincubation for 5 minutes at 37°C in a shaking waterbath, 40 µl erythrocytes (final haematocrit 5%) were added.
Simultaneously, erythrocytes were incubated in 154 mM NaCl (0% lysis) and in double distilled water (100% lysis).
After incubation for 30 minutes at 37°C, samples were centrifuged for a minite at 10000 g .
Haemolysis was determined by measuring the Fe content of the supernatant using an atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer 1100).
The lytic activity was quantified as the area under the lytic curve and expressed as a percentage of the maximal area, which implies 100% lysis of erythrocytes at each dilution of faecal water.
We recently found a high correlation between luminal lytic activity and in vivo colonic proliferation as determined by lysis of erythrocytes and H-thymidine incorporation, respectively.
STATISTICS
Results are given as means of six rats per group with standard errors.
After analysis of variance, differences between means were subjected to the least significant difference (LSD) test.
Differences were regarded as significant if p.
Results
No differences were observed between groups in food intake (mean 13.0 g/day) or in final body weight (mean 175 g).
The daily output of faeces was slightly enhanced by dietary calcium and decreased by dietary phosphate (Table I).
First, we studied the intestinal interactions of calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids in animals fed the low calcium and phosphate control diet or this diet supplemented with either calcium or calcium and phosphate.
Figure 1 shows the effects of these diets on the concentrations of soluble and insoluble calcium and phosphate in the ileum, colon, and faeces.
High dietary calcium, as well as additional supplementation with phosphate, hardly affected the soluble concentrations of calcium and phosphate in the ileum, colon, and faeces.
On the other hand, these treatments drastically increased the concentrations of insoluble calcium.
Calcium supplementation increased the intestinal concentrations of insoluble phosphate, which indicates formation of insoluble calcium phosphate.
This was stimulated further by additional supplementation with phosphate, especially in the colon and faeces.
The total fatty acid and bile acid concentrations along the intestine are shown in Table II.
Because of these diet induced differences in total fatty acid concentrations, the solubility of fatty acids and bile acids is expressed relative to their total concentrations (Fig 2).
Dietary calcium supplementation drastically reduced the solubility of fatty acids in the ileum, and this effect was maintained in the colon and faeces.
Calcium supplementation did not influence the solubility of bile acids in the ileu, but it reduced their solubility to about 20% in the colon and faeces.
Additional phosphate supplementation did not affect the calcium induced reduction in solubility of fatty acids and bile acids.
Because of the similarity of the effects observed in the colon and faeces, we subsequently studied the concentration dependence of the effects of dietary calcium and phosphate in the faeces.
Figures 3 and 4 show the effects of the different diets on the total faecal concentrations of calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids.
As expected, increased dietary calcium increased the total calcium in faeces and this was only slightly stimulated by phosphate supplementation of the high calcium diet (Fig 3).
Increased dietary calcium increased faecal phosphate because the formation of insoluble calcium phosphate inhibits the absorption of phosphate.
This effect was more pronounced in rats taking the high phosphate diets.
Dietary calcium supplementation drastically increased thetotal faecal fatty acid concentration (Fig 4) and this reflects the inhibition of the intestinal absorption of fatty acids.
This inhibition was partly counteracted by increased dietary phosphate.
In contrast to fatty acids, the total bile acid concentration was hardly influenced by the different diets.
The observed slight decrease in faecal bile acid concentration with increasing dietary calcium concentrations reflects the concomitant increase in faecal mass (Table I).
Therefore no significant effect of the different diets on the total daily output of bile acids was observed.
We subsequently determined the soluble faecal concentrations of calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids.
Supplemental dietary calcium did not increase the concentrations of soluble calcium (Fig 5), notwithstanding the large increase in total faecal calcium.
Only on the low calcium diet was soluble calcium significantly decreased, as soluble phosphate was increased by phosphate supplementation of this diet.
Phosphate supplementation of the intermediate and high calcium diets increased the soluble phosphate value, but decreased the pH of faecal water.
The net result of these antagonistic effects was that no significant change in soluble calcium was observed.
The logarithm of the concentration product of calcium and phosphate was negatively correlated with the pH of faecal water (r=-0.75, n=48; p).
This indicates that the soluble faecal concentrations of calcium and phosphate are controlled by the pH dependent solubility product of calcium phosphate.
In creased dietary calcium decreased the fatty acid concentration in faecal water (Fig 6).
Supplementary dietary phosphate decreased the fatty acid concentration only on the low calcium diet.
The bile acid concentration in faecal water also decreased with increasing dietary calcium, and this was not influenced by dietary phosphate.
The logarithms of soluble fatty acid concentrations in the faeces were highly correlated with the logarithms of precipitated faecal calcium and phosphate concentrations (respectively -0.85 and -0.76, n=48; p).
Similar negative correlations were found for the logarithms of soluble bile acids and of precipitated calcium and phosphate (respectively -0.80 and -0.60, n=48; p).
Finally, using lysis of erythrocytes, we ascertained whether the decreased luminal solubility of fatty acids and bile acids affected the cytolytic potency of the intestinal contents.
The lytic activity of faecal water was high on the low calcium diets (Fig 6).
Corresponding with the decreased solubility of fatty acids and bile acids, the lytic activity was completely inhibited by the highest level of dietary calcium and no significant effect of dietary phosphate was observed.
Discussion
These results show for the first time to our knowledge, the interactions between calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids along the intestine.
Extrapolating these results to human diets, the lowest calcium concentration used in the present study (25 µmol/g) reflects a daily intake of calcium of about 12.5 mmol (500 mg) which is about 60% of the recommended dietary allowance for calcium.
Hence, increasing the calcium concentration to 75 and 225 µmol/g mimics a supplementing the human diet with 25 and 100 mmol/day, respectively.
The phosphate concentrations were changed accordingly to incorporate the molar calcium to phosphate ratio of about 0.5, which is typical for human diets.
It was shown that dietary phosphate does not interfere with the protective effects of dietary calcium on luminal solubility and lytic activity of fatty acids and bile acids.
This is supported by our study with human volunteers, in which an excess of dietary phosphate did not prevnet the protective effects of supplemental dietary calcium on solubility and lytic activity of luminal surfactants.
Our study does not, therefore, offer an explanation for the recent observations of Hu et al , who found that phosphate inhibits the protective effect of dietary calcium on colonic proliferation in rats.
These authors, however, used intrarectal instillation of deoxycholate combined with short term (about 24 hours) oral intubations of calcium and phosphate.
This design precludes, in our opinion, the normal physiological interaction between calcium, phosphate, and bile acids in the small and large intestine.
Our results are in accordance with other studies in rodents, which showed that dietary supplementation with calcium phosphate inhibits lytic activity of faecal water and colonic proliferation.
The extent of the reported inhibition is comparable with that found in other studies using similar amounts of calcium carbonate or calcium lactate.
In our opinion, these results already suggest that the type of calcium salt does not interfere with the protective effects of dietary calcium on lytic activity of faecal water an on proliferation.
In none of these studies, however, were the intestinal interactions between calcium, phosphate, fatty acids, and bile acids determined.
Quantification of these interactions is essential for a proper discussion of the intestinal effects of dietary calcium and phosphate.
Dietary supplementation with calcium carbonate did not increase the soluble calcium concentrations along the intestine and in the faeces (Figs 1 and 5), notwithstanding the large increase in the total faecal calcium concentrations (Figs 1 and 3).
The present results indicate that a substantial amount of this total calcium is associated with insoluble phosphate, which is in accordance with results obtained in other animal and human studies.
As shown earlier, calcium phosphate starts precipitating at a pH of about 6.
Therefore, high concentrations of soluble calcium can only exist at the relatively low pH of the proximal small intestine, or when no phosphate is present, as can be derived from the observed negative correlation between the logarithm of the solubility product of calcium phosphate and the pH of faecal water.
Increased dietary calcium drastically increased the faecal excretion of fatty acids (Fig 4), which has also been found in other studies.
This reflects inhibition of the absorption of dietary fat.
On the low phosphate diets this inhibition is probably caused by precipitation of fatty acids by high concentrations of soluble calcium in the proximal small intestine.
As shown in Figure 2, this effect of calcium on the solubility of fatty acids persisted in the ileum and colon.
The stimulation of fatty acid excretion was slightly counteracted by dietary phosphate (Fig 4), which indicates that under these conditions, formation of insoluble calcium phosphate had already occurred in the proximal small intestine.
Our results indicate that this effect of phosphate is confined to the proximal small intestine because increased dietary phosphate did not significantly increase the solubility of fatty acids in the ileum, colon, and faeces (Fig 2).
We do not, at present, have an adequate explanation for the apparently anomalous effect of phosphate on the fatty acid concentration in faecal water in rats fed the low calcium diet, and this requires further investigation.
The present results show that dietary calcium has a site specific effect on the solubility of bile acids.
It can be speculated that the calcium dependent precipitation of bile acids in the colon is a result of their microbial deconjugation and dehydroxylation in this compartment.
Bile acids in the rat are predominantly conjugated with taurine.
As shown earlier, taurine conjugated bile acids are not precipitated by calcium or calcium phosphate.
In contrast, the unconjugated, carboxylic, bile acids are easily precipitated by calcium phosphate.
The observation that bile acids are not precipitated by calcium in the ileum, where reabsorption of bile acids takes place, explains why total faecal bile acid output is hardly affected by dietary calcium (Fig 4).
In contrast, fatty acid excretion is strongly increased by dietary calcium, suggesting that fatty acids are precipitated by calcium before the absorption site, the proximal small intestine, is reached.
These findings indicate that the total faecal concentrations of fatty acids and bile acids are not determined by the amount of intraluminally formed complexes, as was recently suggested by Appleton et al , but are determined by the site at which this occurs.
We found significant negative correlations in faeces between soluble fatty acids and bile acids and insoluble calcium and phosphate.
Although correlations never prove a causal relationship, they may indicate that the solubilities of fatty acids and bile acids are determined by insoluble calcium phosphate.
This is in accordance with out in vitro studies, showing that calcium phsphate decreases the solubility of bile acids.
Finally, a pertinent finding of the present study is that the protective effect of dietary calcium on the lytic activity of faecal water correlated with its effect on the concentrations of soluble fatty acids and bile acids (Fig 6), but not with their total concentrations (Fig 4).
In accordance with the results of several other studies, this indicates that these soluble surfactants are the main determinants of luminal lytic activity.
We recently found that this luminal lytic activity is highly correlated with in vivo proliferation of colonic epithelium, which indicates that these soluble surfactants may affect therisk of colon cancer.
In conclusion these results show that dietary calcium stimulates the formation of insoluble calcium phosphate and decreases the luminal solubility of fatty acids and bile acids in rats.
Luminal lytic activity is consequently inhibited.
These protective effects of calcium are not inhibited by a fourfold increase in dietary phosphate.
Pancreatic hypertrophy with acinar cell nodules after longterm fundectomy in the rat
Abstract
The effect of gastric fundectomy with hypergastrinaemia on the pancreas in rats was studied for 14 months.
Rats with hypercholecystokininaemia which had had a pancreaticobiliary diversion (PBD) operation and sham operated rats served as controls.
Fundectomised rats showed a significant increase in pancreatic weight and total DNA and protein content compared with sham operated rats.
DNA flow cytometry showed a significantly higher rato of tetraploid to diploid nuclei in pancreatic tissue after fundectomy than after sham operation.
Mean values of all these variables were significantly lower after fundectomy than after PBD.
Acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci of the pancreas were diagnosed in both fundectomised and PBD operated rats, but not in sham operated controls.
The volume density and H-thymidine labelling index of the acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci were significantly lower after fundectomy than after PBD.
Changes consistent with pancreatic adenoma were diagnosed in the PBD group only.
In conclusion, fundectomy lasting about half of the life span in rats causes pancreatic hyperplasia and hypertrophy, as well as development of acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci.
Although hypergastrinaemia is a prominent feature, it may not be the only factor responsible for this pancreaticotrophical effect of fundectomy.
Gastrin-17 and pentagastrin given exogenously, as well as surgical procedures leading to endogenous hypergastrinaemia, have been reported to stimulate growth of the exocrine pancreas in mice and rats.
Gastrin receptors have been found in guinea pig pancreatic acini and in an azaserine induced rat carcinoma cell line.
It has been shown in man that gastrin-17 augments pancreatic enzyme secretion at doses that are below the maximum for gastric acid secretion.
These findings show that gastrin, under certain circumstances, may stimulate growth and function of the exocrine pancreas.
There are other studies, however, showing that neither potent acid secretion inhibition with hypergastrinaemia in different rodents, nor gastrin-17 infusion in rats, causes pancreatic growth.
In rats, resection of the oxyntic gland area of the stomach (fundectomy) induces endogenous hypergastrinaemia.
This model has been used to evaluate the effects of chronic hypergastrinaemia on digestive organs, including the pancreas.
In one study, fundectomy for 10 weeks did not induce pancreatic hypertrophy.
The effect of fundectomy for longer than 10 weeks on the pancreas is not known.
The purpose of this study was to investigate this aspect using simultaneous measurements of morphology, DNA ploidy, and autoradiography.
Pancreaticobiliary diversion (PBD) in the rat and hamster induces persistent hypercholecystokininaemia with pancreatic hypertrophy.
This trophic effect can be prevented by the simultaneous administration of a cholecystrokinin (CCK) receptor antagonist namely L-364,718.
In rats, longterm PBD leads to the development of hyperplastic acinar cell nodules and adenoma in the pancreas.
We therefore decided to include this model as a positive control in this study.
Methods
ANIMALS AND STUDY DESIGN
The study was approved by the local animal welfare committee.
Forty two male eight week old Wistar rats (Bantin and Kingman, United Kindom) with a mean body weight (SD) of 268 (21) g were used.
The animals were kept at 20°C, 50% humidity and a light/dark cycle of 12/12 hours.
They had free access to standard rat food pellets (EWOS, Sweden) and tap water.
Rats were divided into three groups.
One group (n= 14) was operated on with resection of the oxyntic gland area of the stomach (fundectomy).
The vagal trunks were preserved, and gastric function was restored by anastomosis between the antrum and the non-oxynit rumen of the proximal stomach.
Another group (n=16) had PBD by transposing, at most, 7 mm of duodenum, including the pancreaticobiliary ducts and papilla, to the middle of the small intestine.
The third group (n=12) was sham operated with small intestinal transection and gastrotomy in the oxyntic gland area.
Ketamine hydrochloride (Ketalar, Parke-Davis, United Kingdom) and xylazin chloride (Rompun, Bayer, Germany) given intraperitoneally were used for general anaesthesia.
Animals were fasted for 15 hours before the operation.
Postoperative fasting lasted 24 hours during which the animals received two subcutaneous injections of 8 ml 0.9% saline.
There was no early postoperative death, but one fundectomised rat died 10 months after the operation.
At 14 months, all rate were killed by exsanguination under general anaesthesia and after fasting for 15 hours.
One hour before being killed, each rat received H-thymidine through the internal jugular vein (specific activity 20.0 Ci/ mmol, Du Pont de Nemours GmbH, Germany) in a dose of 1 µCi/g body weight.
To rule out the possible influence of intraperitoneal sequelae of the operation, only animals with no or slight adhesions in the area of the operation were included.
This resulted in 10 fundectomised, 13 PBD operated, and 10 sham operated rats for further studies.
The entire pancreas was removed, trimmed of fat, and weighed.
The presence of macroscopic nodules was noted and their diameter recorded.
The pancreatic tail was removed and fixed in formalin for histological studies.
A piece of tissue adjacent to the pancreatic tail was excised and kept in citrate buffer at -70°C for flow cytometry.
The rest of the gland was quick frozen and stored at -70°C for DNA and protein analysis.
Blood samples of the fasted state of the rats were taken at the time when the animals were killed for measurement of gastrin and CCK in plasma and were collected in EDTA tubes from the internal jugular vein.
Plasma was stored at -20°C until analysed.
DNA AND PROTEIN ANALYSIS
Pancreatic tissue, DNA and protein contents were analysed according to the methods described by Labarca and Paigen and Lowry et al , respectively.
Flow cytometry was performed blindly.
The tissue was thawed and dissected with a pair of scissors at room temperature.
For preparation of nuclei suspension, a detergent trypsin procedure specified by Vindeløv et al was used.
The trypsinised nuclei, which were stabilized by spermine tetrahydrochloride, were stained with propidium iodide after filtration.
A FACscan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) and a 15 mW argon laser (488 nm) were used to estimate DNA ploidy and S phase fraction.
Histograms with at least 15000 events were recorded.
Chicken and trout red blood cells were used as internal reference standards.
S phase was calculated using a rectangular distribution.
The number of channels between the G /G 1 and G 2 /M peak were multiplied by the mean number of cells in the channels interactively selected in the S phase region of the histogram.
AUTORADIOGRAPHY AND HISTOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
For autoradiographical and morphological studies, tissue specimens fixed in 4% buffered formalin were embedded in plastic (JB4 Kit, Polaron Equipment, Watford, United Kingdom) and cut in 2 µm thick sections.
These were coated with Kodak NTB 2 emulsion (Eastman Kodak, NY, USA), developed after four weeks of incubation in darkness at 4°C, and counterstained with haematoxylin and eosin.
Atypical acinar cell foci were identified histologically and classified as acidophilic or basophilic according to established criteria.
Identification of pancreatic adenoma or carcinoma was also made according to previously described critria.
Sections from the pancreatic tail were screened for such lesions.
The volume density (%) of atypical acinar cell foci was determined blindly with a modified point counting method, using amagnification of ×400 and 25 µm between the points.
In each animal, a total of 30000 points were counted over consecutive visual fields across the tissue sections.
The H-thymidine labelling index of the atypical acinar cell foci was determined blindly on autoradiographed sections with a magnification of ×1000.
Five or more grains overlying a nucleus were considered a significant labelling.
In each animal, a total of 200 labelled and non-labelled acinar cell nuclei within the foci were counted in consecutive visual fields.
Labelling index was expressed as the number of labelled cells per 1000 cells.
The diameter of the foci was determined microscopically, taking the mean of at least two measurements.
PLASMA GASTRIN AND CHOLECYSTOKININ ASSAY
The concentrations of gastrin in plasma were measured by a specific radioimmunoassay, as previously described.
The concentrations of CCK in plasma were measured by a radioimmunoassay using C-terminal directed anti-serum samples without cross reactivity towards gastrin.
The assays have been described in detail elsewhere.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are expressed as mean (SEM).
Two tailed Student's t test as well as the Mann-Whitney U test were used.
Differences were considered significant when pin both tests.
p Values are those derived from the t test unless otherwise stated.
Results
BODY WEIGHT AND PLASMA GASTRIN AND CHOLECYSTOKININ
The animals seemed healthy during the experiment.
At the time of death, the mean body weight of the fundectomised rats was 80% of that in the sham operated rats, while the corresponding figure in PBD operated rats was 96% (Table I).
figure 1 shows the fasting plasma concentrations of gastrin and CCK at the time of death.
PANCREATIC WEIGHT, PROTEIN, AND DNA CONTENT
The mean pancreatic weight was increased by 31% in the fundectomy group and by 142% in the PBD group, compared with the sham operated group (Table I).
Correspondingly, the relative pancreatic weight (mg pancreas per g body weight) was increased by 65% after fundectomy and by 140% after PBD.
The mean total pancreatic content of protein and DNA was increased by 47% and 82%, respectively, in the fundectomy group, and by 159% and 152%, respectively, in the PBD group (Table I).
All these increases were statistically significant, as were the differences between fundectomised and PBD operated animals (p, p, p, p, respectively).
DNA PLOIDY
There was a significant increase in the ratio of tetraploid to diploid nuclei in pancreatic tissue in both fundectomised and PBD operated animals, when compared with the sham operated controls (Table I).
The ratios were higher in the PBD group than in the fundectomy group (p).
The fraction of cells in S phase did not differ significantly between the groups.
Figure 2 shows the DNA flow cytometry histograms.
MACROSCOPICAL AND MICROSCOPICAL FINDINGS
Multiple nodules with a maximum diameter of 1 mm were seem on macroscopical examination on the surface of two of 10 pancreas sections in the fundectomy group, and on four of 13 pancreatic sections in the PBD group.
Nodules with a maximum diameter of 3 mm were seen on three of the 13 pancreatic sections in the PBD group only No nodules were seen in the sham operated animals.
Acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci were diagnosed by microscopical examination in four (40%) of 10 animals in the fundectomy group and in 11 (85%) of 13 animals in the PBD group (Fig 3).
No foci were seen in the sham operated animals.
The volume density of the acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci was significantly lower in the fundectomy group than in the PBD group (Table II).
There was a similar difference in the mean diameter of the acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci.
Furthermore, H-thymidine labelling index of the acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci was significantly lower after fundectomy than after PBD (Table II).
Some nodules with a diameter of 4–6 mm in three of 13 pancreatic sections in the PBD group, but none of those in the fundectomy group, were surrounded by a fibrous capsule and maintained an acinar cell differentiation suggesting adenomatous change (Fig 4).
Basophilic atypical acinar cell foci and carcinomas were not found.
Discussion
In agreement with others, we found that PBD induces chronic endogenous hypercholecystokininaemia with pancreatic hyperplasia and hypertrophy.
These changes persistedafter 14 months at which time acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci and changes consistent with adenoma were also present.
Fundectomy caused a persistent endogenous hypergastrinaemia with a significant, although less pronounced, increase in pancreatic weight, total DNA and protein content, and development of acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci.
The finding of a more pronounced trophic response and more advanced morphological changes after PBD than after fundectomy was paralleled by a significant increase in the ratio of tetraploid to diploid nuclei in pancreatic tissue.
In a previous study, fundectomy did not result in pancreatic hypertrophy.
Some factors should be considered to find an explanation for the difference between that study and this one.
It was recently shown that the trophic response in rat pancreas is inversely related to the age of the animals at the onset of stimulation.
In this aspect there seems to be no difference between the studies.
The difference between the study periods, however, was a maximum of 10 weeks in the previous study compared with 14 months in this study.
This would correspond to several decades in man.
Furthermore, although pancreatic weight, DNA, RNA, and protein contents were analysed in the previous study, results of simultaneous investigations of morphology, morphometry, autoradiography, and DNA flow cytometry were not included.
Using a positive control group with PBD, as in this study, was also useful for comparative purposes and in the interpretation of morphological changes in the fundectomy group.
A recent study in rats, which considered effects of gastric secretion, showed that pronounced duodenogastric reflux (induced by a split gastrojejunostomy) was associated with hyperplasia and adenoma development in the pancreas after 14 months.
Whether these findings were a result of stagnation of secretions with increased CCK release in the afferent jejunal loop, a changed alkaline gastric content, or both is unclear.
There is, however, no reason to believe that fundectomy is associated with increased duodenogastric reflux.
The occurrence of acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci after longstanding fundectomy has not previously been reported.
Morphologically, these foci did not differ from those seen in the PBD group of from lesions previously defined as acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci, which may be induced by a chemical carcinogen in rat.
In the sham operated controls, acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci were not detected within an area of the pancreatic tail corresponding to at least 30000 counted points.
While some previous studies have shown absence of foci in old, untreated and control rats, others have shown that foci do occur spontaneously with increasing age.
Neither is contradicted by the results of this study.
Acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci in the rat have a high proliferative capacity and have been shown to be responsive to CCK, whereas the basophilic atypical acinar cell foci seem to have a low growth potential, not appreciably affected by CCK.
This study supports this concept as no basophilic atypical acinar cell foci were seen after longterm PBD.
Furthermore, fundectomy does not seem to influence the development or growth of basophilic atypical cainar cell foci.
The H-thymidine labelling index of the acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci in the fundectomy group was significantly lower than that in the PBD group, showing that PBD has the strongest stimulatory effect.
This conclusion is further strengthened by the fact that the pancreatic weight and volume density of the acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci in the fundectomy group were also significantly lower than those in the PBD group.
The fraction of cells in S phase did not differ significantly between the groups.
Although being significant, the difference in proliferative activity of the acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci between the fundectomy group and the PBD group may not have been large enough to cause measurable differences in the S phase, especially as flow cytometry was performed on total pancreatic tissue and not only isolated acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci.
We conclude that fundectomy for about half of the life span in rats stimulates pancreatic hyperplasia and hypertrophy as well as growth of acidophilic atypical acinar cell foci.
These effects are less pronounced than those of PBD with hypercholecystokininaemia.
Although hypergastrinaemia is a prominent feature, it may not be the only or main factor responsible for the pancreaticotrophical effect of fundectomy.
Changes in the balance of other hormones or growth factors, which are as yet unknown, may result from fundectomy.
Another factor which may be of relevance is the potentially carcinogenic substrate (N-nitrosamines and N-nitrosamides) formed with achlorhydria in the fairly large gastric remnant (rumen and antrum) after fundectomy.
Certainly, further investigations aimed to clarify these aspects are warranted.
Although these findings were on rats, they may also be relevant with regard to the possible effects of achlorhydria with or without hypergastrinaemia in man.
Epidemiological studies have shown that, apart from an increased risk of developing gastric cancer, patients with pernicious anaemia, as well as patients operated on with gastric resection more than 20 years ago, have an increased risk of developing cancer in other digestive organs, including the pancreas.
It should be emphasised, however, that this study did not show pancreatic neoplasia, including adenoma, in any of the fundectomised animals.
Duodenal mucosa and extracellular cyclic nucleotide pattern in coeliac disease
Abstract
This study measured the values of cyclic nucleotides and adenylate and guanylate cyclase activities in duodenal mucosa homogenates to verify if they played a part in coeliac disease.
Nine controls, 13 patients who did not receive treatment and nine patients who received treatment were studied.
Cyclase activity assays were performed under basal conditions and in the presence of gliadin derived peptides.
Duodenal mucosa cyclic nucleotide values and adenylate cycloase activity were significantly higher in patients who did not receive treatment than in those who did and in controls, whereas guanylate cyclase activity was similar in all groups.
Gliadin derived peptides did not affect guanylate cyclase activity, but significantly increased adenylate cyclase activity in homogenates from patients who did not receive treatment.
As extracellular cyclic nucleotide concentrations could reflect changes in their intracellular metabolism, plasma and urine cyclic nucleotide values were also measured in 25 controls and in 55 patients studied at different stages of their disease.
Extracellular cyclic nucleotides were considerably high in patients who were not healed and become normal after about one year of treatment.
These data suggest that cyclic nucleotides may participate in the pathophysiological processes of coeliac disease.
The biochemical basis for gluten toxicity in coeliac disease is still not known.
Preliminary studies have shown that in mucosa from the small intestine of patients with active coeliac disease the activity of adenylate cyclase, a basolateral membrane enzyme which catalyses the synthesis of adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic AMP, cAMP) from adenosine triphosphate (ATP), is abnormally high under basal conditions, and increases further in the presence of gliadin derived peptides.
The guanylate cyclase-guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cyclic GMP, cGMP) system has not been similarly studied.
In intestinal epithelium, cyclic nucleotides are involved in the regulation of water and electrolyte transport and mediate the action of various hormones, prostaglandins, and bacterial enterotoxins.
Furthermore, both cAMP and cGMP have been suggested to play a part in proliferative and inflammatory processes, which are known to occur in the small bowel mucosa of patients with coeliac disease.
In this study we measured adenylate and guanylate cyclase activities and cyclic nucleotide values in the biopsy specimens of duodenal mucosa from patients with untreated and treated coeliac disease.
Moreover, as extracellular cyclic nucleotide concentrations could reflect changes in their intracellular metabolism, plasma, and urine cyclic nucleotide values were also assessed in a large series of coeliac patients studied at different stages of their disease.
Methods
PATIENTS
Fifty five patients with coeliac disease proved by biopsy (13 men and 42 women, aged 18–66, mean 32.1), were studied.
Twenty had a recent diagnosis and were untreated and 35 were in clinical, biochemical, and histological remission after more than one year of gluten free diet.
No patient had any concomitant disease.
Control groups included 25 normal subjects (seven men and 18 women, aged 18–67, mean 36.8), and nine patients with epigastric pain without any evidence of small bowel disease (three men and six women, aged 24–56, mean 35.8).
All subjects gave informed consent for the study, which was approved by the local ethical committee.
BIOPSY SPECIMENS
Duodenal biopsy specimens were taken during diagnostic endoscopies with biopsy forceps for 13 untreated (mucosa morphology grade III-IV, according to Scott and Losowsky) and nine treated coeliac patients (mucosa morphology grade I-II), and from nine patients investigated for epigastric pain (normal villous structure).
Biopsy specimens were processed immediately.
Some specimens were insufficient to check either cyclase activities and cyclic nucleotide values.
Thus, 11 samples were used for adenylate cyclase, nine for cAMP, six for guanylate cyclase, and six for cGMP determination in the untreated patients.
In treated patients and in controls six samples were used for each index.
BLOOD AND URINE SAMPLES
Cyclic nucleotide values were measured in the plasma from all 55 patients with coeliac disease and from the 25 normal subjects, and in the urine from 17 patients and 10 normal subjects.
Fifteen of the untreated patients were re-evaluated after six and 12 months of gluten free diet.
As changes in extracellular cyclic nucleotide concentrations may result from glucagon or atrial natriuretic peptide hypersecretion, plasma values of these two hormones were assayed in 15 normal subjects, 10 untreated, and 10 treated patients with coeliac disease.
All subjects were asked not to take any drug during the two days before the study.
Urine was collected in refrigerated containers over a 24 hour period, starting between 10 and 12 am on the day before blood sampling.
At the end of collection, urine volumes were measured and aliquots frozen at -30°C until assayed for cyclic nucleotide and creatinine content.
Venous blood samples were drawn between 8 and 9 am, after an overnight fast and at least one hour's bed rest, for routine haematology and serum biochemistry tests and for the specific analyses.
The samples were added to tubes which had been chilled previously containing disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA)(5 mM, final concentration) for cyclic nucleotide assay, and EDTA and aprotinine (500 KIU/ml) for atrial natriuretic peptide and glucagon assays.
Samples of plasma were separated immediately by centrifugation at 4°C and stored at -80°C until assayed.
TISSUE PREPARATION
Biopsy specimens were washed in saline, and homogenised in an ice cold buffer (25 mM TRIS HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol) using a Teflon glass homogeniser (10 strokes).
Cell disruption was checked at microscopy.
Protein content was determined by Lowry's method.
INTRACELLULAR CYCLIC NUCLEOTIDE ASSAY
Cyclic nucleotides were extracted from homogenates by boiling and sonicating, as previously described, and their values measured by radioassay (cyclic AMP assay kit, code TRK 432; cyclic GMP RIA kit, code TRK 500, Amersham, Buckinghamshire) in freeze dried 3500 g supernatants (20 minutes at 4°C), reconstituted in water.
Protein concentrations were 0.2–1.0 mg/ ml for cAMP and 0.75–1.25 mg/ml for cGMP determination.
Each sample was tested in triplicate.
The results were expressed as pmol of cyclic nucleotide/mg of protein.
ADENYLATE AND GUANYLATE CYCLASE ASSAYS
Biopsy homogenates were centrifuged at 7000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C and the pellets resuspended in the homgenisation buffer to obtain a protein concentration of 1–4 mg/ml.
Adenylate cyclase activity was assayed at 30°C for 10 minutes in 50 µl of an incubation mixture containing 25 mM TRIS HCl (pH 7.5), 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.5 mM ATP, 0.5 mM isobutylmethlxanthine, 5 mM creatine phosphate, creatine phosphokinase (50 U/ml), 1 mM dithiothreitol, bovine serum albumin (0.1 mg/ml), 10 µM guanosine triphosphate, and homogenate (10–40 µg of protein).
Incubations were performed under basal conditions, in the presence of 4 µM forskolin (a well known stimulator of adenylate cyclase) used to check if the homogenates retained the ability to respond to stimuli and with a peptic tryptic cotazym digest of bread (San Pastore) wheat gliadin (50 µg/ml)(supplied by Dr M De Vincenzi, Istituto Superiore di Santià, Istituto Sperimentale per la Cerealicoltura, Rome).
In some experiments incubations were also performed with increasing concentrations of peptic tryptic cotazym gliadin digest (10–200 µg/ml).
The reaction was stopped by boiling for 3 minutes.
The cAMP produced was measured by radioassay.
Guanylate cyclase activity was assayed at 32°C for 10 minutes in 100 µl of an incubation mixture (50 mM TRIS HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM GTP, 1 mM isobutylmethylxanthine, 4 mM MnCl 2 , 3.7 mM creatine phosphate, creatine phosphokinae (13 U/ml), homogenate (10–40 µg of protein)), and peptic tryptic cotazym gliadin digest (10–200 µg/ml) when appropriate.
The reaction was stopped by adding 100 µl of 16 mM EDTA in TRIS 50 mM HCl (pH 7.5), and heating at 90°C for 3 minutes.
The cGMP produced was measured by radioimmunoassay.
The formation of both cAMP and cGMP was linear with time for at least 15 minutes, and with protein concentration.
All the enzyme assays were run in triplicate.
Results were expressed as pmol of cyclic nucleotides produced for 10 minutes/mg of protein.
EXTRACELLULAR CYCLIC NUCLEOTIDE ASSAY
Urine was diluted 25 to 100 times with TRIS-EDTA buffer (50 mM TRIS HCl, 4 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) before being assayed for cyclic nucleotides.
Plasma was extracted with ethanol as previously described.
All samples were tested in triplicate using at least two different dilutions.
Results were expressed as pmol/ml for plasma and as µmol/g of creatinine for urine.
Nephrogenous cAMP was also calculated by subtracting the filtered fraction (plasma cAMP x creatinine clearance) from total urinary cAMP.
HORMONE ASSAYS AND BIOCHEMISTRY
Plasma glucagon and atrial natriuretic peptide values were measured by double antibody RIA methods using commercially available kits (Double Antibody Glucagon, Diagnostic Products Corporation, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Human Atrial Natriuretic Peptide, Immuno Technology Service Production BV, Wijchen, The Netherlands).
Plasma atrial natriuretic peptide was extracted according to Sagnella et al .
The lower limits of sensitivity for glucagon and atrial natriuretic peptide assay were 3.7 pmol/l and 1.1 pmol/l, respectively.
The intra and interassay coefficients of variation were 8.1 and 9.3% for glucagon, and 8.4 and 11.3% for atrial natriuretic peptide.
The following analyses were carried out by routine methods: haemoglobin, sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium, albumin, cholesterol, triglycerides, glucose, iron, folate, and vitamin B12.
Carotenemia was measured by a colorimetric method and antigliadin IgA values by an enzyme immunoassay (Gluten IgA EIA kit, Pharmacia, Upsala, Sweden).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical significance of the data was evaluated by one way analysis of variance using Kramer's test for multiple comparison.
Non-homogenously distributed data were analysed by the Kruskal-Wallis and Wilcoxon tests.
Linear regression was used for comparison with different variables.
Results
ADENYLATE AND GUANYLATE CYCLASE ACTIVITIES
Under basal conditions adenylate cyclase activity was significantly higher in homogenates of coeliac disease patients who had not been treated than in those of successfully treated patients and of control subjects (Table I) Forskolin stimulated adenylate cyclase activity in all the samples, whereas peptic tryptic cotazym gliadin digest (50 µg/ml) significantly increased this activity only in the samples from coeliac disease patients who had not been treated.
When the effects of gliadin derived peptides were tested over concentrations ranging from 10 to 200 µg/ml. no adenylate cyclase activation occurred in the homogenates from control subjects and in those from coeliac disease patients who had been treated.
In homogenates from coeliac disease patients who had not been treated peptide concentrations of 10–25 µg/ml failed to increase adenylate cyclase activity consistently, whereas concentrations of 50–200 µg/ml all stimulated the enzyme to the same degree (Figure).
Basal guanylate cyclase activity was lower in homogenates from coeliac disease patients who had not been treated than in those from patients who had been treated and from control subjects, though the differences were not statistically significant (Table I).
Peptic tryptic cotazym gliadin digest at concentrations ranging from 10 to 100 µg/ml did not influence the enzyme activity in any of the samples.
INTRACELLULAR CYCLIC NUCLEOTIDE VALUES
Both cAMP and cGMP values were significantly higher in duodenal mucosa homogenates from coeliac disease patients who had not been treated than in those from patients who had been treated and from control subjects (Table II).
EXTRACELLULAR CYCLIC NUCLEOTIDE VALUES
There were no age or sex related differences in cyclic nucloeitde values in any group of subjects.
Plasma cAMP and cGMP values, nephrogenous cAMP, and total cAMP and cGMP urinary excretion were significantly higher in patients who had not been treated than in normal subjects (Table III).
After six months of clinically successful diet nephrogenous cAMP decreased appreciably in most patients, though plasma values and total urinary excretion of both cyclic nucleotides showed only a slight downtrend.
All these variables, however, were similar to those of normal subjects in the 15 patients re-evaluated after 12 months of gluten free diet as well as in the 35 patients who were treated for more than one year, who were all in clinical, biochemical, and histological remission.
In coeliac disease patients who had not been treated both total and nephrogenous cAMP urinary excretion were inversely related to serum calcium values (r=-0.759, p; r=-0.876, p).
No correlations were found in any group of subjects between extracellular cyclic nucleotide values and the other biochemical variables considered, including plasma glucagon and atrial natriuretic peptide values, when measured.
No significant differences in mean basal glucagon and atrial natriuretic peptide values were seen among normal subjects and coeliac disease patients who had been treated and those who had not (Table IV).
Discussion
This study showed that in both duodenal mucosa specimens and extracellular fluids the pattern of cyclic nucleotides was abnormal in patients with active coeliac disease, but similar to that of control subjects in patients successfully treated with a gluten free diet.
In small intestinal mucosa homogenates from patients who had not been treated the increased basal adenylate cyclase activity, reported also by others.
could in itself account for the presence of high cAMP values.
The finding of high cGMP values, however, with a relatively low guanylate cyclase activity could suggest a reduced rate of cGMP degradation.
On the other hand, discrepancies between intracellular cGMP values and guanylate cyclase activity in broken cells have often been found in response to hormones and other biologically active substances.
This suggests that some mechanisms modulating cGMP production whole cells cannot be activated in cell free systems.
Intestinal crypt cells are known to have a higher adenylate cyclase and a lower guanylate cyclase activity than differentiated villous cells.
Therefore, changes in the cyclase cyclic nucleotide systems in the atrophic intestinal mucosa of coeliac disease patients could be related to the immature character of rapidly proliferating enterocytes in the disease.
As a result of the cell heterogeneity of biopsy specimens, however, it cannot be excluded that inflammatory cells, widely infiltrating the mucosa of coeliac disease patients who have not been treated, also contribute to the changes of cyclic nucleotide metabolism.
Regardless of the cell populations involved, Beguinot et al and our own finding that liadin derived peptides stimulate adenylate cyclase activity in small intestinal mucosa homogenates from patients who have not been treated suggests a role for cAMP in the pathophysiological processes of coeliac disease.
This possibility is also supported by the finding that in active coeliac disease intestinal synthesis and secretion of prostaglandin E 2 , which stimulates adenylate cyclase activity, are abnormally high under basal conditions and further increase after a gliadin challenge.
Failure of gliadin derived peptides to activate adenylate cyclase in duodenal biopsy homogenates from patients who have been successfully treated may be ascribed to the repair of mucosal damage.
Our results also showed that plasma and urine cAMP and cGMP values were abnormally high in coeliac disease patients who had not been treated, and became normal only after treatment when clinical, biochemical, and histological remission was achieved.
Abnormal hormone secretion in active coeliac disease may have contributed to these changes.
The finding that untreated patients with severe hypocalcemia showed the highest values of total and nephrogenous urinary cAMP is in keeping with the notion that a secondary hyperparathyroidism may occur in active coeliac disease.
Hyperparathyroidism does not account, however, for the other changes in extracellular cyclic nucleotide values seen by us.
Moreover, our patients showed normal plasma values of glucagon and atrial natriuretic peptides, the only other hormones known to influence extracellular cyclic nucleotide values.
On the other hand, the small intestine is an important source of circulating cyclic nucleotides.
Therefore, it seems likely that in coeliac disease extracellular cyclic nucleotide concentrations may reflect the abnormally high cAMP and cGMP content of mucosa from the small intestine.
In conclusion, this study provides evidence that cyclic nucoeotide, this study provides evidence that cyclic nucleotide metabolism is changed in active coeliac disease.
The significance of these changes is still unclear, although one could speculate that high values of cAMP, and perhaps of cGMP, in enterocytes contribute to the pathogenesis of diarrhoea.
Also the specificity of our results needs to be verified as we did not study patients with other inflammatory bowel diseases.
Properties of a potassium channel in cultured human gastric cells (HGT-1) possessing specific omeprazole binding sites
Abstract
The HGT-1 human gastric cell line is similar to acid secreting parietal cells in that it possesses H 2 receptors, histamine sensitive adenyl cyclase, and Cl channels, which are activated by histamine by a cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) dependent mechanism.
To discover if HGT-1 cells have additional properties found in parietal cells,[3 H]omeprazole and patch clamp recording techniques were used to evaluate specific omeprazole binding sites and K channels in the plasma membrane.
HGT-1 cells exhibited [3 H]omeprazole binding in the non-stimulated state, which increased 100% in the presence of 1 mM histamine.
High conductance (about 155 pS) K channels were active spontaneously in 17% of cell attached or excised inside out patches in non-stimulated subconfluent HGT-1 cells.
In inside out patches, channel activity increased fivefold during depolarisation, ion substitution experiments confirmed that the channels were highly selective for K, and channel activity was almost abolished by removal of Ca 2 or addition of 5 mM Ba.
In quiescent cell attached patches, 0.1 mM dibutyryl cAMP failed to activate K channels.
In contrast, 6.7 µM A23187 (a Ca 2 ionophore) increased intracellular Ca 2 concentration from mean (SEM) 14 (3) nM to 248 (30) nM and activated K channels in 21% of patches.
It is concluded that the plasma membrane of HGT-1 cells possess (a) specific 3 H-omeprazole binding sites, which may reflect the omeprazole sensitve H, K-ATPase present in gastric parietal cells; and (b) Ca 2-activated K channels, which may be located in the basolateral membrane of human gastric parietal cells and play a part in acid secretion triggered by Ca² -mediated secretory agonists.
Hydrochloric acid secretion by gastric parietal cells entails complex ion transport events at the apical (secretory) membrane.
Movement of Cl -across the apical membrane of stimulated parietal cells seems to be mediated by Cl -channels.
In addition, apically located H + , K + , ATPase exchanges one H + ion for one K + ion, and is therefore dependent on the presence of luminal K + .
Although the precise mechanism by which K + moves from cell cytosol to the lumen of the gastric gland is unclear, a number of mechanisms that link apical K + and Cl -transport have been proposed namely — solely electroneutral KCl cotransport, electroneutral KCl cotransport in parallel with a large Cl -conductance, K + movement by a population of K + -specific channels in parallel with apical Cl -channels, and simultaneous K + and Cl -movement mediated by an apical cotransporter with partial conductive properties.
Gastric parietal cells also possess a basolateral K + conductive pathway in parallel with Na + , K + -ATPase pump units, which mediate basolateral K + uptake.
This pump-leak system allows K + ions to recycle across the basolateral membrane, promotes hyperpolarisation of the parietal cell, and thereby contributes to the maintenance of the electrochemical gradient that favours Cl -exit at the apical membrane during acid secretion.
A human gastric cell line (HGT-1) is now available, the properties of which have been partially characterised.
Similar to gastric parietal cells, the plasma membrane of HGT-1 cells bears H 2 receptors and intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) concentrations rise in response to histamine.
The cells also possess outward recrifying, voltage sensitive, low conductance Cl -channels, which are activated by histamine by a cAMP dependent process, and may represent the apical Cl -channel activated in parietal cells during acid secretion.
The aim of this study was to establish whether HGT-1 cells have additional features in common with gastric parietal cells.
The results show that the plasma membrane of HGT-1 cells contains (a) specific binding sites for omeprazole that probably reflect omeprazole sensitive H + , K + -ASTPase units; and (b) high conductance K + channels that may represent the K + channels present in the basolateral membrane of gastric parietal cells.
Methods
[3 H]OMEPRAZOLE BINDING SITES
Monolayers of the HGT-1 human gastric cell line (and the HT29–19A human colonic cell line) were grown to confluency in 12-well plastic culture plates, and maintained in Dulbecco's modification of Eagle's minimum essential medium, supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 10% (vol/vol) fetal calf serum (heat treated at 55°C for 30 minutes).
Monolayers were grown in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air/5% CO 2 at 37°C.
Culture medium was removed, and the cell layers washed with a buffered NaCl solution containing (mM): Na + , 140; K + , 4.5; Cl -, 149; Ca 2 + , 1.2; Mg 2 + , 1.2; glucose 10; and 4- (2-hydroxyethyl; -1-piperazine ethanesulphonic acid (HEPES) 10, titrated to pH 7.4 with NaOH, and incubated with [3 H]omeprazole (1.25 nmol/ well; equivalent to about 3×10 5 counts per min) in the presence or absence of 1 mM histamine for 30 minutes at 37°C.
Histamine was used at a concentration of 1 mM because previous studies have shown this concentration is required to achieve maximal stimulation of adenylate cyclase in the HGT-1 cell line, which is largely (77%) inhibited by 10 -4 M cimetidine, an H 2 receptor antagonist.
Non-specific binding was assessed by incubating identical wellswith [3 H]omeprazole in the presence of 10 µM unlabelled omeprazole.
Incubation was stopped by rapid washing (4×2 ml over 10 s) with ice cold buffer.
The cell layers were dissolved in 1% Triton X-100, sonicated, and samples taken for scintillation counting and protein determination.
Specific binding was calculated as the difference in cell associated counts between incubations with [3 H]omeprazole alone, and [3 H]omeprazole plus unlabelled omeprazole.
Results are expressed as pmol omeprazole bound-mg cell protein.
PATCH CLAMP STUDIES
Monolayers of HGT-1 cells were maintained as described above, and cells were subcultured under identical conditions at 7 day intervals.
Cells from passages 45–65 were grown on uncoated plastic coverslips and used 4–15 days after subculture.
Subconfluent monolayers remained attached to coverslips, which were placed in a small chamber (vol 2 ml) and visualised on the stage of a Nikon (Diaphot) inverted microscope with Hoffmann modulated optics (×400 magnification).
The microscope was mounted on a vibration isolation table.
Single channel recordings were obtained from membrane patches in cell attached and excised inside out configurations as described previously.
In all experiments the bath solution (temperature 20–22°C) initially contained (mM): K + , 145; Cl -, 149: Ca 2 + , 1.2; Mg 2 + , 1.2; glucose 10; and HEPES 10, titrated to pH 7.4 with KOH (high K + solution), and the pipette contained the NaCl solution (see above).
In some experiments with inside out patches, single channel recordings were obtained after replacing the high K + solution with a low K + solution containing (mM): K + , 22.5; Na + , 122.5; Cl -, 149; Ca 2 + , 1.2; Mg 2 + , 1.2; glucose 10; and HEPES 10, titrated to pH 7.4 with NaOH.
The Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz (GHK) current and voltage equations were used to calculate the K + : Na + permeability ratios (P K : P N a ) and the reversal potentials (E r e v ) respectively.
Pipette resistances varied between 2–15 MV and membrane seal resistances between 5–40 GV.
The bath electrode was a silver chloride coated silver wire.
Single channel currents were recorded with a patch clamp amplifier (List Electronics, Darmstadt, Germany, model EPC-7), and stored on video tape after pulse code modulation (Sony, Japan, model PCM 701ES).
Stored currents were low pass filtered (-3 dB, 4-pole Butterworth) at 1 kHz and loaded into computer memory (IBM PC 286-XT, sampling frequency 4 kHz) through a Labmaster TL1 interface and TM40 A/D converter (Axon Instruments, Foster City, Ca, USA).
Voltages applied to the membrane patches (V c o m ) were referenced to the interior of the patch pipette.
With high K + solution in the bath, cell membrane voltage was assumed to be zero, and V c o m was therefore equivalent to the potential across the membrane patch in both the cell attached and inside out configurations.
Current-voltage (I-V c o m ) relations were constructed by plotting the single channel current (equal to the difference between the open and closed channel currents) at each value of V c o m .
Single channel slope conductance was calculated at two values of V c o m :(a) at -40 mV, the cell membrane voltage measured in rabbit gastric glands with conventional microelectrodes and in rabbit parietal cells during whole cell current clamp studies, and (b) at infinite voltage (corresponding to the linear portion of the I-V c o m curve) where channel conductance was maximal.
Single channel open probability was determined using an analysis programme written in Quick Basic 4.0 (Microsoft, USA).
A transition between the fully closed and fully open current levels occurred when the current crossed a threshold set halfway between these two states.
Single channel open probability (P o ) was calculated as:
where N is the maximum number of channels seen to be open simultaneously during the recording (lasting 20–30 s), n represents the state of the channels (0=closed, 1=one channel open, etc), and t n is the time spent in state n.
Channel kinetics were determined using pClamp software (Axon Instruments) and recordings from membrane patches in which only one channel was seen to be active.
As channel activity usually occurred in bursts (Figs 1A and 2A), mean open and mean closed times, and open and closed time distribution histograms were obtained by restricting the analyses to individual bursts during 20–30 s of continuous recording.
In most cases the first bin was ignored when fitting the distribution histograms (see Fig 4).
The sensitivity of K + channels to Ca 2 + ions was determined in excised inside out patches by recording (V c o m =0 mV) first in the presence of the Ca 2 + containing high K + bath solution, and then in the presence of a Ca 2 + free high K + solution containing the Ca 2 + chelator ethyleneglycol-bis (Β -aminoethyl ether) N, N' tetra-acetic acid (EGTA, 5 mM).
The effect of Ba 2 + ions, which block K + channels in a variety of epithelial cell types, was assessed in excised inside out patched (c o m = 0 mV) by replacing the high K + bath solution with a similar solution containing 5 mM BaCl 2 .
Additional experiments were performed to determine the effects of increasing the intracellular concentrations of cAMP and Ca 2 + on K + channel activity.
With NaCl solution in the bath and high K + solution in the pipette, recordings were obtained from cell attached patches (V c o m = 0 mV) before and after the addition of 0.1 mM dibutyryl cAMP (a permanent analogue of cAMP) or 6.7 µM A23187 (a Ca 2 + ionophore).
After the addition of agonist, 30 s segments of data were recorded at 1 minute intervals for 10- 15 minutes.
MEASUREMENT OF INTRACELLULAR FREE CALCIUM CONCENTRATION
Intracellular free calcium concentration ([Ca 2 + ]i ) was measured in HGT-1 cells loaded with the Ca 2 + sensitive dye Fura-2.
Cells grown on glass coverslips were loaded by incubating with culture medium (DMEM supplemented with 15 mM HEPES, 2 mM glutamine, 50 µg/ml penicillin, 50 µg/ml streptomycin, and 10% fetal calf serum) containing 10 µM Fura-2/AM for 90 minutes in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO 2 /95% air at 37°C.
Coverslips were washed with buffered NaCl solution, mounted in a Sylgard lined chamber on the stage of a Nikon Diaphot microscope, and bathed in NaCl solution at room temperature (20–22°C).
Groups of about 5 cells were illuminated alternately with light of 350 nm and 380 nm wavelengths by means of amotor driven filter change wheel.
The emitted fluorescence (510 (10 nm)) with each excitation wavelength was monitored by photon counting (Newcastle Photometric Systems, Newcastle, UK).
Fluorescence was corrected for background before calculation of the 350 nm/380 nm emission ratio (R).
[Ca 2 + ]i was calculated with reference to a standard calibration curve relating Ca 2 + concentration to R, which was constructed in vitro using Ca 2 + -EGTA buffers (Molecular Probes, Eugene, USA) yielding known Ca 2 + concentrations (0–39.8 µM) and containing 5 µM Fura-2 (free dye).
R values were measured in 40 µl droplets of each solution on a glass coverslip.
HGT-1 cells were exposed sequentially to zero, 3, 6.7, 10, and 20 µM 4-bromo-A23187 (a non-fluorescent analogue of A23187) in NaCl solution containing 0.01% bovine serum albumin, which was included to prevent non-specific binding of ionophore to the chamber.
Bathing solutions were changed by careful aspiration, brief washing with the next solution, followed by addition of the same solution and refocusing on the designated area of cells before commencement of [Ca 2 + ]i measurement.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are expressed as mean (standard error of the mean).
Statistical analyses were performed using Student's t test for paired or unpaired data sa appropriate, and p values of <were considered significant.
Results
[3 H]OMEPRAZOLE BINDING
A characteristic feature of the gastric parietal cell apical membrane is that it possesses omeprazole sensitive H + , K + -ATPase.
When stimulated to secrete acid (for example, by histamine), additional H + , K + -ATPase units become operational as tubulovesicles rich in H + , K + -ATPase move from the cytoplasmic compartment to fuse with the apical membrane.
In HGT-1 cells, specific binding of [3 H]omeprazole was significantly greater in the presence than in the absence of 1 mM histamine (4.17 (0.45) pmol/mg cell protein v 2.08 (0.48) pmol/mg cell protein, p; n=3, measured in triplicate in both cases).
In contrast, there was no evidence of specific binding of [3 H]omeprazole to HT29–19A human colon cells in either the presence or the absence of histamine (n=2, measured in triplicate in both cases).
These data show that the HGT-1 cell line, lke gastric parietal cells, possesses specific omeprazole binding sites that may reflect H + , K + -ATPase moeities in the plasma membrane.
SINGLE CHANNEL CONDUCTANCE AND SELECTIVITY
With high K + solution in the bath and NaCl solution in the pipette, single channel events were seen in subconfluent clumps of cells studied 4 to 8 days after culture, but never during days 9 to 15 after culture when cells seemed to be fully confluent.
Under basal conditions, spontaneous channel activity was seen at V c o m =0 mV in 6 of 35 (17%) cell attached patches and in 14 of 85 (16%) excised inside out patches.
One channel was seen in three of the six cell attached patches and in six of 14 inside out patches, while two or three channels were active simultaneously in the other patches.
Initial recordings were obtained in the cell attached configuration, and Fig 1A shows the activity of a single K + channel over a range of pipette potentials in one experiment.
Under these conditions (high K + bath solution, NaCl pipette solution), progressive depolarisation of the membrane patch (increasingly positive V c o m ) increased the amplitude of the outward K + currents, and Fig 1B shows the I-V c o m curve for this channel.
Data from six cell attached patches were fitted by the GHK equations.
Mean single channel conductances at V c o m =-40 mV (g -4 ) and V c o m =infinity were 56 (6) pS and 155 (23) pS respectively, the mean value of E r e v was -84.2 (0.2) mV, and inward currents were not seen when V c o m was varied between -80 mV and -120 mV.
These data show that the channel was highly selective for K + over Na + (mean P K : P N a ratio 232 (19:1)).
K + channel activity was also studied over a range of pipette potentials in a series of excised inside out patches, and Fig 2A shows results from a patch that contained a single channel (high K + bath solution, NaCl pipette solution).
Similar to the cell attached configuration, K + currents flowed outwards from the bath into the pipette, and increased during depolarisation of the membrane patch.
The mean values of g -4 , E r e v , and P K : P N a ratio from 14 inside out patches were 62 (6) pS, 153 (11) pS, -84.8 (0.1) mV and 260 (11): 1 respectively, and were not significantly different from those obtained in the cell attached configuration.
Figure 2B shows smaller outward K + currents across one of four inside out patches when the K + concentration of the bath solution was decreased from 145 mM to 22.5 mM (with equimolar Na + replacement), and Fig 2C shows the effect of this change in bath K + concentration on the I-V c o m curves for the channel.
Compared with 145 mM K + in the bath solution, the mean values of E r e v , andP K : P N a with 22.5 mM K + in the bath solution were all significantly (p) lower at 41 (4) pS, -36.7 (0.6) mV, and 153 (18): 1 respectively (n=4).
These data confirm that the plasma membrane of HGT-1 cells contains high conductance channels which are highly selective for K + over Na + .
VOLTAGE SENSITIVITY AND SINGLE CHANNEL KINETICS
Figure 3 shows the relation between single channel open probability (P o ) and pipette potential (V c o m ) in excised inside out patches (high K + bath solution, NaCl pipette solution).
Open probability increased almost fivefold during depolarisation of the membrane from -80 mV to -20 mV, showing that the channels were voltage dependent across the voltage range normally encountered within epithelial cells.
Further depolarisation of the membrane to non-physiological voltage (0 mV to +40 mV) caused a decrease in open probability that was particularly noticeable (56%) in four patches (data not shown).
The cause of this decrease in open probability is unclear, but it is possible that over this range of depolarising voltages, Ca 2 + at high concentration (1.2 mM in the bath) blocked the channel at a site that normally binds Ba 2 + (see below), as seen with rabbit skeletal muscle K + channels incorporated into planar lipid bilayers.
Preliminary examination of channel recordings obtained from cell attached patches (for example, Fig 1A) showed rapid current transitions, channels opening and closing for comparatively short periods.
In contrast, with inside out patches (for example, Fig 2A) channels generally spent longer in the open state at equivalent values of V c o m , while closed times were similar to those seen in cell attached patches (see below).
The kinetics of bursts of channel activity were assessed by obtaining open and closed time histograms for membrane patches containing a single channel.
Fibure 4A shows typical histograms from one of four cell attached patches, which showed (at V c o m =0 mV) one open time constant (mean value 6.7 (1.0) ms) and two closed times constants (mean values 0.7 (0.2) ms and 4.2 (1.1) ms), with mean open and closed times of 6.8 (0.7) ms and 3.0 (0.5) ms respectively.
Figure 4B shows histograms from one of five inside out patches, which again showed (at V c o m =0 mV) one open time constant (mean value 31.1 (10.0) ms) and two closed time constants (mean values 0.4 (0.1) ms and 1.8 (0.3) ms), with mean open and closed times of 30.4 (8.1) ms and 1.5 (0.2) ms respectively.
The long closed intervals (>ms) seen between bursts would probably provide a third closed time constant, but there were insufficient for histogram analysis.
It should be noted that the mean open time was significantly longer and the mean closed time was significantly shorter in the inside out patches than in the cell attached patches (30.4 (8.1) ms v 6.8 (0.7) ms, pand 1.5 (0.2) ms v 3.0 (0.5) ms, prespectively).
These differences may reflect the higher concentration of Ca 2 + presented to the cytosolic surface of the membrane in the inside out configuration (see below).
CALCIUM SENSITIVITY
To determine the Ca 2 + sensitivity of K + channels in inside out patches, recordings were attempted after the Ca 2 + containing (1.2 mM) high K + bath solution was replaced with either a Ca 2 + free high K + solution containing 5 mM EGTA (Ca 2 + concentration 10 nM) or an EGTA buffered high K + solution containing 1 µM Ca 2 + .
In nearly all cases, these manoeuvres caused patches to be lost almost immediately.
Consequently, Ca 2 + sensitivity of the K + channel was examined in only two inside out patches at V c o m =0 mV.
Figure 5 shows that in one patch, replacing the Ca 2 + containing high K + bath solution with the Ca 2 + free high K + solution decreased P o from 0.200 to 0.005 and returning to 1.2 mM Ca 2 + increased P o to 0.359.
In the other patch, Ca 2 + removal decreased P o from 0.396 to 0.017.
Thus, although it was not possible to obtain a detailed analysis of the relation between P o and V c o m at different Ca 2 + concentrations, the available data show that under these experimental conditions, K + channels were sensitive to changes in the concentration of Ca 2 + bathing the cytosolic surface of the membrane.
BARIUM SENSITIVITY
The effect Ba 2 + ions (final bath concentration 5 mM) on K + channel activity was examined in inside out patches (V c o m =0 mV).
Figure 6 shows recordings from one patch in which Ba 2 + inhibited K + channel activity, while channel activity returned almost to the initial level after washing out Ba 2 + .
In three patches, Ba 2 + decreased P o from 0.392 (0.081) to 0.030 (0.024)(p).
EFFECTS OF DIBUTYRYL cAMP AND α 23187
With NaCl solution in the bath and high K + solution in the pipette (V c o m =0 mV), the addition of 0.1 mM dibutyryl cAMP failed to elicit K + channel activity in 17 cell attached patches while recording for periods of up to 15 minutes, suggesting that K + channels in HGT-1 cells are not regulated by intracellular camp.
In contrast, the assition of 6.7 µM A23187 stimulated K + channel activity (generally within four minutes, see Fig 7) in five of 24 (21%) quiescent cell attached patches, P o increasing to 0.218 (0.097) at V c o m =0 mV.
As shown in Fig 7, channel kinetics underconditions that produced inward current flow (NaCl solution in the bath and high K + solution in the pipette) differed from those seen during outward current flow (see Fig 1), and it is possible that channels were not activated sufficiently to produce sustained bursts of openings when NaCl solution was present in the bath.
Although the reason for this is unclear, it may at least partly reflect the voltage sensitivity of the K + channels (see Fig 3).
Thus, irrespective of other intracellular regulatory factors, K + channel activity will be lower with NaCl solution in the bath (that is, at the resting potential of the cell membrane) than with high K + solution in the bath (that is , when cell membrane potential is zero).
It seems extremely unlikely that the inward currents reflect Cl -movement from the cell to the pipette by Ca 2 + -activated Cl -channels, as the mean single channel current at V c o m =0 mV (5.5 (1.3) pA, n=5) was considerably greater than that (approximately 1 pA at V c o m =0 mV) flowing through cAMP activated Cl -channels in cell attached patches of HGT-1 cells with NaCl solution in both the bath and the pipette.
Taken together, these findings suggest that the inward currents in A23187-stimulated cells reflected K + flow from pipette to cell through high conductance K + channels.
INTRACELLULAR CALCIUM CONCENTRATION IN HGT-1 CELLS
As mentioned above, it was not possible to perform a detailed study of the Ca 2 + sensitivity of K + channels in excised inside out patches.
Because 6.7 µM A23187 activated K + channels in cell attached patches when cells were bathed in NaCl solution, we measured the changes in [Ca 2 + ]i that occurred under identical conditions in response to increasing concentrations of A23187.
As shown in Fig 8, basal values of [Ca 2 + ]i were low before the addition of 4-bromo-A23187 (14 (3 nM)).
The ionophore, however, stimulated dose dependent increases in [Ca 2 + ]i , steady state values being achieved within four to five minutes.
Intracellular Ca 2 + concentration increased to 248 (30) nM (range: 166–301 nM) after the addition of 6.7 µM 4-bromo-A23187, which suggests that 6.7 µM A23187 stimulated K + channel activity in cell attached patches (see Fig 7) by increasing [Ca 2 + ]i to similar values.
Discussion
EVIDENCE FOR H + K + -ATPASE IN HGT-1 CELLS
HGT-1 cells share a number of characteristics with acid secreting gastric parietal cells (for example, H 2 receptors, histamine activated adenylate cyclase, cAMP mediated Cl -channels), but previous studies have not evaluated their H + , K + -ATPase content.
With [3 H]omeprazole as a probe for H + , K + -ATPase, we found that HGT-1 cells exhibited a significant degree of specific [3 H]omeprazole binding, which increased 100% in the presence of histamine.
Although histamine stimulates the incorporation of H + , K + -ATPase rich cytoplasmic tubulovesicles into the apical membrane in parietal cells, it is unclear whether a similar phenomenon occurred in HGT-1 cells as they have been shown to be devoid of secretory organelles.
It is worth noting at this point, however, that although the HGT-1 cell line shows morphological heterogeneity, seven clonal cell lines each with homogeneous morphology have been identified.
Two of these clones exhibited activities of histamine induced cAMP production that were 2–3 times greater than those in the other clones or in the parent HGT-1 line despite the absence of interclonal variability in the affinity of the clones for histamine.
Thus it seems that the HGT-1 cell line contains subpopulations of epithelial cells, two of which may have a comparatively high density of H 2 receptors or a particularly efficient interaction between the H 2 receptor and adenylate cyclase.
These two clones (clones 3 and 6, see ref 13) may bear the closest resemblance to gastric parietal cells and contain secretory organelles within their cytoplasm, which become incorporated into the cell membrane in the presence of histamine.
Furthermore, histamine has been shown to trigger cAMP dependent phosphorylation of a 27 kDa phosphoprotein, which is restricted to the same low speed fraction of parietal cells that contains increased H + , K + -ATPase activity after histamine stimulation.
The ability of histamine to increase [3 H]omeprazole binding in HGT-1 cells may therefore reflect the presence of H + , K + -ATPase units within the plasma membrane whose affinity for [3 H]omeprazole is increased by cAMP dependent phosphorylation of the enzyme protein.
HGT-1 CELLS EXPRESS K + CHANNELS
There is strong evidence that K + channels exist in both the apical and basolateral membranes of gastric parietal cells.
In frog stomach and isolated rabbit gastric glands, external K + is an absolute requirement for acid secretion.
At the external (luminal) surface of the apical membrane, K + ions participate in a H + , K + -ATPase mediated exchange with H + ions, although whether the initial apical K + exit step is electroneutral or channel mediated remains controversial.
If it is assumed that basolateral Na + -K + pump activity increases during acid secretion, K + entering the cell must recycle across the basolateral membrane to maintain intracellular K + concentration, and a basolateral conductance has been shown in Necturus and frog oxyntic cells.
This study shows that HGT-1 cells express K + channels, and we now consider their comparatively low prevalence, likely site of origin, and characteristics.
We saw K + channel activity in 17% of cell attached and inside out patches from HGT-1 cells in the absence of acid secretory agonists.
This fairly low level of detection suggests that either K + channels were present at low density in the plasma membrane, or that K + channels were limited to a small subpopulation of cells withint the HGT-1 cell line.
It should be noted that K + channels were seen after four to eight days of culture when cells were subconfluent, but never beyond eight days when the cells were fully confluent.
This suggests that either the K + channel bearing cells were overgrown by other cell types when true confluency was achieved, or confluency was associated with full polarisation of the cells and mvoement of K + channels to the basolateral membrane, which was inaccessible to the patch pipette.
The fact that the prevalence of K + channels in cell attached patches was similar when A23187 stimulated cells were bathed in NaCl solution (21%) and non-stimulated cells were bathed in high K + solution (17%), suggests that the high external K + concentration depolarised the cells and caused a passive increase in [Ca 2 + ]i .
Our results show that the K + channel expressed by HGT-1 cells is Ca 2 + dependent, voltage and Ba 2 + sensitive, and possesses complex gating characteristics with one open state and at least two closed states.
Single channel conductance was high (about 155 pS) at infinite voltage but considerably lower (about 60 pS) at -40 mV, the cell membrane voltage measured in rabbit parietal cells.
Basolateral K + conductance is the main determinant of basolateral membrane voltage in Necturus oxyntic cells, and the basolateral membrane of frog oxyntic cells possesses a substantial Ba 2 + senstive K + conductance, which increases in the presence of histamine.
Single channel studies have shown two types of basolateral K + channel (one activated by cAMP, the other by Ca 2 + ) in Necturus oxyntic cells.
Frog oxyntic cells also possess two types of inward rectifying basolateral K + channel (a) a Ca 2 + activated, 61 pS channel that is voltage independent, Ca 2 + sensitive and Ba 2 + sensitive, and (b) a cAMP-activated, 30 pS channel that is Ca 2 + insensitve.
In contrast, it is not clear if the basolateral membrane voltage in mammalian (rabbit) parietal cells reflects Cl -, K + , or both types of channel.
Although the properties of basolateral K + channels in oxyntic cells seem to be species dependent, K + channels in HGT-1 cells share some characteristics (for example, similar conductance within the physiological voltage range, activation by Ca 2 + , and sensitivity to Ca 2 + and Ba 2 + ) with the 61 pS K + channel identified in amphibian oxyntic cells.
Acid secretion by gastric parietal cells is regulated by several receptor mediated neurohumoral agonists including histamine, which increases the intracellular concentrations of both cAMP and Ca 2 + .
Indeed, concomitant increases in intracellular cAMP (induced by adding dibutyryl cAMP) and Ca 2 + (induced by adding carbachol) have a potentiating effect on acid accumulation in isolated canine parietal cells.
It is now clear that HGT-1 cells resemble parietal cells in possessing H 2 receptors and specific omeprazole binding sites (presumably H + , K + -ATPase units).
The additional presence of cAMP dependent Cl -channels and Ca 2 + dependent K + channels in this gastric cell line may provide an opportunity to study possible interactions between these two types of channel in response to a variety of acid secretory agonists.
Gastric secretion of platelet activating factor and precursors in healthy humans: effect of pentagastrin
Abstract
The release of platelet activating factor (PAF-ACETHER or PAF) and its precursors in the gastric lumen was assessed in 13 normal subjects in basal condition and after stimulation by gastrin.
Acid, pepsin, and sialic acid outputs were determined under the same conditions.
Gastric juice was collected using a nasogastric tube after overnight fast in basal condition for 60 minutes, then under pentagastrin infusion (6 µg/kg/hr for 60 minutes).
platelet activating factor was detected at low concentration in 4/13 subjects under basal condition (mean (SEM) 1.2 (0.6) pg/hr) while high concentrations of lyso platelet activating factor (6.1 (1.8) µg/hr) and of alkyl-acyl-glycerophosphocholine (AAGPC)(11.5 (3) µg/hr) were found in 13 and 11 subjects, respectively.
Platelet activating factor was not detected during pentagastrin infusion, while lyso platelet activating factor and alkyl-acyl-glycerophosphocholine were detected in 13 and in 12 subjects, respectively.
Compared with the basal condition these platelet activating factor precursors increased significantly (p) going up to fivefold baseline (31.8 (6.8) µg/hr and 53 (9.3) µg/hr respectively) in response to pentagastrin.
There was a positive correlation between platelet activating factor precursors and acid or pepsin output but not between platelet activating factor precursors and sialic acid.
As sialic acid may be considered an index of mucus glycoprotein degradation, it seems that gastrin stimulation of gastric epithelial cells results in a concomittant secretion of platelet activating factor precursors, acid, and pepsin irrespective of mucus glycoprotein degradation.
Platelet activating factor, first described as platelet activating factor and identified as , is a lipid mediator that participates in hypersensitivity and inflammatory reactions.
Platelet activating factor is synthetised by numerous human cell types, including neutrophils, minocytes, macrophages, platelets, eosiniophils, vascular endothelial cells, and several cancer cell lines.
Two metabolic steps play a part in platelet activating factor biosynthesis: firstly, phospholipase A 2 acts on membrane choline containing alkyl phospholipids such as alkyl-acyl-glycerophosphocholine (AAGPC) resulting in the production of lyso platelet activating factor, that is — 1-O-alkyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine; secondly, this lyso platelet activating factor is acetylated by an acetyltransferase to yield the biologically active molecule.
Platelet activating factor causes gastrointestinal mucosal injury and ischemic bowel necrosis.
Recently we described the presence of platelet activating factor in the gastric juice in disease conditions in humans and in the physiological condition in the cat.
Several hormones may stimulate platelet activating factor biosynthesis in vitro.
In the cat, histamine stimulates both gastric acid and platelet activating factor in vivo.
Gastrin is one of the most important physiological regulatory factors of gastric secretion that reduces gastric platelet activating factor output in patients suffering from oesophagitis, or gastroduodenal ulcers, or both.
In this study we aimed at the investigation of platelet activating factor synthesis in the gastric juice of normal healthy volunteers in vivo, in basal condition, and in response to pentagastrin.
We assessed gastric platelet activating factor, lyso platelet activating factor, and AAGPC outputs and analysed correlations between platelet activating factor and precursors, and gastric acid, pepsin, and mucus linked sialic acid.
Patients and methods
SUBJECTS
Thirteen normal white male volunteers (ages ranging from 20 to 53, mean 29 years) were investigated.
They had no previous medical history of gastrointestinal, inflammatory, hypersensitivity, or neoplastic diseases, and none was taking drugs; two of 13 were smokers (subjects 3 and 6, Table).
All individuals gave informed consent and had gastric juice analysis: after an overnight fast, a nasogastric tube was positioned in the gastric antrum with endoscopy guidance and its correct position checked by the water recovery test with the subjects in semirecumbent position.
The gastric juice was collected by gentle manual aspiration during 135 minutes.
The first 15 minute sample was discarded.
Then basal samples were collected every 15 minutes for one hour followed by four 15 minute samples collected during intravenous infusion of pentagastrin (6 µg/kg/hr).
Each sample was submitted to assay for platelet activating factor, platelet activating factor precursors, acid, pepsin, choline, and N-acetylneuraminic acid (NANA).
MEASUREMENT OF PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR AND PRECURSORS
For extraction of platelet activating factor and platelet activating factor precursors, gastric juice samples were immediately mixed on ice with 100% ethanol (1 vol:4 vol) and kept at -20°C until platelet activating factor assay.
Platelet activating factor concentration was measured in each 15 minute sample, then lyso platelet activating factor was assessed after chemical acetylation and AAGPC after alkaline hydrolysis and subsequent acetylation.
Platelet activating factor extraction and purification — Gastric juice lipids were extracted using 80% ethanol.
These ethanol extracted samples were dried.
For high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis, the dried residues were dissolved in 500 µl of solution comprising 60:50:5 dichloromethane/methanol/ water (vol:vol).
Samples were then applied to a Microporasil column 3.9 mm ID, 300 mm length (Waters Associates, Milford, MA, USA) with a flow rate of 1 ml/min.
Each 1 ml fraction was dried and resuspended in 50 µl of 60% ethanol and then assayed for platelet aggregating activity.
Assay for platelet activating factor — Washed rabbit platelets were prepared as previously described.
Aspirinated platelets (1.6×10 8 ) in 300 µl of Tyrode's solution, containing 2.5% gelatin and the ADP scavenger mixture creatine phosphate (1 mM) and creatine phosphokinase (10 U/ml) were stirred in an aggregometer (Icare, Marseille, France).
Aggregating activity of the samples was measured over the linear portion of the calibration curve obtained with synthetic platelet activating factor.
Assay for lyso platelet activating factor — Lyso platelet activating factor was measured after chemical acetylation into platelet activating factor.
Briefly, the ethanolic extracts were dried under an air stream, mixed with 200 µl of pyridine and acetic anhydride and kept for 18 hours in the dark, at room temperature.
Samples were evaporated and traces of pyridine were removed with dichloromethane.
Samples were recovered with 100 µl of 60% ethanol and were assayed as described above.
The amount of lyso platelet activating factor was calculated as the difference between the quantity of platelet activating factor measured after and before acetylation of the samples.
Assays for AAGPC — AAGPC were measured after alkaline hydrolysis and subsequent acetylation.
Briefly, aliquots of the dried extracts were treated with 0.03 N NaOH in methanol for 2 hours at room temperature.
The pH was adjusted to 7.0 with 1 N HCl and the mixture was evaporated to dryness.
The amount of AAGPC was calculated as the difference between the concentrations of platelet activating factor measured after and before alkaline hydrolysis and acetylation.
Characterisation of platelet activating factor — In addition to its ADP and arachidonic acid independent aggregating activity on rabbit platelets, the lipidic material extracted from gastric juice samples was pooled, dried, and eluted on HPLC.
The platelet activating activity was eluted from 18 to 21 minutes.
This material had a retention time typical of platelet activating factor during HPLC analysis using phosphatidylcholine, lysophosphatidylcholine, and synthetic platelet activating factor as standards and was further characterised as platelet activating factor on the basis of the following criteria:(a) its aggregating activity was suppressed in the presence of 0.1 mM BN 52021, a specific platelet activating factor receptor antagonist;(b) and after incubation of the samples with 10 µg/ml phospholipase A 2 from hog pancreas; lipase A1 from R arrhizus 100 µg/ml was without effect.
The efficiency of this procedure averaged 80% using (3 H) platelet activating factor as internal standard.
GASTRIC ACID MEASUREMENT
Gastric acid was measured by automated titration using 1/10 N NaOH to an endpoint pH of 7.0 and determined as mmol/l.
CHOLINE MEASUREMENT
Choline concentration in gastric juice was used as duodenogastric bile reflux marker.
We have previously reported that measurement of choline is sufficient to exclude biliopancreatic reflux in the stomach when its amount is below 10 µmol/ hr.
The concentration of choline in gastric juice was measured by an enzymatic method as described: phospholipase D treatment and oxidation by 4-aminophenazone (Biolyon).
PEPSIN MEASUREMENT
The proteolytic activity of each 15 minute gastric juice samples were determined by an automatic method using human haemoglobin as substrate and the concentration was determined as UP/ml.
SIALIC ACID DETERMINATION
N-Acetylneuraminic acid (NANA), a sialic acid linked to mucus glycoproteins, was determined according to Aminoff.
Briefly, NANA was oxidised by periodic acid (0.9 N; 37°C), and then this oxidised component was bound to thiobarbituric acid giving a stable chromophore in butanol.
The adsorption was read at 549 nm and compared with a scale of the NANA standard.
The results were expressed in µg/ml.
The concentration of solubilised NANA in gastric juice was obtained by the difference between total NANA measured after acidic hydrolysis (H 2 SO 4 0.1 N, 80°C, 60 min) and free NANA measured directly as µg/ml.
CALCULATIONS AND STATISTICAL TESTS
Volume of total gastric juice in basal and under pentagastrin infusion was calculated as the sum of four 15 minute samples in each period (Table) and the hourly output of each substance (platelet activating factor: pg/hr; lyso platelet activating factor: µg/hr; AAGPC: µg/hr; acid: mmol/hr; pepsin: pepsin unit UP/hr; NANA: µg/hr; choline: µg/hr) was calculated as the sum of four 15 minute rates of secretion; each 15 minute rate having been determiend by multiplication of concentration by the volume of gastric juice aspirated during 15 minutes.
All values were expressed as mean (SEM).
Statistical analysis were performed with the Student's paired t test, and the Spearman rank correlation tests.
To show the concentration pattern in basal and under pentagastrin conditions, we also calculated concentrations of acid, platelet activating factor, platelet activating factor precursors, and NANA as the mean of four 15 minute concentrations for each period, basal and pentagastrin (Table).
Results
Mean concentrations of platelet activating factor and precursors in gastric juice in basal condition and during pentagastrin infusion are shown in the Table.
In the basal condition as well as under pentagastrin infusion choline outputs remained below 10 µmol/hr (mean=1.5 (0.8) and 4 (2) µmol/h, respectively).
So that no subject had to be excluded because of duodenogastric bile reflux.
GASTRIC PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR PRECURSORS IN BASAL CONDITION AND UNDER PENTAGASTRIN
Lyso platelet activating factor — It was detected in all subjects with amounts ranging from 1 to 23 µg/h (mean 6.1 (1.8)) in basal condition and increased significantly (1 to 77 µg/h; mean 31.8 (6.8) µg/hr) under pentagastrin infusion (Table and Fig 1).
AAGPC — It was detected in 11 of 13 subjects with amounts ranging from 2 to 35 µg/h (mean 11.5 (3)) in basal condition and increased significantly (10 to 109 µg/h; mean 53 (9.3)) under pentagastrin infusion (Table and Fig 1).
Overall, in a given subject, the platelet activating factor and precursors concentrations determined in each 15 minute samples were very close to those obtained from hourly pooled gastric juice.
GASTRIC PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR IN BASAL CONDITION AND UNDER PENTAGASTRIN
Platelet activating factor was detected in four of 13 subjects (30%) in all 15 minute gastric juice samples; hourly amounts ranged from 1 to 8 pg/h (mean 1.2 (0.06)).
In the remaining subjects platelet activating factor was not detected in any 15 minute sample or in hourly pooled gastric juice samples.
Platelet activating factor was not detected under pentagastrin infusion in any 15 minute sample or in hourly pooled gastric juice; thus, compared with the basal situation, its secretion decreased in four subjects (Fig 2).
CORRELATION BETWEEN PLATELET ACTIVATING FACTOR PRECURSORS AND ACID, PEPSIN, AND NANA
As expected basal acid, pepsin, and NANA outputs (3.2 (0.7) mmol/h, 283 (53) UP/h, and 1100 (140) µg/h, respectively) increased significantly under pentagastrin infusion (28 (2.5) mmol/h, 985 (145) UP/h, and 1763 (292) µg/h), respectively; Fig 1).
Under pentagastrin stimulation, taking all subjects together, the regression analysis showed a significant correlation between lyso platelet activating factor and acid, lyso platelet activating factor and pepsin, AAGPC and acid, AAGPC and pepsin (Fig 2).
When hourly gastric outputs were compared, no significant correlation was found between NANA and lyso platelet activating factor (r=0.08; p=0.6), NANA, and AAGPC (r=0.45; p=0.06); again, when concentrations were compared no significant correlation was found between NANA (µg/ml) and lyso platelet activating factor (ng/ml)(r=0.4; p= 0.19) or NANA and AAGPC (µg/ml)(r=0.05; p=0.86).
Discussion
In this study, we showed that in healthy volunteers secretion of gastric platelet activating factor precursors increased under pentagastrin infusion.
We found a relation between platelet activating factor precursors and acid, and between platelet activating factor precursors and pepsin.
Given the various substances that can activate platelets, it was necessary to show that the platelet aggregating material purified from gastric juice samples was platelet activating factor.
To do this, we used experimental criteria to characterise and distinguish it from arachidonic acid, prostaglandin, chollagen, thrombin, or adenosine diphosphate (see Methods).
Yet, choline output remained below 10 µg/h showing that lipidic material purified from gastric juice was not of biliopancreatic origin.
In this study, we preferred choline measurement to a duodenal or pyloric occluding balloon that might induce gastric or duodenal distension.
Platelet activating factor is one of the most potent lipid mediators discovered, which exerts a wide span of cellular and tissular effects ranging from degranulation of inflammatory cells to mucosal ulceration and necrosis.
Platelet activating factor plays a part in the mucosal injury of the gastrointestinal tract in anomals.
In humans, platelet activating factor has been found in patients with oesophagitis, ulcer gastric, Crohn's disease, and ulcerative colitis by us and others.
Until now, however, only a few data pointed to the production of platelet activating factor in physiological processes.
In this study, we found platelet activating factor in four of 13 normal subjects.
The concentration of platelet activating factor in this study (1.2 pg/h) is much lower than that we had previously found in patients suffering from oesophagitis (28 pg/h), erosive gastritis (25 pg/h), and duodenal ulcer (5 pg/h).
The significance of platelet activating factor in the gastric juice of healthy humans is still difficult to analyse.
In this study, all subjects were selected on the basis of standard criteria of normality.
We can not exclude the possibility, however, of abnormal metabolism of platelet activating factor in four of them.
Two of four were smokers (patients 3 and 6) suggesting a possible cause of abnormal platelet activating factor metabolism; yet, non-symptomatic gastritis related to Helicobacter pylori (H pylori)cannot be excluded in them (or at least, in two non-smokers).
Nevertheless, in our previous study performed in 36 symptomatic patients, we showed that neither the concentration of gastric platelet activating factor output or the content of platelet activating factor in the gastric mucosa were significantly related to the inflammatory cell infiltration in the gastric mucosa.
Clearly, whether low gastric platelet activating factor concentration in 30% normal subjects should be considered as physiological or pathophysiological needs further investigation.
H pylori , which is able to generate in vitro platelet activating factor from platelet activating factor precursors, may be a possible pathophysiological cause of platelet activating factor increase.
More than 90% of patients with duodenal ulcer are carriers of H pylori .
All carriers of the bacterium, however, do not suffer from duodenal ulcer.
Thus, the role of platelet activating factor should be interpreted considering both H pylori and acid.
The fact that pentagastrin increased platelet activating factor precursors would suggest that platelet activating factor may have a role in the gastric functions, in particular gastric acid secretion.
A possible relation between platelet activating factor and gastric acid secretion and platelet activating factor and gastric motility has already been suggested as a physiological phenomenon in the gastrointestinal tract.
Also Wallace and keenan have reported that intracolonic administration of platelet activating factor may have a protective role in the gastrointestinal tract in animals.
As platelet activating factor was not detected under pentagastrin infusion, two hypotheses should be discussed concerning the effect of pentagastrin on gastric platelet activating factor synthesis.
Firstly, gastrin would exert a direct negative effect on platelet activating factor synthesis.
Such a mechanism seems unlikely because platelet activating factor precursors increase under pentagastrin infusion.
Alternatively, gastrin might affect enzymes participating in platelet activating factor generation by acid or pepsin.
Benveniste et al showed that <was susceptible to lipase C and D, and Moreau et al reported that pentagastrin could enhance gastric lipase activity in humans.
This hypothesis deserves further study as platelet activating factor metabolism in the stomach lumen is unknown.
In our previous study of gastric platelet activating factor analysis, gastric juice content seemed to be a more valuable index than mucosal content as platelet activating factor was not detectable in several biopsy specimens.
This might be as a result of the weight of endoscopy biopsy samples.
The ratio of platelet activating factor/lyso platelet activating factor/AAGPC in the gastric mucosa was similar to that of gastric juice.
For all these reasons, we think that extraction of platelet activating factor and precursors from the gastric mucosa would not give more information than that obtained from gastric juice analyses.
Yet, in this study the amount of platelet activating factor (0.03 pg/ml; 1.2 ng/h) is much lower than that of lyso platelet activating factor (0.09 ng/ml; 6.1 µg/h) and AAGPC (0.14 µg/ml; 11.5 µg/h) suggesting that platelet activating factor degradation may not be the only source of platelet activating factor precursors under pentagastrin stimulation.
Because calcium is increased in gastric epithelial cells in response to gastrin and the remodelling pathway of platelet activating factor synthesis is activated by calcium.
platelet activating factor precursors seem to be related to the calcium increase in gastric cells.
Acid and pepsin are released from gastric epithelial cells.
NANA, which represents the sialic acid linked to mucus glycoproteins, illustrates glycoprotein erosion under pentagastrin stimulation.
As the regression analysis showed a significant correlation between platelet activating factor precursors and both acid and pepsin but no significant correlation between platelet activating factor precursors and NANA, we suggest that platelet activating factor precursors would not result from degraded gastric mucin.
In concludion, the rise in platelet activating factor precursors induced by pentagastrin correlates with acid and pepsin.
This correlation argues for the possibility of synthesis of platelet activating factor precursors in cells sensitive to gastrin stimulation.
Effect of gastro-oesophageal reflux on upper oesophageal sphincter motility in children
Abstract
Motor events of the upper oesophageal sphincter associated with gastro-oesophageal reflux were evaluated in 53 symptomatic children (median age 13 months) who were studied recumbent and unsedated.
Children were divided into four groups according to symptoms, and then into two groups according to the presence or absence of neurological deficit.
No grouping had basal upper oesophageal sphincter pressure that differed significantly from any other.
Oesophageal distention due to gastro-oesophageal reflux, which was recognisable as oesophageal common cavity episodes, was associated with augmentation of mean basal upper oesophageal sphincter pressure from 36.5 (SD 18) mm Hg to 48.5 (18) mm Hg (p), irrespective of whether gastro-oesophageal reflux caused oesophageal acidification.
Abrupt relaxations of the upper oesophageal sphincter independent of swallowing and lasting up to three seconds occurred during 54% of common cavity episodes.
Forth nine per cent of these relaxations occurred within four seconds after the onset of distention.
The oesophageal distention caused by gastro-oesophageal reflux is a potent stimulus of transient upper oesophageal sphincter relaxations in children.
These relaxations are a more likely explanation for oesophagopharyngeal reflux than defective basal upper oesophageal sphincter tone.
Oesophagopharyngeal reflux is a common problem, especially in infants and can have serious consequences.
Major complications that can occur include calorie loss due to vomiting with resultant growth failure and respiratory disease secondary to aspiration of refluxate.
The upper oesophageal sphincter (UOS) is considered to be the major barrier preventing oesophagopharyngeal reflux.
The concept that oesophagopharyngeal reflux occurs because of abnormally low basal UOS tone has dominated thinking about its pathogenesis.
There is minimal information about patterns of USO pressure in children with problems believed to be related to oesophagopharyngeal reflux.
Neither Sondheimer not Staiano et al found USO pressure to be any different in children with gastro-oesophageal reflux compared with those without.
They examined the hypothesis that basal UOS hypotonia caused oesophagopharyngeal reflux in an indirect manner.
The methods used did not allow continuous monitoring of UOS pressure or examination of motor events associated with occurrence of either gastro-oesophageal reflux or oesophagopharyngeal reflux.
The capacity to monitor UOS pressure for prolonged periods has only recently been developed.
Initially, a sleeve sensor was adapted for this purpose in adults and we have now developed the UOS sleeve sensor so that it is small enough for use in children.
In this study we aimed to record for the first time patterns of UOS motility associated with occurrence of GOR in children referred for evaluation of suspected disorders of oesophageal motility including pathological gastro-oesophageal reflux.
We sought to investigate the hypothesis that episodes of spontaneous gastro-oesophageal reflux cause reflex UOS relaxations, which may be the mechanism of regurgitation rather than a deficiency of basal UOS tone.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
Fifty five children aged 2 to 81 months (median 13 months) were enrolled in the study.
The patients were referred to the gastroenterology unit of the Adelaide Children's Hospital for evaluation of symptoms thought to be due to gastro-oesophageal reflux or a feeding disorder.
All children were fully assessed clinical by one of us (GPD) or one other consultant pediatric gastroenterologist.
The study protocol was approved by the ethics research committee of Adelaide Children's Hospital.
Informed parental consent was obtained before the study.
Table I gives the classification of major presenting symptoms and incidence of neurological dysfunction in the 53 children in whom technically satisfactory UOS recordings were obtained.
Neurological dysfunction was defined by the presence of symptoms and signs of cerebral palsy or developmental delay confirmed by the Denver developmental screening test.
PROTOCOL
Dual sleeve manometric assemblies were used for concurrent monitoring of lower oesophageal sphincter (LOS) and UOS pressures.
Assemblies were passed transnasally without the aid of sedation after a three hour fast.
After positioning of a pH electrode and manometric assembly (see later) the child was allowed to settle and was then fed appropriately for age with formula or non-acid food such as sandwiches and milk.
Monitoring of spontaneous patterns of motility and oesophageal pH was started at the end of the meal and continued for four hours with the children recumbent and unsedated.
RECORDING TECHNIQUE
We have described the technique previously.
Briefly, one of two manometric assemblies was used (Fig 1).
These had different intersleeve distances to cope with the range of intersphincteric distances found in this age group.
They had an outer diameter of 3.5 mm except for the proximal sleeve, which had an oval cross section (3.5 mm×5.5 mm).
This allowed consistent positioning in the UOS in the anterior or posterior orientation, thus controlling for radial asymmetry of the pressure profile.
Six sideholes, perfused at 0.15 ml/min, monitored gastric and oesophageal body pressures; one sidehole perfused at 0.07 ml/min monitored pharyngeal pressures.
The two sleeves were perfused at 0.3 ml/min.
Distal oesophageal pH was monitored concurrently with a miniature intraluminal monopolar glass electrode (Microelectrodes Inc, New Hampshire, USA, model MI-506), and a skin electrode used as a reference (Micro-electrodes Inc, New Hampshire, USA, model MI-402).
The manometric assembly was positioned such that the side holes at each end of the LOS sleeve showed gastric and oesophageal body pressure patterns whereas the side holes at either end of the UOS sleeve indicated pharyngeal and oesophageal body pressures (Figs 1, 2, 3).
In two children the intersleeve distance was not compatible with simultaneous, technically satisfactory recording from the UOS and LOS.
In these children the assembly was positioned to meet the clinical requirement for adequate LOS manometry.
Consequently the data from the 53 children with technically satisfactory UOS recordings were analysed.
DATA ANALYSIS
Analysis of manometric tracings —Manometric indicators of reflux Abrupt, sustained increases in intra-oesophageal pressure to intragastric pressure known as common cavity episodes, were used to recognise oesophageal distension by reflux without reference to the pH recording (Fig 2).
Common cavity episodes have been described and evaluated in detail elsewhere, and have been shown by fluoroscopy to be due to oesophageal body distention with gas.
Common cavity episodes were only scored when the rise in intra-oesophageal pressure was recorded in at least two oesophageal body manometric channels.
Rises in basal oesophageal pressure due to straining or breath holding were excluded by recognition of similar rises in the gastric pressure tracing, whereas true oesophageal body common cavity episodes were not associated with a comparable change of intragastric pressure (Fig 2).
Analysis of basal UOS pressure — For the purposes of this study basal UOS pressure was defined as the mean UOS pressure after editing of disturbances caused by strains or swallows.
A strain was defined as an abrupt rise in gastric pressure of 5 mm Hg or more above the baseline for two or more seconds, with a temporally associated disturbance of oesophageal body pressure.
Swallowing was indicated by characteristic pharyngeal pressure waves in the most proximal sidehole (Figs 2, 3).
The reference point for timing of swallows was taken from the onset of this pressure wave.
Basal UOS pressure was referenced to basal end expiratory midoesophageal body pressure and analysed in two ways as outlined:
(1)
Basal UOS pressure was determined for every 12th minute throughout the monitoring period as described previously.
Disturbances induced by swallowing were edited from the UOS pressure tracing by excluding pressures from four seconds before to six seconds after swallows.
A visual mean of basal UOS pressure was determined from each edited minute of tracing if there were more than 14 seconds remaining after editing.
In view of our recent finding that basal UOS pressure is influenced by the child's state of arousal, this was assessed throughout the monitoring period and noted as: A — resting with eyes shut, B — resting with eyes open, C — moving, comfortable, D — moving, uncomfortable, and E — crying.
The child's arousal classification was noted for each 12th minute value of UOS pressure and a mean value obtained for arousal states A and B. Although arousal states C to E were noted their data were not analysed for this study.
(2)
UOS pressure around common cavity episodes was analysed if there were no swallows for 13 seconds before and three seconds after the onset of each common cavity episode (Fig 3).
Visual mean values of UOS pressure were taken for each two second interval from 10 seconds before the onset of the common cavity episode until one second before the first swallow after the common cavity episode, or the onset of the first secondary oesophageal peristaltic wave (Fig 3).
An overall value of basal UOS pressure was derived for the six seconds before and up to six seconds after the onset of the common cavity episode by averaging the individual two second values.
Mean values for pre- and post-common cavity pressures were then derived for each child.
Measures of magnitude, duration, and extent of oesophageal distention — Occurrence of a pattern of intraoesophageal pressure oscillation identical to that of intragastric pressure during a common cavity episode was taken to indicate a period of communication between the lumina of the esophageal body and stomach.
The percentage of time that such a pattern was seen during common cavity episodes was recorded.
The change of basal end expiratory intraoesophageal pressure produced by a common cavity episode was measured from an oesophageal body channel.
The extent of an esophageal common cavity was determined from the number of sideholes proximal to the LOS that registered the common cavity episode.
Transient UOS relaxations — The tracings were scanned for UOS relaxations that occurred independently of swallowing.
This excluded any relaxation that had its onset within three seconds before or one second after the onset of a swallow.
Figure 3 shows the analysis of transient UOS relaxations.
These were scored when UOS pressure dropped to less than 50% of the prevailing UOS pressure within one second without the occurrence of swallowing or straining.
In the case of relaxations that occurred before common cavity episodes, the reference basal UOS pressure was derived from the 10 seconds before the onset of the common cavity episode.
For relaxations that occurred during common cavity episodes, the reference basal UOS pressure was derived from the UOS pressure values during the common cavity.
Transient UOS relaxations were taken as having ended when UOS pressure rose above 50% of the relaxation pressure.
The nadir of transient UOS relaxation swas the most clearcut point and so was related to the time of onset of the common cavity episode to the nearest second.
Nadir pressure was referenced to the prevailing midoesophageal body pressure in that second and so took into account changes of basal oesophagela body pressure produced by common cavity episodes.
The duration of the nadir of transient UOS relaxations was measured to the nearest second.
Analysis of pH recording
Acid reflux was defined as a fall of oesophageal pH to four or less for four or more seconds.
The pH changes associated with each common cavity episode were evaluated by taking the pH five seconds before and five seconds after the onset of the common cavity episode.
The pH nadir during the common cavity episode was also noted.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Student's paired t test was used to compare basal UOS pressure for the six seconds before the common cavity to the six seconds after the onset of the common cavity.
This was done by calculating mean deltas of UOS pressure for each subject and comparing group mean differences before and after the common cavity.
Incidence of transient UOS relaxations among symptom groups and between neurological divisions was compared by χ 2 analysis.
Incidence of transient UOS relaxations was compared with oesophageal acidification, change of oesophageal body pressure, and extent of communication by χ 2 tests.
The difference in increase in UOS pressure for those episodes with acid reflux and those without was compared with one way ANOVA.
A p×q factorial experiment with adjustment for unequal cell frequencies was used for comparison of basal UOS pressure among symptom groups, the presence or absence of neurological deficit, and the influence of arousal.
An average of six values was available for estimation of a representative cell observation.
Differences among nadir pressures of transient UOS relaxations occurring before the onset of the common cavity, and the first, second, and third and subsequent transient UOS relaxations after the onset of the common cavity were analysed as a single factor experiment with adjustment for unequal sample size.
All data are expressed as median and interquartile ranges unless otherwise stated.
Results
BASAL UOS PRESSURE INDEPENDENT OF REFLUX
Tables II and III show the mean values for basal UOS pressure according to arousal state, symptom classification, and presence or absence of neurological deficit.
No significant differences were evident among the different clinical groups for arousal states A or B. Mean basal UOS pressure was not significantly different in the patients with neurological deficit compared with the neurologically normal children.
Consistent with our previous report arousal state influenced UOS pressure irrespective of the clinical grouping, with UOS pressure being significantly greater in arousal state B in all cases (p).
BASAL UOS PRESSURE ASSOCIATED WITH COMMON CAVITY EPISODES
screening of the tracings showed 369 common cavity episodes.
The median number identified per child was five, with a wide variation from zero to 29.
Of these, 102 episodes fitted the criteria described in the methods section, which were designed to ensure that the effects of swallowing or straining did not influence assessment of the effect of reflux on UOS pressures.
These episodes gave a total of 551 two second time intervals before the onset of the common cavity episodes, and 476 two second time intervals after the common cavity onset.
The median duration of the common cavities was eight seconds (interquartile range four to 10 seconds).
The median rise in basal intraoesophageal pressure by common cavity episodes was six mm Hg (interquartile range 5–8 mm Hg).
Figure 4 shows the pattern of basal UOS pressure before and during the common cavity episode.
Overall, common cavity episodes caused a 25% increase in mean UOS pressure from 36.5 (SD 18 mm Hg to 48.5 (18) mm Hg, which was highly significant (p).
This effect did not depend on oesophageal acidification as it occurred to the same extent with both pH + and pH -common cavity episodes.
As only three episodes of acid reflux were seen in the absence of a common cavity episode no statement could be made about the effects of acidification alone.
TRANSIENT UOS RELAXATIONS
One hundred and one transient UOS relaxations occurred around the time of 60 (54%) of the 112 common cavity episodes.
Figure 5 shows their distribution with time; 49% occurred in the first four seconds after the onset of the common cavity episode and 34% were scattered over the 5th to the 27th second after the onset of the common cavity.
The remaining 17% occurred over the 10 seconds preceding the onset of the common cavity episode, being evenly distributed through this time.
Most common cavity episodes had a single transient UOS relaxation, but up to five were seen during a single episode.
There were 65 first transient UOS relaxations, 24 second transient UOS relaxations, and 12 third and subsequent transient UOS relaxations.
No grouping of the patients according to symptoms or the presence or absence of neurological deficit showed any difference in incidence of transient UOS relaxations.
Figure 6 shows the range of individual nadir pressures of transient UOS relaxations before and after the common cavity episode.
The nadir pressures of the first transient UOS relaxations that occurred during the common cavity episodes differed significantly from the first transient UOS relaxations that occurred before the common cavity (p).
The duration of the nadir could only be graded into coarse divisions of less than one second, one to two seconds, or more than two seconds as the paper speed at which the recordings were made did not allow greater accuracy.
Eighty two per cent lasted less than one second, 16% were one to two seconds, and 2% were more than two seconds in duration.
There were no significant differences in the mean duration of the nadirs of transient UOS relaxations according to their timing relative to the common cavity onset among the symptom groups.
Oesophageal acidification had no effect on triggering of transient UOS relaxations as the proportions of acid negative (48 of 84) and acid positive (14 of 22) episodes that triggered transient UOS relaxations did not differ significantly.
Neither of the measures of the extent of oesophageal distention showed any correlation with triggering of transient UOS relaxations.
Table IV shows the range of increases in intraoesophageal body pressure from the common cavity episodes.
Table V shows the percentage of time the oesophageal and gastric tracings indicated identical pressure recordings.
In all but one of the common cavity episodes the pressure increase was seen in all oesophageal body monometric recording ports.
Discussion
This report describes for the first time the changes of UOS pressure that occur during spontaneous gastro-oesophageal reflux in unsedated children.
One major finding in the children studied, who had a range of clinical problems, was that transient UOS relaxations occurred during a proportion of episodes of gastro-oesophageal reflux induced distention of the oesophagus.
Another significant finding was that there was no difference in basal UOS pressure in children whose problems could be ascribed to oesophagopharyngeal reflux when compared with children in other groups.
These findings suggest that lowered basal UOS tone is unlikely to be a major cause of oesophagopharyngeal reflux, but that transient relaxations of the UOS in response to distention are a more probable cause of such reflux.
Our analyses also support further our previous finding that basal UOS pressure is highly labile and emphasise that the level of arousal must be recorded and controlled for any valid comparisons of basal UOS pressure.
The scope of the evaluations undertaken was only possible through the use of perfused sleeve manometry of the UOS.
The modifications of this approach for use in children have been presented previously.
Earlier manmetric studies of the UOS in children used perfused sidehole pull through methods with sedation, an approach that only gives a few sample values of UOS pressure and these are influenced by the effects of sedation and stress.
Our technique permits continuous recording from the upper oesophageal sphincter for periods of several hours without resort to sedation.
This approach enabled us to evaluate UOS function under standard conditions with adequate control for the influence of level of arousal, and also provided the opportunity to analyse events around the time of occurrence of spontaneous episodes of gastro-oesophageal reflux.
There is a prevailing theory that basal hypotonia of the UOS is the cause of pathological oesophagopharyngeal reflux.
The previous pediatric studies of Sondheimer and Staiano et al did not support this theory.
The sleeve sensor recordings of basal UOS pressure in the present study produced many hours of UOS pressure recording and allowed us to undertake a searching and carefully controlled evaluation of the possibility that UOS hypotonia is related to any particular symptom pattern in children.
The patients were classified in two ways: firstly into four groups based on their most prominent presenting symptom, and secondly according to the presence or absence of neurological deficit.
The group of children with symptoms of vomiting (27 of 29) or failure to thrive (two of 29) were the group whose problems were primarily due to regurgitation.
When the level of arousal was taken into account there was no significant difference of UOS pressure in this group compared with any of the other three symptom groups.
The existence of a neurological deficit was also shown to have no significant effect on basal UOS pressure.
We therefore support the findings of Sondheimer and Staiano et al that basal hypotonia of the UOS is not a cause of pathological oesophagopharyngeal reflux.
Unfortunately, in the present study it was only possible to make comparisons among symptomatic children, because ethical constraints precluded measurement of UOS pressure from children who were well.
Because of the perceived significance of augmentation of basal UOS pressure as a mechanism that may prevent gastro-oesophageal reflux, we performed an analysis of the effects of oesophageal distention and acidification on basal UOS pressure.
Although there is general agreement that distention of the oesophagus causes an increase in basal UOS pressure, there is confusion as to the effects of oesophagel acidification on basal UOS pressure.
In the present study distention of the oesophagus alone caused a significant increase of 12 mm Hg, and concurrent acidification had not added effect.
Although the post-reflex augmentation of UOS pressure is statistically highly significant, in absolute terms it is a modest effect and we doubt that it is of great importance for the prevention of oesophagopharyngeal reflux.
There were only three episodes of acid gastro-oesophageal reflux without associated oesophageal distention, too few to allow us to comment on the effects of acidification alone.
Our studies were designed to determine whether transient UOS relaxations occur during gastro-oesophageal reflux.
Such relaxations are seen in healthy adults after abrupt oesophageal distention with insufflated gas or gas gastro-oesophageal reflux.
They are the basis for the audible component of belching through oesophagopharyngeal passage of gas and occur independently of swallowing, having a somewhat longer time course than the UOS relaxation induced by swallowing.
Our studies provided evidence of such relaxations during episodes of spontaneous gastro-oesophageal reflux in children.
Transient UOS relaxations were clustered predominantly into the first few seconds of oesophageal distention consistent with the triggering of transient UOS relaxations reported by Kahrilas et al in adults.
Acidification of the oesophagus in the presence of distention had no effect on triggering of transient UOS relaxations as seen by the proportions of common caviety episodes with and without acidification that were associatedwith transient UOS relaxations.
This confirms a recent report by Vakil et al that there was no correlation between oesophageal acidification and occurrence of transient UOS relaxations in normal volunteers or in patients with oesophagitis.
There were no transient UOS relaxations in the three episodes of acidification of the oesophagus without associated common cavity episodes, but this sample is too small to allow for any firm conclusions.
The analysis of the magnitude of the increase of basal intraoesophageal pressure produced by the common cavity and the percentage of time that the stomach was in pressure communication with the oesophageal lumen were attempts to determine whether intensity of distention had any bearing on the triggering of transient UOS relaxations.
Neither of these relatively crude measures suggest that there was any correlation of degree or duration of oesophageal distention with triggering of transient UOS relaxations.
Our results should not be interpreted as excluding this possibility as Kahrilas et al did find such a dose response relation in adults, but also considerable variation in thresholds for triggering of transient UOS relaxations among different adult subjects.
There is a possibility that transient UOS relaxations may be unusually easy to trigger in some subjects and so predispose them to oesophagopharyngeal reflux.
This theory requires direct examination by correlation of events after spontaneous episodes of gastro-oesophageal reflux in which the volume of refluxate is monitored scintigraphically, or by standardised testing of thresholds for transient UOS relaxations in infants by air insufflation.
Our study has monitored UOS pressure in unsedated children and established the occurrence of transient UOS relaxations in children, which may contribute to oesophagopharyngeal reflux.
Basal UOS pressure is very labile, responding to the child's level of arousal and to oesophageal distention, but not to oesophageal acidification.
The prevailing theory that oesophagopharyngeal reflux is due to lowered basal UOS tone has not been supported.
Definitive evaluation of the possible causes of oesophagopharyngeal reflux awaits the recording of UOS pressure during well defined episodes of such reflux.
A smaller catheter to enable us to study infants in the first two months of life is eagerly awaited, as this is the age group in which most oesophagopharyngeal reflux occurs.
Location of superoxide anion generation in human colonic mucosa obtained by biopsy
Abstract
To identify which cells generate superoxide, inflamed human mucosa was tested with nitroblue tetrazolium as a probe, because it is reduced by strong reducing agents to form insoluble blue formazan, which then precipitates in tissues.
Biopsy specimens from control subjects and patients with ulcerative colitis were studied.
The specimens were organ cultured with bubbling air or nitrogen, and inhibition of the reduction by catalase (a hydrogen peroxide scavenger), para-benzoquinone (a tissue permeable superoxide scavenger), or superoxide dismutase (a superoxide scavenger) was assayed.
The dye was reduced by epithelial cells, vascular endothelium, and infiltrating mononuclear cells of the mucosa.
Its reduction by vascular endothelium and infiltrating mononuclear cells was greater in inflamed mucosa.
The reduction by vascular endothelium and infiltrating mononuclear cells was inhibited in cultures with nitrogen saturation or with 1 mM para-benzoquinone.
The vascular endothelium seems to produce superoxide in the inflamed mucosa, which would exacerbate tissue injury in ulcerative colitis.
The aetiology of ulcerative colitis is unclear.
The number of mononuclear phagocytes is high at the site of inflammation, which suggests that these cells participate in the pathogenesis and resolution of the tissue damage by releasing enzymes or generating toxic oxygen metabolites.
Reactive oxygen species have a role in ischaemia-reperfusion injury of the intestine, and may also participate in the pathogenesis of several kinds of gastric lesions.
The role of reactive oxygen species in ulcerative colitis has been studied by the use of circulating or isolated phagocytic cells of patients with this disease.
It is not known, however, if the production of reactive oxygen species by neutrophils or mononuclear cells in colonic mucosa is higher than normal in ulcerative colitis.
We used the reduction of nitroblue tetrazolium to detect the generation of superoxide in inflamed colonic mucosa.
The soluble yellow form of nitroblue tetrazolium is reduced by strong reducing agents such as superoxide to form blue formazon, which is insoluble, precipitating in tissues.
Inhibition assays were undertaken in anaerobic cultures with nitrogen saturation and by the addition of para-benzoquinone, a superoxide scavenger that can permeat tissues.
Methods
Biopsy specimens were taken from the sigmoid colon (about 20 cm from the anus) of 28 patients with ulcerative colitis (mean age, 35 years; range, 15–59 years; 10 men and 18 women) and 23 controls without ulcerative colitis (mean age, 52 years; range, 20–73 years) who underwent sigmoidoscopy because of suspected non-inflammatory bowel disease.
Biopsy specimens were washed with physiological saline containing 100 U/ml penicillin G and 100 µg/ml streptomycin.
For aerobic and anaerobic culture, each specimen was placed in a screw capped culture bottle and 4 ml of Eagle's minimum essential medium (MEM) were added.
The specimens were organ cultured for one hour at room temperature with bubbling air or nitrogen.
The medium was then replaced with 4 ml of MEM containing 0.1 mg/ml nitroblue tetrazolium, and the specimen was cultured for one hour more with air or nitrogen saturation, without switching.
A further assay of nitroblue tetrazolium reduction was undertaken with catalase, para-benzoquinone, or superoxide dismutase.
Speimens were placed in a tissue culture plate (Falcon 3847 multiwell plate, Becton Dickinson and Cox) and cultured with 0.4 ml of MEM alone or with catalase, para-benzoquinone, or superoxide dismutase added.
The medium was then changed to 0.4 ml of MEM containing 0.1 mg/ml nitroblue tetrazolium, with or without an addition.
Tissue specimens were then fixed with periodate-lysine-2% paraformaldehyde for six hours at 4°C and washed three times with increasing concentrations of sucrose (10, 15, and 20%).
The fixed specimens were embedded in Tissue Tek OCT compound (Miles Pharmaceutical, Naperville, IL) and frozen in ethanol cooled with dry ice.
Cryostat sections about 5 µm thick were prepared and stained with methyl green for examination under a light microscope.
Deposits of formazan were graded as follows.
For epithelial cells, 0 was negative, 1 was weakly positive, 2 was strongly positive, and 3 was very strongly positive.
For the vascular endothelium, 0 was negative, 1 was weakly positive in places, 2 was diffuse and weakly positive, and 3 was diffuse and strongly positive.
Mononulcear cells stained for formazan were found in various locations at various densities, but they aggregated to form clusters in some specimens, so the presence or absence of these clusters (at least three mononuclear cells grouped together) was recorded.
All sections were coded and then analysed for the relationship between nitroblue tetrazolium deposits and the degree of inflammation.
Inflammation was graded according to Matt's criteria by one of the authors, who was given no clinical information.
Data were analysed by the χ 2 test.
Results
Deposits of formazan were found in the colonic epithelium, vascular endothelium, and infiltrating mononuclear cells.
Nitroblue tetrazolium reduction by the vascular endothelium and infiltrating mononuclear cells was strongly inhibited in the cultures with nitrogen saturation or those to which 1 mM para-benzoquinone had been added, and reduction by the epithelial cells was partly inhibited in these circumstances (Fig (A)).
Catalase and superoxide dismutase, which were tested at concentrations of up to 3000 U/ml, did not inhibit nitroblue tetrazolium reduction.
Nitroblue tetrazolium was reduced at the brush border of the colonic epithelium in the control tissue (Fig (B)) and in specimens from ulcerative colitis patients (Fig (C)).
There was no difference between the degree of nitroblue tetrazolium deposit and the degree of tissue inflammation in the colonic epithelium (Table I).
In specimens of inflamed mucosa, vascular endothelium strongly reduced nitroblue tetrazolium (Fig (C)), but in the control mucosa, reduction was weak or absent (Fig (B)).
The reduction of nitroblue tetrazolium by the vascular endothelium increased with the degree of inflammation (Table II, p).
Mononuclear cells that infiltrated the inflamed mucosa reduced nitroblue tetrazolium (Fig (D)) and sometimes formed clusters, especially in active ulcerative colitis.
Mononuclear cell clusters stained with formazan were found in inflamed mucosa only (Table III, p).
Discussion
Phagocytic cells are found in the intestinal mucosa; they are heterogeneous immunohistochemically in both normal and inflamed mucosa.
The number of activated macrophages is probably increased in inflamed ulcerative colitis mucosa, and these macrophages generate superoxide by membrane associated NADPH oxidase, which mediates antimicrobial and cytotoxic effects.
Many of the circulating moncytes in patients with inflammatory bowel disease are activated.
In a study of isolated macrophages, a greater proportion than normal of macrophages from the mucosa of ulcerative colitis patients underwent a respiratory burst to generate superoxide.
These findings suggested that superoxide is involved in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease.
Oxyradical dependent photoemission of granulocytes stimulated by platelet activating factor has been detected in vivo in rat mesenteric microvascular beds, but it is not known if these reactive oxygen species are generated in vivo in the colonic mucosa because phagocytes may be activated during isolation procedures used in in vitro studies.
The fact that nitroblue tetrazolium reduction was not inhibited by catalase or superoxide dismutase may be the result of a lack of tissue permeability of these enzymes.
On the other hand, inhibited reduction of nitroblue tetrazolium by colonic vascular endothelium and mononuclear cells under anaerobic conditions or with the addition of 1 mM para-benzoquinone may reflect the participation of reactive oxygen species in the reduction.
Hydrogen peroxide and its metabolites do not reduce nitroblue tetrazolium, so superoxide may cause the reduction.
The vascular endothelium may be essential for the occurence of inflammatory or immunological phenomena.
Xanthine oxidase has been found in the endothelium of capillaries by immunohistochemistry, and superoxide is generated in endothelial cell cultures.
Superoxide seems to be generated by the endothelium in inflamed colonic mucosa.
The activation of the endothelium may be the result of microbial attack, contat activation by activated neutrophils, or some other external stimulus, including inflammatory mediators.
The superoxide generated may have a direct cytotoxic effect or it may interact with inflammatory mediators to modify the inflammatory process.
Fibroblast growth factor in gastroprotection and ulcer healing: interaction with sucralfate
Abstract
The study was designed to determine the gastroprotective and ulcer healing efficacy of basic transforming growth factor (bFGF) and to assess whether this peptide contributes to the action of sucralfate on the rat stomach.
Application of human recombinant bFGF (1–100 µg/kg/hour subcutaneously) failed to affect the formation of acute gastric lesions induced by 100% ethanol and acidified aspirin but reduced the stress induced by gastric lesions.
Sucralfate (100–200 mg/kg given orally) protected gastric mucosa against the ethanol, aspirin, and stress induced acute gastric lesions but the addition of bFGF (100 µg/kg subcutaneously or intragastrically) failed to affect sucralfate induced protection against ethanol or aspirin but increased that against stress.
Administration of bFGF (3–300 µg/kg/day) by an intragastric or an intraperitoneal route or sucralfate (400 mg/kg/day) orally to rats with acetic acid induced gastric ulcers, enhanced the healing rate of these ulcers during seven day treatment in a dose dependent manner.
This was accompanied by a prounced increase in the number of capillaries and myofibroblasts and in DNA synthesis and DNA and RNA concentrations in the granulation tissue in the ulcer area.
[I]bFGF (1 µCi) applied subcutaneously or intragastrically accumulated in two to threefold higher amounts in the ulcer area than in the intact mucosa, particularly in rats treated with sucralfate.
Concurrent treatment with indomethacin (2 mg/kg intraperitoneally) delayed ulcer healing and reduced the binding of labelled bFGF to the ulcer area, angiogenesis, and DNA synthesis by sucralfate.
Addition of [I]bFGF to sucralfate at various pHs resulted in the coprecipitation of bFGF by sucralfate in a pH dependent manner from about 10% at pH 7.0 to 90% at pH 1.5.
Thus bFGF shows little protective activity and is not essential for gastroprotection afforded by sucralfate but plays an important part in healing of gastric ulcers possibly due to its growth promoting and angiogenic actions.
Growth factors such as epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor (TGF), platelet derived growth factor (PDGF), and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) are potent mitogenic peptides expressed in various tissues including the gastrointestinal tract.
Both EGF and TGF were identified in the gastric mucosa and found to promote cell proliferation, mucosal repair, gastroprotection, and healing processes.
An interaction was reported between EGF and antiulcer drugs such as sucralfate and antacids in healing of chronic gastroduodenal ulcerations.
Fibroblast growth factors exist in acidic (aFGF) and basic (bFGF) forms and are expressed in most cells of the body, especially in endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and macrophages.
They are stored within the basal membrane or extracellular matric and released in an active form to stimulate tissue repair and healing.
Oral treatment with acid resistant bFGF was recently reported to accelerate healing of gastroduodenal ulcers induced by acetic acid or cysteamine in rats.
Basic FGF is more potent than aFGF in an in vitro system but no information is available on its efficacy inmucosal protection, repair, and healing processes.
The purposes of the present study were (1) to determine the binding of human recombinant bFGF to the intact and ulcerated gastric mucosa;(2) to assess the protective activity of bFGF against the damage by various irritants and stress;(3) to examine the efficacy of bFGF in ehaling of gastric ulcers; and (4) to evaluate the interaction of bFGF with sucralfate in the gastroprotection and healing of gastric ulcerations in rats.
Materials and methods
ANIMALS
Male Wistar rats weighing about 250 g were fitted with chronic gastric fistulas and used about four weeks later.
Before each experiment, the animals were fasted for around 18 hours and placed in individual (Bollman type) cages to maintain the minimum restraint necessary.
The fistula was opened and the stomach was rinsed gently with about 5 ml of tap water at 37°C.
Basal gastric secretion was collected for 60 minutes, and bFGF was infused subcutaneously (at a rate of 4ml/hour) in various doses ranging from 1 to 100 µg/kg/hour with a peristaltic pump; each dose was infused for 60 minutes in one day's test.
In tests with intragastric administration of bFGF, the peptide was dissolved in 1 ml of saline and instilled into the stomach via the cannula of the gastric fistula and the fistula was closed for 30 minutes.
Then the collection of gastric juice was restarted and continued for a final 60 minutes.
Only the 100 µg/kg dose of bFGF was given by the intragastric route.
For comparison, omeprazole (30 mg/kg) was administered subcutaneously.
In control tests, vehicle (saline) was infused at the same volume and in the same manner as in tests with bFGF.
Gastric juice was collected in 30 minute aliquots, the volume of the juice was measured, and acid concentration was assessed by titration with 100 mM NaOH to pH 7.0 with an autoburette (Radiometer, Copenhagen).
Acid output was expressed a µM per 30 minutes as described.
Pepsin output was also measured in each sample by Anson's haemoglobin method and expressed in mg/30 minutes.
EXPERIMENTS WITH ACUTE GASTRIC LESIONS
Acute gastric lesions were induced by ethanol, aspirin, or stress as described before.
Absolute ethanol was introduced by an intragastric route in a 1.5 ml volume with a metal orogastric tube.
The animals were anaesthetised one hour after ethanol administration to allow measurement of gastric blood flow by laser Doppler flowmetry (Laserflo, model BPM 403A, Vasamedics Inc, St Paul, MN) as described previously.
They were then killed.
The stomach was removed and the area of gastric lesions was measured by planimeter (Morphomat, Carl Zeiss Berlin, Germany) by two investigators under blinded conditions.
Aspirin was introduced by an intragastric route in a dose of 200 mg/kg in 250 mM HCl.
The animals were anaesthetised three hours later and gastric blood flow and area of gastric lesions were measured as previously described.
Stress ulcerations were evoked by placing the animals in stress cages and immersion in a water bath at 23°C for six hours to the xyphoid level as described by Takeuchi et al .
Immediately after the stress, the animals were anaesthetised to enable measurement of gastric glood flow.
The stomach was then removed and the number of gastric lesions were counted.
Several groups of eight to 10 rats were used in studies with each ulcerogen (100% ethanol, acidified aspirin, and stress).
These were (1) vehicle (saline) given by intragastric instillation or subcutaneous infusion followed 30 minutes later by ulcerogen;(2) bFGF infused subcutaneously in a dose of 100 µg/kg/hour followed 30 minutes later by ulcerogen;(3) bFGF given by an intragastric route at a dose of 100 µg/kg followed 30 minutes later by ulcerogen,(4) sucralfate (100 mg/kg by intragastric instillation) followed 30 minutes later by ulcerogen,(5) bFGF infused subcutaneously in a dose of 100 µg/kg/hour and sucralfate (100 mg/kg by intragastric instillation) followed 30 minutes later by ulcerogen; and (6) intragastric bFGF (100 µg/ kg) given in combination with sucralfate (100 mg/kg) followed 30 minutes later by ulcerogen.
Sucralfate or bFGF was dissolved in saline and given by the intragastric route in a volume of 1 ml or infused subcutaneously at 4ml/hour.
Saline was also used as vehicle and was administered in the same manner and in the same volume as the test substances.
Basic FGF and sucralfate in suspension were supplied by Dr E Gehrls (Merck E, Darmstadt, Germany).
EXPERIMENTS WITH ACETIC ACID INDUCED GASTRIC ULCERATIONS
Gastric ulcers were induced with our modifications of the acetic acid method originally described by Takagi et al .
The animals were fasted for 24 hours and then their abdomen was opened and the stomach exposed under light ether anaesthesia.
A plastic mould of 6 mm diameter was applied tightly to the serosal surface of the anterior wall of the stomach just proximal to the antral gland area and 70 µl 100% acetic acid was poured through the mould on to the surface of the stomach for 20 seconds.
This method caused an immediate necrosis of the entire thickness of gastric wall under the area of acetic acid application (about 28 mm) but without perforation or penetration of ulcers to the surrounding organs as in the original technique.
After the application of acetic acid, animals were allowed to recover from the anaesthesia andreceived only water on the day of operation (day 0).
Then they were divided into various groups and given unlimited normal rat food and water for the next seven days.
Several groups, each consisting of eight to 10 rats with gastric ulcers, were used in two series, A and B. In series A, group I rats were treated with vehicle (saline, 1 ml given by intragastric route three times daily) only (control); group II rats were given intragastric bFGF (3, 30, or 300 µg/kg/day in three equal doses, each dose dissolved in 1 ml of saline), group III rats were given bFGF by intraperitoneal injection (3, 30, or 300 µg/kg/day in three equal doses), group IV rats were treated with intragastric sucralfate (added to drinking water; 400 mg/kg/day); group V rats were treated with a combination of intragastric bFGF (30 µg/kg/day in three equal doses) plus sucralfate; group VI rats were treated with intraperitoneal bFGF (30 µ/kg/day; in three equal doses); and for comparison group VII rats were treated with omeprazole (60 mg/kg/day into the peritoneum in two equal doses each dissolved in 1 ml of saline).
Rats of series B were divided into group I treated with vehicle (saline) alone; group II treated with daily intraperitoneal injection of indomethacin (2 mg/kg); group III treated with sucralfate (400 mg/kg/day); and group IV, treated with a combination of indomethacin (2 mg/kg) plus sucralfate (400 mg/kg).
To evaluate the effects of bFGF and sucralfate on ulcer healing, the animals of series A were treated for seven days and the anaesthetised with ether.
The abdomen was opened and the stomach was exposed to assess the mucosal blood flow at the ulcer margin, ulcer bed, and adjacent intact mucosa.
Then the stomach was removed and opened for the measurement of ulcer area.
All measurements were performed by technical personnel unware of the treatment given.
Samples of the mucosa from the ulcer margin including the granulation tissue and the adjacent intact mucosa were excised in each rat of series A for biochemical analysis (DNA synthesis and DNA and RNA content) and histological assessment of number of capillaries and myofibroblasts.
HISTOLOGICAL EVALUATION OF THE MUCOSA AT THE ULCER AREA
The mucosal samples were fixed in 10% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin.
The paraffin sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
Histological examination was performed by two pathologists unaware of the treatment.
Quantitative assessment of microvessel profiles was performed under 500× magnification and expressed as the mean number of microvessels per microscopical field.
Number of fibroblasts was also calculated per microscopical field at 1000× magnification.
Mean values were calculated from at least three ields on each slide.
BIOCHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF GROWTH OF INTACT AND ULCERATED MUCOSA
The portions of the tissue excised from the ulcer margin and from the adjacent intact mucosa were weighed and the rate of DNA synthesis was measured by incubating the tissue at 30°C for 30 minutes in Eagle's minimal essential culture medium containing 2 µCi/ml of [H]thyumidine (Amersham, UK) as described previously.
The incorporation of labelled thymidine into filtrate containing DNA was measured in a Beckman liquid scintillation system; DNA synthesis was expressed as disintegrations perminute (dpm) /µg DNA.
The DNA and RNA concentrations were also determined in each sample according to a method described in detail elseqhere and expressed in µg/100 mg of tissue.
STUDIES ON BINDING OF [I]bFGF TO SUCRALFATE AND TO THE GASTRIC MUCOSA
The adsorption of bFGF to sucralfate was examined in vitro by adding 100 µl of sucralfate (about 20 mg/l) or vehicle (control) to 500 µl of [I]bFGF (about 30000 cpm) dissolved in phosphate buffer (with 0.1% bovine albumin) adjusted to pHs ranging from 1.5 to 7.5.
The mixtures were incubated for 30 minutes at 25°C and centrifuged for 10 minutes.
The bFGF bound to sucralfate was harvested and the radioactivity was counted for 1 minute in a γ scintillation counter (LKB Wallace, Wien, Austria).
The results are expressed in per cent of [I]bFGF copreipitated by sucralfate or vehicle v pH of the incubation mixture.
In rats of series B (treated with sucralfate, or indomethacin, or both), each group was subdivided and one subgroup was injected intravenously with 1 µCi of [I]bFGF before killing.
Two areas of about 40 mm, one including the gastric ulcer and the other a similar area of adjacent intact mucosa were excised and the radioactivity of each excised piece was measured and expressed as cpm per 100 mg of tissue.
The ratio of radioactivity of ulcer area v intact mucosa was calculated for each group of rats.
In another subgroup similar 40 mm areas were placed in 0.5 ml of 0.05 M phosphate buffer pH 7.0 containing 0.5% BSA and aprotonin with addition of [I]bFGF (about 6000 cpm in 0.1 ml) were incubated at 25°C for 60 minutes.
The reaction was stopped by the addition of ice cold phosphate.
Each tube was centrifuged at 1500 g for 10 minutes and after separation, the radioactivity of the pellet was counted in an LKB 1271 RIAGAMA counter (Turku, Finland).
Non-specific bFGF binding was estimated by incubating tissue samples to which 1 µg of non-labelled bFGF was added before the addition of [I]bFGF.
The results were expressed as means of cpm of tissue bound [I]bFGF.
Non-specific bFGF binding did not exceed 20% of total radioactivity added.
The ratio of the radioactivity bound to the ulcerated and to the intact mucosa was calculated for each group of animals of the B series.
statistics
The data are expressed as mean (SEM).
Comparisons between groups of parametric data were made by Student's t test for unpaired data or analysis of variance and Duncans multiple range tests.
p Values <were taken as significant.
Results
EFFECTS OF bFGF ON GASTRIC ACID SECRETION
Basal gastric acid and pepsin outputs from the gastric fistulas of conscious rats treated with vehicle averaged 131 (16) µmol/30 minutes and 0.95 (0.12) mg/30 minutes respectively.
Infusion of bFGF subcutaneously in various doses (1–100 µg/kg/hour) did not significantly alter gastric acid or pepsin secretion, although at the highest fose of bFGF (100 µg/kg) gastric secretion tended to decline; acid output fell to 103 (15) µmol/30 minutes and pepsin output fell to 0.76 (0.17).
The administration of bFGF (100 µg/kg) directly into the stomach also failed to significantly alter gastric acid or pepsin secretion and these results have not been included.
For comparison, omeprazole given subcutaneously at a dose of 30 mg/kg resulted in almost complete inhibition of acid output (12 (2) µmol/30 minutes) and pepsin output (0.15 (0.04) mg/30 minutes).
EFFECTS OF bFGF AND SUCRALFATE ON ACUTE GASTRIC LESIONS INDUCED BY 100% ETHANOL, ACIDIFIED ASPIRIN, OR STRESS
In tests with vehicle plus 100% ethanol (control), the mean number of gastric lesions was 15 (3) and the mean area of gastric lesions averaged 82 (6) mm per rat (Table I).
When bFGF was administered subcutaneously or by intragastric route in a dose of 100 µg/kg, there was no significant change in the ethanol induced gastric lesions.
Pretreatment with sucralfate (100 mg/kg) resulted in a significant decrease in lesion area to about 60% of the control area.
The combination of bFGF given subcutaneously or by an intragastric route with sucralfate administered intragastrically did not significantly influence the reduction in the ethanol induced lesion area compared with that obtained with sucralfate alone (Table I).
Gastric blood flow averaged about 62 (5) ml/ min/100 g of tissue in the oxyntic portion of intact mucosa.
After exposure of the mucosa to 100% ethanol, this was reduced by about 65% and the reduction was not significantly altered by the administration of bFGF.
Pretreatment with sucralfate (100 mg/kg) significantly enhanced gastric blood flow but combination with bFGF did not influence this enhancement (Table I).
Acidified aspirin in vehicle treated rats evoked gastric lesions of similar number and area to those produced by 100% ethanol and resulted in similar reduction in gastric blood flow (by about 68%; Table I).
Administration of bFGF given did not significantly affect the lesion area or the gastric blood flow in rats treated with aspirin.
Sucralfate (100 mg/kg) reduced the area of lesions induced by modified aspirin by about 43% and significantly improved the gastric blood flow.
The combination of bFGF with sucralfate caused similar reductions in lesion area and gastric blood flow as those found with sucralfate alone.
In vehicle treated rats exposed to three hours of water immersion and restraint stress, gastric lesions appeared as small and scattered haemorrhagic erosions mostly in the oxyntic gland area and this was accompanied by about 63% reduction in gastric blood flow.
Sucralfate (200 mg/kg) caused a significant reduction (by about 50%) in the number and area of gastric lesions and a significant increase in gastric blood flow above that obtained in vehicle treated controls.
Pretreatment with bFGF alone (100 µg/kg/hour) resulted in a small but significant reduction in the number and area of stress lesions.
In rats receiving intragastric bFGF, the stress lesions tended to decline but this was not statistically significant.
When bFGF given subcutoneously (but not by the intragastric route) was combined with sucralfate, the reduction in gastric lesions was more pronounced than that achieved with sucralfate or bFGF alone (Table I).
EFFECTS OF bFGF ON HEALING OF CHRONIC GASTRODUODENAL ULCERATIONS IN RATS WITH OR WITHOUT ADMINISTRATION OF INDOMETHACIN
In rats of series A, serosal application of acetic acid resulted in the formation of gastric ulcerations in all rats tested.
The initial area of ulcers measured one day after their induction conformed with the size of the mould and averaged 28 mm.
Seven days after induction, the area in vehicle treated animals was 10.4 (0.9) mm (Table II).
In rats treated with bFGF at doses of 3–300 µg/kg per day, there was a dose dependent decrease in the ulcer area (compared with vehicle control).
The reduction in the ulcer area after treatment with intraperitoneal bFGF at a dose of 30 µg/kg/day was comparable with that obtained with omeprazole at a dose of 60 mg/kg/ day — namely, almost complete inhibition of gastric acid secretion (Table II).
Sucralfate administered at 400 mg/kg/day caused similar reductions in ulcer area to that found in rats treated with bFGF at a dose of 30 µg/kg/day.
The combination of sucralfate plus bFGF (30 µg/kg/day) resulted in a decrease in the ulcer area similar to that with sucralfate alone or bFGF alone but the combination of sucralfate plus bFGF injected into the peritoneum resulted in greater reduction in the ulcer area than that attained with sucralfate alone or bFGF alone (Table II).
Gastric blood flow at the ulcer bed was 12 (3) ml/minute/100 g and at the ulcer margin — 32 (4) ml/minute/100 g, whereas in the adjacent intact mucosa it was 58 (7) ml/minute/100 g.
A similar profile of gastric blood flow was found in rats treatedwith sucralfate or omeprazole but in rats given bFGF, especially when injected into the peritoneum alone or in combination with sucralfate, the gastric blood flow at the ulcer margin reached significantly higher values than that in vehicle treated controls (Table II).
In rats of series B receiving daily injection of indomethacin (2 mg/kg) throughout the seven day period after ulcer induction, the area of gastric ulcers was about 50% larger than in animals without indomethacin administration (Fig 1).
Addition of sucralfate (400 mg/kg/day) resulted in a significant reduction in the area compared with vehicle control.
In rats receiving the combination of sucralfate plus indomethacin, the area of gastric ulcer was less than the vehicle control but significantly higher than that after the treatment with sucralfate alone.
EFFECTS OF bFGF AND SUCRALFATE ON THE NUMBER OF CAPILLARIES AND MYOFIBROBLASTS AT THE ULCER MARGIN
The number of capillaries and myofibroblasts in the granulation tissue at the ulcer margin in vehicle treated rats were 16 (0.8) and 104 (6) respectively (Table III).
Intragastric administration of bFGF caused a significant increase in capillaries but not myofibroblasts.
Treatment with sucralfate did not significantly alter the number of capillaries or myofibroblasts.
In rats injected intraperitoneally with bFGF, the number of capillaries almost doubled and the number of myofibroblasts was significantly increased (by about 30%).
The combination of bFGF plus sucralfate resulted in similar increase in capillaries and myofibroblasts to those with bFGF alone.
EFFECTS OF SUCRALFATE AND INDOMETHACIN ON BINDING OF [I]bFGF TO THE INTACT AND ULCERATED MUCOSA
Figure 1 shows distribution of [I]bFGF between the ulcer area and adjacent intact mucosa presented as the radioactivity ratio (ulcer area v intact mucosa).
There were small but measurable amounts of [I]bFGF bound to the intact mucosa and treatment with sucralfate for seven days did not significantly influence this.
By contrast, the ulcer area accumulated about twofold more labelled bFGF in vehicle treated rats and about threefold more in sucralfate treated animals.
The addition of indomethacin resulted in a significant decrease in the radioactivity ratio between ulcerated and intact mucosa.
A similar distribution of labelled FGF between the ulcer area and the intact mucosa was found after in vitro exposure and these results have not been included.
Labelled bFGF added in vitro to the suspension of sucralfate adjusted to pHs ranging from 7.0 to 2.0 was bound in gradually increasing amounts with decreasing pH.
At pH 7.0 about 10% of total radioactivity of [I]bFGF was bound to sucralfate, whereas at pH 2.0 the binding increased to about 90% (Fig 2).
EFFECTS OF bFGF AND SUCRALFATE ON NUCLEIC ACID CONTENT IN THE GASTRIC MUCOSA
In intact rats without induction of gastric ulcers, the values of DNA synthesis and DNA or RNA concentrations in oxyntic mucosa averaged 30.3 (2.0) dpm/µg DNA, 371 (34) µg/100 mg, and 1062 (60) µg/100 mg respectively.
After induction of acetic acid ulcerations and seven day administration of vehicle in rats of series A, the values of DNA synthesis and nucleic acid concentrations in the intact mucosa opposite to the ulcer area were not significantly different from the control values (Table IV).
By contrast, the mucosa resected from the ulcer margin, including the granulation tissue, showed significantly higher DNA synthesis and higher DNA and RNA concentrations.
Treatment with bFGF almost doubled the DNA synthesis at the ulcer margin and in the non ulcerated mucosa.
The DNA and RNA concentrations were also significantly increased (compared with vehicle control) both in the ulcer margin and in the adjacent non-ulcerated mucosa.
Treatment with sucralfate alone (400 mg/kg) did not significantly alter DNA synthesis and the concentrations of nucleic acid in the ulcer margin or in the adjacent intact mucosa.
The addition of bFGF to sucralfate resulted in similar stimulation in DNA synthesis and in similar increases in the concentrations of DNA and RNA to those in rats treated with bFGF without sucalfate (Table IV).
Discussion
This study provides evidence that bFGF given parenterally or by an intragastric route is not protective agaisnt the acute gastric lesions induced by topical irritants such as ethanol or aspirin but exerts a significant protection against the stress induced lesions and considerably enhances the healing rate of chronic gastric ulcers.
Addition of sucralfate to bFGF does not influence the gastroprotective properties but augments the ulcer healing action of this drug.
The presence of bFGF and the binding sites for this peptide have been documented in various tissues including the gastrointestinal tract but the physiological role of bFGF has not previously been established.
This study shows that bFGF, unlike EGF or FGF a , does not affect gastric acid secretion or gastric blood flow, the major factors that have been implicated in mucosal protection by EGF and TGF against topical irritants.
This probably explains the failure of bFGF to protect the gastric mucosa against the damage caused by absolute ethanol and acidified aspirin.
Only in rats subjected to stress did bFGF (given subcutaneously in a large dose) cause a small but significant attenuation of the mucosal lesions and this was accompanied by increased gastric blood flow suggesting that the maintenance of gastric circulation in stressed rats could explain this protection.
Other mechanisms, however, such stimulation of cell migration and proliferation are not excluded.
Sucralfate was effective against all three types of mucosal lesions.
This was probably due to the stimulation of mucosal defence mechanisms and to the increase in mucosal blood flow that has been recognised previously and attributed recently to the formation of nitric oxide, a potent locally acting vasorelaxing factor.
As expected, the addition of bFGF to sucralfate did not augment the gastroprotective activity of this drug except in stress lesions, which were significantly more reduced after treatment with the combination of bFGF and sucralfate than with each agent separately.
The most important finding is that bFGF given parenterally or applied directly to the mucosa enhanced the healing of acetic acid induced gastric ulcerations and augmented the healing activity of sucralfate.
These effects of bFGF have been documented with our modification of chronic gastric ulceration induced by serosal application of acetic acid that is now widely used in studies of the efficacy of various antiulcer drugs.
These ulcers heal spontaneously and rapidly so that seven days after their induction the ulcer area was usually reduced to about 30% of its initial size.
The mechanism of the healing is unknown but previous studies showed that the new vacularisation at the ulcer margin, the establishment of adequate blood flow around the ulcer base, and stimulation of cell migration and proliferation in the granulation tissue at the ulcer bed are the key factors in this process.
Agents that inhibit gastric acid secretion enhance the healing and this was also confirmed in our study because omeprazole at a dose that almost completely inhibited gastric acid secretion was effective in promoting ulcer healing.
Our study shows that bFGF, even at a dose that did not affect gastric acid secretion (30 µg/kg/day), was also effective in healing these lesions.
Obviously, this healing effect could not be mediated by the inhibition of acid secretion and other mechanisms are involved in the healing process.
Administration of bFGF strongly stimulated DNA synthesis, especially in the granulation tissue at the ulcer margin, and increased the DNA and RNA content in the adjacent intact mucosa.
Detailed histological assessment showed a significant increase in the number of capillaries and fibroblasts in the granulation tissue of rats treated with bFGF compared with that in vehicle treated controls.
Cell migration and proliferation and angiogenesis could all contribute to the ulcer healing activity of bFGF.
The stimulation of new microvessel formation was postulated as it is the major mechanism of action of FGF on gastric ulcers and of acid resistant bFGF on healing acetic acid induced gastric ulcer and cysteamine induced duodenal ulcers in rats.
It is of interest that sucralfate alone was also effective in speeding the healing rate of gastric ulcers and this is in keeping with previous studies on ulcer healing properties of this drug in animal models and in humans.
In acidic gastric milieu, sucralfate is a polyvalent anion, electrostatically binding most protein molecules (preferentially in the ulcer base) that are positively charged.
Also, sucralfate was found in this study to bind labelled bFGF in vitro in a pH related manner.
This suggests accumulation of bFGF to the ulcer area to form a reservoir of bFGF that could be responsible for the enhancement of angiogenesis and mucosal growth (increased DNA and RNA) in the ulcer margin seen in rats treated with the combination of bFGF plus sucralfate.
The growth indices at the ulcer margin in rats treated with sucralfate alone were, however, not significantly different from those in vehicle treated animals indicating that endogenous growth factors such as EGF and TGF a released locally from the injured mucosa may be sufficient to drive the cell proliferation at the ulcer margin.
An additional supply of exogenous bFGF accelerated the ulcer healing probably due to the increased angiogenesis and the proliferation of cells such as myofibroblasts in the granulation tissue.
It is of interest that the addition of intragastric bFGF to sucralfate did not cause any further decrease in ulcer size despite the increase in DNA synthesis at the ulcer margin.
This indicates that the stimulation of cell proliferation may not be the only factor in ulcer healing by sucralfate.
When sucralfate was combined with another growth factor (EGF) no additive effects on healing of acetic acid induced gastric ulcers were found either.
In summary, bFGF administered orally or given parenterally accelerated the healing of acetic acid induced gastric ulcers in rats.
The healing affect was dose dependent and, at a dose that did not affect gastric secretion, was comparable to that achieved with omeprazole, a potent inhibitor of gastric secretion.
The ulcer healing by bFGF seems to involve angiogenesis and cell proliferation, especially at the ulcer margin, and is enhanced by treatment with sucralfate.
Reduced cholesterol metastability of hepatic bile and its further decline in gall bladder bile in patients with cholesterol gall stones
Abstract
The reduced metastability of biliary cholesterol in the gall bladder bile of patients with cholesterol gall stones has been well shown.
The purpose of this study was to examine the hypothesis that such a difference in metastability already exists in hepatic bile.
Paired hepatic and gall bladder bile samples were collected from 10 patients with cholesterol gall stones and six patients without gall stones.
Cholesterol nucleation time, biliary lipid concentration, vesicular cholesterol distribution, and biliary protein concentration were measured and compared.
The nucleation time in the hepatic bile of patients with cholesterol gall stones was significantly shorter than the gall stone free patients (8.2 (7.2)v 15.7 (5.8) days, p), and was associated with a greater concentration of biliary lipid despite the lack of a difference in the cholesterol saturation index (CSI) and total protein concentration.
during the storage of bile in the gall bladder, the nucleation time became quicker in the patients with cholesterol gall stone (2.9 (1.7) days) while it was similar in the gall stone free patients (17.3 (5.7) days) compared with that of the corresponding hepatic bile.
These differences were associated with a higher CSI (1.44 (0.33)v 1.13 (0.14), p) and a greater vesicular cholesterol distribution (19.7 (11.9)v 4.4 (1.4) %, p) in the patients with cholesterol gall stones than the gall stone free patients.
The concentrations of total lipid and protein in gall bladder bile were not significantly different between the two groups.
In conclusion, patients with cholesterol gall stones produce less metastable hepatic bile measured by the evidence of shorter nucleation time.
During the storage of the bile in the gall bladder, the metastability is reduced further only in the cholesterol gall stone patients but not in the gall stone free patients.
Biliary supersaturation with cholesterol is a prerequisite for cholesterol gallstone formation.
Patients without cholesterol gall stones (gall stone free and pigment gall stone patients), however, often have bile supersaturated with cholesterol.
These findings suggest that factors, in addition to biliary cholesterol saturation, are responsible for the formation of cholesterol gall stones.
The stability of biliary cholesterol verified by the first appearance of cholesterol monohydrate crystals (nucleation time), rather than the cholesterol saturation index (CSI), is considered to be a better index for differentiating bile metastability.
Cholesterol nucleation occurs from phospholipid cholesterol vesicles, the main carriers of cholesterol in addition to bile acid phospholipid cholesterol mixed micelles.
Cholesterol nucleation is preceded by vesicle aggregation and fusion, and is believed to be an initial step in the formation of cholesterol gall stones.
Changes in biliary lipid composition such as high CSI, high bile acid/phospholipid molar ratio or low bile acid concentration accelerates cholesterol nucleation associated with a greater distribution of vesicular cholesterol.
Recently, a high total lipid concentration has been reported to reduce the metastability of bile.
Furthermore, a high biliary concentration of total protein is reported to reduce bile metastability.
The importance of pro and anti-nucleating protein in bile has been shown.
Thus, the metastability of biliary cholesterol is modulated by several factors such as biliary lipid composition, total lipid concentration, biliary protein, and the presence of stable/unstable vesicles.
Changes in the gall bladder, such as the increased absorption of water and the hypersecretion of mucous glycoprotein have also been shown to be responsible for cholesterol gall stone formation.
There has been little investigation, however, as to how the metastability of hepatic bile changes in the gall bladder of patients with or without cholesterol gall stones.
Furthermore, despire a possible difference in the cholesterol metastability of hepatic bile between the patients with choesterol gall stones and control subjects, the nucleation time in hepatic bile has not been compared.
We hypothesised that the patients with cholesterol gall stones have less metastable hepatic bile which would become more lithogenic during the storage in the gall bladder.
To examine the hypothesis, we verified the nucleation time, biliary lipid concentration, biliary protein concentration, and the distribution of vesicular cholesterol in paired hepatic and ball bladder bile from patients with or without cholesterol gall stones.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS AND BILE SAMPLES
Paired samples of hepatic and gall bladder bile were collected from 10 patients with cholesterol gall stones and six patients without gall stones at the time of surgery.
The cholesterol gall stone patients consisted of eight women and two men, mean age 53.8 (16.8).
The gall stone free patients consisted of four women and two men, mean age 53.5 (17.8).
Four patients had gastric cancer and there was one case each of a solitary liver metastasis from thyroid cancer and a simple liver cyst.
Cholecystectomy was carried out in patients with gastric cancer to dissect lymph nodes in porta hepatica and to prevent cholecystitis after gastrectomy.
There were no significant differences in the sex and age distribution between the two groups.
All patients had a normal ordinary food intake with mean per cent ideal body weight of 104.8 (16.2) %.
Their liver function tests (glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase, serum alkaline phosphatase, and serum bilirubin) were all within the normal range.
Informed consent was obtained from all patients.
Gall bladder bile samples were collected after the ligation of the cystic duct by the complete sterile needle aspiration f the gall bladder to prevent the stratification f bile.
A balloon catheter was cannulated into the common bile duct through the cystic duct and a sample of 2–3 ml of hepatic bile was collected through the hole proximal to the inflated balloon to prevent contamination by pancreatic and duodenal juice.
Each patient had a functional gall bladder according to the evidence of a clearly visible gall bladder and its contractile response to egg yolk recorded on the drip infusion cholangiogram before operation, and by a total biliary lipid concentration greater than 50 g/l.
The paired hepatic and gall bladder bile samples thus collected were immediately transferred to the laboratory in sterile brown test tubes kept at 37°C.
The samples were immediately ultracentrifuged at 100000 g for two hours at 37°C (Hitachi 55P-72, Tokyo, Japan).
The separated isotropic cholesterol crystal free phase between the great density sediment of the bottom and the buoyant supernatant phase was collected with a sterile needle and syringe.
The absence of cholesterol crystals was confirmed with polarised light microscopy (Nikon XTP-II, Tokyo, Japan).
The isotropic bile samples were subsequently used to measure the nucleation time and the relative distribution of vesicular cholesterol.
Part of the bile samples were frozen at -20°C until chemical analysis.
NUCLEATION TIME AND RELATIVE DISTRIBUTION OF VESICULAR CHOLESTEROL
Nucleation time, defined as the first appearance time of cholesterol monohydrate crystals, was measured as described by Holan et al with certain modifications.
Isotropic bile samples were immediately transferred into small sterile brown glass tubes, flushed with nitrogen, sealed, and placed in an incubator at 37°C without shaking throughout the study period.
An aliquot was examined daily for the appearance of cholesterol monohydrate crystals with their typical rhomboidal notched and plated structures under the polarised microscope for 21 days of study.
When cholesterol monohydrate crystals did not appear during the study period, the nucleation time was recorded as 21 days.
Separation of vesicles from micelles was performed by the gel filtration method using a 350×10 mm column packed with Sephacryl S-300 gel (Pharmacia LKB, Uppsala, Sweden) as reported.
Although the validity of this method has been confirmed by comparison with other methods, it is now considered to be conventional and artificial.
For a non-perturbed separation, the correct intermicellar bile salt concentration and species should be determined in each bile sample.
Therefore, the relative distribution of cholesterol in the vesicular phase was measured and compared.
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS
Bile acids and cholesterol were simultaneously quantified by gas liquid chromatography using nordeoxycholic acid as an internal standard as described by Chijiiwa and Nakayama.
Phospholipids were verified by Bartlett's method.
The cholesterol saturation index was calculated from the tables provided by Carey.
Total protein concentration was measured by the fluorometric technique described by Yamazaki et al .
Briefly, 1 ml of 50–100 fold diluted bile was added to 1ml of trichloroacetic acid solution (final concentration 10%) and placed at 4°C for 30 minutes.
The solution was centrifuged at 1700 g for 30 minutes at 4°C.
This procedure was repeated twice.
After discarding the supernatant, the precipitate was washed with diethyl ether/ethanol (3:1 vol/vol) and then centrifuged as above.
The delipidation procedure was also repeated twice.
The final pellet was dissolved in borate buffer (pH 9.0) and incubated overnight at 4°C. 0.5 ml of fluorescamine solution (0.03% in acetone)(Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) was added to 1.5 ml of each sample.
After 15 minutes, fluorescence was measured at an excitation wavelength of 390 nm and an emission wavelength of 480 nm by means of fluorescence spectrophotometry (RF-500, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) using bovine serum albumin as the standard.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data are represented as mean (SD).
Differences were tested by the Mann-Whitney U test for unpaired data and the Wilcoxon signed rank test for paired data.
The least square method was used in calculating the correlations.
A probability value less than 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
Results
NUCLEATION TIME
Figure 1 shows that, the nucleation time of hepatic bile in the patients with cholesterol gall stones (8.2 (7.2) days) was significantly shorter (p) than that in the gallstone free patients (15.7 (5.8) days).
A significantly shorter nucleation time (2.9 (1.7) days) was also seen in gall bladder bile from the cholesterol gall stone patients compared with the gall stone free patients (17.3 (5.7) days)(p).
Interestingly, in the cholesterol gall stone patients, the nucleation time of gall bladder bile was significantly shorter (p) compared with the corresponding value of hepatic bile.
such an acceleration was absent in the gall stone free patients.
BILIARY LIPID COMPOSITION AND TOTAL PROTEIN CONCENTRATION
The Table shows the differences in biliary lipid composition and total protein concentration between the cholesterol gall stone patients and the gall stone free patients.
The concentrations of total bile acids, cholesterol, and total lipid were significantly higher (p) in the hepatic bile of the cholesterol gall stone patients than those of the gall stone free patients.
The composition of individual bile acids was similar between the two groups.
The concentration of phospholipids was also higher in the cholesterol gall stone patients but not to a significant degree.
The molar per cent of cholesterol in hepatic bile was similar in the cholesterol gall stone patients and the gall stone free patients (14.1 (4.3) % v 13.7 (4.7) %).
The CSI in hepatic bile of the cholesterol gall stone patients did not differe significantly from that of the gallstone free patients (3.17 (1.29)v 3.90 (1.82)).
Biliary protein concentration was similar between the two groups.
In gall bladder bile, no significant differences were seen between the two groups in the concentrations of biliary lipid and total lipid.
The composition of individual bile acids was similar between the groups.
The molar per cent of cholesterol in gall bladder bile did not differ significantly between the groups (9.2 (1.9)v 8.6 (1.8) %).
The CSI in gall bladder bile of the cholesterol gall stone patients, however, was significantly greater (p) than that of the gall stone free patients.
No significant difference in total protein concentration was seen in gall bladder bile between the cholesterol gall stone patients and the gall stone free patients.
DIFFERENCE IN DISTRIBUTION OF VESICULAR CHOLESTEROL
The relative distribution of vesicular cholesterol in hepatic bile of the cholesterol gall stone patients was higher than that of the gall stone free patients, but not to a significant extent (42.3 (14.9) % v 21.9 (21.0) %).
In gall bladder bile, a significantly greater distribution of vesicular cholesterol was found in the cholesterol gall stone patients compared with the gall stone free patients (19.7 (11.9) % v 4.4 (1.4) %, p)(Table).
RELATION BETWEEN NUCLEATION TIME AND CSI, TOTAL LIPID CONCENTRATION, TOTAL PROTEIN CONCENTRATION, OR VESICULAR CHOLESTEROL DISTRIBUTION
In hepatic bile, the nucleation time was inversely correlated with total lipid concentration when two groups were combined (Fig 2; r=-0.53, p).
Such a significant correlation, however, was absent in each bile sample taken from the cholesterol gall stone patients (r=-0.43) or gall stone free patients (r=0.02).
No correlation was found between the nucleation time and CSI, total protein concentration or the distribution of vesicular cholesterol in hepatic bile.
In gall bladder bile, the nucleation time was inversely correlated significantly with the CSI (r=-0.51, p) and with the distribution of vesicular cholesterol (r=-0.61, p) when combined samples from the two groups were considered (Fi 3).
When analysed separately in the cholesterol gall stone patients and gall stone free patients, there were no significant correlation of the nucleation time with the CSI (r=0.12 and r=-0.60, respectively or with the distribution of vesicular cholesterol (r=-0.02 and r=-0.61, respectively).
The nucleation time did not correlate with either total lipid concentration or total protein concentration.
Discussion
This is the first attempt to compare the biliary cholesterol metastability of paired hepatic and gall bladder bile between the patients with cholesterol gall stones and the gall stone free patients.
The most important findings were:(1) hepatic bile, as well as gall bladder bile, is less metastable in the patients with cholesterol gall stones than the gall stone free patients; and (2) the metastability of bile is reduced further in the gall bladder only in the patients with cholesterol gall stones.
The nucleation time of gall bladder bile in cholesterol gall stone patients is quicker than that in gall stone free or pigment gall stone patients, which was confirmed by this study.
In addition, the nucleation time from more concentrated gall bladder bile has been reported to be quicker than that from hepatic bile in cholesterol gall stone patients.
The reported nucleation times of hepatic bile from cholesterol gall stone patients were 9.8 (8.6), 7.3 (6.5), and 8.8 (7.0) days, comparable with our finding of 8.2 (7.2) days.
There have been no studies reported, however, on the nucleation time of hepatic bile in gall stone free patients.
In this study, hepatic bile of the cholesterol gall stone patients provided a significantly shorter nucleation time than that of the gall stone free patients.
This indicates that cholesterol gall stone patients produce hepatic bile with a more reduced metastability of cholesterol compared with that of gall stone free patients.
The concentration of biliary protein and the relative distribution of vesicular cholesterol were compared to examine the possible factors responsible for the difference in metastability of hepatic bile and biliary lipid composition.
Hepatic bile was supersaturated in a similar way in patients with cholesterol gall stones and gall stone free patients, which was consistent with the findings of Carey et al and Gallinger et al .
Although the calculated CSI in very dilute bile (total lipid concentration <g/l) possibly has an error as described by Carey, the molar per cent of cholesterol was also similar between the two groups.
There was no correlation between the nucleation time and the CSI in hepatic bile.
The total protein concentration in hepatic bile did not differ between the two groups as shown by Gallinger et al , and was not connected with the nucleation time.
The total lipid concentration was greater in the hepatic bile of patients with cholesterol gall stones than that in the gall stone free patients (Table).
This may imply that the difference in total lipid concentration of diluted bile has a greater influence on the nucleation time compared with that of concentrated bile, as shown in model bile.
In this study, the hepatic bile was possibly mixed with newly secreted bile, as time was required to collect the necessary volume.
This explains the lower value of total lipid concentration in hepatic bile than that in retained bile of the common bile duct, but the value is within the ragne of values (8–29 g/l) reported for hepatic bile collected by T tube drainage.
Previous studies have shown that hepatic bile from cholesterol gall stone patients provides a greater total lipid concentration but not to a significant degree compared with controls.
In this study, a significantly greater total lipid concentration was found in the hepatic bile of cholesterol gall stone patients.
The reason for the greater total lipid concentration in cholesterol gall stone patients is not clear at present.
A possible explanation is that the reduced bile flow as shown in cholesterol gall stone patients may enhance the absorption of water in the bile duct and may thus produce hepatic bile with a greater total lipid concentration.
This could also explain the difference in biliary lipid secretion rate between the two groups.
As a result, a greater biliary lipid concentration with a concomitant increase in the vesicular cholesterol distribution reduced the metastability of hepatic bile in the cholesterol gall stone patients.
The nucleation time of hepatic bile in each group, however, was not significantly correlated with the total lipid concentration despite the presence of significant correlation in whole bile samples.
The results suggest that the main factor differentiating the nucleation time between the two groups may be the difference in the activity of pro and anti-nucleating protein as both proteins coexist in hepatic bile.
Whatever the mechanism is, the patients with cholesterol gall stones produce less metastable hepatic bile.
During the storage of such different metastable hepatic bile in the gall bladder, the metastability of bile was further reduced compared with the corresponding hepatic bile in the cholesterol gall stone patients, whereas such an effect was absent in the gall stone free patients (Fig 1).
The factors differentiating metastability of gall bladder bile in two populations might be ascribed to the CSI and the distribution of vesicular cholesterol.
This is partly supported by the evidence that the CSI and the distribution of vesicular cholesterol differed significantly between the two groups (Table) despite the lack of significant correlation between the nucleation time and these variables in each group (Fig 3).
In contrast with hepatic bile, a significant difference in the total lipid concentration was not seen in gall bladder bile and the total lipid concentration did not correlate with the nucleation time of gall bladder bile.
This may be because of the presence of gall stones, as gall bladder bile is more concentrated in the early stage of cholesterol gall stone formation but becomes diluted depending upon the severity of cholecystitis.
The total protein concentration did not differ between the two groups as shown by Yamazaki et al .
A role of the balance between the activity of pro and anti-nucleating protein has been also suggested to be a differentiating factor for the nucleation time.
A higher ratio of the concentration rate of protein to that of bile acids in gall bladder to hepatic beile as seen in the cholesterol gall stone patients than the gall stone free patients (0.75 (1.02)v 0.15 (0.11), p).
This indirect evidence suggests a reduced absorption or increased secretion of protein, or both by the gall bladder leading to a change in the biliary protein fraction, as the gall bladder absorbs biliary protein selectively and the increased CSI enhances the secretion of pronucleating protein mucin.
The study that gall bladder bile from cholesterol gall stone patients had a higher concentration of mucin despite a similar total protein concentration compared with the controls supports this possibility.
Thus, a higher CSI possibly associated with an increase in the pronucleating protein fraction could induce cholesterol rich vesicles, resulting in a further reduced metastability of gall bladder bile in the cholesterol gall stone patients.
In conclusion, cholesterol gall stone patients produce less metastable hepatic bile compared with gall stone-free patients proved by the shorter nucleation time.
During the storage in the gall bladder, biliary metastability becomes further reduced only in the cholesterol gall stone patients and not in the gall stone free patients.
The gall bladder is the last place to produce bile that is likely to nucleate in the patients with cholesterol gall stones.
Intestinal bile acid malabsorption in cystic fibrosis
Abstract
This study aimed at examining the mechanisms participating in excessive faecal bile acid loss in cystic fibrosis.
The study was designed to define the relation between faecal fat and faecal bile acid loss in patients with and without cystic fibrosis related liver disease; to assess terminal ileal bile acid absorption by a seven day whole body retention of selenium labelled homotaurocholic acid (SeHCAT); and to determine if small intestinal bacterial overgrowth contributes to faecal bile acid loss.
The study population comprised 40 patients (27 men; median age 18 years) with cystic fibrosis (n=) and without (n=32) liver disease and eight control subjects.
Faecal bile acid excretion was significantly higher in cystic fibrosis patients without liver disease compared with control subjects (mean (SEM) 21.5 (2.4) and 7.3 (1.2) umol/kg/24 hours respectively; p) and patients with liver disease (7.9 (1.3) umol/kg/24 hours; p).
No correlation was found between faecal fat (g fat/ 24 hours) and faecal bile acid (umol/24 hours) excretion.
Eight (33%) of cystic fibrosis patients had seven day SeHCAT retention <(normal retention >).
SeHCAT retention in cystic fibrosis patients with liver disease was comparable with control subjects (30.0 (SEM) 8.3% v 36.8 (5.9) %; p=NS) while SeHCAT retention in cystic fibrosis patients who did not have liver disease was significantly reduced (19.9 (3.8); p).
Although evidence of small bowel bacterial overgrowth was present in 40% of patients no relation was found between breath hydrogen excretion, faecal fat, and faecal bile acid loss.
The results are consistent with the presence of an abnormality in terminal ileal function in patients with cystic fibrosis who do not have liver disease and that a defect in the ileal absorption of bile acids may be a contributory factor to excessive faecal bile acid loss.
Faecal bile acid loss in cystic fibrosis is unrelated to the presence of intraluminal fat or intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
Excessive faecal bile acid loss is well recognised in patients with cystic fibrosis and has been attributed to an inhibitory effect of intraluminal unhydrolysed triglycerides on the intestinal absorption of bile acids.
Some studies, however, have shown no correlation between faecal fat excretion and faecal bile acid loss suggesting that additional factors are responsible for bile acid malabsorption in cystic fibrosis.
Thus in vitro studies have shown a defect in the terminal ileal bile acid active transport mechanisms in patients with cystic fibrosis, which if present in vivo, would also contribute to excessive faecal bile acid loss.
In addition, intestinal bacterial overgrowth, resulting from prolonged intestinal transit and stasis, may result in deconjugation and dehydroxylation of bile salts and contribute to impaired bile acid absorption and faecal bile acid loss.
Excessive faecal bile acid losses have not been found in all studies in adult patients with cystic fibrosis.
This finding has been attributed to the increased prevalence of hepatic dysfunction, with associated impairment of bile acid synthesis and contraction of the total bile acid pool, in adults with cystic fibrosis.
The objectives of this study in an adult population of patients with cystic fibrosis were to:(1) define the relation between faecal fat and faecal bile acid excretion in patients with and without liver disease;(2) to discover if a defect in the ileal bile acid active transport mechanism contributes to faecal bile acid loss; and (3) to assess the contribution of small bowel bacterial overgrowth to faecal fat and faecal bile acid losses.
Methods
PATIENTS
The study population comprised of 40 patients with cystic fibrosis admitted to the Adult Cystic Fibrosis Centre for evaluation of their respiratory or hepatic state, or both.
Most patients were receiving standard treatment with bronchodilators, antibiotic prophylaxis against pseudomonas or staphylococcal infections, or both, and pancreatic enzyme supplements.
The presence of hepatic disease was determined by abnormal liver biochemistry tests (gammaglutamyl transferase >IU/l, 5'nucleotidase >IU/l) of at least six months duration, histological evidence of fibrosis/cirrhosis on liver biopsy and the presence of portal hypertension, or both.
Eight patients in whom there was no evidence of gastrointestinal, pancreatic, or hepatobiliary disease served as a control population.
Dietary advice to achieve a total energy intake of 120–150% of the recommended daily allowance for age, with approximately 40% of the total energy intake derived from fat, was given to each patient.
All patients received fat and water soluble vitamin supplements and none were taking taurine supplementation.
FAECAL FAT AND BILE ACID ANALYSIS
Faecal fat and faecal bile acid analysis was performed on 17 patients with cystic fibrosis (five with liver disease) and wight control subjects.
Faecal samples were collected over three days during which at least 50 grams of fat were ingested per day.
The dietary intake over the 72 hour collection period was noted and fat intake calculated in grams/day.
Three day stool collection were stored at -20°C and were subsequently analysed for fat and bile acid content.
FAECAL FAT MEASUREMENT
Faecal fat analysis was performed using the method of van de Kamer and expressed as g fat/ g stool/24 hours.
The coefficient of fat absorption (CFA) was calculated from the daily dietary fat intake and the daily stool fat output and expressed as a percentage of the daily fat intake.
FAECAL BILE ACID MEASUREMENT
Bile acids were extracted from a 100 mg aliquot of dried homogenate of faeces.
Fifty microlitres of [1 4 C]-sodium cholate was added as an internal standard to allow assessment of recovery rates at the end of the extraction procedure.
Bile acids were hydrolysed under alkaline conditions at 220°C and were subsequently neutralised with hydrochloric acid and extracted with diethylether.
Total faecal bile acids were measured using a 3a-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase assay and expressed as µmol bile acid/g stool/24 hours.
The results were also expressed as mg glycocholate equivalent bile acid/g stool/24 hours by adding a glycocholate standard to the stool specimen before analysis.
SELENIUM HOMOTAUROCHOLIC ACID (SeHCAT) RETENTION
The seven day retention of 7 5 selenium labelled homotaurocholic acid (SeHCAT), a bile acid specifically absorbed by an ileal active transport mechanism, was measured in 21 cystic fibrosis patients (6 with cystic fibrosis related liver disease) and eight control subjects.
One microcurie (37 kBq) of SeHCAT was given orally in capsule form to each subject.
Whole body retention (% of dose) of selenium radioactivity was measured on two occasions using a shallow shield whole body counter (Camberra Accuscan) three hours and seven days after ingestion of the radiolabelled isotope.
HYDROGEN BREATH TEST ANALYSIS
Increased breath hydrogen excretion after the ingestion of glucose and increased breath hydrogen excretion in the fasting state, is a useful indicator of intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
Hydrogen breath tests were performed on 33 patients with cystic fibrosis including five patients with cystic fibrosis related liver disease and eight control subjects.
None of the patients had ingested lactulose in the preceding 36 hours.
Breath hydrogen concentration was measured using an exhaled hydrogen monitor (Keymed).
After an overnight fast (minimum 10 hours) two 20 ml aliquots of end expiratory breath samples were obtained using a modified Haldane-Priestly tube.
Breath hydrogen was measured immediately and if less than 12 parts per million (ppm) 50 g sucrose was given orally.
After ingestion of sucrose, breath hydrogen was measured at 20 minute intervals for 160 minutes.
If during this period breath hydrogen increased by 100% or more the test was considered abnormal.
If the fasting breath hydrogen was greater than 12 ppm fasting was continued for up to 14 hours and a breath hydrogen persistently greater than 12 ppm at the end of this period was considered abnormal.
EFFECT OF ANTIMICROBIAL TREATMENT
To find out if small bowel bacterial overgrowth contributes to faecal fat and faecal bile acid losses four patients with positive hydrogen breath tests and excessive faecal fat and faecal bile acid losses were treated with a seven day course of oral metronidazole (400 mg three times daily).
Hydrogen breath tests and three day stool collections for faecal fat were repeated at the end of the course of treatment.
STATISTICS
All data are expressed as mean (SEM).
Differences between groups were compared using a Wilcoxon rank sum test.
Faecal fat and faecal bile acid values before and after metronidazole treatment were compared using a paired Student's t test.
A p value of <was considered significant.
Results
PATIENTS
The patients with and without liver disease were comparable with regard to age, sex, pancreatic enzyme supplementation, the prevalence of meconium ileus equivalent, and nutritional state (Table I).
All patients with liver disease had advanced disease with either fibrosis on liver biopsy examination or clinical or endoscopical evidence of portal hypertension.
FAECAL FAT
Faecal fat excretion, expressed as g fat/g stool/24 hours in patients without liver disease (45.9 (8.6) ×10 -3 ).
The coefficient of fat absorption was 81.3 (9.1) % and 85.7 (3.9) % in the patients with and without liver disease respectively and significantly lower than in control subjects (97.1 (0.5) %; p; Table II).
FAECAL BILE ACID EXCRETION
Faecal bile acid excretion was significantly higher in cystic fibrosis patients without liver disease compared with control subjects (21.5 (2.4) and 7.3 (1.2) µmol/kg/24 hours respectively; p) and patients with liver disease (7.9 (1.3) µmol/kg/24 hours; p).
Similar results were obtained when faecal bile acid losses were expressed as mg glycocholate equivalent bile acid/g stool/24 hours×10 -2 (Table II).
There was no correlation between faecal fat (g fat/24 hours) and faecal bile acid (µmol bile acid/ 24 hours) excretion in the patient group as a whole or when patients were stratified for the presence or absence of liver disease (Fig 1).
Similarly no correlation was seen between faecal fat expressed as g fat/g stool/24 hours and faecal bile acids expressed as mg bile acid glycocholate equivalent/g stool/24 hours (data not shown).
Three of four patients with the highest faecal bile acid losses had normal or near normal fat excretions of 4.5, 6.9, and 7.1 g/24 hours.
SeHCAT RETENTION
The mean percentage seven day retention of SeHCAT in patients with liver disease was 30.0 (8.3) % and comparable with that in control subjects (36.8 (5.9) %; p=NS).
In contrast a mean percentage seven day retention in patients without liver disease of 19.9 (3.8) % was lower (p) than in control subjects and patients with liver disease although the second did not reach statistical significance (Table II).
Seven day SeHCAT retention was abnormal in eight (38%) of 21 cystic fibrosis patients only one of whom had liver disease.
SeCHAT retention in the remaining five patients with liver disease was similar to, or greater than, the value in control subjects (Fig 2).
BREATH HYDROGEN EXCRETION
Sixteen (48.5%) of 33 cystic fibrosis patients had an increased fasting breath hydrogen (three of five patients with liver disease and 13 of 28 patients without liver disease; p=NS)(Table III) with eight patients having appreciably raised (>ppm) values (range 75–780 ppm).
The hydrogen breath test was positive in 20 of 33 (66%) patients and no difference was seen between the patients with and without liver disease (Table III).
Fasting breath hydrogen in control subjects was less than 12 ppm (range 0–11 ppm) and did not increase after sucrose given orally.
RELATION BETWEEN BREATH HYDROGEN EXCRETION, FAECAL FAT AND FAECAL BILE ACID LOSSES, AND SeHCAT RETENTION
There was no significant difference in faecal fat excretion in patients with a positive and negative hydrogen breath test (59.3 (8.6) ×10 -3 v 47.1 (18.9) ×10 -3 g fat/g stool/24 hours respectively (p=NS).
Similarly there was no significant difference in faecal bile acid excretion in patients with a positive and negative hydrogen breath test (167.1 (37)v 125.4 (22.9) mg bile acid/g stool/24 hours respectively; p=NS; Fig 3).
There was no correlation between peak, after sucrose, breath hydrogen excretion and percentage SeHCAT retention in the 12 patients in whom both studies were performed (r=-0.02, p=NS; Fig 4).
EFFECT OF ANTIMICROBIAL TREATMENT
In four patients with positive hydrogen breath tests treated with oral metronidazole (400 mg three times daily) for seven days, fasting and post sucrose breath hydrogen excretion decreased to normal values of less than 12 ppm, which was associated with a reduction in faecal fat excretion in all four patients from 77.5 (8.4) ×10 -3 to 57.7 (15) g fat/g stool/24 hours×10 -3 (p=NS).
Faecal bile acid excretion decreased in three of four patients from 105.2 (13.1) mg to 84.5 (23.3) mg bile acid/g stool/24 hours×10 -2 (p=NS; Fig 5).
Discussion
Several studies have shown that faecal bile acid excretion is appreciably raised in patients with cystic fibrosis and is comparable with that seen in subjects who have had ileal resection.
The suggestion that excess faecal bile acid losses in cystic fibrosis is related to the presence of intraluminal unhydrolysed triglyceride, is based on:(1) a close correlation between faecal bile acid and faecal fat excretion;(2) the finding that improvements in fat digestion with pancreatic enzyme supplementation was associated with a concomitant reduction in faecal bile acid losses; and (3) substitution of dietary fat with medium chain triglycerides resulted in a decrease in both faecal fat and faecal bile acid excretion.
Not all studies support a direct link between fat malabsorption and faecal bile acid losses.
Thus a correlation between faecal fat and faecal bile acid excretion has not been seen in all studies.
Administration of sodium bicarbonate while reducing faecal fat excretion was not associated with a reduction in faecal bile acid losses and in vitro studies have failed to show an inhibitory effect of unhydrolysed triglycerides on ileal bile acid absorption.
This study confirms previous findings that faecal bile acid losses are increased appreciably in patients with cystic fibrosis.
Several findings are inconsistent with the theory that an inhibitory effect of unhydrolysed fat on small intestinal bile acid absorption is a major factor responsible for faecal bile acid losses including:(1) the absence of a correlation between faecal fat excretion and faecal bile acid loss;(2) the normal faecal bile acid losses in patients with liver disease compared with the excessive losses in those without liver disease despite similar faecal fat excretion; and (3) the finding that patients with near normal fat excretion continue to lose large amounts of bile acids.
Thus factors other than the presence of intraluminal unhydrolysed triglycerides must be contributing to faecal bile acid loss in this group of patients.
In vitro studies have shown impairment of bile acid absorption in the ileal mucosa of patients with cystic fibrosis.
A defect in ileal transport mechanisms is also supported by in vivo findings suggesting a selective malabsorption of cholic acid, a primary bile acid specifically absorbed by an active transport mechanism in the terminal ileum.
Using a marker perfusion technique, however, the uptake of taurocholate and glycocholate was measured in three infants with cystic fibrosis and was noted to be similar to control subjects.
The results of this study are consistent with a defect in the ileal transport of bile acids in patients with cystic fibrosis with over a third of such patients retaining significantly less radiolabelled bile acids over a seven day period compared with control subjects.
Of particular interest were the findings that the defect was present predominantly in patients without liver disease and that bile acid absorption in patients with liver disease was comparable with control subjects.
This finding also provides an explanation for the fact that faecal bile acid excretion in patients with liver disease is comparable with control subjects.
Intestinal motility disturbances with prolonged intestinal transit times are well described in patients with cystic fibrosis and may predispose to the development of small bowel bacterial overgrowth, bacterial dehydroxylation and deconjugation of bile acids, decreased bile salt solubility, diminished intestinal bile acid absorption, and excessive faecal bile acid loss.
Forth per cent of cystic fibrosis patients in this series had evidence of bacterial overgrowth based on a fasting breath hydrogen excretion of greater than 75 ppm after prolonged fasting or a positive hydrogen breath test.
The reduction in post sucrose breath hydrogen excretion, faecal fat, and faecal bile acids after antibiotic treatment would suggest that small intestinal bacterial overgrowth contributes to malabsorption in these patients.
It is unlikely, however, that bacterial overgrowth is a major factor determining the malabsorbtion of fat and bile acids as there was no significant difference in faecal fat and faecal bile acid excretion in patients with a positive or negative hydrogen breath test and no correlation was seen between breath hydrogen excretion and SeHCAT retention.
The results of this study show that:(1) excessive faecal bile acid losses in cystic fibrosis occurs almost exclusively in patients without liver disease of whom almost 50% have reduced retention of SeHCAT consistent with the presence of a terminal ileal bile acid active transport defect;(2) faecal bile acid loss is unrelated to the presence of intraluminal fat; and (3) bacterial overgrowth in these patients plays a minor part in excessive faecal bile acid excretion.
Gastrointestinal function in chronic radiation enteritis — effects of loperamide-N-oxide
Abstract
The effects of loperamide-N-oxide, a new peripheral opiate agonist precursor, on gastrointestinal function were evaluated in 18 patients with diarrhoea caused by chronic radiation enteritis.
Each patient was given, in double-blind randomised order, loperamide-N-oxide (3 mg orally twice daily) and placebo for 14 days, separated by a washout period of 14 days.
Gastrointestinal symptoms; absorption of bile acid, vitamin B12, lactose, and fat; gastric emptying; small intestinal and whole gut transit; and intestinal permeability were measured during placebo and loperamide-N-oxide phases.
Data were compared with those obtained in 18 normal subjects.
In the patients, in addition to an increased frequency of bowel actions (p), there was reduced bile acid absorption,(p) a higher prevalence of lactos malabsorption (p) associated with a reduced dietary intake of dairy products (p), and faster small intestinal (p) and whole gut transit (p) when compared with the normal subjects.
There was no significant difference in gastric emptying between the two groups.
Treatment with loperamide-N-oxide was associated with a reduced frequency of bowel actions (p), slower small intestinal (p), and total gut transit (p), more rapid gastric emptying (p), improved absorption of bile acid (p), and increased permeability to 5 1 Cr EDTA (p).
These observations indicate that:(1) diarrhoea caused by chronic radiation enteritis is associated with more rapid intestinal transit and a high prevalence of bile acid and lactose malabsorption, and (2) loperamide-N-oxide slows small intestinal transit, increases bile acid absorption, and is effective in the treatment of diarrhoea associated with chronic radiation enteritis.
Chronic radiation enteritis is now recognised as a frequent and clinically important sequel of abdominal and pelvic irradiation treatment for malignant disease.
Diarrhoea, with or without abdominal cramps, is the most common symptom.
Although intestinal stricture and associated bacterial overgrowth are well recognised in chronic radiation enteritis, in most cases the pathophysiology of the diarrhoea is uncertain.
While changes in intestinal absorption and motility unrelated to bacterial overgrowth have been implicated in the aetiology of diarrhoea, there has been no comprehensive evaluation of gastrointestinal function in chronic radiation enteritis.
Perhaps partly as a result of this, present approaches to treatment have often been empirical.
This study aimed to evaluate various aspects of gastrointestinal function in patients with diarrhoea caused by chronic radiation enteritis and the effects of treatment with the peripheral opiate agonist precursor loperamide-N-oxide.
Methods
SUBJECTS
Twenty patients (16 women, four men, median age 73 years (range 42–90), median body weight 65 kg (54–114 kg) and median body mass index (BMI) 25.1 (18.8–31.4)) with persistent diarrhoea 3–22 years after therapeutic pelvic irradiation for carcinoma of the genitourinary tract (see Table I for individual patient characteristics) were studied.
Persistent diarrhoea was defined as a chronic doubling of the frequency of defecation before irradiation and a minimum frequency of at least 14 bowel actions a week.
Patients who had had gastrointestinal surgery, apart from uncomplicated appendicectomy, were excluded.
Other criteria for exclusion were inflammatory bowel disease, pernicious anaemia, evidence of hepatic or renal dysfunction (any biochemical parameter for hepatic function exceeding twice the normal range or plasma creatinine >mmol/l, or both), anda constant requirement for medication (such as anticholinergics, anti depressants, or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) which might influence gastrointestinal motility, or otherwise interfere with the evaluation of the test drug.
Significant small intestinal strictures were excluded by small bowel radiological investigations.
Eighteen normal volunteers (11 women, seven men, median age 45 years (19–75), median body weight 75 kg (45–109kg), and median BMI 26.0 (17.8–38.7) who had no history of gastrointestinal disease and were not taking any medication were also studied.
The median age in the normal volunteers was less than that in the patient group (p) but there was no significant difference in BMI between the two groups.
All of the patients and all but one of the controls were white.
PROTOCOL
Each of the 20 patients was given, in double-blind randomised order, loperamide oxide tablets (Janssen Pharmaecutica Beerse, Belgium) in a dose of 3 mg twice daily by mouth (0800 h and 2000 h) and placebo (identical tablets without loperamide oxide) for 14 days, separated by a wash-out period of 14 days.
Between days 3 and 14 after starting either loperamide oxide or placebo, each patient underwent measurements of the following aspects of gastrointestinal function:(i) gastrointestinal symptoms (day 14);(ii) absorption of bile acid and vitamin B12 (days 3 to 10), lactose (day 6), dietary fat and stool weight (day 10);(iii) gastrointestinal transit: gastric emptying, small intestinal and whole gut transit (day 7); and (iv) intestinal permeability (days 13, 14).
Because of methodological practicalities, absorption of bile acid and vitamin B12 was determined before the measurements of gastrointestinal transit and intestinal permeability was measured last.
Each patient had a complete blood examination, multiple biochemical analysis of plasma, and EKG on recruitment into the study and at the end of each phase of the study.
Any adverse effects from the trial medication were also documented at the end of each phase of the study.
The control subjects did not receive either placebo or loperamide oxide tablets but underwent an identical series of measurements on one occasion.
The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Royal Adelaide Hospital on March 30, 1989 and each subject gave written informed consent.
MEASUREMENTS
Gastrointestinal symptoms
The following symptoms were assessed by questionnaire on entry into the study and at the end of each phase of the study:(i) nausea,(ii) vomiting,(iii) abdominal pain,(iv) frequency of bowel actions (number of bowel actions per weeks) and stool consistency (hard formed, soft formed, loose or watery).
Except for(iv), each symptom was scored according to the following classification: 0 — symptom absent; 1 — mild, symptom could be ignored if the subject did not think about it; 2 — moderate, symptom could not be ignored but did not influence daily activities; 3 — severe, symptom influenced daily activities.
The total score (maximum 9) was then calculated for each phase of the study.
The frequency and consistency of bowel actions for the 2 week periods on loperamide oxide and placebo and during the wash-out period were recorded in a diary.
The number of bowel actions each week was calculated.
The number of bowel actions in each three day faecal collection was also recorded.
A questionnaire was also used to record dietary intake of milk products and fat and the presence or absence of intolerance to milk or milk products (symptoms of nausea, abdominal bloating, abdominal cramps, or diarrhoea) after wach subject had been enrolled into the study.
Intake of dairy foods was expressed as calcium intake/week and fat intake was classified as 1=low, 2=medium, or 3=high.
Absorption
Bile acid and vitamin B12 absorption were determined by measuring the whole body retention at 7 days of selenium-75 labelled homo-taurocholic acid (SeHCAT) and cobalt-58 labelled vitamin B12 (5 8 Co vitamin B12).
On day 1, after a light breakfast of tea and toast at 0700 h, one capsule of 5 8 Co vitamin B12 (Amersham International) containing 30 kBQ 5 8 Co was swallowed with 30 ml water at 0900 h.
The photo-peak counts corresponding to the 808 keV photon energy of 5 8 Co and the 265 keV photon energy of 7 5 Se (to correct for down scatter from the ihigher energy,5 8 Co window into the lower energy 7 5 Se window) were recorded from a whole body counter.
One capsule of SeHCAT (Amersham International) containing 37 kBQ 7 5 Se was then swallowed with 30 ml water.
Four hours later the number of counts in both the 5 8 Co and 7 5 Se photo peak windows were determined.
This figure, after correction for room background counts (and down-scatter counts from the 5 8 Co ubti tge 7 5 Se photo peak windows) was considered to represent 100% whole body retention.
There was no significant difference between the 5 8 Co counts at baseline and at 4 hours.
Seven days later at 0900 h the counts in both 5 8 Co and 7 5 Se photo peak windows were again measured.
This number, after correction for room background counts, radionuclide decay, and Compton scatter was used to derive the percentage whole body retention of bile acid and vitamin B12.
Although the second measurement of vitamin B12 and bile acid absorption was made at least 4 weeks later, a correction for patient background counts was made by first counting the residual counts in both the 5 8 Co and 7 5 Se photo peak windows before the administration of the second doses of 5 8 Co vitamin B12 and SeHCAT.
Otherwise an identical protocol was observed.
Dietary far absorption was assessed by measuring the fat content in a day day collection of faeces, using a standard method modified for extraction of fatty acids into chloroform.
Lactose absotption was assessed by measurement of breath hydrogen concentrations after an oral lactose load.
Each subject fasted overnight and at 0900 h was given 50 g lactose dissolved in 200 ml water, after an antiseptic mouth wash and a baseline end expiratory breath sample had been taken.
Subsequent end expiratory breath samples were obtained at least every 30 minutes for up to 4 hours.
All breath samples were analysed for hydrogen concentration using a sensitive chromatographic method, capable of detecting concentrations as low as 1 ppm.
A sustained peak in breath hydrogen greater than 10 ppm was taken to indicate malabsorption of lactose.
The day after the performance of this test, patients were asked (by one of the investigators who was unaware of the hydrogen analysis) whether symptoms of nausea, abdominal bloating, cramps, or diarrhoea occurred within 8 hours of the lactose load.
Gastrointestinal transit
At 0830 h, after an overnight fast (from 2200 h on the evening before the test) each subject ingested 200 ml water containing 10 g lactulose (Duphalac-Duphar, Holland), 20 g dextrose, 40 mBQ 9 9 m Tc-sulphur colloid and 50 radio-opaque plastic markers over a period of 2 minutes.
The subject then laid supine under a wide field view gamma camera.
A cobalt marker was placed at theright anterior superior iliac crest to aid alignment of images.
Data were acquired for a minimum of 5 hours.
For the first 30 minutes after meal completion data were sampled every minute, followed by 3 minute frames for the remainder of the study.
End expiratory breath samples were taken at 10–15 minute intrvals after ingestion of the meal for breath hydrogen analysis.
During the study the subject was allowed to sit up, or walk around briefly if they wished every 60 minutes.
Regions of interest were drawn around the stomach and colon.
After data were corrected for radionuclide decay, scatter, and gamma ray attenuation, using previously described methods, time-activity curves characterising gastric emptying and colonic filling were derived.
By a process of computer subtraction a time activity curve representing small intestinal transit was also obtained.
Time zero was considered the time of completion of the test meal.
A sustained rise in the breath hydrogen concentration >ppm was considered to represent the arrival of the meal at the caecum.
For gastric emptying, the lag phase before any of the meal emptied from the stomach and the 50% emptying time were determined.
For small intestinal transit the following parameters were determined:(i) start of colonic filling (arrival of head of meal assessed scintigraphically and by breath hydrogen measurements);(ii) small intestinal transit (start of colonic filling minus the lag phase for gastric emptying);(iii) small intestinal residence (area under derived small intestinal transit time activity curve);(iv) time for 50% colonic filling.
Whole gut transit was determined radiographically by the first arrival of the radio-opaque marker(s) and the time when 50% or more of the radio-opaque markers were in the stool.
Intestinal permeability
This was assessed by two tests.
(1)
Urinary excretion of 5 1 Cr EDTA.
Each subject was initially asked to collect their urine for 24 hours.
At 0930 h after an overnight fast (from 2400 h the subject ingested 2–10 ml of 5 1 Cr EDTA (Australian Atomic Energy Commission, cod no CRIMI) containing 750 kBQ of 5 1 Cr, followed by 300 ml water.
Fasting was maintained for a further 2 hours, after which a normal diet was permitted.
Patients were instructed to take no alcohol and to collect all urine for the next 24 hours.
The entire 24 hour collection was counted in a large volume counter.
The 24 hour urine collection before 5 1 Cr EDTA was also counted, to correct for any background radioactivity derived from 7 5 Se from the bile acid absorption test.
The result was expressed as a percentage of administered dose.
(2)
Urinary excretion of a double sugar-lactulose/ rhamnose.
After an overnight fast (from 2400 h, each subject was instructed to urinate at 0900 h and was then given 22.6 g glucose, 5 g lactulose, and 1 g L-rhamnose in 100 ml of distilled water.
Thirty minutes after ingestion of the test solution the patient was encouraged to drink and was instructed to collect urine over the next 5 hours.
The concentration of sugars in urine was measured by high performance thin layer chromotography.
After correction of the rhamnose valuesfor urea concentration (the latter was determined in a 1 ml aliquot of urine), the results were expressed as a ratio of the 5 hour urinary excretions of lactulose and rhamnose.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data were evaluated using the Wilcoxon rank sum test (paired measurements), the Mann-Whitney U test (unpaired measurements), the χ 2 2 test, and linear regression analysis.
A p value of <was considered significant.
Data are expressed as median values and ranges.
Results
Eighteen of 20 patients completed the study.
The two patients who withdrew (numbers 6 and 13) felt they could no longer cope with the programme of evaluations of gastrointestinal function required in the protocol.
No significant adverse effects were reported and no significant changes in haematological, biochemical, and electrocardiographc parameters were documented.
One scintigraphic assessment of gastric emptying and intestinal transit (in patient 5), one urine collection for the double sugar lactulose/ rhamnose permeability test (patient 10) and one faecal fat estimation (in patient 11) were lost.
In consequence only 17 paired measurements were used in some cases for the comparison between placebo and loperamide oxide phases of the study.
COMPARISON BETWEEN CONTROL SUBJECTS AND PATIENTS DURING PLACEBO TREATMENT
Table II summarises the results for the patients and the control subjects during the placebo phase of the study.
There was no evidence of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in the patients — that is, no early rise in breath hydrogen concentrations after oral lactose or lactulose.
Both the number of bowel actions per week (assessed by diary) and stool frequency per 3 days (assessed by 3 day faecal collection) were greater in the patients than in the control group (p).
There was no significant difference in stool weight.
Except for the frequency of bowel actions, there was no difference in gastrointestinal symptoms between the patients and controls.
Bile acid absorption was considerably reduced in the patients (p), but there was no significant difference between the two groups in vitamin B12 absorption.
Faecal fat excretion was less in the patients (p).
Dietary intake of diary products was lower (p) and fat intake also tended to be less (p=0.09) in the patients.
Ten patients had lactose malabsorption, compared with two of the control subjects (p).
Of the aptients with lactose malabsorption, only two had a history of gastrointestinal intolerance to milk or milk products.
Despite this, dietary intake of diary products was less in patients with lactose malabsorption then in the remainder of the group (213 g (0–4940) v 2354 g (320–8190) p).
Gastrointestinal symptoms after the lactose load were reported by four patients.
There was no significant difference in gastric emptying between the two groups, but small intestinal transit (p) and whole gut transit (p) were faster in the patients than in the control subjects.
There was no significant difference in intestinal permeability between the two groups.
In the control group there was a significant correlation (r, p) between bile acid absorption and whole gut transit (first radio-opaque marker and 50% markers).
In the patients, stool frequency per 3 days was inversely related to bile acid absorption (r=-0.49, p).
Otherwise there were no significant relationships between the frequency of bowel actions or stool weight and other parameters of gastrointestinal function in either the patients or the control subjects.
EFFECTS OF LOPERAMIDE OXIDE
Table III summarises the results during the placebo and loperamide oxide phases of the study.
Loperamide oxide decreased stool frequency (p) and weight (p).
After treatment with loperamide oxide the number of bowel actions was still greater in the patients than in the control subjects (p) but the stool weight was less (p)(Table IV).
Bile acid absorption was increased appreciably by loperamide oxide (p)(Figure) and, after treatment, was not significantly different from values in the control group (Table IV).
Somewhat surprisingly, treatment with loperamide oxide was associated with a small but significant decrease (p) in vitamin B12 absorption.
Loperamide oxide did not affect faecal fat excretion but during treatment with this drug there was an inverse relationship between bile acid absorption and faecal fat excretion (r=-0.63, p).
There was no difference between the two groups in the lag phase, but the time for 50% gastric emptying was less during treatment with loperamide oxide (p) and gastric emptying was faster in patients after treatment with loperamide oxide (p) than in control subjects (Table IV).
In contrast, loperamide oxide delayed both small intestinal (p) and whole gut (pfirst marker, p50% markers) transit.
During treatment with loperamide oxide, small intestinal transit and whole gut transit were not significantly different from the control group (Table IV).
There were significant relationships between stool weight and both whole gut transit (r=-0.58, p) and stool frequency (r=0.45, p) during treatment with loperamide oxide.
Intestinal permeability, as assessed by the 5 1 Cr EDTA test, was greater (p) after treatment loperamide oxide but there was no difference in the absorption of lactulose/rhamnose (Table III).
5 1 Cr EDTA absorption was related to small bowel residence during both the placebo and loperamide oxide phases (r, p).
Discussion
During abdominal or pelvic irradiation, or both, acute radiation enteritis, manifest as diarrhoea with or without abdominal cramps, is almost inevitable.
The prevalence of chronic radiation enteritis, defined as the persistence of symptoms beyond 3 months of the completion of radiation treatment, is, however, uncrtain.
Several retrospective surgical series suggest that the incidence of ‘significant’ damage is only 5–15%.
These studies have considerable limitations, however.
In particular, they do not include patients who died or were lost to follow up in the prolonged interval between treatment and the onset of symptoms.
In contrast, a sustained increase in bowel frequency was noted in 12 of 17 unselected women who had received pelvic radiotherapy for gynaecological malignancy 1–26 years previously.
It therefore seems probable that the incidence of chronic radiation enteritis has been generally underestimated (and may be more than 50%), that increased bowel frequency is the most frequent symptom of chronic radiation enteritis, and that most patients with this condition do not seek medical help until the occurrence of a severe complication such as stricture, perforation, or anaemia caused by blood loss.
There is some evidence that the incidence of radiation bowel disease has increased in recent years as a result of changes in long established techniques.
For example, although radium has now been replaced by safer isotopes such as cesium and cobalt, this has also entailed new or modified applicators, altered dose rates, and changes in the number of treatments.
The rectum, sigmoid colon, and terminal ileum seem to be particularly at risk from pelvic radiotherapy.
While the histological features of chronic radiation enteritis, characterised by obliterative endarteritis of the small vessels in the intestinal wall, submucosal oedema, and lymphatic dilatation are well documented, there is little information about the pathophysiology of diarrhoea because of chronic radiation enteritis.
It has been suggested that diarrhoea reflects malabsorption because of either infiltration of the mucosa by inflammatory cells and luminal narrowing of the submucosal arterioles, or intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
The possibility that abnormalities in intestinal motor function may be important has also been recognised.
In the first comprehensive study of intestinal function in patients with diarrhoea caused by chronic radiation enteritis, we have shown a high prevalence of abnormalities in intestinal transit and absorption.
Both small intestinal and whole gut (mainly colonic) transit, were faster in the patients than the control subjects.
Bile acid absorption was reduced in many of the patients (although vitamin B12 absorption was usually normal), and 10 patients had malabsorption of lactose.
All of these factors may theoretically contribute to diarrhoea.
These observations were not the result of intestinal stricture or bactrial overgrowth.
The relatively small difference in median age between the patients and the control subjects is unlikely to be important.
The observation that despite increased stool frequency, stool weight was not greater in the patients is likely to reflect dietary changes, which inevitably occur in patients with a long history of diarrhoea.
Intake of diary products was less in the patients and probably contributed to the normal faecal fat excretion.
It is also possible that in some patients concurrent radiation proctitis caused rectal irritability and contributed to a stool weight that was lower than would be predictd from stool frequency.
The SeHCAT test has made intestinal bile acid malabsorption much more easy to detect.
A high prevalence of bile acid malabsorption has been reported in patients with otherwise unexplained diarrhoea and it has been suggested that this is of pathogenetic importance and predictive of improvement with cholestyramine.
Our observation of a high prevalence of bile acid malabsorption in patients with chronic radiation enteritis is consistent with the results of a previous study.
While vitamin B12 malabsorption has been shown in some patients, it is recognised that bile acid absorption is a more sensitive test of terminal ileal function than vitamin B12 absorption.
The reduced bile acid absorption is likely to reflect damage to the terminal ileal mucosa.
It should, however, be recognised that more rapid intestinal transit, by reducing the time available for absorption, could contribute to decreased bile acid absorption and diarrhoea.
In particular, the terminal ileum seems to have an important role in the regulation of small intestinal transit.
The lactose malabsorption shown in 10 patients probably reflects mucosal damage, as small intestinal bacterial overgrowth was essentially excluded and all of the patients were white.
A high prevalence of lactose malabsorption has been reported previously in patients with chronic radiation enteritis who required parenateral nutrition.
the observation that lactose malabsorption is a common long term effect of abdominal or pelvic irradiation, or both, is important and consistent with the findings of a prospective study conducted by our group which suggests that mucosal damage in acute radiation enteritis does not resolve in many patients.
It is not surprising that a history of milk intolerance was seldom obtained in patients with lactose malabsorption, although dietary intake of diary products was reduced.
Wehave shown for the first time that small intestinal and whole gut transit is faster in patients with chronic radiation enteritis.
Both single large doses and fractionated doses of radiation have been shown to alter small intestinal motility in animals.
Fractionated doses of abdominal radiation increase the frequency of giant migrating contractions and retrograde giant contractions.
We andothers have reported that both small intestinal and total gut transit is faster in acute radiation enteritis.
Although there is unequivocal evidence of damage to the intestinal smooth muscle in chronic radiation enteritis, we are unaware of any studies of intestinal motor function in chronic radiation enteritis in either animals or humans.
Medical therapy of diarrhoea caused by chronic radiation enteritis has been largely empirical and there have been no adequate controlled studies.
Antidiarrhoeal agents, broad spectrum antibiotics, cholestyramine, sulphasalazine, and oral corticosteroids have all been used but anecdotal experience suggests that satisfactory control of diarrhoea is rarely achieved.
Most series have focused on surgical approaches to complications such as stricture and fistula formation.
The results of our study indicate that loperamide-N-oxide is effective in the treatment of diarrhoea associated with chronic radiation entritis.
Lperamide-N-oxide is a peripheral opiate agonist precursor which is converted to loperamide in the intestinal lumen and liver.
Loperamide-N-oxide is itself inactive and has negligible affinity for opiate receptors.
Plasma concentrations of loperamide after oral administration of loperamide-oxide are twofold lower than the equivalent oral doses of loperamide, resulting in a twofold increase in the already high safety margin of loperamide.
At the same time anti-diarrhoeal efficacy is maintained, since a dose of even 1 mg has been shown to be effective in a randomised double blind study of acute diarrhoea in adults.
As a result of the gradual activation of loperamide oxide, associated with lessened absorption of loperamide into the systemic circulation, it has been suggested that the incidence of adverse effects such as constipation may be less.
Previous studies which suggest that loperamide may be effective in the treatment of diarrhoea associated with acute radiation enteritis provide no insights into the mechanisms of action, as only symptoms were evaluated.
Other studies indicate that loperamide may prolong intestinal transit, normalise intestinal fluid and electrolyte movement, and increase anal sphincter tone.
Loperamide treatment of diarrhoea associated with chronic radiation enteritis was associated with significant changes in stool frequency and volume, gastrointestinal transit, intestinal absorption, and permeability.
Stool frequency and volume decreased and bile acid absorption increased after treatment.
We are unable to explain why vitamin B12 absorption decreased during treatment with loperamide oxide, but can only comment that the magnitude of the change was relatively small.
Loperamide oxide increased the rate of gastric emptying but slowed both small intestinal and whole gut transit.
Intestinal permeability to 5 1 Cr EDTA but not lactulose/rhamnose was increased by loperamide oxide.
The beneficial effects of the drug on stool frequency, bile acid absorption, and intestinal permeability are likely to reflect the slowing of small intestinal and colonic transit.
The fact that permeability, as evaluated by the double sugar test, was not increased is consistent with this hypothesis, as results of this test are independent of intestinal transit.
An effect of loperamide oxide on intestinal secretion cannot be excluded as this was not examined.
The faster gastric emptying after treatment is not unexpected.
This effect is likely to reflect the absence of central opiate properties of loperamide compared with other opiates such as morphine which slow gastric emptying.
Although most of our patients had minimal upper gastrointestinal symptoms and normal gastric emptying, the effect of loperamide on gastric emptying may be beneficial in some patients with chronic radiation enteritis, as chronic gastroparesis is a recognised sequel to abdominal irradiation.
A study of the pathogenesis of Helicobacter pylori negative chronic duodenal ulceration
Abstract
In the past five years 12 patients have been identified presenting with chronic duodenal ulcer (DU) disease and with no evidence of current or recent Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) infection.
Four of them were taking regular non-steroidal anti inflaammatory agents, one was subsequently found to have Crohn's disease of the duodenum, and one to have the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
The remaining six patients with idiopathic DU disease were remarkable for their absence of the A 1 blood antigen gene.
Detailed studies of gastric function were performed in these six patients and compared with H pylori positive patients with DU and with healthy volunteers.
The median integrated gastrin response in the patients with idiopathic DU (2810 (range 750- 8550) ng/l min) was similar to that of the H pylori positive patients with DU (3355 (550- 8725)) and higher than that of the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (560 (225–1125)).
the median peak acid output in the patients with idiopathic DU (37 mmol/h, range 17–52) was similar to that of the H pylori positive patients with DU (40 (15–57)) and higher than that of the non-ulcer controls (22 (16–29)).
The median percentage of a liquid meal retained in the stomach at 60 minutes was less in the patients with idiopathic DU (23 (15–33)) than in H pylori negative healthy volunteers (34 (30- 53) p).
The median percentage of a solid meal retained at 60 minutes was less in the patients with idiopathic DU (54 (9–83)) than in either H pylori negative healthy volunteers (87 (49–95) p) or H pylori positive patients with DU (79 (51–100) p).
In conclusion, three abnormalities of gastric function are prevalent in patients with H pylori negative idiopathic DU disease — hypergastrinaemia, increased acid secretion, and the one feature distinguishing them from H pylori positive patients with DU — rapid gastric emptying of both liquids and solids.
Each of these abnormalities will increase the exposure of the duodenal mucosa to acid and thus explain its ulceration.
The absence of the blood group A 1 antigen gene is consistent with a genetic basis for the disturbed gastric function linked to the ABO blood group antigen genes.
More than 95% of patients with chronic duodenal ulcer (DU) disease have Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) infection and accompanying antral gastritis.
This infection is thought to play an important part in the pathogenesis of the ulcer disease as eradicating it dramatically lowers the ulcer relapse rate.
The mechanism by which H pylori infection predisposes to duodenal ulceration remains unclear.
Due to the high prevalence of H pylori infection in DU disease the numerous previous studies of the pathogenesis of DU have consisted almost entirely of patients with H pylori related DU.
Consequently, little is known about the pathogenesis of chronic DU disease in patients without H pylori infection.
Studies of such patients may be particularly valuable in allowing a clearer insight into the disturbances of gastric function predisposing to DU.
Also, any genetic component of DU disease should be more prominent and thus more readily detected in H pylori negative patients with DU who have developed the disorder in the absence of this important acquired factor.
Another problem with the vast number of previous publications on disturbed gastric function patients with DU is that a high proportion of the so called normal controls will have had disturbed gastric function due to unrecognised H pylori infection.
We have examined patients identified in our gastrointestinal unit over the past five years with chronic DU disease unassociated with current or recent H pylori infection.
In the subgroup of these H pylori negative patients with DU in whom no cause for their ulcer disease was identified, detailed studies of gastric function have been performed and compared with those in patients with DU with H pylori infection as well as with healthy volunteers.
Patients and methods
During the past five years we have identified a total of 12 patients with endoscopically confirmed chronic DU disease unassociated with current or recent H pylori infection (Table 1).
These patients were negative for H pylori infection by each of four tests: histological examination of antral biopsy for H pylori like organisms, C-urea breath test, serum anti- H pylori IgG (Helico-G test, Porton, Cambridge, UK), and the urease slide test (CLO test, Delta West Ltd, Bentley, Western Australia) of antral biopsy.
Over the same period we have seen 423 patients with DU associated with H pylori infection.
In six of these 12 patients a cause for their DU was readily identified (Table 1).
Four of them had been taking non-steroidal anti inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for a mean period of 10 (range one to 18) months for arthritis and remarkably one of these had DU in spite of having pentagastrin fast achlorhydria due to pernicious anaemia.
A further patient was found to have the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
Another patient had severe inflammation and numerous granulomata on histological examination of duodenal biopsies indicating Crohn's disease of the duodenum.
Six patients remained in whom there was no apparent explanation for their DU disease and we have chosen for convenience to refer to these patients as having idiopathic DU.
Four were men and their median age was 42 (28–64) years (Table 1).
Five were smokers but only one drank more than five units of alcohol a week and only one patient had a family history of ulcer disease.
The median age of onset of their DU disease was 34 (18–56) years.
The median interval between the initial endoscopic diagnosis of their DU disease and entry into this study was eight (one to 12) years and each patient had suffered recurrent dyspepsia requiring medical treatment over this time.
Five of these six idiopathic patients had been difficult to control on acid inhibitory treatment.
In four there was persistence of symptoms and endoscopic evidence of failure of ulcer healing despite three months of treatment with 300 mg ranitidine a day.
Two of these patients who were refractory to H 2 antagonist treatment required treatment with omeprazole and one of them (No 7) eventually needed a highly selective vagotomy.
Two of the five patients who were difficult to control on acid inhibitory treatment had complications from their DU; one having an acute bleed requiring transfusion of three units of blood while on full dose H 2 antagonist treatment and one experiencing two separate acute bleeds each requiring blood transfusion.
METHODS
In these six patients with idiopathic DU, further investigations were performed as described later.
The results of these tests were compared with those in age and sex matched patients with DU and with H pylori infection.
In most of the tests it was also possible to compare the results with those in age and sex matched healthy volunteers with and without H pylori .
This control data was obtained from patients and healthy volunteers who had undergone identical tests as the patients with idiopathic DU and over the same period either specifically for the present study or as part of another study.
These control subjects did not all undergo all the tests that were performed on the patients with idiopathic DU and, therefore, the number of control subjects for the different tests varies.
Detailed studies of gastric function were not performed in the H pylori negative patients with DU in whom an explanation for their ulcer disease was apparent (NSAIDs use, Crohn's disease, or Zollinger-Ellison syndrome).
Serum gastrin and pepsinogen I
The patients reported at 0900 after an overnight fast and having discontinued their acid inhibitory treatment two weeks previously.
Three venous blood samples were taken at 15 minute intervals.
They then drank a peptone meal over five minutes consisting of two beef cubes (OXO Ltd, Croydon, UK) dissolved in 200 ml water at 50°C.
A further blood sample was obtained 10 minutes after starting the drink and thereafter at 10 minute intervals for 90 minutes.
The blood samples were allowed to clot over 15 minutes and then the serum was separated by centrifugation and stored at -20°C.
Serum gastrin concentration was measured by radioimmunoassay with antibody R98 as previously described.
This detects both gastrin 17 and 34 and uses G17 as standard.
The mean of the three fasting samples was used as the basal gastrin concentration.
The integrated response to the meal was assessed by the area under the gastrin concentration time curve by the trapezoid method.
Serum pepsinogen I was measured in the sample taken immediately before starting the meal by the commercial radioimmunoassay kit manufactured by Incstar Ltd (Berkshire, UK).
Serum pepsinogen I shows little response to eating.
Gastric acid and pepsin secretion
The patients reported at 0900 after an overnight fast and having discontinued acid inhibitory drugs two weeks earlier.
A 16F dual lumen tube (Andersen Inc, New York, USA) with side vent open to the atmosphere was passed orogastrically and the residual gastric contents aspirated and discarded.
The position of the tube was confirmed by the water recovery test.
Three 15 minute collections of fasting gastric juice was taken.
The patients then received either a single injection of 6 µg/kg pentagastrin (peptavlon, ICI Pharmaceuticals, UK) subcutaneously or an intravenous infusion of 0.6 mg/kg/h over one hour.
Four 15 minute collections were taken over the hour.
The volume of each collection was recorded and its hydrogen ion concentration determined by titration with 0.1 N sodium hydroxide to pH 7 with an autotitrator (Radiometer ETS 822).
A 1.0 ml sample from each collection of gastric juice was mixed with 0.3 ml glycerol/HCL (10 mmol/l v/v) and stored at -80°C before measurement of pepsin activity by the method of Gray and Billings.
Preliminary studies confirmed that pepsin was stable when stored in this way for up to seven months.
The second and third 15 minute basal collections were used to determine the basal output.
Peak acid output was calculated by adding the two highest stimulated 15 minute outpts and multiplying by two.
Gastric emptying of liquids and solids
The patients fasted at 0900 having not taken any drugs which affect gastric secretion or motility over the previous 10 days.
They then consumed a peptone meal over five minutes consisting of two beef cubes (OCO Ltd, Croydon, UK) dissolved in 200 ml water at 50°C, 75 ml of semi-skimmed milk, and 20 g cornflakes (Kellogg's).
The liquid phase was labelled with m In and the solid phase with m Tc albumin colloid.
The solid marker was impregnated on blotting paper and then coated with cellulose.
This was then cut into 0.5 cm squares and mixed into the cornflakes.
Images of each nuclide were taken in anterior and posterior projections every 15 minutes for two hours, with the patient standing.
The patient sat between measurements.
The gastric outline was defined on the early images of both nuclides in anterior and posterior projections and applied to all images of the study, after moving as necessary into correct registration.
Total gastric counts were evaluated on each image.
For each nuclide at each time the geometric of anterior and posterior counts was calculated, to compensate for the anteroposterior movement of the gastric contents during emptying.
The mean counts were each corrected for nuclide decay and the results plotted against time on a semi-logarithmic plot.
The liquid emptying plots were all straight lines and were fitted to a single exponential function by an iterative least squares method.
The liquid emptying half life and percentage retentions at 60 minutes were calculated from these fits.
The solid emptying plots started with a straight line section but often suffered an abrupt increase in slope at between 45 and 90 minutes.
In two cases, however, the emptying rate decreased.
The solid emptying half life and percentage retentions at 60 minutes were calculated by exponential interpolation with as many surrounding points as appropriate.
Histology of antral mucosa
During routine upper gastrointestinal endoscopy one biopsy was taken for hostological examination from the antral mucosa 2 cm from the pylorus and one from the first part of the duodenum on the opposite wall to the area of ulceration.
The biopsies were fixed in formalin and stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
The severity of the antral gastritis was assessed with the scoring system described by Rauws et al , which gave a possible total cumulative score of 10.
Blood groups and secretory state
ABO blood group state was found by standard haemagglutination techniques with monoclonal reagents and red cell suspensions prepared by the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service.
The lectin from Dolichos biflorus was used to distinguish A1 and A2 antigens.
Secretor state was assessed on saliva samples taken fasting and treated with centrifugation and heat inactivation.
Standard haemagglutination inhibition techniques with diluted human anti-A, anti-B, and anti-H (extracted from the lectin Ulex europaeus ) were applied with saliva at dilutions up to one in 16.
Statistical analysis
Statistical significance was assessed by the Mann-Whitney U test.
The study was approved by the Western Infirmary ethics committee and each patient gave informed written consent.
Results
Antral histology was normal in five of the six patients with idiopathic DU, with their cumulative antral gastritis scores being either 0 or 1.
In the other patient (No 7) there was evidence of chronic and acute inflammatory cell infiltration and the cumulative gastritis score was 6.
In three of the patients, the duodenal biopsies were normal and in the others there was a chronic and acute inflammatory cell infiltrate and evidence of gastric metaplasia.
The median serum pepsinogen I concentration (ng/ml) in the patients with idiopathic DU was 86 (range 40–249).
This was not significantly different from that in the H pylori positive DU patients (97 (53–130))H pylori negative healthy volunteers (73 (46–101)), or H pylori positive healthy volunteers (81 (43–115)).
Two of the patients with idiopathic DU had, however, serum pepsinogen I values that were more than 50% higher than the highest value of all the other groups studied (Table 2).
The blood group antigen A 1 was not found in any of the six patients with idiopathic DU.
By comparison it was present in 38% of the H pylori positive patients with DU and 56% of the non-ulcer controls (Table 3).
Four of the six patients with idiopathic DU were blood group 0.
Only one of the six patients with idiopathic DU was a non-secretor of blood group antigens compared with 46% of the H pylori positive patients with DU and 32% of the healthy volunteers.
The basal serum gastrin concentrations (ng/l) were increased in the H pylori positive patients with DU (median 57 (range 13–103) compared with the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (20 (10–40) p) but were similar to those in the H pylori positive healthy volunteers (48 (37–95))(Fig 1).
The basal serum gastrin concentrations in the patients with idiopathic DU (15–110) were more similar to those of the H pylori positive patients with DU or H pylori positive healthy volunteers than to those of the H pylori negative healthy volunteers.
The integrated gastrin response (IGR)(ng/l min) was exaggerated in the H pylori positive patients with DU (3375 (550–8725)) compared with the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (560 (225–1125) p) but was similar to that in the H pylori positive healthy volunteers (4150 (900–8500))(Fig 2).
The integrated gastrin response in the patients with idiopathic DU (2810 (750–8750)) was similar to that of the H pylori positive patients with DU and H pylori positive volunteers, with four of the six patients with idiopathic DU having values above the range of the H pylori negative healthy volunteers.
Basal acid output (mmol/h) was higher in the H pylori positive patients with DU (1–9) compared with the healthy volunteers (1.8 (0.3–5)) p,(Fig 3).
The values in the patients with idiopathic DU (5.9 (1–20)) were similar to the H pylori positive patients with DU.
Four of the six patients with idiopathic DU had basal acid output values above the range in the healthy volunteers although due to the small numbers of the former the ifference between these groups did not reach statistical significance (p=0.06).
Peak acid output (mmol/h) was increased in the H pylori positive patients with DU (40 (15- 57)) compared with the healthy volunteers (22 (16–29) p, Fig 4).
The patients with idiopathic DU had peak acid output values (37 (17–52)) that were similar to those of the H pylori positive patients with DU.
Four of the six patients with idiopathic DU had peak acid output values above the range of the healthy volunteers but again due to the small number of the first the difference between these groups did not reach statistical significance (p=0.08).
The H pylori negative and positive healthy volunteers were similar for both basal and peak acid output.
The pentagastrin stimulated pepsin output in the H pylori negative patients with DU (median 50 units/h (range 26–59)) was similar to that in the H pylori positive patients with DU (42 (15–168), Table 2).
The liquid emptying rate in the patients with idiopathic DU was significantly faster than in the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (median 60 minute percentage retentions 23 (range 15–33) and 34 (30–53) respectively (p; Fig 5)).
The liduid emptying half time was correspondingly shorter in the patients with idiopathic DU (median 28 min (range 22–38)) than in the H pylori negative healthy volunteers (39 (35–66); p).
There was no significant difference in liquid emptying rate between the patients with idiopathic DU and H pylori positive patients with DU or between the H pylori positive patients with DU and H pylori negative healthy volunteers (Fig 5).
The solid emptying rate as measured by the percentage retention at 60 minutes was faster in the patients with idiopathic DU (median 54 (range 9–83)) than in the H pylori positive patients with DU (79 (51–100); p) or H pylori negative healthy volunteers (87 (49–95); p; Fig 6).
The solid emptying half time was correspondingly shorter in the patients with idiopathic DU (median 67 min (range 11–221)) compared with the H pylori positive patients with DU (180 (62–1500; p) and H pylori negative healthy volunteers (431 (58–838); p).
the H pylori positive patients with DU were similar to the H pylori negative healthy volunteers with respect to both solid emptying 60 minute retention values (p=0.3) and half time (p=0.4).
Discussion
In this study we adopted particularly strict criteria for accepting a patient as having H pylori negative DU.
By insisting that each patient was negative for H pylori by microscopy, C-urea breath test, urease slide test, and H pylori IgG serology we ensured that no patient was included with current or recent infection.
Although the 12 such patients were identified for more than 400 patients with DU examined, this may not represent the true prevalence of H pylori negative patients with DU as not all the 400 patients with DU had their H pylori state determined with the same stringency.
In half of the H pylori negative patients with DU, as explanation for the ulcer disease was readily apparent.
Four of these patients were taking regular NSAIDs.
Nensey et al recently reported that nine (75%) of their 12 H pylori negative patients with DU were taking NSAIDs or aspirin compared with 33% of their H pylori positive patients with DU.
Likewise, Borody et al found that eight (57%) of their 14 H pylori negative patients not on antibiotics were taking NSAIDs compared with only 5% of their H pylori positive patients with DU.
One of our patients with H pylori negative DU associated with NSAIDs was achlorhydric due to pernicious anaemia indicating that NSAIDs can cause ulceration in the absence of both acid and H pylori .
One H pylori negative patient with DU had the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and this is consistent with the finding of Fich et al that 55% of their patients with the syndrome were negative for H pylori infection.
Another of our H pylori negative patients with DU had histological changes in duodenal biopsies consistent with Crohn's disease.
Borody et al found that two of their 14 H pylori negative patients with DU not taking antibiotics had Crohn's disease of the duodenum.
In the light of these findings it is important that Crohn's disease and the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome are excluded in patients with H pylori negative DU who are not taking NSAIDs.
The six patients with chronic DU disease in whom there was no evidence of H pylori or other explanation for their ulceration are of particular interest.
We have chosen to refer to these patients as having idiopathic DU.
Though H pylori is recognised to be the most important acquired factor in the pathogenesis of DU the prevalence of the infection is more than four times that of DU.
This indicates that other cofactors must play an important part.
One would expect that such cofactors would be particularly apparent in patients who develop DU in the absence of the most important acuired factor.
Smoking is an important cofactor in the development of DU and five of the six patients with idiopathic DU were smokers.
To further elucidate the mechanism of the ulceration in these patients with idiopathic DU, studies of gastric function and of claimed genetic markers for DU were performed.
Hyperpepsinogenaemia I has been claimed to be marker for the DU diathesis.
More recent studies, however, have shown that H pylori infection raises serum pepsinogen I. The fact that two of our patients with idiopathic DU had serum pepsinogen I concentrations that were considerably higher than those in any of the H pylori positive patients with DU or H pylori positive healthy controls suggests that there is an association between hyperpepsinogenaemia I and DU disease independent of H pylori .
Blood group O and non-secretor state are genetic traits associated with DU disease and when both are present they increase the risk of the disease by 150%.
In this study blood group O was positively associated with idiopathic DU, being present in four of the six patients compared with 36% of non-ulcer controls.
More notable, however, was the total absence of the A 1 antigen and gene in the patients with idiopathic DU.
Calculations based on the A gene frequency of 0.21 in the UK population and the presence of 2 ABO genes a patient indicate a random probability of this association of only 2.4%.
It seems likely that the patients with idiopathic DU represent a largely genetic form of the disease and the noticeable absence of the A 1 antigen gene is consistent with the genetic basis being linked to the absence of the A 1 antigen gene.
It is notable also that the H pylori positive patients with DU differed more from the non-ulcer controls with respect to their lower prevalence of blood group A 1 than increased prevalence of blood group O.
Hypergastrinaemia is a recognised factor in the pathogenesis of DU as examplified by the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and G cell hyperplasia.
H pylori infection also causes hypergastrinaemia, which may be relevant to its role in DU disease.
As previously reported, the H pylori positive patients with DU and the H pylori positive healthy controls had similarly exaggerated integrated gastrin responses to eating compared with the H pylori negative healthy controls.
Four of the six patients with idiopathic DU had gastrin responses to eating that were similar to those of the H pylori positive patients with DU and H pylori positive volunteers.
The mechanism of hypergastrinaemia associated with H pylori infection is not known but the accompanying antral gastritis might be involved.
The reason for the hypergastrinaemia in the four idiopathic DU patients is also unclear and it is of note that only one of them had antral gastritis.
Increased basal acid output and increased peak acid output are important features in patients with DU.
and in our study we found that these were both increased in the H pylori positive patients with DU compared with the non-ulcer healthy controls.
Increased basal and peak acid output was also prevalent in the patients with idiopathic DU.
In a recent study Levi et al reported that pentagastrin stimulated acid output was less in H pylori negative patients with DU than in H pylori positive patients with DU but we could not show this in our study.
The difference between the studies may be explained by the fact that we adopted more stringent criteria for assessing H pylori state and also assessed gastric function only in H pylori negative patients with DU who had no other explanation for their ulcer disease.
The stringent criteria for selecting our patients meant that we had few patients and it is possible that a difference in acid secretion between the patients with idiopathic DU and H pylori positive patients with DU could become apparent with greater numbers.
The increased peak acid output to pentagastrin in the patients with idiopathic DU and H pylori positive patients with DU indicates that both have an increased parietal cell mass.
The cause of this is unclear but it could be due to the trophic effect of hypergastrinaemia on the oxyntic mucosa, an effect of smoking, an inherited characteristic, or a combination of these.
Theonly characteristic that clearly distinguished the patients with idiopathic DU from both H pylori positive patients with DU and H pylori negative healthy volunteers was their rapid gastric emptying of both liquids and solids.
An increased rate of gastric emptying has previously been noted in some patients with DU, and a familial form of the disease associated with rapid gastric emptying has also been described.
The accelerated gastric emptying of both liquids and solids in the patients with idiopathic DU may explain why their ulcer disease was more difficult to control with antisecretory agents and the use of pharmalogical agents to delay gastric emptying might be helpful.
In summary, this studh shows that in about 50% of patients with H pylori negative DU their disease can be explained by NSAID use, underlying Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, or Crohn's disease.
In the rest of the patients with idiopathic DU three disturbances of gastric function are prevalent: hypergastrinaemia, increased basal and peak acid output, and rapid gastric emptying.
Each of these abnormalities of gastric function will increase the duodenal acid load, thus supporting a role for duodenal acidity in the pathogenesis of the ulceration.
The cause of the disturbed gastric function in the patients with idiopathic DU is unclear but their lack of the blood group A 1 antigen is consistent with a genetic basis linked to ABO blood group antigen genes.
Inflammatory bowel disease — a radical view
Although the aetiology of inflammatory bowel disease remains unknown, its pathogenesis is gradually being unravelled.
Increasing attention has been focussed recently on the role of free radicals, in both normal metabolism and defence against disease, and also in a wide variety of conditions, for example rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes mellitus, atherosclerosis, pancreatitis, and peptic ulcer, in which oxidant stress seems to exceed homeostatic mechanisms.
Free radical activity may contribute to the pathogenesis of both inflammation and cancer.
This review examines the evidence that abnormal oxidative metabolism is of central importance to active inflammatory bowel disease.
The potential pathogenicity of free radicals has been emphasised by recent work which suggests that reactive oxygen metabolities are not just one of a number of mediators and cytokines involved in the inflammatory process in inflammatory bowel disease but may have a pivotal role by initiating the expression of genes controlling may other aspects of the inflammatory, immune, and acute phase response, by activation of the transcription factor NF-kΒ.
Free radical chemistry
Free radical chemistry is complex and evanescent.
A free radical is defined as any species capable of independent existence that contains one or more unpaired electrons, an unpaired electron being defined as one that is alone in an orbita.
Since electrons are more stable when paired together in orbitals, radicals are generally more reactive than non-radicals.
Radicals may react with non-radicals in a number of ways: by donating the unpaired electron, or by abstracting an electron from, or combining with, another molecule.
All of these reactions, however, result in the production of another radical and will usually result in a chain reaction.
These reactions may be terminated by the interaction with another radical or with one of the ‘chain-breaking antioxidant molecules’(such as vitamin E), or by one of the enzymatic antioxidant defences (for example superoxide dismutase, catalase, or glutathione peroxidase).
An outline of reactive oxygen metabolite chemistry in biological tissues is given in the Figure.
Oxygen is a prerequisite for the efficient production of energy in aerobic organisms and yet the diatomic oxygen molecules on which we depend are themselves ‘diradicals’ and major promoters of free radical chemistry.
Although oxygen is a good oxidising agent (atom or molecule that accepts electrons from the molecule it oxidises), restrictions on the direction of spin of the electrons it accepts means that it usually accepts these one at a time as shown in the following equations:
Transition metals, such as iron, are important promoters of free radical reactions, and in particular of the formation of the extremely reactive hydroxyl radical (OH.) via the Fenton reaction.
The overall reaction scheme is as follows:
Superoxide and hydrogen peroxide increase mucosal and vascular permeability, are involved in the recruitment and activation of neutrophils, and are precursors of the more damaging hydroxyl radical (via Fenton chemistry) and hypochlorite (via the action of myeloperoxidase released by activated neurtophils).
The hydroxyl radical can attack and damage almost every molecule found in living cells, including proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and DNA.
It is for this reason that the production of free radicals is normally tightly controlled and that concentrations of free transition metals are virtually non-existent.
Hypochlorite is a powerful oxidant that may react directly against membrane associated targets or indirectly by forming less reactive chloramines that may diffuse across the membrane and attack cytosolic components.
Since neither hydrogen peroxide nor hypochlorite have an unpaired electron (free radical) we shall henceforward use the term ‘reactive oxygen metabolites’(ROM) which encompasses all the species so far described.
ROM in inflammatory bowel disease
Several points merit consideration in the evaluation of the pathogenic role of ROM in inflammatory bowel disease.
Firstly, even in cell free systems, the measurement of ROM is complicated by rapid reactions and interconversions between them, the wide variety of reactions possible, and the relative non-specificity of many of the methods used to detect ROM and of the scavengers used to identify particular species.
These problems are intensified in biological experiments.
Secondly, most of the work to date relating to free radicals in inflammatory bowel disease has concentrated on ROM, but these are not the only radicals found in living cells: others, for example nitrogen, carbon, and sulphur centred radicals, may be as important.
Lastly, as in the evaluation of the contribution to the inflammatory response of other mediators such as eicosanoids, it is crucial to assess the pathogenic importance of ROM using the criteria resembling those originally set out by Vane as follows:
DETECTION OF ROM AT THE SITE OF INFLAMMATION
Increased mucosal production of ROM related to disease activity has been shown in colorectal biopsy specimens and stimulated mucosal phagocytes from patients with inflammatory bowel disease compared with controls.
Quantification is difficult, but evidence that sufficient ROM are produced to cause mucosal damage is supported by the findings of increased lipid peroxides in rectal biopsy specimens of patients with active ulcerative colitis and 8-oxop7-hydrodeoxyguanosine, produced by hydroxyl radical attack on DNA, in the ileocolonic mucosa of patients with Crohn's disease, as well as in the circulating lymphocytes and polymorphs of patients with ulcerative colitis.
Low values of mucosal trypsin inhibitor, superoxide dismutase, metallothionein, and glutathione, and of circulating superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase, and increased activities of circulating leukocyte elastase and colorectal mucosal collagenase may also reflect the activity of ROM in patients with active inflammatory bowel disease.
What are the sources of ROM production in the gut?
There are two main candidates (Figure).
Firstly, phagocytes are prominent in the mucosa of patients with active inflammatory bowel disease and can produce ROM via both the respiratory burst and prostaglandin and leukotriene metabolism.
Secondly, xanthine oxidase, which produces superoxide, is formed from xanthine dehydrogenase during ischaemia and is implicated in the pathogenesis of ischaemia-reperfusion injury; this seems a likely route of ROM production in Crohn's disease if multifocal gastrointestinal infarction does indeed contribute to its pathogenesis.
Conversion of xanthine dehydrogenase to xanthine oxidase, however, can also take place in the presence of various proinflammatory substances such as formyl-leucyl-methionyl phenylalanine (FMLP) and tumour necrosis factor alpha, and can be induced by activated neutrophils.
Superoxide and hydrogen peroxide are not only precursors of more harmful substances, but, by increasing mucosal permeability and recruitment and activation of further neutrophils, may help establish a vicious cycle of inflammation and tissue damage.
PRODUCTION OF MUCOSAL DAMAGE BY ROM
Stimulated neutrophils are cytotoxic to cells in vitro .
Hydrogen peroxide has been used as an enema or as a cleaning agent for endoscopes and may cause mucosal damage when applied to the surface of the gut wall.
‘Hydrogen peroxide enteritis’ can mimic an acute ulcerative, ischaemic, or pseudomembranous colitis and ranges from a reversible, clinically silent process to an acute, toxic fulminant colitis associated with perforation and death.
In anecdotal reports of exacerbation of inflammatory bowel disease by iron supplementation, this may be mediated by hydroxyl radical production by the Fenton reaction.
Millimolar concentrations of stable oxidants (H 2 O 2 , OCl -, and monochloramine) cause a dose dependent increase in mucosal permeability in animal models and are toxic to intestinal epithelial cells.
Whether these concentrations of ROM resemble those found in the mucosa in inflammatory bowel disease in vivo is unclear.
An animal model of colitis, however, has been developed recently using the free radical initiator, 2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane) dihydrochloride and trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid, which also induces colitis experimentally and is metabolised to superoxide and hydrogen peroxide by rat colon homogenates or isolated colonocytes.
There is considerable interest in the relation between oxidant stress and the development of cancer.
While there is no doubt that ROM can cause oxidative DNA damage leading to base changes, strand breaks, and enhanced expression of proto-oncogenes, and that oxidative stress can induce malignant transformation in cell culture, the relation between these observations and the development of malignancy in vivo is more complex and will depend on other factors such as the rate of damage, antioxidant defences, DNA repair mechanisms, and the necessity for multiple steps (initiation, promotion, and progression).
The constitutive and oxidant induced activity of adenosine diphosphate ribosyl transferase (ADPRT), an enzyme involved in DNA repair, is reduced in patients with inflammatory bowel disease and also in those with colon cancer.
This may be the result of genetic variation in factors determining the redox cycling of reduced glutathione, and correlates well with the low glutathione values found in the colonic mucosa of patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
Although the finding of oxidative DNA damage is remote from establishing a causal link betweeh excess ROM production and cancer in patients with inflammatory bowel disease, it does suggest further possible lines of research.
PREVENTION OR AMELIORATION OF MUCOSAL DAMAGE BY AGENTS WHICH PREVENT THE RELEASE OR BLOCK THE EFFECTS OF ROM
Agents blocking the release or effects of ROM, for example, xanthine oxidase inhibitors, superoxide dismutase or its mimetic WR 2721, catalase, the glutathione peroxidase mimetic PZ 51, dimethyl sulphoxide, and desferrioxamine (Figure), all decrease inflammation in animal or intestinal cell culture models of colitis, and uncontrolled studies show promise for the use of allopurinol in pouchitis and superoxide dismutase injections in refractory Crohn's disease.
The aminosalicylates are far less specific agents, and it is not known which of their many pharmacological actions explains their therapeutic effect in inflammatory bowel disease.
The aminosalicylates scavenge ROMs in vitro at low concentrations (IC 5 for scavening superoxide 10–20 µM) and in vivo .
They also inhibit myeloperoxidase and chelate iron at low concentrations (IC 5 20 µM and 300 µM respectively).
These concentrations are of the same order as those found in the plasma of patients taking 5-ASA preparations orally (10–15 µm) and are far lower than those required to inhibit cyclo-oxygenase, lipoxygenase, or the binding of FMLP to neutrophils (IC 5 10, 6, and >mM respectively) or those found within the colonic lumen of these patients (10–20 mM).
The finding of 5-ASA metabolites identical to those formed by the reaction of 5-ASA with the hydroxyl radical in extracts of faeces from patients with inflammatory bowel disease treated with sulphasalazine, but not in those with rheumatoid arthritis also receiving the drug, suggests that ROM scavenging is a clinically important mechanism of action in inflammatory bowel disease.
One of the arguments used against a significant ROM scavenging role for the aminosalicylates is that 4-ASA, while clinically effective, is less efficient in scavenging ROM than 5-ASA.
While this is certainly true for some radicals, both 4-ASA and 5-ASA scavenge hypochlorite and inhibit myeloperoxidase at low concentrations.
Indeed, hydroxyl radical scavening is an unlikely mode of action in vivo for most drugs because the drugs are never present in tissues at sufficiently high concentrations to compete with biological molecules for the hydroxyl radicals generated in vivo .
Whether the ability to chelate free iron and so prevent the formation of the hydroxyl radical is important remains to be seen.
Conclusions
It is now clear that ROM are produced in excess in active inflammatory bowel disease.
That they are rather more than irrelevant epiphenomena, at least in experimental colitis, is indicated by the anti-inflammatory effects of specific antioxidants.
While the known antioxidant actions of the aminolsalicylates are compatible with the proposal that ROM play a major role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease, proof of the hypothesis must await the outcome of controlled trials in the human disease of more specific agents that interfere with oxidative metabolism.
This treatment may prove valuable not only in ameliorating the inflammatory response, but also in chronic ulcerative colitis, and it may even find a place in preventing colonic cancer.
Regulation of gall bladder motility by the arginine-nitric oxide pathway in guinea pigs
Abstract
Nitric oxide (NO) synthesised from L-arginine is an intercellular messenger in various biological actions including endothelial dependent relaxation and inhibition of platelet aggregation.
This study explored the role of the L-arginine-NO pathway in the regulation of gall bladder motility.
Intraluminal gall bladder pressure was recorded in anaesthetised guines pigs in response to cholecystokinin or bethanechol before and after treatment with specific NO synthase inhibitors (N G -nitro-L-arginine, N G -nitro-L-arginine methyl ester, or N G -monomethyl-L-arginine), or with a NO donor (sodium nitroprusside).
Baseline gall bladder pressure significantly increased after treatment with the NO synthase inhibitors.
Responses to cholecystokinin (0.025–1.25 nmol/kg) were significantly enhanced after treatment with N G -nitro-L-larginine methyl ester and lasted two to threefold longer than in control experiments.
The effect of the inhibitor both on resting pressure and on cholecystokinin induced changes was reversed by L-arginine but not by D-arginine.
Pretreatment with the inhibitors also induced a significant enhancement of the response to bethanechol.
On the other hand, sodium nitroprusside abolished the response to low dose cholecystokinin and reduced the response to a high dose by about 80%.
In vitro experiments with isolated gall bladder strips showed a significant enhancement of the contractile response to cholecystokinin or bethanechol after preincubation with the NO synthase inhibitor.
Calcium dependent activity of NO synthase was detected in fresh homogenates from gall bladder tissue and incubation with endotoxin induced considerable calcium independent activity.
These findings support the existence of a key L-arginine-nitric oxide pathway regulating gall bladder contraction.
An enzymatic pathway that synthesises nitric oxide (NO) from the terminal guanidino nitrogen of L-arginine was originally shown in vascular endothelial cells.
This was followed by the finding that the L-arginine-NO pathway is a widespread tissue system involved in the regulation of cell function and communication.
The L-arginine-NO system exerts various biological actions including vascular smooth muscle relaxation and inhibition of platelet aggregation.
Recent experimental data suggest that NO acts as a neurotransmitter in non-adrenergic non-cholinergic pathways of the gastrointestinal tract.
It is now well established that NO exerts its actions through stimulation of a cytosolic guanylate cyclase with a consequent rise in cycliguanosine monophosphate (cGMP) concentrations.
In gall bladder smooth muscle, accumulation of intracellular cGMP and muscle contraction are inversely related events.
Cholecystokinin (CCK) is the main physiological agent that induces gall bladder contraction.
Thus cGMP has been shown to relax gall bladder smooth muscle and antagonise the action of CCK.
On the other hand, non-adrenergic non-cholinergic nerves conduct inhibitory signals that induce gall bladder relaxation.
These data suggest that NO may be involved in some of these processes but the potential role of the L-arginine-NO pathway in gall bladder physiology has not been explored.
Thus we designed the present experiments to investigate the effect of NO synthase inhibition on gall bladder muscular activity in vivo and in vitro.
We also investigated the presence of the enzyme able to convert L-arginine to NO in tissue homogenates from guinea pig gall bladder.
Materials and methods
ANIMALS
Male albino guinea pigs weighing 350–450 g (Charles River, France) were used.
They were maintained in a temperature controlled environment provided with a 12:12 hour light:dark cycle and given regular guinea pig food and tap water ad libitum.
IN VIVO STUDIES
Intraluminal gall bladder pressure was measured in vivo by the method described by Poston et al for guinea pigs.
After an overnight fast, the animals were anaesthetised with 2 g/kg intraperitoneal urethane (Fluka, Bucks, Switzerland).
A tracheostomy was performed and a catheter contained heparinised (10 U/ml) saline was inserted into the right carotid artery for continuous monitoring of arterial blood pressure.
A second catheter was inserted into the internal jugular veing to give drugs intravenously.
After a midline abdominal incision, a catheter (internal diameter 0.89 mm) was inserted through the gall bladder fundus into the lumen and tied in position to prevent any leakage.
The contents of the gall bladder were emptied and 2 ml normal saline injected.
Thereafter, saline was constantly infused at a rate of 0.1 ml/min through the gall bladder catheter with an ASID Bonz PP infusion pump (Germany).
A side channel from the infusion catheter was connected to a pressure transducer (model 1280C, Hewlett-Packard) on line with a recording system.
This infusion rate was needed to maintain a constant baseline pressure within the open biliary system.
Thus gall bladder muscle contractions could be recorded as changes in intraluminal gall bladder pressure.
The protocol consisted of constructing dose-response curves of intraluminal gall bladder pressure in response to cholecystokinin octapeptide (CCK-8, Sigma, St Louis, Mo) at doses ranging from 0.025 to 1.25 nmol/kg or to bethanechol (Roig Farma, Barcelona, Spain) at doses ranging from 12.5 to 50 µg/kg, before and after inhibition of the NO synthase with the arginine analogues N G -monomethyl-L-arginine (L-NMMA, 100 mg/kg, Wellcome Research Laboratories, Beckenham, Kent, UK), N G -nitro-L-arginine (L-NA, 10 mg/kg, Sigma), or N G -nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME, 10 mg/kg, Sigma).
Resting gall bladder pressure was the mean pressure recorded over a five minute period immediately before an intravenous bolus of either CCK-8 or bethanechol, and the response was defined as the maximal change in intraluminal pressure recorded during the first five minute period after the bolus.
Responses to CCK-8 or bethanechol were recorded 10 minutes after pretreatment with the NO synthase inhibitors or with saline (all drugs were administered as an intravenous bolus dissolved in 0.9% NaCl).
In some experiments, the specific substrate of NO synthase, L-Arginine (300 mg/kg, Sigma), was given to reverse the effects of the inhibitors, whereas the enantiomer D-arginine (300 mg/kg, Sigma) was used as the inactive control compound.
Other experiments were performed on animals pretreated with socium nitroprusside (2 mg/kg, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), an exogenous non-enzymatic donor of NO, to assess the effects of NO on gall bladder responses to CKK-8.
Finally, to discriminate the effect on gall bladder pressure of changes in systemic glood pressure induced by the NO synthase inhibitors, the vasopressor agent phenylephrine (10 µg/kg/min, Roig Farma) was infused intravenously into anaesthetised guinea pigs and changes in both systemic and intralumina gall bladder pressure were measured.
IN VITRO STUDIES
Longitudinal gall bladder strips were taken from male albino guinea pigs that had been fasted overnight.
The strips were placed in organ baths containing 20 ml of Krebs solution at 37°C continuously bubbled with O 2 : CO 2 (95%:5%).
Resting strip tension was adjusted to 1 g and changes were monitored by an isometric force transducer (Letica, Barcelona, Spain) and recorded by a polygraph connected on line.
Experiments were started after a two hour stabilisation period.
Tension responsesto CCK-8 (25 ng/ml) and bethanecol (2 µg/ml) were tested in control experiments and after addition of L-NAME (27 µg/ml) to the incubation medium.
DETERMINATION OF NO SYNTHASE ACTIVITY
The enzymatic transformation of L-arginine to L-citrulline was determined in tissue homogenates with the method described by Knowles et al .
Aliquots of tissue homogenate (20 µl) were added to 10 ml plastic tubes containing 100 µl of a buffer consisting of 50 mM potassium phosphate pH 7.2, 60 mM L-valine, 120 µM NADPH, 1.2 mM L-citrulline, 24 µM L-arginine, L-[U- 1 4 C]-arginine (150000 dpm), 1.2 mM MgCl 2 , and 0.24 mM CaCl 2 .
Samples were incubated for 10 minutes at 37°C before the reaction was stopped by removal of substrate and dilution by addition of 1.5 ml of 1:1 (vol:vol) H 2 O:Dowex-50W (200–400, 8% cross linked, Na + -form).
Five ml of H 2 O were added to the resin incubated mix, this was left to settle for 10 minutes, and 4 ml of supernatant was removed and examined for the presence of 1 4 C-citrulline by liquid scintillation counting.
The activity of the calcium dependent NO synthase was found from the difference between the 1 4 C-citrulline produced from control samples and samples containing 1 mM ethylene glycol tetra-acetic acid (EGTA); the activity of the calcium independent enzyme was determined from the difference between samples containing 1mM EGTA and samples containing 1 mM EGTA and 1 mM L-NAME.
A further series of enzyme activities were measured after incubation of gall bladder tissue in the presence of lipopolysaccharide from S typhosa (Sigma) at a concentration of 10 µg/ml.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are expressed as mean (SEM).
In the in vivo studies, differences between means were tested by analysis of variance for multiple comparisons and by Student's t test for unpaired data for single comparisons.
In the in vitro experiments, a Student's t test for paired data was used for comparing changes before and after incubation with L-NAME.
Results
Basal intraluminal gall bladder pressure was stable and averaged 8 (1) mm Hg under our in vivo experimental conditions.
The NO synthase inhibitors L-NAME, L-NMMA, or L-NA significantly increased baseline gall bladder pressure (Fig 1).
The effect of these inhibitors was evident within a few minutes and lasted for at least one hour.
Administration of L-arginine, a substrate of NO synthase, reversed the effect of the inhibitors; however, the enantiomer D-arginine was ineffective.
Figure 2 shows the effect of inhibition of NO synthase on the response of the gall bladder to CCK-8.
Changes in intraluminal gall bladder pressure were dose-dependent and occurred 10 to 20 seconds after CCK-8 was given.
Interestingly, pretreatment with L-NAME resulted in a shift to the left of the dose-response curve, as CCK-8 induced higher pressure responses in animals given L-NAME than in saline controls.
At every CCK-8 dose testd, differences between animals treated with L-NAME and with saline were significant.
The effect of NO synthase inhibition was not only indicated by an increase in the maximal response induced by CCK-8 but also by a prolonged duration of the response.
Figure 3 shows that the duration of changes in gall bladder pressure induced by CCK-8 increased in relation to the dose of CCK-8 given.
The higher the dose, the longer the response to CCK-8.
Pretreatment with L-NAME significantly prolonged the response to CCK-8 at all doses studied.
The effect of L-NAME on changes in intraluminal gall bladder pressure induced by CCK was reversed by a simultaneous dose of L-arginine.
Figure 4 shows that the effect of L-NAME on the response of the gall bladder to CCK-8 was not found in animals receiving L-arginine.
The substrate of the NO synthase was able to reverse the effect of the inhibitor.
In a second series of experiments, the cholinergic agonist bethanechol was used as a cholecystokinetic agent.
Bethanechol produced a dose dependent increase in intraluminal gall bladder pressure in animals treated with saline (Fig 5).
Again, as noted for CCK-8, pretreatment with L-NAME greatly increased the responses of the gall bladder to bethanechol.
Differences were significant throughout the dose range studied by comparison with the saline group.
In these experiments, the duration of changes in intraluminal gall bladder pressure was not modified by the inhibitor.
Figure 6 shows the effect of sodium nitroprusside gall bladder contraction induced by CCK.
Sodium nitroprusside is able to act as a donor of NO.
Note that the effect on sodium nitroprusside was the opposite of that found with the NO synthase inhibitors and its administration greatly reduced the response of the gall bladder to CCK-8.
Responses to low dose CCK-8 were completely abolished whereas responses to a high dose were reduced by about 80%.
Systemic arterial blood pressure in anaesthetised guinea pigs averaged 40 (2) mm Hg.
The NO synthase inhibitors L-NA and L-NAME produced a comparable increase in blood pressure that persisted for at least one hour.
When L-arginine was given after the inhibitors, blood pressure returned to resting values within five minutes.
By contrast, D-arginine did not reverse the pressor effects induced by the NO synthase inhibitors.
Administration of L-arginine alone did not alter the resting blood pressure in untreated animals.
Intravenous infusion of phenylephrine produced a sustained increase in blood pressure, but phenylephrine did not affect either basal gall bladder pressure or the response to CCK-8 (Table I).
Table II shows the effect of L-NAME on in vitro gall bladder strip contraction induced either by CCK-8 or bethanechol.
Both agents greatly increased the isometric tension generated by the muscle strips.
In the presence of L-NAME, responses to CCK-8 or bethanechol were significantly enhanced.
Considerable activity of calcium dependent NO synthase was detected in whole homogenates from guines pig gall bladder (7.9 (1.5) pmol/h/ mg of protein), indicating the presence of constitutive NO synthase in normal gall bladder tissue.
Calcium independent activity was not detected under these experimental conditions.
After incubation of fresh tissue with 10 µg/ml endotoxin for five hours, however, a high rate of calcium independent activity was found (30.0 (5.7) pmol/h/mg of protein).
These results suggest the existence of an isoenzyme that is inducible by endotoxin, as described in other tissue preparations.
Discussion
Data presented here indicate that (a ) resting gall bladder pressure and contractions induced by both CCK-8 and bethanechol are enhanced by inhibition of the NO synthase (shown by our in vivo and in vitro experiments);(b ) these effects are specifically reversed by the NO synthase substrate L-arginine;(c ) sodium nitroprusside, an exogenous donor of NO, counteracts the effect of CCK-8 on gall bladder pressure; and (d ) a constitutive calcium dependent NO synthase can be detected in normal gall bladder tissue.
Taken together, these findings suggest that local generation of NO participates in the regulation of gall bladder motility in guinea pigs.
Generation of NO was first described in the vascular endothelium in response to acetylcholine or other vasorelaxants.
It is well known that the inhibition of NO synthesis with L-arginine analogues induces a sustained vasoconstriction and causes an increase in systemic arterial blood pressure.
In our study, changes in intraluminal gall bladder pressure after treatment with the L-arginine analogues were associated with the known vasomotor effects induced by NO synthase inhibition.
It is unlikely, however, that vasoconstriction accounted for the results found in our experiments as phenylephrine was able to increase systemic arterial blood pressure to a similar extent without changing intraluminal gall bladder pressure.
Also, the experiments performed in vitro clearly show that the effects of inhibition of NO synthase are independent of blood flow.
Changes in intraluminal gall bladder pressure may reflect changes in the intrinsic tone of its musculoelastic wall or in the resistance of the sphincter of Oddi to bile flow.
Our findings suggest that synthesis of NO from L-arginine may play an important part in regulating gall bladder tone, as the in vitro experiments showed a significant increment in muscular tension after inhibition of NO synthase.
We have also found, by a different method, that NO synthase inhibition increases resistance to bile flow by an action on the intrinsic muscular activity of the sphincter of Oddi.
Nevertheless, the experiments presented in our paper point out the role of the L-arginine-NO pathway among the mechanisms that modulate the compliance of the gall bladder wall.
The presence of constitutive NO synthase in normal gall bladder tissue together with the effect of the inhibitors on resting gall bladder pressure suggest that the L-arginine-NO pathway is permanently active for normal gall bladder physiology.
The gall bladder is a reservoir that empties at a slow pace.
In humans, for instance, gall bladder emptying elicited by CCK is a slow steady process that generally required 30–60 minutes to reach its maximum.
The most important determinant of gall bladder emptying is contraction of gall bladder smooth muscle, although the resistance to bile flow at the cystic duct and sphincter of Oddi may also modulate the process.
As found in our experiments, inhibition of NO synthesis may enhance the contraction of the smooth muscle of the gall bladder and the tonic response to CCK-8 can be prolonged, favouring the delivery of bile.
Non-adrenergic non-cholinergic nerves conduct inhibitory signals that modeulate gall bladder contraction.
As NO has been shown to act as a neurotransmitter of non-adrenergic non-cholinergic signals in the gastrointestinal tract, it is plausible that inhibition of NO synthase results in a blockade of the non-adrenergic non-cholinergic pathways.
The absence of the neural modulation of the contraction would enhance the response to CCK-8 and bethanechol as found in our experiments.
Additional support for the role of NO in gall bladder motility is provided by the results from the experiment with sodium nitroprusside.
It is known that sodium nitroprusside releases NO through a spontaneous reaction independently of the enzymatic pathway that uses L-arginine as substrate.
We found that sodium nitroprusside given before CCK produced a shiftin the pressure dose-response curve of the gall bladder that was opposite to that produced by the NO synthase inhibitors.
The reduced responsiveness of gall bladder muscle to CCK by such an exogenous source of NO can probably be explained by the accumulation of cGMP in the gall bladder smooth muscle induced by NO.
Finally, our data show that endotixin is able to induce a calcium independent NO synthase in guinea pig gall bladder tissue.
According to our findings, the inducible enzyme may display an activity four to five times higher than that of the constitutive enzyme.
The extraordinary generation of NO induced by endotoxin could explain the absence of motor activity that usually occurs in association with gall bladder infection.
In summary, the L-arginine-NO pathway is present in guinea pig bladder tissue.
This pathway generates NO and plays a significant part in the regulation of resting gall bladder tone and in gall bladder emptying.
Restorative proctocolectony with end to end pouch-anal anastomosis in patients over the age of fifty
Abstract
This study was to examine whether ‘fit’ patients over the age of 50 who require elective surgery for ulcerative colitis are suitable candidates for restorative proctocolectomy, providing that they are continent berore operation and that the anal sphincter is preserved in its entirety without stripping of the mucosa or endoanal anastomosis.
Between 1986 and 1991, 18 patients 50 to 66 years old (median 55 years: nine men) underwent restorative proctocolectomy with end to end ileoanal anastomosis without mucosal stripping (12 quadruplicated (W), four duplicated (J), two no reservoir).
The results were compared 12 (range three to 24) months later with those of 18 matched patients who were less than 50 years of age (median 34 years).
In patients over 50, median resting anal pressure was 88 (range 44–131) cm water before and 80 (47–138) cm water after the operation (NS).
In patients under 50, median resting anal pressure was 76 (51–128) cm water before and 77 (36–137) cmwater after operation (NS).
Resting anal pressure in older patients did not differ significantly from that in younger patients either before or after the operation.
Both sensory and reflex anal functions were preserved as well after operation in the older patients as in the younger ones.
The clinical results in patients over 50 were slightly inferior to the results for the younger patients, but the difference was small and not significant.
Hence age alone is not a contraindication to restorative surgery provided that the anal sphincter is preserved in its entirety.
Restorative proctocolectomy is the procedure of choice for most patients who require surgical treatment for ulcerative colitis.
As experience with the procedure has increased a wide range of functional results has been reported; some patients achieve virtually normal bowel function, whereas a few suffer from urgency and frequency of defecation and even incontinence.
This in turn has led clinicians to try to identify the factors that might be responsible for poor clinical results.
In the large Mayo clinic series of pelvic J reservoirs with mucosal proctectomy, mean bowel frequency was 11 in 24 hours in patients over 50 years of age compared with seven in 24 hours in patients under 50, a statistically significant and clinically important difference.
Although the age of the patients did not correlate with their ability to achieve continence after operation, the greater the number of stools, the more often were the patients incontinent.
Findings such as these — together with considerations of operative risk to life — have tended to limit the use of restorative proctocolectomy to patients who are less than 50 years of age.
We showed previously that two factors were of critical importance if a good clinical result were to be achieved after restorative proctocolectomy: firstly, the pelvic reservoir should be capacious and compliant and should empty well; secondly, the anal sphincter must be strong both before and after operation.
The second objective was best served, in our experience, by leaving the anal sphincter intact at operation without any stripping of anorectal mucosa and without endoanal anastomosis.
We wondered whether, if these criteria were satisfied, the benefits of restorative proctocolectomy might be extended to older patients.
In this paper we describe the results of restorative proctocolectomy in 18 patients over the age of 50 whom we have treated in the past six years and compare them with the results achieved in younger patients.
This is a retrospective study.
Patients and methods
Between 1986 and 1991, 18 (18%) patients out of a total of 100 who underwent restorative proctocolectomy were aged 50 years or over (median 55 years, range 50 to 66 years).
Nine were men.
Each patient underwent restorative proctocolectomy, the pelvic reservoir or ileum being anastomosed end to end to the anal sphincter without any stripping of the anal mucosa.
We have described the technique employed in detail.
Twelve patients had quadruplicated (W) ileal reservoirs, four had duplicated (J) reservoirs, and two patients underwent straight ileoanal anastomoses.
A group of 18 patients aged 16 to 41 years (median 31 years), who had also undergone restorative proctocolectomy, matched for sex, type of reservoir, operative technique, and duration of follow up formed a control group for comparison with the older patients (Table I).
This control group represents a consecutive 18 patients chosen at random from a period midway through our experience in 1987 to 1989, who are typical of patients presenting for elective operation for ulcerative colitis.
The selection criteria used were the same for all patients — namely, each patient was individually assessed with respect to general fitness for function of the anal sphincter.
Anal sphincteric function was then assessed quantitatively in our physiology laboratory.
The same physiological selection criteria for operation were used for young and old patients alike.
In simple terms, provided the patient with colitis was clinically continent, we found that this was invariably accompanied by satisfactory physiological results.
All patients who expressed a desire to undergo a sphincter preserving operation were found to have satisfactory anal sphincter pressure and anal canal sensation, and therefore to date we have not rejected any patients simply on the grounds of age and inadequate sphincter function on testing.
LABORATORY STUDIES
Each patient underwent studies of anal sphincteric function before operation and a median of 12 months (range 3–24 months) after operation.
Anal pressure was measured by a station pull through technique as described previously.
Sensation was tested by measuring threshold electrosensitivity of the anal mucosa by means of a bipolar constant current stimulator probe, lubricated with a solution of KY Jelly (Johnson and Johnson, Ascot, Berks, UK) and normal saline in equal quantities.
The rectoanal inhibitory reflex was assessed by inflating a balloon situation in the pelvic reservoir with air and measuring the response of the anal sphincter to distension of the reservoir: a 20% decrease in anal pressure was taken to denote a positive reflex.
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF OUTCOME
The quality of anal continence was assessed clinically by two doctors who questioned each patient about faecal leakage by day and during sleep, the need to wear a pad, anal soreness, the ability to defer defecation for longer than 15 minutes, and the ability not only to discriminate between flatus and faeces but to release flatus safely without having to visit the lavatory.
This assessment took the form of a standard preconstructed quality of life questionnaire that was presented to the patients a median of 12 (three to 24) months after operation.
All patients routinely underwent clinical assessment of continence before operation.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All grouped data were expressed as median and range.
The groups were compared by means of the Wilcoxon matched pairs signed rank test for paired data and the Mann-Whitney U test for unpaired data.
Nominal data were analysed with Fisher's exact test.
Results
ANAL SPHINCTER PRESSURE
Inpatients over 50, median maximum resting anal pressure was 88 cm water (range 44–131) before operation and 80 cm water (range 47–138) after operation (NS).
In patients under 50, median maximum resting and pressure was 76 cm water (range 51–128) before operation and 77 cm water (range 36–137) after operation (NS).
Resting and pressure in older patients did not differ significantly from that in younger patients, either before or after operation (Fig 1).
In patients over 50, the median maximum squeeze pressure was 167 cm water (range 68- 240) before operation and 135 cm water (range 58–233) after operation (NS).
In patients under 50, the median maximum squeeze pressure was 120 cm water (range 58–240) before operation and 171 cm water (range 58–291) after operation (NS).
The maximum squeeze pressure in older patients did not differ significantly from that in younger patients, either before or after operation (Fig 2).
PRESSURE PROFILE OF THE ANAL SPHINCTER
Figure 3 and 4 show the pressure profiles of the anal sphincter before and after operation in the two groups of patients.
The profile of the sphincter after operation did not differ significantly from the profile before operation in either group of patients.
Also, the sphincter pressure profile before operation in patients over 50 did not differ significantly from the profile before operation in patients under 50: nor did the pressure profiles of the two groups after operation differ significantly.
SENSATION IN THE ANAL CANAL
The thresholds for sensation in the upper, mid, and lower anal canal after operation did not differ significantly from the thresholds for sensation at these sites before operation as determined by mucosal electrosensitivity.
When sensory thresholds in patients over 50 were compared with sensory thresholds in patients under 50, no significant difference was found either before or after operation (Fig 5).
RECTOANAL INHIBITORY REFLEX
The reflex was present in all patients before operation.
After operation it was present in 13 patients over 50 and in 15 patients under 50 years of age (NS).
CLINICAL RESULTS
Table II summarises the clinical results.
The functional outcome in patients over 50 was slightly but not significantly inferior to the outcome in the younger patients.
Six patients over the age of 50 experienced minor leakage whereas only three patients under the age of 50 experienced such leakage.
In five of these six patients the leakage consisted only of mucus.
Only one patient experienced minor faecal leakage and even that was not severe enough to necessitate the wearing of a pad.
Most patients in both groups could defer defecation for longer than 15 minutes (usually for much longer periods) and could discriminate satisfactorily between flatus and faeces.
Discussion
The introduction and subsequent evolution of restorative proctocolectomy over the past 14 years has meant that most patients who require surgical treatment for chronic ulcerative colitis are no longer condemned to life with a permanent ileostomy.
Also, a perineal wound is avoided entirely and it is rare for pelvic autonomic nerves to be damaged.
It is widely assumed that restoration of intestinal continuity inevitably results in a better quality of life for the patient, but that is not necessarily the case.
For example, if the patients' bowels act too often or with great urgency, and espcially if there should be repeated episodes of faecal leakage or even frank incontinence, they might be better off with an ileostomy.
Hence the report from the Mayo clinic that after mucosal proctectomy with a pelvic J reservoir and endoanal, pouchanal anastomosis, bowel frequency in patients over 50 years was 11 in 24 hours, compared with seven in patients under 50 years.
The fact that about 50% of all patients experienced minor faecal leakage in the first year after operation, discouraged the use of restorative proctocolectomy in older patients in whome the operative risk must also be assumed to be greater.
That report from the Mayo clinic was mirrored to some extent by the study of Pescatori and Mattana who reported that 45% of patients over the age of 45 experienced faecal soiling, whereas only 24% of patients under 45 years of age did so.
These authors also reported that when bowel frequency increased to more than five evacuations in 24 hours, irrespective of the patient's age, the incidence of faecal soiling increased from 20% to 48%.
Such imperfections of bowel function obviously result in a poorer quality of life for the patients concerned, suggesting that the price paid for avoidance of a permanent ileostomy may be too high in older patients.
The effect of age on anorectal function in normal people has been investigated previously.
Mean maximal resting anal pressures and maximum squeeze pressures were significantly lower in older people, although the word ‘older’ referred to patients over the age of 65 rather than 50 as in this study.
In patients with longstanding ulcerative colitis, any tendency for the anal sphincter to weaken with age may be counterbalanced by the effect of work hypertrophy on the anal sphincter.
Thus it should not be assumed that older patients with ulcerative colitis have weaker sphincters than younger patients.
If, despite the urgency and frequency of defecation associated with ulcerative colitis, older patients affirm before operation that they are continent, we believe that they are likely to remain continent after restorative proctocolectomy provided that care is taken not to weaken the sphincter in the course of the operation and that a capacious and compliant rectal substitute is provided.
The best way to preserve the full function of the anal sphincter in our opinion is to avoid stripping its mucosal lining and to anastomose the pelvic reservoir end to end to the top of the aal canal, rather than endoanally.
Mucosal proctectomy, by contrast, in which full thickness ileum is anastomosed to the anus within the sphincter at the dentate line, seems from first principles more likely to impair the function of th sphincter, and in fact has been shown in several studies to decrease maximum resting anal pressure, although the magnitude of that decrease has varied between studies.
In a recently published randomised trial of hand sewn ileoanal anastomosis with mucosectomy v stapled anastomosis without mucosectomy, although the maximum resting anal pressure was significantly decreased after sutured endoanal ileoanal anastomosis when compared with a stapled anastomosis, this did not seem to adversely influence the functional outcome.
It was concluded that a full mucosectomy does not compromise function and that surgical removal of the disease is more complete, this continues to be the view held by the Mayo clinic group.
Our philosophy differs from theirs on this point.
We showed previously that preservation of the entire anal canal in the course of restorative proctocolectomy by means of an end to end stapled anastomosis 1–2 cm above the dentate line resulted in higher sphincter pressures, better anal sensation, and significantly better clinical results than we found after mucosal stripping and endocanal, ileoanal anastomosis.
These findings are supported by the clinical results reported by Martin et al with regard to the critical level of the ileoanal anastomosis.
Hence, if stripping of the anal mucosa with encoanal anastomosis is used in older patients, we think that it is more likely to lead to lower anal pressures and faecal leakage after operation than the technically simpler alternative of end to end anastomosis.
The findings of the present study lend further support to the concept that the entire anal canal should be preserved.
The thirty six patients who underwent paired physiological tests of anal motor, sensory, and reflex function before and a median of 12 months after operation were typical of patients who undergo elective restorative proctocolectomy for ulcerative colitis worldwide.
The clinical results were admittedly slightly inferior in the older patients than in the younger ones, but any differences were small and not statistically significant.
Bowel frequency, for example, was little greater in the older patients than in the younger ones.
Nine patients experienced minor leakage, six of whom were over the age of 50; such leakage, however, was of mucus only and of minor degree in five of the six patients, and the sole patient who experienced minor faecal leakage was assessed within six months of operation and has in fact improved after longer follow up.
Finally, none of the 36 patients experienced leakage that was severe enough to necessitate the wearing of a pad.
We conclude that age itself is not a contraindication to the performance of restorative proctocolectomy with pouch anal anastomosis.
Rather, each patient should be assessed individually before operation with respect to his or her general fitness for major surgery, motivation to avoid an ileostomy, and clinical function of the anal sphincter.
Adequacy of anal sphincteric function should then be confirmed by means of laboratory tests of anal pressure and sensation.
The case for such objective assessment before operation seems particularly strong in women over the age of 50 because they may have suffered occult damage to the anal sphincter during the childbirth and could be at particular risk of a poor functional outcome if the sphincter were to sustain further damage at the time of operation.
Patients who give a histoiry of previous anal fistula or abscess represent another subgroup in whom objective measurement of anal sphincteric function before operation is essential.
Provided then that function of the anal sphincter is confirmed to be normal before operation and is kept ormal at operation by preservation of the entire anal sphincter, we suggest that age alone should not be regarded as an absolute contraindication to the use of restorative proctocolectomy.
Patients over the age of 50 who are relatively ‘fit’ need not be denied the benefits of conservative, sphincter saving surgery.
Helicobacter pylori related hypergastrinaemia is the result of a selective increase in gastrin 17
Abstract
Helicobacter pylori infection increases the serum concentration of gastrin, and this may be one of the mechanisms by which it predisposes to duodenal ulceration.
Different forms of circulating gastrin were studied both basally and postprandially in 13 duodenal ulcer patients before and one month after eradication of H pylori .
Three antisera that are specific for particular regions of the gastrin molecules were used.
Gel chromatography indicated that >of the circulating gastrin consisted of gastrin (G) 17 and G34 both before and after eradicating the infection.
The basal median total immunoreactive gastrin concentration fell from 26 pmol/l (range 11–43) to 19 pmol/l (8–39)(p), entirely because of a fall in G17 from 6 pmol/l (<) to <pmol/l (<)(p).
The median (range) basal G34 values were similar before (15 pmol (2–36)) and after (10 pmol (2–30)) eradication.
The median total immunoreactive gastrin concentration determined 20 minutes postprandially fell from 59 pmol/l (38–114) to 33 pmol/l (19–88)(p), and again this was entirely the result of a fall in G17 from 43 pmol/l (9–95) to 17 pmol/l (<)(p).
The median postprandial G34 values were similar before (13 pmol/l, range 6–42) and after (15 pmol/l, range 6–30) eradication.
Eating stimulated a noticeable rise in G17 but little change in G34, both in the presence and absence of H pylori .
The finding that H pylori infection selectively increases G17 explains why the infection causes mainly postprandial hypergastrinaemia.
G17 is increased selectively because H pylori predominantly affects the antral mucosa which is the main source of G17 whereas G34 is mainly duodenal in origin.
This study also indicates that the increased concentration of gastrin in H pylori infection is the result of an increase in one of the main biologically active forms of the hormone.
Numerous studies have shown that Helicobacter pylori infection of the gastric antrum raises circulating gastrin concentrations in duodenal ulcer patients and healthy volunteers.
The basal concentrations are increased by approximately 50%, and the integrated gastrin response to a meal is increased by approximately 100%.
The mechanism by which H pylori infection increases serum gastrin is unknown but does not seem to be related to the bacterium's urease activity or any effect of this on antral surface pH.
The role of the increased serum gastrin concentration induced by H pylori in the pathogenesis of duodenal ulcer disease is also unknown.
Studies to date have produced conflicting evidence concerning changes in acid secretion after eradication of H pylori and lowering of the serum gastrin concentration.
The reason for this is unclear.
One possible explanation is that the increased immunoreactive gastrin circulating in patients with H pylori infection is of reduced biological activity or indeed not biologically active at all.
It is established that gastrin circulates in at least four bioactive forms, component I, gastrin (G) 34, G17, and G14.
It has been suggested by Akai et al that some gastrin may be produced by an alternative processing route, which may involve other intermediate forms.
Kothary et al have reported that terminally extended forms of gastrin in conjunction with G14 are more prevalent in duodenal ulcer patients.
Other fragments including N-terminal fragments of G34 have also been identified.
It is possible that the inflammation of the antral mucosa induced by H pylori infection disturbs the intracellular processing of gastrin by the antral G cells.
There have been conflicting reports concerning the form of gastrin that is increased in H pylori infection.
Beardshall et al have reported that the increased gastrin response to gastrin releasing peptide in H pylori infection is the result of increased G17.
Graham et al , however, have claimed that the exaggerated meal stimulated gastrin response caused by H pylori is the result of an increase in biologically inactive progastrin.
To clarify this, we have examined the different circulating forms of gastrin in duodenal ulcer patients, basally and in response to eating, and both before and after eradication of H pylori .
Subjects and methods
PATIENTS
Thirteen patients (three women, age range 25–64 years) with a history of duodenal ulceration were studied.
H pylori infection was confirmed in each by microscopy of endoscopic antral biopsy tissue, urease slide test (CLO-test) of antral biopsy tissue, and positive C-urea breath test.
All patients stopped taking any acid inhibitory agents at least two weeks before entering the study and none had received bismuth preparations in the past.
METHODS
The patients reported at 0900 h after an overnight fast.
Three venous blood samples (10 ml each) were taken over 30 minutes for fasting gastrin estimation.
The patients then drank over 5 minutes a peptone meal consisting of two beef cubes (OXO Ltd, Croydon, England) dissolved in 200 ml water at 60°C.
A blood sample was taken five minutes after completing the drink and further samples were taken at 10 minutes intervals for 90 minutes.
Patients then received a three week course of tripotassium dicitrato-bismuthate (De-Nol)(120 mg four times daily), metronidazole (400 mg three times daily), and amoxycillin (500 mg three times daily).
One month after completing this treatment, the C-urea breath test was repeated to assess eradication of the infection.
At this time the basal and meal stimulated gastrin concentrations were reassessed as described above.
ANALYSIS
The venous blood samples were allowed to clot over 10 minutes and the serum separated and stored at -20°C.
Preliminary studies were undertaken in which random blood samples were obtained from 15 subjects and processed as serum.
EDTA plasma, and lithium heparin plasma.
These showed no statistical difference in the concentrations of the various forms of gastrins between the different methods of sample preparation.
The gastrin measurements were performed by standard radioimmunoassay techniques using three antisera, R98, GP168, and R526.
Antisera R98 was raised in rabbit to synthetic unsulphated human gastrin 2–17 coupled to chicken egg albumen using glutaraldehyde.
It binds component I, G34, G17, and G14 in sulphated and unsulphated forms with equimolar potency.
Cross reaction with cholecystokinn (CCK) is <.
The coefficient of interassay variation is 3.8% at 10 pmol/l, 3.3% at 20 pmol/l, and 5.4% at 40 pmol/l.
Antisera GP168 was raised in guinea pig to synthetic human gastrin fragment 1–13 of G17 coupled to chicken egg albumen using carbodiimide.
It binds G17 in the sulphated and unsulphated forms with equimolar potency and also fragments 1–6 and 1–13 of G17.
It does not bind component I, G34, or G14 and shows no cross reaction with CCK.
The coefficient of interassay variation is 10.1% at 10 pmol/l, 7.3% at 20 pmol/l, and 3.8% at 40 pmol/l.
Antisera R526 was raised in rabbit to synthetic human gastrin fragment 1–17 of G34, coupled to chicken egg albumen using glutaraldehyde.
It binds G34 in the sulphated and unsulphated forms and also binds N-terminal fragments of G34.
It does not bind G17 and G14.
The coefficient of interassay variation is 12.1% at 10 pmol/l, 8.5% at 20 pmol/l, and 6.2% at 40 pmol/l.
The tracer used with both R98 and GP168 antisera was mono-iodinated (Leu15) human G17.
The detection limit of both assays was <pmol/l as used routinely.
The tracer used with R526 was nono-iodinated human G34.
The detection limits of the assay was 5 pmol.
All specimens were assayed in at least two dilutions and samples taken before and after eradication were assayed within the same batch.
G34 was assayed using antisera R526 in only eight patients in order to preserve sufficient sample for chromatographic studies.
G34 was estimated using subtraction of G17 (GP168) from total gastrins (R98) in all 13 patients.
The interassay variation for the subtraction assay is 10.4% at 20 pmol/l, as determined by repeated measurements of clinical samples.
Chromatographic analysis was performed on serum samples obtained 20 minutes postprandially before and after eradication of H pylori in six patients.
This was undertaken to determine the contribution of G17 and G34 to the total immunoreactive gastrin in the presence and absence of H pylori .
The 2.5 ml samples were applied to a G50 superfine column (0.9×100 cm).
The samples were eluted using phosphate buffer 0.1 M pH 7.2 that contained human albumen 0.1 g% (RIA grade).
The flow rate was 4 ml/hour.
All eluates were assayed with the three assays described above.
Recovery of gastrins from the column was >.
The mean value of the fasting samples obtained at 15 minutes and immediately before the meal was taken as the basal gastrin value.
Statistical analysis was performed by means of the Wilcoxon rank sum test for paired data.
The study was approved by the Western Infirmary Ethical Committee and each patient gave written informed consent.
Results
The triple anti- H pylori treatment regimen eradicated the infection in each subject.
This was confirmed by their 20 minute C urea breath test values (percentage of administered C urea excreted as C-CO 2 per mmol expired CO 2 ×kg body weight×100) which fell from a range of 60- 550 before treatment to 2–8 afterwards.
Eradication of H pylori lowered the median basal total immunoreactive gastrin concentration from 26 pmol/l (range 11–43) to 19 pmol/l (8–39)(p) representing a median fall of 20% (Fig 1).
This fall in basal gastrin was the result of a fall in G17 from 6 pmol/l (<) to <pmol/l (<)(p) representing a median fall of 40%.
The median basal G34 values were similar before (16 pmol/l, range 0–40) and after (16 pmol/l, range 0.36) eradication of H pylori when estimated by subtraction assay, and also similar before (15 pmol/l, 2–36) and after (10 pmol/l, 2–30) when assayed using antisera R526.
Eradication of H pylori also lowered the postprandial total immunoreactive gastrin concentration with the median 20 minute value falling from 59 pmol/l (38–114) to 33 pmol/l (19–88)(p), and representing a median fall of 43% (Fig 2).
This was again explained by a fall in the G17 concentration from 43 pmol/l (9–95) to 17 pmol/l (<)(p) representing amedian fall of 60%.
The median 20 minute postprandial G34 concentration was similar before (26 pmol/l, range 0–57) and after (21 pmol/l, 7–36) eradication of H pylori as determined by subtraction assay, and also similar before (13 pmol/l, 6–42) and after (15 pmol/l, 6–30) as measured by antisera R526.
In both the presence and absence of H pylori , the rise in total immunoreactive gastrin with eating was predominantly caused by an increase in G17 (Fig 3).
In the presence of H pylori , the median G17 concentration rose from a basal value of 6 pmol/l (<) to 43 pmol/l (9–95)(p) at 20 minute postprandially, and after eradication rose from <pmol/l (<) to 17 pmol/l (<)(p).
In the presence of H pylori , the median G34 concentration was 16 pmol/l (0–40) basally and 26 pmol/l (0–57) 20 minutes postprandially (p=0.2) as determined by subtraction assay, and 15 pmol/l (2–36) basally and 13 pmol/l (6–42) postprandially measured by antisera R526.
After eradication of H pylori , the median G34 was 16.5 pmol/l (0–36) basally compared with 21 pmol/l (5–36) postprandially (p=0.06) as determined by subtraction assay and 10 pmol/l (2–30) basally and 15 pmol/l (6–30) postprandially by antisera R526.
In the fasting state, G17 represented only 23% of the total immunoreactive gastrin in molar terms in the presence of H pylori and this fell to less than 10% after eradication of the infection.
In contrast, the 20 minute postprandial total immunoreactive gastrin consisted of 72% G17 in the presence of H pylori and 52% G17 after eradication.
Chromatographic analysis of the postprandial serum from the six patients indicated that G17 and G34 comprised more than 90% of the total immunoreactive gastrin detected by antisera R98 both before and after eradication of H pylori (Fig 4)(Table).
Only a minor contribution was made by component I and G14.
Further analysis of the eluate using all three antisera indicated that a minor contribution was made also by a N-terminal 1–13 of G17 identified by the GP168 antiserum.
This co-elutes with G14 (detected by R98)(Fig 5).
No other aberrent forms were observed.
Discussion
This study indicates that in duodenal ulcer patients circulating gastrin consists almost entirely of G17 and G34 in both the presence and absence of H pylori infection.
This is consistent with previous studies which have shown that more than 90% of gastrin in serum consists of G17 and G34 in both duodenal ulcer patients and healthy volunteers.
The current study also shows that the increased serum total immunoreactive gastrin in H pylori infection is entirely the result of an increase in G17, with no change in G34.
The former is mainly antral in origin, whereas G34 is preferentially released from the duodenum.
The selective increase in the form of gastrin produced by the antrum is consistent with the finding that H pylori infection predominantly affects this region of the stomach.
Our finding that fasting serum gastrin consists mainly of G34 is consistent with previous reports.
These earlier studies were performed before the recognition of H pylori and most of the patients included would have had the infection.
Our present study indicates that in the presence of H pylori infection, fasting serum gastrin consists of 77% G34 whereas in the absence of H pylori it consists almost exclusively of G34 (98%).
It is possible that re-examination of these patients at a later date when any persisting antral gastritis has resolved may indicate that fasting gastrin consists entirely of G34.
Our finding also confirms previous reports that postprandial serum gastrin consists of approximately equivalent concentrations of G17 and G34.
The ratio of G17:G34, however, is greater in the presence of the infection (72% G17) than in its absence (52%).
the change in the G17:G34 ratio as a result of H pylori infection is explained by the infection selectively increasing the G17 concentration.
It has previously been recognised that eating produces a more noticeable rise in G17 than in G34.
We found no statistically significant rise in G34 postprandially, either in the presence or absence of H pylori .
In contrast, there was a noticeable rise in G17 both before and after eradication of the infection.
Our finding is similar to that of Walker et al , who reported that the rise in gastrin with eating was solely the result of a rise in G17 in duodenal ulcer patients.
In an earlier study by Dockray and Taylor, however, a rise in both G17 and G34 was noted after eating in duodenal ulcer patients.
The reason for these different findings is unclear but may be related to the different forms of meal used.
Most investigators have observed that H pylori infection causes a greater percentage increase in the postprandial gastrin than fasting gastrin.
This can now be explained by the fact that H pylori causes a selective increase in G17, which is the form of hormone which rises most with eating.
Though H pylori also raises G17 several fold in the fasting state, this only causes a minor increase in fasting serum gastrin which consists predominantly of G34.
The mechanism by which H pylori infection stimulates the release of G17 is not known.
It was suggested by Levi et al that the ammonia produced by the organism's urease would prevent the suppression of antral gastrin release by luminal acid.
This seems unlikely, however, as earlier studies have shown that neither increasing, inhibiting, or completely suppressing H pylori urease activity in vivo changes the serum gastrin.
In addition,H pylori infection has been shown to change gastrin to a similar degree at acidic and neutral pH.
The time course of resolution of the hypergastrinaemia during antibacterial treatment indicates that it is more closely related to resolution of the antral gastritis than to suppression of bacterial urease activity.
It has been suggested that the processing of gastrin in duodenal ulcer patients may be altered and that aberrent forms of gastrin that are immunoreactive but not bioactive may circulate, thus obscuring any correlation between gastrin and gastric acid secretion.
Our present study clearly indicates that any contribution made by abnormal forms of gastrin is minimal and that the gastrin which is increased in the presence of H pylori infection is G17.
In view of the fact that eradication of H pylori infection noticeably lowers postprandial G17 concentrations, one would expect an accompanying decrease in meal stimulated acid secretion.
G17 and G34 are equipotent in molar terms with respect to stimulating acid secretion.
At one month after eradication of H pylori in duodenal ulcer patients we observed a more marked rise in postprandial pH consistent with a reduced acid response to the meal.
Using intragastric titration, however, Moss et al have been unable to show a fall in meal stimulated acid secretion after anti- H pylori treatment.
The lack of fall in acid secretion despite a considerable fall in biologically active gastrin could be explained by H pylori altering the parietal cell sensitivity to gastrin.
H pylori has been shown to produce a factor which inhibits parietal cells in vitro and hypochlorhydria may be a feature of the acute infection.
We have show, however, that there is no change in parietal cell sensitivity to gastrin after eradication of H pylori in duodenal ulcer patients.
The finding of our present study that eradication of H pylori reduces noticeably a biologically active form of gastrin, together with our previous inding that this is not accompanied by reduced parietal cell sensitivity to the hormone, strongly suggests that there should be an accompanying fall in gastrin mediated acid secretion.
The failure of studies to show this clearly is probably related to the technical difficulties involved in measuring meal stimulated acid secretion.
In vivo rectal inflammatory mediator changes with radiotherapy to the pelvis
Abstract
In vivo changes in the rectal values of eicosanoid inflammatory mediators induced by pelvic ratiotherapy were measured to study the pathophysiology of the early radiation bowel reaction.
Ten patients having pelvic radiotherapy, aged 57 to 78, had rectal dialysis.
Values of the eicosanoids leukotriene B 4 (LTB 4 ), thromboxane B 2 (TXB 2 ), and prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ) were measured before radiotherapy, at the end of radiotherapy, and at least four weeks after radiotherapy.
Values of LTB 2 rose with radiotherapy from 0.21 ng.mo -1 (median) to 1.14 ng.ml -1 (p=0.012); PGE 2 rose from 0.60 ng.ml -1 to 1.58 ng. ml -1 (p=0.038), and TXB 2 rose from 0.365 ng.ml -1 to 1.6 ng.ml -1 (p=0.005).
The rise in eicosanoid inflammatory mediators may have an important role in the pathophysiology of the early radiation bowel reaction.
The early radiation bowel reaction occurs in radiotherapy to the pelvis in up to 75% of patients treated.
This normal tissue injury is a limiting factor for radiotherapy dose.
The early reaction is associated with symptoms of diarrhoea and nausea and histologically is characterised by an inflammatory cell infiltrate, oedema, ulceration, epithelial cell loss, congestion, and nuclear damage.
The cellular mechanisms underlying this reaction are not clearly understood; they probably entail the triggering of inflammatory reactions by the release of reactive species generated by ionising radiation.
Eicosanoid inflammatory mediators include the oxidative products of arachidonic acid prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ), thromboxane A 2 (TXA 2 ), and leukotriene B 4 (LTB 4 ).
Eicosanoid mediators of inflammation are raised in animal models of radiation injury to the gut.
We have investigated the mechanism of the early radiation bowel reaction in vivo in humans by measuring changes in rectal dialysate values of PGE 2 , LTB 4 , and TXB 4 (the stable product of TXA 2 ).
Methods
DESIGN AND AIMS
The study was an open prospective study to investigate the in vivo effect of pelvic radiotherapy on rectal values of the eicosanoid inflammatory mediators PGE 2 , TXB 2 , and LTB 4 measured in rectal dialysates.
PATIENTS
Ten patients, nine men, one women were studied; all were receiving radical pelvic irradiation for bladder or prostatic cancer.
The study was approved by the Nottingham University Hospital Ethics Committee.
Patients gave written informed consent.
One other patient withdrew from the trial because of development of a painful rectum during radiotherapy.
The study was conducted in a subregional radiotherapy centre and an academic department of gastroenterology and therapeutics.
RADIOTHERAPY
Radiotherapy was given as clinically indicated using either a 6 MV or 8 MV linear accelerator.
The dose to the rectum was calculated from the planning computed tonography.
The maximum and minimum radiation dose to the rectum was calculated in the plane of the planning slice for each patient.
The dialysis technique sampled this area.
Radiotherapy for cancer of the bladder was typically given in two phases; phase I tumour dose of 40 Gray in 20 daily fractions over four weeks and Phase II 20 Gray in 10 daily fractions over two weeks, the different phases being distinguished by the fields used but always irradiating a similar volume of the rectum.
Radiotherapy for cancer of the prostate was also in two phases but with a 25 Gray phase two, in 15 fractions.
CLINICAL SCORING OF ABDOMINAL SYMPTOMS
A clinical score was derived at the time of each dialysis by adding scores for: abdominal pain (none=0, mild=1, moderate=2, severe=3); the stool frequency (1 or less per day=0, 2 to 3=1, 4 to 5=2, 6 to 9=3, 10 or more=4); the visible presence of blood in the stool (none=0, a trace=1, more than a trace=2); and the stool consistency (normal=0, semiformed=1, liquid=2).
All medicines being taken by patients were recorded.
RECTAL DIALYSIS
Patients had rectal dialysis at baseline and then at the end of the course of radiotherapy.
Six patients had a third dialysis after at least a further four weeks.
Rectal dialysis bags were made from inch Visking Tubing (Medicell) with a molecular weight cut off of 12000–14000 filled with Rheomacrodex (Pharmacia) as previously described.
Patients evacuated their bowels before rectal dialysis.
Dialysis bags were inserted per rectum for two hours and then removed.
A two hour dialysis time does not achieve equilibrium values of the eicosanoid measured but reflects epithelial values and has been used by other authors.
We did not discard stained dialysates.
The treatment time was chosen because patients are able to tolerate it well and variable early expulsion is avoided.
Dialysis was performed at the same time of day for each subject.
Unextracted samples were stored at -40°C and samples extracted into methanol were stoed at -20°C.
Samples from individual subjects were assayed together.
radioimmunoassay of eicosanoids
Dialysates were assayed by radioimmunoassay.
The assays were validated against high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) for the LTB 4 assay and against gas chromatography and mass spectrometry (GCMS) for the TXB 2 and PGE 2 assay.
LTB 4 
Samples were extracted for LTB 4 assay.
One ml of rectal dialysate sample was mixed with 1 ml of HPLC grade methanol (Fisons).
This precipitated out the dextran which was spun down at 3500 rpm at 4°C for 10 minutes.
Samples of each supernatant (1.67 ml) were taken and acidified to pH 4 with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma) using an autotitrator (Radiometer, Copenhagen).
Fifth µl of 3 H LTB 4 (approximately 1000 cpm, Amersham International) was added as a recovery standard and the sample further diluted with 2 ml of water at Ph 3.5.
Each sample was loaded onto a C8 reverse phase silica cartridge with metal frits (Bond-elute, Anachem) previously prepared with washes of methanol and water at pH 3.5; washed with 1 ml each of HPLC grade water, 10% ethanol and hexane, and finally eluted with 1 ml of methanol.
Extracted samples were stored in sealed polypropylene tubes at -20°C and subsequently assayed with a commercial radioimmunoassay (Amersham International).
The assay has a cross reactivity for 20-OH LTB 4 of 3.9%, with lower cross reactivity to other eicosanoids.
Samples were measured in comparison with extracted standards prepared in duplicate.
PGE 2 AND TXB 2 
PGE 2 and TXB 2 were assayed in diluted unextracted dialysates by radioimmunoassay as previously described.
The PGE 2 antibody (Sigma) has a cross reactivity of 51% to PGE 1 but not to other eicosanoids.
TXB 2 antibody was obtained from Levine.
The antibody has a cross reactivity of <to PGE 2 and other eicosanoids.
VALIDATION OF RADIOIMMUNOASSAYS
Healthy volunteer dialysate spiked with 1–5 ng.ml LTB 4 was assayed by both HPLC and radioimmunoassay.
Results correlated well (r= 0.92, p=0.015)(Fig 1).
Dialysates from patients with ulcerative colitis were assayed both by GCMS and by radioimmunoassays.
For PGE 2 (Fig 2) and TXB 2 (Fig 3), there was a good correlation for both radioimmunoassays: PGE 2 (r=0.944, p=0.001) and TXB 2 (r=0.736, p= 0.037).
In spiking experiments 10 ng.ml -1 of LTB 4 , PGE 2 , and TXB 2 were added to n=6 samples.
Separate unspiked aliquots of the same dialysate were also assayed.
The measured differences were not significantly different from the known addition: LTB 4 88% recovery (confidence intervals, 73–103%); TXB 2 108% recovery (82–134%); PGE 2 recovery 112% (91- 113%).
SENSITIVITY
Sensitivity was assessed as the threshold detection at 90% B/Bo for the individual radioimmunoassays.
The LTB 4 assay threshold was 0.2 ng.ml -1 and the PGE 2 assay threshold was 0.6 ng.ml -1 .
REPRODUCIBILITY OF ASSAYS
Paired specimens were measured in the same assay.
The intra assay variability of LTB 4 at 2.46 ng.ml -1 showed a standard deviation of 0.5 ng.ml -1 , coefficient of variation 20.13%.
PGE 2 assay showed an intra assay variability at 8.8 ng.ml -1 of standard deviation 0.92 ng.ml -1 , coefficient of variation 11.5%.
TXB 2 assay had an intra assay variability at mean 6.55 ng.ml -1 of 0.26 ng.ml -1 standard deviation, coefficient of variation 4.01%.
FAECAL COLORATION OF DIALYSATES
Coloration of the dialysates was assessed as light absorbency at 488 nm measured by spectrophotometry (Pye Unicam)(stained dialysates typically have a broad peak at this frequency).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The Wilcoxon signed rank test for matched pairs was used for statistical analysis.
Results
RADIATION DOSE TO THE RECTUM
The Table shows the dose ranges for the individual patients.
The minimum dose given to the rectum in the plane of the radiotherapy planning slice ranged from 18 to 50.3 Gray and the maximum dose ranged from 32.2 to 54.3 Gray.
CHANGES IN CLINICAL SCORES AND DRUG USAGE
The Table shows the drugs given and clinical scoring.
Six of the patients used an opiate or an anti-diarrhoeal preparation during the radiotherapy.
Clinical scoring rose by 1 (median, 0 to 4) points.
There tended to be a correlation between the clinical score at the end of radiotherapy and the values of PGE 2 (r=0.49, p= 0.076 Spearman), TXB 2 (r=0.47, p=0.085), and LTB 4 (r=0.37, p=0.15).
CHANGES IN DIALYSATE COLORATION
The colour of the dialysate was not significantly different between the three dialysis periods changing from an absorbency of 0.56 (median, range 0.2 to 4.56) at baseline to 1.1 (0.36 to 7.52, difference p=0.37 Wilcoxon) after radiotherapy and to 1.09 (0.08 to 5.06, difference from post radiotherapy dialysis p=0.12) four weeks after radiotherapy.
CHANGES IN INFLAMMATORY MEDIATORS AFTER RADIOTHERAPY
Radiotherapy caused rectal eicosanoid value to rise.
The finish of radiotherapy caused values to fall back towards baseline after four weeks.
Figure 4 shows the results for LTB 4 .
There is a consistent and significant rise in the LTB 4 from 0.21 (median, range 0.20 to 0.64) before radiotherapy to 1.14 (0.20 to 4.0) after radiotherapy (median rise 0.89 ng.ml -1 , p=0.012).
In those subjects studied again at four to eight weeks after radiotherapy LTB 4 values fell by 1 ng.ml -1 (0 to -1.6, p=0.028).
TXB 2 rose after radiotherapy from 0.36 ng.ml -1 (0.10 to 0.88) before radiotherapy to 1.6 (0.26 to 3.28, median rise 1.25 ng.ml -1 (p= 0.005)) and then fell four weeks after radiotherapy stopped by 1.33 ng.ml -1 (+0.05 to -3.01, p=0.028)(Fig 5).
PGE 2 rose after radiotherapy from 0.6 ng.ml -1 (0.60 to 2.4) to 1.58 ng.ml -1 (median 0.60 to 9.6) with a median rise of 0.44 ng.ml -1 , p=0.038) and then fell by -0.48 ng.ml -1 (median, range +0.92 to -1.56, p=0.173)(Fig 6).
Discussion
We have shown that rectal dialysate values of LTB 4 , TXB 2 , and PGE 2 rise after pelvic radiotherapy.
These mediators are probably responsible for pathological changes because it is known that these mediators can induce an inflammatory response by changing capillary permeability, inducing inflammatory cell infiltration, and activating the inflammatory cells.
Leukotriene B 4 causes neutrophil chemotaxis, adherence, aggregation, degranulation, and an oxidative burst.
Thromboxane causes adherence of neutrophils and vasoconstriction.
Prostaglandin E 2 promotes oedema formation and chloride secretion (however, it also has some anti-inflammatory action such as inhibiting neutrophil degranulation).
The changes in mediators tended to correlate with the clinical score.
This also supports the proposed pathogenical role.
We did not look at the histological correlate of the inflammatory mediators as for ethical reasons we did not perform sigmoidoscopy and rectal biopsy.
The mechanism of induction of eicosanoids may be either primary or secondary.
A trigger for leukotriene synthesis may be the formation by ionising radiation of lipid peroxides, which may in turn promote synthesis of leukotrienes by LTA 4 hydrolase.
Evidence supportive of this mechanism is that vitamin E, a fat soluble free radical scavenger, reduces the formation of fluid in a rat model of radiation enteritis.
Other biological effects of radiation may also be important.
Radiation induces nuclear regulating proteins, these are able to regulate cytokines, which may themselves have secondary effects on eicosanoids.
Radiation damage to the epithelium will lead to a breakdown of the mucosal barrier to chemoattractants such as FMLP, bacteria, and toxins, resulting in a secondary inflammatory response.
Radiation may induce diarrhoea by a non-inflammatory mechanism such as bile acid malabsorption (although only as a feature of late radiation damage to the small bowel).
Although we did not study any patients with severe symptoms, our findings seem to be clinically relevant.
Clinical scores rose in 6/10 patients, anti-diarrhoeal drugs were used in 3/10, and opiate containing preparation in a further five.
The changes in eicosanoids reflected the clinical symptoms; and we would expect them to be greater in severely symptomatic patients.
We do not know whether our findings of early changes in rectal dialysate eicosanoid values relate to the risk of late complications.
In pelvic radiotherapy the early rise in rectal leukotrienes, thromboxane, and prostaglandins has a potential treatment implication as inhibitors are available.
Aspirin will inhibit both thromboxane and prostaglandin synthesis; it has been shown to ameliorate the early radiation bowel reaction.
Steroids inhibit the synthesis of all the eicosanoids; they reduce late radiation induced fibrosis in experimental models.
Prostaglandins, however, may be radioprotective.
Therefore, selective inhibitors that inhibitleukotrienes and thromboxanes but not prostaglandins may be of value.
Drugs such as 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors and TXB 2 synthase inhibitors and receptor antagonists are becoming available.
Specific prophylactic inhibition of eicosanoid inflammatory mediators should be investigated as a way of limiting normal tissue injury to the rectum during pelvic radiotherapy.
Bursts of non-deglutitive simultaneous contractions may be a normal oesophageal motility pattern
Abstract
The frequency and characteristics of non-deglutitive motor activity of the human oesophagus and its relation to motility patterns in the antrum and upper small intestine were studied in 25 fasted healthy subjects.
Motility of the oesophagus, antrum, and upper small intestine was recorded by means of a manometric perfused catherter system.
The most striking non-deglutitive motility pattrn consisted of repetitive bursts of non-sequential pressure peaks occurring in the smooth muscle of the oesophagus.
The mean number of pressure peaks per burst was 2.7 (SD 2) waves with a mean amplitude of 19.5 (SD 9.9) mm Hg and a duration of 3.09 (SD 0.22) seconds.
The highest amplitude was 80 mm Hg and the longest burst consisted of 13 repetitive waves.
The bursts were recorded up to a distance of 15–20 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter.
Ninety five per cent of the bursts occurred during a 15 minute period before the onset of phase 3 of the migrating motor complex in the antral or upper small intestinal area, or during the lower oesophageal sphincter component of the migrating motor complex.
In conclusion, spontaneous bursts of non-sequential pressure peaks occured in the smooth muscle part of the human oesophagus in relation to phase 3 of the migrating motor complex.
They represent the oesophageal body component of phase 3 of the migrating motor complex and are not a sign of oesophageal motor abnormalities.
Non-deglutitive motor activity of the oesophagus is usually considered to be a sign of disordered motility.
There have been isolated reports indicating that spontaneous contractions unrelated to swallowing occasionally occur in the human oesophagus, particularly during phases 2 and 3 of the migrating motor complex.
These contractions are often non-peristaltic.
Recent studies with ambulatory pressure monitoring systems indicate that an appreciable number of non-peristaltic contractions are commonly found in apparently normal subjects.
Now that 24 hour pressure recordings are used increasingly for the investigation of disorders of oesophageal motility in patients with chest pain of undertermined origin, it is important to have a better understanding and a more precise characterisation of the non-deglutitive and non-peristaltic motor activity of the normal oesophagus.
Moreover, ambulatory oesophageal pressure recording systems have only two or three recording ports, so that the relation of oesophageal motility to motor activity elsewhere in the gastrointestinal tract cannot be established.
The aim of this study was to determine the frequency and characteristics of non-deglutitive motor activity inthe normal human oesophagus and to study the relation of this oesophageal motor activity to motility patterns elsewhere in the gastrointestinal tract.
Methods
Twenty five normal subjects (mean age 24 years, range 20 to 38 years; 20 men) were studied after an overnight fast of at least 10 hours.
All subjects belonged to a group of volunteers who had previously participated in other studies and who were known to have normal oesophageal motility.
All subjects were symptomfree, were not taking any drugs, and agreed to collaborate as volunteers.
The study was approved by the ethics committee of the university hospital.
Oesophageal pressures were measured with a low compliance perfused catheter system (Arndorfer Medical Specialists, Greendale, Wisconsin) containing six lumens.
The catheters (0.8 mm internal diameter, 1.5 mm outside diameter) were perfused at a rate of 0.6 ml/min.
Side openings measured pressures in the oesophagus at 5, 10, 15, and 20 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter.
This pressure was continuously monitored with a Dent sleeve and fundic pressure was also measured with a side opening 1 cm distal to the sleeve.
The pressure changes captured by external transducers were amplified (E 0333E-E 154E, Siemens, Elema, Sweden) and recorded on paper with a polygraph (Mingograph 82; Siemens).
Two carefully placed external electrodes (red dots, Ag/AgCl, 3m, Saint Paul, USA) recorded the electromyographic activity of the suprahyoid muscles, motor activity of the antrum, duodenum (15 cm distally to the antral recording site), and proximal jejunum (40 and 65 cm distally to the antral site) was also recorded simultaneously via a separate four lumen perfused catheter system.
Both tubes were introduced via the nose and the position of the tubes was checked with a fluoroscope.
The subjects were studied in the semirecumbent position and were not allowed to eat during the study.
Before starting the study, pressures were recorded for 30 minutes to check the correct functioning of the recording system and to allow the subjects to accommodate to the catheters.
Pressure tracings were analysed manually according to accepted criteria and by a specific computer program.
The first step in the analysis consisted of determining the deglutitive or non-deglutitive nature of all oesophageal pressure waves.
The various characteristics of the individual waves were analysed by the computer program.
Only pressure waves greater than the respiratory swing at that level were taken into account.
The amplitude was measured from the midrespiratory basal pressure level to the peak of the pressure wave.
The onset of the pressure wave was the point where the tangent of the sudden upstroke of the wave crossed the basal pressure.
The end of the wave was determined in a similar way.
A wave was considered to be peristaltic if the interval between the onset of two pressure waves, recorded at adjacent points 5 cm apart, was more than 0.5 seconds (corresponding to a progression velocity of less than 10 cm/s).
The lower oesophageal sphincter pressure was measured as the difference between the sleeve pressure and the fundic pressure.
Phasic contractions in the lower oesophageal sphincter, were considered to be present when resting pressure slowly but transiently increased to more than 50% of its basal value.
In the 10 subjects in whom antral-duodenal, and jejunal motilities were monitored simultaneously with the oesophageal recording, the different phases of the migrating motor complex were visually identified according to accepted criteria.
In these 10 subjects, it was determined whether the non-deglutitive pressure waves in the oesophageal body were temporally related to phase 3 of the migrating motor complex.
This relation was accepted when the non-deglutitive pressure waves occurred in a time window of 15 minutes before the start of phase in the antrum or proximal small bowel.
In the 15 subjects in whom antral and upper intestinal recordings were not available, the relation to phase 3 of the migrating motor complex could only be determined indirectly by the temporal relation of non-deglutitive pressure waves in the oesophageal body with the non-deglutitive plastic contractions of the lower oesophageal sphincter (this represented the sphincteric component of phase 3 of the migrating motor complex that occurred during the 10- 15 minute period preceding phase 3 in the antrum or proximal jejunum, as shown previously by others.)
Student's t test for paired data was used for statistical analyses.
Results are presented as means (SD).
Results
The total recording time analysed in the 25 subjects was 172 hours.
In each subject a minimum fo six hours of recording was analysed.
The mean deglutitive activity consisted of peristaltic pressure waves in 76.7 (SD 21.2) % of the dry swallows.
The pressure waves had a mean amplitude of 64 (37) mm Hg in the distal oesophagus (mean value for 5, 10, and 15 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter, and a duration of 3. (1.0) seconds.
The mean progression velocity was 3.9 (1.4) cm/s.
The mean resting pressure in the lower oesophageal sphincter during the first 30 minutes of the recording was 17.6 (6.3) mm Hg.
Non-deglutitive activity was found in the oesophageal body of 24 of the 25 normal subjects (Figure).
This consisted characteristically of bursts of repetitive non-sequential pressure peaks with a mean of 2.7 (2) waves per burst (range two to 13).
A burst was defined as a group of two or more contractions separated from preceding and following contractions by a short silent period of at least 10 seconds.
A total number of 242 bursts (654 waves) were recorded during 172 hours of recording.
The pressure waves during the bursts had an amplotude of 19.5 (9.9) mm Hg and a duration of 3.09 (0.22) seconds.
This amplitude, but not the duration, was significantly lower than the corresponding value for peristaltic contractions induced by dry swallows (p).
The highest amplitude was 80 mm Hg recorded at 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter.
The longest burst consisted of 13 repetitive waves.
The bursts were recorded in the lower oesophagus, up to a distance of 15 cm (70% of the bursts) and even 20 cm (40% of the bursts) above the lower oesophageal sphincter.
They usually occurred in clusters of two to five bursts over a six to 15 minute period; 98% of the bursts occurred together with non-deglutitive phasic contractions of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
In the 10 subjects in whom the gastrojejunal migrating motor complex was monitored on the oesophageal pressure days, 95% of the bursts occurred in the 15 minute time window before phase 3 of the migrating motor complex in the antrum or proximal intestine.
The bursts of repetitive, non-sequential pressure peaks were often interrupted by peristaltic contraction waves, which could be deglutitive or non-deglutitive in nature.
The bursts of oesophageal contractions were not related to inappropriate lower oesophageal sphincter relaxations.
In fact, none of the inappropriate relaxations of the lower oesophageal sphincter was accompanied by this type of non-deglutitive motor activity.
These bursts of repetitive non-sequential pressure peaks did not show any characteristics that would suggest a common cavity phenomenon; they were not preceded by a sudden small increase in base line oesophageal pressure occurring simultaneously at different levels of the oesophagus; and the shape of the individual waves, although occurring simultaneously at different levels of the oesophagus, was often different from one level to the other.
The bursts were more often present during periods of low swallowing rate (for example, sleep): the mean swallowing frequency during the period of non-deglutitive motor activity was 0.51 (0.29) swallows/min, which was significantly lower than the 0.99 (0.26) /min swallowing rate during the remainer of the recording period (p).
Discussion
It is generally believed that the normal oesophagus is only active in response to a stimulus (deglutition or oesophageal distension resulting in primary or secondary peristalsis) and that non-glutitive activity of the oesophageal body is mostly abnormal.
Also, the normal deglutitive response is generally considered to consist of a contraction wave that appears at manometry as a single or M shaped peak.
Repetitive waves — namely, two or more separate peaks in response to a single swallow are also generally believed to be abnormal.
This study shows that the motor activity of the normal human oesophagus is not limited to contraction waves in response to swallowing, but that non-deglutitive motility patterns occur in almost all normal gullets.
The most striking non-deglutitive motility pattern we found in this group of normal subjects consisted of repetitive bursts of non-sequential pressure peaks in the smooth muscle of the oesophagus.
These repetitive simultaneous pressure waves usually occurred together with the lower oesophageal sphincter component of the migrating motor complex.
Our findings confirm and extend previous reports on the occasional occurrence of single or repetitive pressure waves unrelated to swallowing during phases2 and 3 of the gastroduodenal migrating motor complex.
The non-deglutitive motility pattern usually occurred when the subject was lying down quietly and relaxed and was swallowing infrequently.
It may well be the reason why this motility pattern has previously attracted so little attention.
During conventional manometric studies of oesophageal motility, the patient is asked to swallow at regular intervals to record deglutitive responses in the lower oesophageal sphincter and oesophageal body.
This situation is different from the condition in which the present studies were performed and in which pressures were recorded over long periods, with the patient not being asked to take swallows.
The clinical importance of the finding, therefore, lies in the interpretation of 24 hour pressure recordings in ambulatory patients.
The circumstances in which part of these 24 hour studies are performed closely resemble the circumstances in which our studies were carried out.
According to our data, non-deglutitive repetitive simultaneous pressure waves may occur as a normal oesophageal motor pattern.
This has to be taken into account when determining reference values for 24 hour ambulatory manometry.
These findings also have important implications for the analysis of prolonged motility recordings in patients with non-cardiac chest pain: repetitive simultaneous pressure waves occurring at the time of an attack of chest pain, do not necessarily indicate that the pain was accompanied by disorders of oesophageal motility, or that such disorders were the cause of the chest pain.
The present studies show that the migrating motor complex not only has a lower oesophageal sphincter component, but also an oesophageal body component.
As this oesophageal motor activity is non-peristaltic in nature, it probably doies not have a function in clearing the oesophageal lumen from residual contents or refluxed materials.
This is by contrast with phase 3 in the antrum and small intestine, which was shown to have a cleaning, ‘housekeeper’ function.
Although simultaneous oesophageal pH measurements were not done, the bursts of non-deglutitive contractions were not preceded by a small pressure plateau or other signs of a common cavity phenomenon.
Therefore, it is unlikely that reflux of acid or gas had occurred just before the onset of the contractile activity.
The bursts almost always occurred together with the lower oesophageal sphincter component of phase 3 of the migrating motor complex when the resting pressure in the sphincter is high.
Moreover, transient lower oesophageal sphincter relaxations, which are a prerequisite for reflux to occur in the presence of a normal resting pressure of the sphincter, were never seen before or during the non-deglutitive motor activity.
Audit of the role of oesophageal manometry in clinical practice
Abstract
This oesophageal laboratory serves a population of 1.5 million.
The study aimed to review referral patterns and assess the cost effectiveness of oesophageal manometry in clinical practice.
All 276 consecutive manometry studies performed between 1988 and 1991 were reviewed.
Reasons for referral in the 268 first referrals were: dysphagia 50.4%, non-cardiac chest pain 23.1%, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 14.2%, connective tissue disease 11.2%, and ‘other’ 1.1%.
Manometry was normal in 49.3%, showed achalasia in 17.9%, diffuse oesophageal spasm in 13.4%, connective tissue disease in 7.8%, hypertensive lower oesophageal sphincter in 4.5%, nutcracker oesophagus in 2.6%, and ‘other’ in 4.5%.
A positive diagnosis was significantly more common if dysphagia was the reason for referral (65.9% v 35.3%, p).
A positive diagnosis was established in 60% of patients referred with connective tissue disease, 30.6% with non-cardiac chest pain, and 21.1% with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease.
A positive diagnosis was significantly more common in connective tissue disease when symptoms were present (85% v 10%, p).
Management was changed in 48.9% of all patients because of manometry findings.
The cost of each oesophageal manometry study was calculated to be £63.00: every change in patient management cost £129.00.
In conclusion, oesophageal manometry changed management in over 20% of patients with non-cardiac chest pain or gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and in over 60% of those with dysphagia.
It is, therefore, a useful and cost effective test in patients with these symptoms.
As recently as 1990 it was stated that the use of oesphageal manometry in America was governed more by financial reimbursement than by clinical usefulness.
It has also been suggested that manometry is only worthwhile in the investigation of patients with non-cardiac chest pain.
There are few reports of the cost effectiveness of manometry, but in one study published 10 years ago, Meshkinpour et al concluded that the cost of each change in patient management was $6482.00.
Our oesophageal aboratory serves a population of 1.5 million people and is sited in a hospital which contains the regional thoracic surgery unit and the regional medical cardiology centre.
New computerised equipment for performing oesophageal manometry was purchased in 1988.
The purpose of this study was to audit its clinical usefulness in patient management.
Patients and methods
Between 1988 and 1991 our laboratory performed 276 oesophageal motility studies on 268 patients.
All 268 first referrals were reviewed using a copy of the manometry report held in the laboratory and the patients' clinical notes.
Reasons for referral were classified as, dysphagia, non-cardiac chest pain, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, connective tissue disease, and other.
The referral source was classified as either surgical, which included the regional thoracic surgery unit, or medical, which included the regional medical cardiology centre.
Water perfused manometry was performed using a low compliance capillary infusion pump (Arndorfer Inc, USA) and an eight channel polyvinyl catheter with a 6 cm Dent sleeve (Arndorfer Inc, USA).
Individual channels were connected to external transducers (Medex Inc) and their analogue output was converted to a digital signal using a Digitrapper (Synectics Medical, England).
This was displayed and stored on an IBM compatible computer (PC 1640, Amstrad Inc).
Pressures were recorded from 1 cm below the Dent sleeve (gastric), the Dent sleeve (lower esophageal sphincter pressure), and in the oesophagus 2 cm, 5 cm, 8 cm, and 14 cm above the upper border of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
A minimum of 10, 5 ml boluses of water were given at 30 second intervals.
Edrophonium was given to the first 21 patients referred with non-cardiac chest pain.
This practice was stopped after review indicated that it was not of diagnostic value in our hands.
The criteria used for manometric diagnosis were those recommended by Castell et al .
Achalasia was defined as failure of relaxation of a hypertensive or normal lower oesophageal sphincter with absent peristalsis in the oesophageal body.
Diffuse oesophageal spasm was defined as the presence of greater than 10% but less than 100% simultaneous contractions.
Hypertensive lower oesophageal sphincter was defined as a resting lower oesophageal sphincter pressure >mm Hg with normal relaxation and normal peristaltic progression.
Nutcracker oesophagus was defined as high amplitude contractions (mean >mm Hg) in the distal oesophagus (channels 2 cm and 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter combined and divided by two), which may be prolonged (mean >sec) but with normal peristaltic progression.
Patients were regarded as having manometric results in keeping with connective tissue disease if they exhibited low amplitude waves (<mm Hg) and decreased peristalsis that was most noticeable in the distal two thirds of the oesophagus.
From the clinical notes and manometry report it was determined whether there had been a change of diagnosis, a confirmation of diagnosis, or a change in management.
A change of diagnosis was regarded as one in which manometry resulted in a diagnosis that had not previously been made by other investigations even if clinically suspected — for example a diagnosis of nutcracker oesophagus in a patient presenting with non-cardiac chest pain.
A confirmed diagnosis was one in which manometry was necessary for confirmation of a diagnosis before considering treatment — for example, achalasia suspected on barium meal.
A change in management was recorded if manometry changed either medical or surgical treatment.
The cost of each study was calculated with the advice of a health economist and a hospital finance officer.
It was based on costs of medical and nursing staff, depreciation of equipment, and the expenses of consumables, administration, and overheads.
The cost per alteration in management was calculated to be 
Results
There were 268 first referrals during the four year period.
A total of 119 of these patients were male, the mean age was 50.9 years, and the age range was 12–82 years.
Other upper gastrointestinal investigations had been performed before manometry in most patients.
Upper gastroinintestinal endoscopy had been performed in 146 patients (54%), barium swallow in 35 (13%), and both investigations in 60 patients (22%).
Of the remaining 27 patients, eight had been referred with non-cardiac chest pain after negative cardiac investigations and 19 with suspected connective tissue involvement of the oesophagus.
Oesophageal manometry was successful in all but six cases.
In two cases intubation failed and in four there was failure to cross the lower oesophageal sphincter.
In three of these cases referred with a probable diagnosis of achalasia, however, the absence of peristalsis in the body of the oesophagus helped to confirm the diagnosis.
The reasons for referral were: dysphagia (50.4%), non-cardiac chest pain (23.1%), gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (14.2%), connective tissue disease (11.2%), and other (1.1%)(Figure).
The numbers of referrals from physicians and surgeons were almost identical (133 v 135).
The results of manometry were, normal 49.3%, achalasia 17.9%, diffuse oesophageal spasm 13.4%, connective tissue disease 7.8%, hypertensive lower oesophageal sphincter 4.5%, nutcracker oesophagus 2.6%, and other 4.5% (Table I).
There were significantly more cases of achalasia in the patients referred by a surgeon (22.2% v 13.5%, p) and significantly more cases of connective tissue disease among those referred by a physician (12.0% v 3.7%, p).
A positive diagnosis was made in 50.7% of referrals.
This was significantly more common when dysphagia was the reason for referral (65.9% v 35.3%, p).
A positive diagnosis was established in 60% referred with connective tissue disease, 30.6% with non-cardiac chest pain, and 21.1% with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease.
When a patient was referred with suspected connective tissue disease, a positive diagnosis was significantly more common in the presence of oesophageal symptoms (85% v 10%, p).
Overall, there was a change in diagnosis in 25% (67 patients).
Of these 67 patients, most were cases of diffuse oesophageal spasm or hypertensive lower oesophageal sphincter.
In all cases the final diagnosis had not been suggested before manometry.
This included six patients in whom achalasia had been suspected on the basis of barium studies but in whom manometry was normal (see Table II).
Confirmation of diagnosis was made in 64 patients (23.9%) and there was a specific management change in 131 patients (48.9%).
There was no significant difference in the number of changes in management when referrals from physicians and surgeons were compared (46.6% v 51.1%, NS).
Details of the costing are shown in Table III.
The capital cost of our equipment was £17029.00.
Capital costs are expressed as annual equivalents assuming a seven year lifespan for the equipment and a 5% discount rate.
These assumptions represent the prevailing convention for expressing capital costs in the National Health Service.
The annual equivalent for our equipment was £2942.94, and with 69 studies per annum the cost per study was £42.65.
The reporting of manometry is performed by a research registrar who is under the supervision of a consultant gastroenterologist.
There is a period of training in which joint reporting by a consultant and a registrar occurs for the first 50 studies.
The costing of both staff is based on their salaries and allows for National Insurance contributions and superannuation.
Nursing time was estimated by the sister to be one hour and this allows for preparation, performance of the test, and cleaning up.
No support staff were required because the computer generates its own report, and since most reports were sent by internal mail, administrative costs were minimal.
Overheads were an estimate based on floor space and include heating, lighting, and porterage.
A detailed list of consumables is given.
At a cost of £63.00 per study the overall cost per change in management was £129.00.
Discussion
Despite the increasingly widespread use of oesophageal manometry, few studies have assessed its benefit to patient management.
In a cost-benefit analysis in 1982, Meshkinpour et al calculated the cost per change in management to be $6482.00.
Despite this high figure they concluded that oesophageal manometry was beneficial in patients with chest pain, dysphagia, and those in whom achalasia is suspected.
The purpose of this study was to determine the cost-effectiveness of oesophageal manometry in our laboratory.
The patterns of referral to our laboratory were similar to those experienced elsewhere, except for a significant number of rheumatology patients, with 11.2% of all patients referred for assessment of suspected connective tissue disease.
In keeping with other studies of this nature, a manometric abnormality was significantly more common when dysphagia was the reason for referral.
Our finding that only one in 10 asymptomatic patients with know connective tissue disease had a manometric abnormality is at variance with previous studies in patients with scleroderma and mixed connective tissue disease.
This may indicate early referral by our rheumatology department in keeping with the high percentage of these patients in our study.
The finding of a manometric abnormality in 30.6% of patients with non-cardiac chest pain is in keeping with other studies, which have shown an 18–58% prevalence.
Long term follow up of these patients has shown that although they have similar mortality to an age matched control group, they have increased morbidity.
It has also been observed that although these patients continue to experience chest pain, the knowledge that the oesophagus is the source of this reduces their perception of the disability and their requests to see a physician.
In view of this influence on patient management, a positive diagnosis of 30.6% in patients with non-cardiac chest pain justifies its use.
The source of referral was not shown to influence the rate of change of management, which is a similar finding to that of Shoenut et al .
The purpose of this study was to assess cost effectiveness of oesophageal manometry.
At a cost of £129.00 per change in management, it compares favourably with other specialist investigations.
In a study assessing the cost effectiveness of investigations for dysphagia, Richter estimated the cost per change in management to be $1148.00 for endoscopy and $1099.00 for radiology.
Although our cost-benefit figure differs from that of Meshkinpour et al by a factor of 10, it is nearer the finding of Owen et al who estimated a cost of £427.00 per change in diagnosis.
There are several factors which explain the difference in cost between our study and that of Meshkinpour et al , the most significant factor being the make-up of the patient populations.
In Meshkinpour's study all patients had manometry performed routinely in addition to an oesophagogram, whereas in our study most patients were referred for manometry only when prior investigations had failed to identify the cause of their symptoms.
Patient selection, therefore, affected their rate of positive diagnosis, which was only 14% compared with 50.7% in our study.
Secondly, Meshkinpour did not regard confirmation of a diagnosis as influencing patient management whereas we felt that it was of value in certain situation such as in patients with suspected achalasia before myotomy.
Thirdly, in the study by Meshkinpour over a third of the patients were referred with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease compared with 14.2% in our study, and it was this patient population which yielded the smallest number of positive diagnoses in our experience.
Finally, Meshkinpour's figures were calculated on the basis of hospital charges for manometry, whereas our figure was derived from actual costs.
Even a decade ago their charge was significantly higher than our calculated cost.
In conclusion, oesophageal manometry changed management in over 20% of patients with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and non-cardiac chest pain and in over 60% of patients with dysphagia.
The overall cost per alteration in management was £129.00.
It is, therefore, a useful and cost effective test in the management of patients with these symptoms.
Comparison of leukocyte excretion and blood loss in inflammatory disease of the bowel
Abstract
Clinical relapse of inflammatory bowel disease is characterised by increased neutrophil migration into the intestine.
The site of the neutrophil chemoattractant(s), whether luminal or mucosal, may be important since, on contact with a chemoattractant, neutrophils cause indiscriminate damage to their immediate surroundings by generating reactive oxygen species and by lysosomal enzyme release.
If this happens within the mucosa, inflammation should correlate significantly with tissue damage as assessed by bleeding, but if it occurs within the intestinal lumen, the inflammation would be disproportionately greater than the bleeding such as is seen in classical exudation.
Intestinal inflammation and bleeding were quantitated with the simultaneous use of indium-111 labelled neutrophils (four day faecal excretion of indium-111) and chromium-51 labelled red cells in patients with ulcerative colitis (n=12), Crohn's disease (n=15), and NSAID induced enteropathy (n=34).
Intestinal inflammation and blood loss correlated significantly (Spearman) in patients with ulcerative colitis (20.3% v 6.5 ml/d (median) r: 9–85, p) and NSAD enteropathy (1.6% v 1.9 ml/d, r: 0.60, p) but not in Crohn's disease (17.0% v 2.1 ml/d, r: 0.38, p).
For a given indium-111 excretion, patients with ulcerative colitis had significantly greater (p) blood loss than patients with Crohn's disease.
These results suggest that the predominant site of neutrophil chemoattractants may be within the mucosa in ulcerative colitis and NSAID enteropathy and within the lumen in Crohn's disease.
The study of humoral anc cellular immunopathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease has received much interest.
The most characteristic feature of clinical relapse is the increased flux of neutrophils into the intestine.
Understanding the movement of neutrophils and the mechanisms through which they mediate tissue injury is fundamental to elucidating the pathogenesis of relapse.
Although controversial, it now seems likely that the striking ‘in vitro’ findings of reduced neutrophil mobilisation and altered function in patients with inflammatory bowel disease are not intrinsic to the cell but reflect neutrophil conditioning by different inflammatory milieu.
Study of indium-111 labelled neutrophils shows close similarities between ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease in respect of the quantity and kinetics of neutrophil migration from blood to lumen across the intestinal mucosa.
The question then arises as to the site and anture of the neutrophil chemoattractant.
The latter has been extensively studied by Stenson, who suggested a two stage pathogenic framework for inflammatory bowel disease.
He proposes that there is an as yet unknown triggering event which initiates an early neutrophil influx.
Subsequent to this there is an amplified second phase of neutrophil chemotaxis which is much greater than the original.
There is compelling evidence to suggest that the second amplification stage is mediated by leukotriene B 4 , a lipo-oxygenase product released by the neutrophils themselves.
It is clear that whatever the primary or secondary chemoattractant is the neutrophils destined for it will respond in a predictable fashion.
On contact with the chemoattractant they form oxygen free radical species and there is release of lysosomal enzymes after phagocytosis.
Both of these mechanisms may destroy the chemoattractant but will also cause unavoidable non-specific damage in the immediate vicinity of the neutrophil.
The site of neutrophil chemoattractants may therefore be an important determinator of the secondary damage (as assessed by blood or protein loss) caused by neutrophils.
This is particularly well demonstrated in the experimental animal where the emigration of neutrophils through the intestinal mucosa in response to a luminal chemoattractand does not cause tissue damage while intracutaneous inoculation of the same substance does.
In an attempt to localise, in vivo, the site of neutrophil chemoattractants in patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, we used a dual isotope method to quantitate simultaneously intestinal inflammation and blood loss.
We argued from the above that the two should correlate closely if the neutrophils are seeking a mucosal chemoattractant, less so if the chemoattractant is in the lumen, in which case the inflammation should be disproportionally greater than the blood loss.
Patients on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) acted as a control group.
There is some evidence to suggest that the neutrophil chemoattractant in NSAID enteropathy may be a metronidazole sensitive microbe.
Subjects and methods
Patients were recruited from gastroenterology and rheumatology outpatient clinics at Northwick Park Hospital.
All patients gave fully informed consent to the studies which were approved by the Harrow Health Authority Ethical Committee.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
Twelve patients with ulcerative colitis (eight pancolitis and four left sided colitis; age 22–70 years; five were on sulphasalazine and two on prednisolone 10 and 30 mg) and 15 patients with Crohn's disease (one of whom had undergone ileal resection)(six ileal and pancolitis, one left sided colitis, six ileal and two small intestinal; age 18–70 years; 13 were on no treatment, one on 10 mg prednisolone and one on sulphasalazine) were studied.
There were no significant differences in haemoglobin; white cell and platelet counts; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; or clinical disease activity between patients with ulcerative volitis and those with Crohn's disease.
After the indium-111 and 51-chromium excretion studies all patients had a full colonoscopy or double contrast barium enema to confirm the diagnosis and to evaluate the extent of disease.
PATIENTS WITH RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
Thirty four patients with rheumatoid arthritis were studied.
The patients had been on treatment for more than six months and although the type of NSAID varied, all had been established on one drug continuously for over six weeks.
Twenty patients were on concomitant, second line agents (nine colchinine, six gold im, five penicillamine); but we have previously shown that these drugs do not affect the frequency or severity of the small intestinal inflammation caused by NSAIDs.
INDIUM LABELLING STUDIES
An indwelling catheter was placed in an anticubital vein.
Six millilitres of blood were drawn into a syringe containing 11 ml of acid citrate dextrose (National Institutes of Health formula A), dispensed into two sterile polythene tubes, and allowed to sediment for one hour at room temperature.
The supernatant was removed and centrifuged at 100 g for five minutes.
The resultant supernatant was removed immediately and respun at 300 g to yield a cell free plasma.
The pellet from the 100 g centrifugation was resuspended and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature in 0.1 HEPES saline buffer (pH 7.4) containing 20 mM HEPES in 0.8% sodium chloride, 4.4 mM tropolone and 300 µCi (11 MBq) indium-111 chloride (Amersham International).
Five millilitres of cell free plasma were added to the cell suspension and centrifuged at 100 g for five minutes.
The suspension containing the unlabelled indium-111 was poured off and the labelled cells were resuspended in 6 ml of cell-free plasma.
Five millilitres (7–9 MBq) were injected and the rest used for standards.
The labelling efficiency by this technique averages 84% (range 74–93%).
The leukocytes maintain their integrity and function during this procedure.
Abdominal scintigrams were obtained at one to four hours and 20 hours after injection of the labelled cells, to localise the site and extent of disease using an IGE 400 AT gamma camera with a STAR computer at the appropriate channel settings.
Individual faecal excretions were collected over a four day period in 500 ml polythene clip top containers.
Standards (0.1 ml aliquots of the labelled cells) were made up to 50 ml with water and distributed over a fixed amount of filter paper in an identical container.
Both samples and standard were individually counted in a high resolution bulk sample counter as previously described.
Counts were made for 20 seconds, which allows the measurement of 0.01% of the injected dose with a counting accuracy of 4%.
Each count was then corrected for any chromium-51 crossover into the indium-111 channel which is negitable if performed on completion of the study.
Normal excretion values had been obtained in patients with the irritable bowel syndrome (n=14) who excreted 0.5% (mean) with an upper limit of normal at 1%.
BLOOD LOSS STUDIES
At the same time as blood was obtained for leukocyte labelling, 10 ml were dispensed into 40 ml of citrate-phosphate-dextrose solution containing trisodium citrate dihydrate 3 (w/v); sodium dihydrogen phosphate 0.015 (w/v); dextrose 0.2 (w/v) at pH of 6.9.
The solution was centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 minutes, the supernatant was discarded and 1.5 µCi/kg body weight of disodium (51) chromate was added dropwise to the pellet of red cells while mixing gently.
The pellet was allowed to stand at room temperature for 15 minutes to allow binding to occur and unbound 51-chromium was then removed by washing with 0.9% saline.
The final pellet was made up to 10 ml with saline before injection into the patient.
Individual faecal excretions were made for five days in conjunction with the indium-111 neutrophil studies.
Standards were made up by drawing 5 ml of venous blood daily for four days after injection of the labelled red cells.
Four ml were distributed over a fixed amount of filter paper in a faecal collection container.
Once the indium-111 counting was completed the samples were stored for four to six weeks to allow decay of the indium-111.
Each count was corrected for any possible spillover of residual indium-111.
The chromium-51 activity in the stools was correlated with the chromium-51 activity in blood from the previous day which allows quantitation of intestinal blood lodd.
The upper normal limit of intestinal blood loss is 1.0 ml/ day.
Using a 300 µCi (11 MBq) injection of indium-111 and a 100 µCi (4 MBq) injection of chromium-51 the estimated radiation dose received by the patient during these studies is 7.2 milli Sieverts (effective dose equivalent).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Wilcoxon's rank sum test was used for non-parametric data to analyse the mean values, which are given as median and interquartile range.
Spearman's rank correlation coefficient was used to correlate between inflammation and bleeding.
The sign test was used to assess the differences in red cell loss (using the square root data) between patients with ulcerative colitis and those with Crohn's disease for a given level of inflammation.
Results
The Table shows that there was no significant difference in the four day faecal excretion of indium-111 between patients with ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease.
Figure 1 shows that there is a significant correlation between the inflammation and blood loss in patients with ulcerative colitis (r: 0.85, p(two sided test)) but not in those with Crohn's disease (r: 0.38, p).
At a given faecal excretion of indium-111 (% dose) patients with ulcerative colitis have significantly greater blood loss (p) than patients with Crohn's disease.
When patients with small and large bowel Crohn's disease were analysed separately there was no significant difference between the faecal excretion of indium-111 leukocytes and chromium 51 red cells, and the lack of significant correlation between the two parameters was evident in both subgroups (small bowel Crohn's (r=-0.08, p=0.80) and large bowel Crohn's (r=0.39, p=0.30)).
Moreover, for a given faecal excretion of indium-111, patients with both small and large bowel Crohn's disease bleed significantly (p) less than patients with ulcerative colitis.
The Table shows that patients on NSAIDs hadsignificantly less inflammation than patients with inflammatory bowel disease but the blood loss was similar to that of patients with Crohn's disease.
Figure 2 shows that there is a significant correlation (r: 0.60, p) between inflammation and blood loss in patients taking NSAIDs.
Discussion
The techniques of indium-111 labelled neutrophils and chromium-51 red cells are well described and are accurate, specific, and sensitive methods for quantitating intestinal inflammation and blood loss.
The indium-111 leukocyte technique is particularly suitable for the present study since it utilises the homing properties of neutrophils in response to specific chemoattractants.
Its simultaneous use with labelled red cells shows the specificity of the technique and the selectivity of neutrophil migration to the intestine in these disorders.
Thus, as neutrophils are normal constituents of blood it would seem possible that the faecal excretion of indium-111 simply reflected non-specific intestinal bleeding or oozing (for example, vascular injury due to eroding ulcers).
If this was indeed the case, then each 1% of injected neutrophils excreted in faeces should be associated with equivalent blood loss.
However, 1% of the circulating blood volume in an average person (five litres) is 50 ml.
Clearly, the excretion of the neutrophils is considerably greater than could be accounted for simply by bleeding.
Of the various neutrophil functions — namely adherence, aggregation, orientation, locomotion, and chemotaxis — few are better defined and understood than the sequence of events when the neurtophil comes into contact with a chemoattractant.
On contact free radical species are generated via nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphage linked oxidase, flavoprotins, cytochrome b, and myeloperoxidase.
Concomitant phagocytosis internalises the chemoattractant for further degradation with subsequent lysosomal enzyme release.
Both mechanisms, however, cause indiscriminate damage in the immediate vicinity fo the neutrophil.
The idea that damage relates to the localisation of the chemoattractant, whether mucosal or luminal, is supported by data in the experimental animal.2
Although the pathogenesis of the three disorders is uncertain, that of NSAID enteropathy is probably best understood.
NSAIDs cause direct cellular damage during drug absorption by several interacting actions on intermediary metabolism.
The mucosa is further compromised because of the effect of NSAIDs on cyclo-oxygenase, effectively preventing the production of reparative prostaglandins.
Damaged intercellular junctions allow increased permeation of luminal substances, which by itself seems to be insufficient to elicit detectable neutrophil chemoattraction.
Indeed inflammation is only consistently evident after six months of NSAID ingestion and may be due to a metronidazole sensitive microbe.
The driving force for inflammation then is a combination of drug and luminal induced mucosal damage.
Although not directly comparable (because of the different range of indium-111 faecal excretion) it seems that there is similar blood loss in NSAID treated patients and patients with Crohn's disease, although the inflammatory activity was 10 fold higher in the latter.
Combined with the rather weak correlation between inflammation and bleeding (r: 0.60), this suggests that while most of the neutrophils are seeking a mucosal signal, some may also be destined for the lumen in NSAID induced enteropathy.
In inflammatory bowel disease the initial or predisposing event is unknown.
The relapse, however, may be due to a chemoattractant with secondary amplification by local neutrophil leukotriene production and it is of note that twice as many leukotrienes are found in ulcerative colitis mucosa than in Crohn's disease.
The different results obtained in this study in patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease agrees with many clinical and experimental observations.
It confirms the clinical dictum that patients with ulcerative colitis often present with a greater degree of blood loss than patients with Crohn's disease, and that this is not simply a matter of being concealed (or occult) in Crohn's disease.
The data are consistent with detailed histopathological assessment showing that the mucosal neutrophils in ulcerative colitis are activated and show ultrastructural evidence of phagocytosis and granular extrusion.
In Crohn's disease, however, where the mononuclear cell infiltrate is both transmural and patchy, the neutrophils are mainly centred around ulcers and show little evidence of the activation that occurs on contact with a chemoattractant.
The prominence of a luminal neutrophil chemoattractant in active Crohn's disease may partly explain the observation that treatments directed towards altering the luminal milieu (elemental diets, total parentral nutrition, and diversion surgery) are consistently as effective for active Crohn's disease as they are ineffective for patients with ulcerative colitis.
Luminal factors also seem to be important in the recurrence of disease after surgery.
The precise nature of neutrophil chemoattractants in these disorders is unknown and they could be of a diverse nature including microbial, chemical (including prostanoids) or indeed in ulcerative colitis the damaged colonocytes themselves.
In conclusion, the acute inflammatory infiltrate and bleeding go hand in hand in active ulcerative colitis and in patients taking NSAIDs, suggesting that the main neutrophil chemoattractant(s) is within the mucosa.
In Crohn's disease there is disproportionally greater inflammation than blood loss and the lack of correlation between the two suggests that the predominant site of the chemoattractants is within the gut lumen.
An audit of restorative proctocolectomy
Abstract
A total of 168 restorative proctocolectomies have been performed without mortality during the past nine years.
Morbidity from pelvic sepsis (12%), ileoanal stricture (15%), and pouch related fistulas (16%) have become less with increasing experience of the operation.
Pouch excision, which occurred in 30% of the first 50 patients was undertaken in only 4% in the last 68 patients.
Despite this, intetinal obstruction (18%) continues to complicate the operation.
We have abandoned restorative proctocolectomy after failed ileorectal anastomosis in patients with slow transit constipation as half have now requested pouch excision because of poor results.
Failure to identify Crohn's disease continues to influence the outcome: in 10 patients now known to have Crohn's disease six developed post operative fistulas, three that required pouch excision.
Sexual impairment has occurred in three male patients (4%).
Ten women had children after operation, eight uncomplicated baginal deliveries occurred without impaired continence.
Seven of nine patients over 60 years of age have had a successful outcome.
Our data also indicate that the operation may be justified in distal disease if urgency is socially inconvenient.
Frequency of defaecation is usually less than three per 24 hours in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis but remains variable in those with ulcerative colitis.
Restorative proctocolectomy is a useful operation for ulcerative colitis, familial adenomatous polyposis, and some diseases where colonic function is severely disturbed.
The aim of the operation is to ablate the diseased bowel while preserving normal function of the anal sphincter.
Methods
EVOLUTION OF STANDARD TECHNIQUE
We have used resorative proctocolectomy for nine years, initially with a modest annual operation rate but as confidence has grown and the indications for the operation seemed to have expanded, so the frequency of operation has increased (1984, 4; 1985, 9; 1986, 16; 1987, 21; 1988, 24; 1989, 22; 1990, 24; 1991, 30; so far in 1992, 18).
Indications for restorative proctocolectomy now include not only ulcerative colitis and familial adenomatous polyposis but high grade dysplasia, megacolon constipation, and certain cases of distal colitis.
In the first 18 cases the lower third of the rectum was retained and an extensive anal mucosectomy was performed with a sutured pouch (most being of the double limb J variety) at the dentate line.
This procedure resulted in considerable damage to the sphincter and was replaced by a technique of abdominal mucosectomy and sutured ileoanastomosis for the next 58 operations.
With an intra-anal sutured ileoanal anastomosis, mesenteric vascular division was required to deliver the apex of the pouch to the dentate line in 24 of the first 76 (32%) cases.
With increasing confidence of low sutured anastomosis, loop ileostomy has been dispensed with in selected cases (well nourished patients with no steroid medication and with no technical difficulties in the construction of the anastomosis).
By 1988 we had begun to adopt the double stapling technique for ileoanal anastomosis (anal transection with a transverse linear stapler: RL30 (Ethicon) and the end to end circular stapler with detachable anvil: CEEA (Autosuture)), incorporating a stapling technique (linear staple cutter PLC 75 (Ehicon)) for pouch construction.
In most cases the ileoanal anastomosis lies at the top of the anal columns and hence the anal transition zone is retained; however, in patients with polyposis we usually perform a mucosectomy and a sutured anastomosis at the denate line.
After a trial of loop ileostomy in totally stapled restorative proctocolectomy loop ileostom is now only used in selected cases (four in the last 18 cases after closure of the trial).
Rectal excision was originally performed keeping close to the bowel and preserving the superior haemorrhoidal vessels (n=29).
Thereafter all rectal excisions have included the mesorectum, care being taken at the pelvic brim to identify and preserve the pelvic nerves and not to enter Dennonvilliers fascia during the anterior rectal dissection.
Results
PATIENTS
We have analysed our results chronologically into three groups; the first and second 50 cases and the last 68.
We fully accept that there have been changes in technique during this time, as described earlier, and as table 1 shows, in all sutured ileoanal anastomosis some form of mucosectomy was performed.
The variable use of loop ileostomy is shown.
Most patients (n=123) were operated on for presumed ulcerative colitis but 10 (8%) are now known to have Crohn's disease and a further 10 (8%) have certain features of Crohn's disease and have been labelled indeterminate colitis.
Twenty six patients have had a restorative proctocolectomy for familial adenomatous polyposis of whom 20 had a synchronous proctocolectomy and pouch construction and only four of these patients had a covering loop ileostomy.
There were eight patients who had a previous subtotal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis for slow transit constipation who had developed recurrent difficulty with defaecation that necessitated large doses of laxatives to control secondary constipation.
These eight were treated by restorative proctocolectomy.
Similarly, there were 10 patients with longstanding acquired megacolon and megarectum with normal ileal function and acceptable anal sphincter activity who have been treated by restorative proctocolectomy.
The double stapling technique was never applicable in these cases because of the widely dilated and thick walled anus; hence a hand sewn ileoanal anastomosis was required.
There were seven patients over the age of 60 who have had a restorative proctocolectomy, one of whom had longstanding polyps and high grade dysplasia; the rest had ulcerative colitis.
COMPLICATIONS
Mortality There has been no operative mortality but two late deaths have occurred; one patient had a fatal motorcycle accident and a further patient who suffered chronic small bowel obstruction after pouch surgery developed fatal septicaemia after pouch excision seven years after the original operation (table II).
Early morbidity
Table II shows the details of morbidity.
Over half of all patients developed a clinically import nt complication in the first 100 operations (52%); this figure has now fallen to 25% in the last 68 operations.
There were three important early complications — namely, infarction of the pouch (n=6), pelvic bleeding (n=6), and pelvic sepsis (n=21).
These complications often coexisted and with the exception of pelvic sepsis, their incidence has not fallen with increased experience with the operation.
There were three diabetic patients, in the seris, and two of them had severe sepsis after operation.
Although pouch ischaemia was in the past associated with radical mesenteric vascular division, this complication is still seen.
Two recent cases were from malrotation of the pouch and another from mesenteric vein thrombosis complicating pelvic sepsis.
Late morbidity
Late complications included stenosis of the ileoanal anastomosis (n=25, 15%).
This event seems to be less frequent after the use of stapled anastomosis at the top of the anal column (8% compared with sutured ileoanal anastomosis 22%).
Intestinal obstruction that necessitated admission to hospital occurred in 31 (18%) patients.
Episodes of intestinal obstruction usually occurred in the first year of operation but in seven patients admission to hospital with obstruction occurred after the first 12 months.
In 14 patients operative intervention was necessary for relief of obstruction and in six of these 10 to 50 cm of small bowel required resection, either because of operative damage (n=3) or infarction from the obstruction (n=3).
The frequency of obstruction seems to have remained constant throughout the series even though there has been a tendency to use loop ilesostomy more sparingly with increasing experience.
Twenty seven fistulas occurred after operation.
Fistulas either presented early (n=13), in which case they usually resulted from a breakdown of an ileoanal anastomosis or a suture line deshiscence in the pouch to the abdominal wall, perineum, or vagina (two cases that were later proved to have Crohn's disease).
Alternatively fistulas have presented later after operation (n= 14) due to unrecognised Crohn's disease (n=4), chronic obstruction at the ileoanal anastomosis (n=3), from a stitch sinus (n=1), or from possible reactivation of latent cryptoglandular infections (n=6).
Table III shows the anatomical varities of fistulas, their relation to the underlying bowel disorder, and outcome.
Fortunately this complication seems to have occurred less often with increasing experience.
The presence of symptomatic gall stones in eight patients is interesting and is the subject of a more thorough investigation.
POUCH EXCISION (FAILURES)
In 22 (13%) patients the pouch has been excised.
In half (11 cases) this was at the patients' request because of poor function.
One patient with Crohn's disease requested pouch excision because of severe diarrhoea, four patients with slow transit constipation who had a pouch requested excision because of continuing abdominal distension and a feeling of incomplete evacuation.
The remaining six patients who requested pouch excision all had ulcerative colitis.
Pouch excision was undertaken in two other patients with Crohn's disease because of pouch fistulas.
In three patients the pouch was removed because of severe sepsis after operation and in six early excision was necessary because of infarction.
POUCH FUNCTION
Table IV gives the eventual outcome according to the underlying pathology.
Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis have a uniformily excellent functional result.
All of them have intact pouches and bowel frequency ranges from one to four per 24 hours.
By contrast, restorative proctocolectomy for slow transit constipation is now no longer recommended as half have had their pouch excised because they were dissatisfied with the functional results.
On the other hand, results of restorative proctocolectomy in patients with megacolon and megarectum have been good.
Restorative proctocolectomy is not recommended knowingly for Crohn's colitis, as recurrence is eventually anticipated and there is a high incidence of complications.
Half the patients with Crohn's disease in this series developed fistulas after operation and three have already had their pouch removed.
Those with Crohn's disease who still retain their pouch, however, have a bowel frequency that is only just greater than in those patients having the operation for ulcerative colitis.
All of these patients are loath to consider an ileostomy at the moment but fully accept that pouch excision may eventually be necessary.
The functional result in patients with ulcerative colitis is extremely variable.
Some patients have a bowel frequency of only two in 24 hours whereas others defaecate 10 times in 24 hours.
Despite this the symptom of urgency is invariably improved and all 81 patients with ulcerative colitis who have been followed up for more than six months state that they can defer defaecation for more than two hours.
In ulcerative colitis 17% of patients continue to take antidiarrhoeal agents and some dietary restriction is reported in 25%.
Despite this, constipating agents and dietry restriction tends to be used less often with increasing duration of follow up.
Twenty six patients with ulcerative colitis had disease confined to the left colon and seven restorative proctocolectomies were performed for proctitis alone because of severe urgency.
The 33 patients with distal disease have functional results that are indistinguishable from those with total colitis.
Nine patients over the age of 60 are included in this series.
Two pouches failed because of ischaemia but the clinical results in the remaining seven patients are indistinguishable from younger patients in the series.
All three diabetic patients had a satisfactory outcome despite the fact that one of them has severe autonomic neuropathy.
Somewhat surprisingly all six patients in whom a small bowel resection was performed for obstruction report a satisfactory outcome with a defaecation frequency (6.3 in 24 hours) that is not in excess of the total population.
SEXUAL FUNCTION
Although a detailed sexual history was not recorded before operation only three of 71 men (4%) have had any sexual dysfunction after pouch construction.
One suffers from a weak erection and two complain of retrograde ejaculation.
Dyspareunia has been troublesome after operation in eight of 97 women (8%).
Ten women have had children after pouch construction, two by caesarian section.
Eight women have had a total of nine vaginal deliveries and none of these women have had inpaired continence after delivery.
POUCHITIS
Pouchitis has been recognised clinically and confirmed by endoscopy in 30 patients.
Seven have had repeated episodes of pouchitis of whom four are now known to have Crohn's disease.
All 23 single attacks of pouchitis have responded within three days of treatment with metronidazole orally.
Pouchitis has not occurred in patients with constipation or megacolon but has been found in three of 24 patients with familial adenomatous polyposis.
Discussion
After nine years exploring a new operation for large bowel disease we considered that it was time to take stock and objectively evaluate the merit of restorative proctocolectomy for ulcerative colitis, familial adenomatous polyposis, and functional bowel disorders.
We therefore reviewed all patients by personal interview where possible (n=154).
Those living abroad or in other regions and unable to attend were contacted by post or telephone.
The review was undertaken by one of two research fellows who attempted to be as objective as possible.
An independent investigator outside the surgical team was not used.
Although restorative proctocolectomy is associated with a low mortality the morbidity is considerable.
Complications after operation have become less prominent with increasing experience, but there is still a failure rate of about 10%.
Some failures are due to ischaemia, sepsis, and fistulas in the arly period after operation and it is to be hoped that these complications will become less with further experience.
Half of all the failures are because patients are dissatisfied with the functional results of this operation.
The only way in which these late pouch excisions are likely to be minimised is by greater care in patient selection, particularly the identification of Crohn's disease.
Pouch construction is no longer recommended for functional bowel disease unless there is a megacolon and megarectum.
Fistulas after operation are a special problem of this operation and seem to be related to a failure to recognise Crohn's disease, technical problems related to pouch construction and ileoanal anastomosis, or from secondary sepsis.
In our opinion not all of the pouch excisions performed would not be necessary; in some of the earlier cases of fistulas that were encountered the pouch might now be salvaged.
Small bowel obstruction continues to occur after this operation despite increasing experience with the procedure.
In some patients the small bowel has required resection for relieft of obstruction due to infarction or iatrogenic damage.
As the incidence of intestinal obstruction has persisted despite a lower frequency of covering loop ileostomy it is difficult to blame the use of a loop ileostomy for the increased frequency of this complication.
One important finding from this series has been a failure to identify Crohn's disease preoperatively, despite thorough radiology, endoscopy, histology from biopsy or colectomy specimens, absence of perianal disease, and apparently normal small bowel at operation.
The eventual outcome in patientswith Crohn's colitis has been poor.
Sic developed fistulas and three out of 10 have had their pouch excised.
Many of the remaining patients with an intact pouch have repeated episodes of pouchitis, diarrhoea is generally troublesome, and most patients require medication for symptoms.
Not all cases of Crohn's disease were identified in the colectomy specimen; nevertheless we now rarely perform pouch construction at the time of colectomy because of the possibility of unrecognised Crohn's disease.
We also believe that preliminary colectomy results in safer pouch surgery, because patients are no longer on steroid medication, are well nourished, and there is no co-existing sepsis.
As a consequence of this policy loop ileostomy is now used in only 22% of operations.
In those cases with indeterminate colitis, only time will tell whether these patients behave as those with ulcerative colitis or true Crohn's disease.
We would not routinely recommend restorative proctocolectomy knowingly for patients with Crohn's colitis because the failure rate is high and most will eventually develop recurrence of disease in the anal canal or in the small bowel.
So far two of 10 patients with a diagnosis of Crohn's disease have already developed recurrence in the small intestine.
Nevertheless some of the patients with an intact pouch have had a relatively satisfactory short term outcome.
Most of these patients are loath to consider a permanent ileostomy at the moment.
Nevertheless most are likely at some stage to lose their pouch and in so doing will sacrifice 40 to 50 cm of terminal ileum.
The low morbidity and excellent functional results of pouch construction with ablation of all colonic disease and the anal mucosa among patients with familial adenomatous polyposis make us believe that this is the operation of choice in most patients for this disease.
In an inherited disease with a 50% penetrance resulting in large bowel malignancy, the stigma of a stoma if conventional proctocolectomy is used or the need for repeated sigmoidoscopy if ileorectal anastomosis is offered for treatment make potential recruitment of family members for screening a real problem.
These families are notoriously unreliable both in alowing themselves to be followed up and allowing their family members to be screened.
The arguments against restorative proctocolectomy for familial adenomatous polyposis on the grounds that the operation carries a much greater morbidity than ileorectal anastomosis now seem to be unfounded, particularly when the need for annual and sometimes difficult sigmoidoscopy after ileorectal anastomosis is considered.
We do not think that regular pouch surveillence is necessary after operation in polyposis even though polyps have been reported in the small bowel, because their malignant potential is very low.
We previously proposed that restorative proctocolectomy might have a role in the management of patients with continued constipation despite subtotal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis if there was objective evidence of slow transit constipation.
The results of this audit indicates that restorative proctocolectomy should be resisted as an option in these patients particularly as many have features of the irritable bowel syndrome which in all groups seems to be associated with poor functional results.
On the other hand, in adult megacolon with a megarectum, the results are extremely good provided small bowel and anal function are normal.
The results of restorative proctocolectomy for ulcerative colitis are variable.
Some patients seem to do well and have a bowel frequency of less than four in 24 hours without any impairment of continence.
By contrast, some patients seem to have a frequency that is rarely less than 10 in 24 hours and need to take antidiarrhoeal agents and modify their diet.
The one symptom that is invariably improved by restorative proctocolectomy is that of urgency.
Indeed these results justify the operation even in distal disease where urgency is the principal symptom.
Retaining the anal mucosa sometimes results in bleeding from the involved mucosa but discrimination may be improved by avoiding mucosectomy.
We would usually advise mucosectomy for dysplasia or coexisting colorectal cancer, however, as we do in polyposis.
Elderly patients should not necessarily be denied the operation if they are fit and have normal anal function.
Even patients with diabetes mellitus complicated by autonomic neuropathy are not necessarily a contraindication to restorative proctocolectomy.
The functional results of patients who have lost up to 50 cm of small bowel raises the question as to whether repeated pouch construction is justified in those patients whose pouch has had to be removed because of ischaemia.
The identification of symptomatic gall stones after operation might imply that the enterohepatic circulation of bile salts is disturbed by altering the function of the terminal ileum after this operation.
Changes in bile acid metabolism after resotrative proctocolectomy is currently being investigated and the results are awaited with interest.
At one time pouchitis was thought to be a serious complication of pouch construction and even an argument against resorative proctocolectomy.
In our experience, however, pouchitis is often only a single event that responds rapidly to treatment with metronidazole.
If repeated pouchitis occurs the possibility of underlying Crohn's disease should be seriously explored.
Sexual complications after operation were fortunately uncommon, in line with most other's experience, furthermore it seems that a close rectal dissection is not necessary to avoid autonomic nerve damage in men.
Perhaps the most encouraging finding from this audit is that the quality of life, sexual fulfilment, and procreation are often improved by the operation.
The quality of life after restorative proctocolectomy seems now to be appreciably better than after conventional proctocolectomy although this was not measured in this audit.
This being the case, provided patients realise that they may experience a bowel frequency of seven in 24 hours (usually five stools in the day and one night time evacuation), the operation has unquestionably improved the wellbeing of most patients.
Furthermore, the operation has also changed the indications for surgical resection in ulcerative colitis.
Alcohol and gastric acid secretion in humans
Abstract
The secretory response of gastric acid to pure ethanol and alcoholic beverages may be different because the action of the non-ethanolic contents of the beverage may overwhelm that of ethanol.
Pure ethanol in low concentrations (<volume/volume) is a mild stimulant of acid secretion whereas at higher concentrations it has either no effect or a mildly inhibitory one.
Pure ethanol given by any route does not cause release of gastrin in humans.
Alcoholic beverages with low ethanol content (beer and wine) and strong stimulants of gastric acid secretion and gastrin release, the effect of beer being equal to the maximal acid output.
Beverages with a higher ethanol content (whisky, gin, cognac) do not stimulate gastric acid secretion or release of gastrin.
The powerful stimulants of gastric acid secretion present in beer, which are yet to be identified, are thermostable and anionic polar substances.
The effect of chronic alcohol abuse on gastric acid secretion is not as predictable.
Chronic alcoholic patients may have normal, enhanced, or diminished acid secretory capacity; hypochlorhydria being associated histologically with atrophic gastritis.
There are no studies on the acute effect of alcohol intake on gastric acid secretion in chronic alcoholic patients.
The acid stimulatory component of beer and wine needs to be characterised and its possible role in the causation of alcohol induced gastrointestinal diseases needs to be investigated.
Despite widespread interest in gastrointestinal diseases induced by alcohol the effects of acute and chronic exposure of the stomach to alcohol remain to be fully elucidated.
A review of publications shows diverse and even contradictory results.
For example, Lenz et al found 5% and 10% ethanl to significantly stimulate gastric acid secretion whereas Singer et al did not find any stimulatory effect.
An explanation for these contradictions can often be traced to the experimental conditions of the different studies.
Here we review the studies on the effect of ethanol and alcoholic beverages on gastric acid secretion in humans and discuss the possible reasons for the apparently discrepant results.
We also consider the areas that need further research.
There is considerable species variation in the response of the stomach to alcohol and so animal studies will be cited only where data from humans are inadequate.
Effects of acute exposure of non-alcoholic subjects to alcohol on gastric acid secretion
The effect of pure ethanol on gastric acid secretion has been investigated by several workers.
Early uncontrolled experiments suggested that alcohol had a stimulatory effect on gastric acid secretion; thus an ‘ethanol test meal’ was introduced to clinically evaluate acid secretory state in humans.
Recent controlled studies have served to clarify the different aspects of the interaction between alcohol and gastric acid secretion.
Gastric acid secretion is influenced by a number of factors such as pH, volume, osmotic activity, and caloric value of the infusate.
The ideal osmotic control for ethanol is distilled water and not hypertonic glucose or saline as has been used in some studies.
This is because ethanol is a non-electrolyte of small molecular weight that diffuses rapidly in and through biological membranes.
Consequently the effective osmotic pressure that it exerts on biological membranes is far less than its osmotic pressure measured by an osmometer.
Distilled water has an identical effect and is pharmacologically inactive.
It is, therefore, considered the ideal osmotic control for ethanol (for detailed discussion see).
Because alcohol is also a source of energy (1 g of ethanol provides 7.1 kcal), it is necessary to have an additional caloric control.
An equicaloric glucose solution is used for this purpose.
To compare the effect of different substances on gastric acid secretion proper control solutions comparable with the test solution should be used.
Unfortunately, not all studies have used proper controls and this may account for some of the contradictory results reported.
Effect of pure ethanol on gastric acid secretion
Intravenous infusion of different doses of ethanol has been consistently shown to stimulate gastric acid secretion.
Hirschowitz et al infused 10, 20, and 40 ml of alcohol intravenously for thirty minutes and found a pronounced and dose dependent increase in acid secretion.
Demol et al found a 2.2-fold increase in output of gastric acid on infusion of 300 mg/kg of ethanol for 30 minutes followed by continuous infusion of 3 mg/kg/min for two hours.
The dose used is comparable to those used by Hirschowitz et al .
Interestingly, Kölbel et al , who used a higher initial dose of 600 mg/kg ethanol, found only a 55% increase in acid secretion.
If a dose dependent increase in gastric acid secretion occurs in response to intravenous infusion of ethanol it must be in the lower dose range.
With higher doses there seems to be a negative effect on gastric acid secretion, the mechanism for which is not clear.
Studies on the effect of enteral infusion of ethanol have produced strikingly different results (table I).
Early studies by Cooke showed that ethanol in concentrations of 1% to 20% did not stimulate gastric acid secretion.
Lenz et al used intragastric titration to measure acid output and hypertonic solutions of glucose saline as controls and found that 5% and 10% ethanl significantly increased three hour acid secretion whereas 20% ethanol had a mild but insignificant stimulatory effect.
Subsequent studies have not, however, been able to show the stimulatory effect of 5% and 10% ethanol.
In a well controlled study with isovolumetric, iso-osmotic and isocaloric controls Singer et al studied the effect of intragastric bolus infusion of 1.4%, 4%, 5%, 6%, 7%, 8%, 10%, 20%, and 40% ethanol.
By intragastric titration 1.4% and 4% ethanol were found to have a stimulatory effect on gastric acid secretion with a response equal to 23% and 22% respectively of the pentagastrin stimulated incremental acid output (maximal acid output-basal acid output).
The higher concentrations of ethanol studied has either no effect or a mildly inhibitory one.
Petersen et al under similar controlled conditions found that slow intragastric infusion (28 g/h) of pure ethanol at concentrations of 5%, 12%, and 36% had no effect on gastric acid secretion.
Thus we conclude that intravenous ethanol, at least in the doses used, and intragastric infusion of low concentrations (up to 5%) of ethanol stimulate gastric acid secretion whereas intragastric infusion of higher concentrations has either no effect or a mildly inhibitory one.
effect of alcoholic beverages
Interestingly, the findings of the oral ethanol ingestion experiments are exaggerated when alcoholic beverages are studied (table II).
Oral and intragastric infusions of beer were found to be potent stimuli of gastric acid secretion, with a response of over 95% of that produced by pentagastrin.
This response was fourfold stronger than that produced by 4% ethanol.
Intrajejunal administration of beer also stimulated acid secretion, although the response was less than that to intragastrically infused beet.
Wine too proved to be a good stimulant of acid secretion, although not as good as beer, whereas 10% ethanol had no effect.
Beverages with higher alcohol content such as whisky and cognac did not stimulate acid secretion.
Effect of acute exposure to alcohol on gastrin release
This aspect has been systematically studied by a number of workers including our group and allows some firm conclusions to be drawn.
There is no direct correlation between acid secretion and gastrin release in response to alcohol (table III).
The facts that seem to emerge from analysis of the recent controlled studies are:(a ) pure ethanol given intravenously, orally, or by an intragastric route, in different concentrations does not stimulate gastrin release whether or not it stimulates acid secretion;(b ) among the alcoholic beverages beer and wine produce pronounced stimulation of gastrin release whereas whisky, gin, cognac, and vodka do not have any effect on gastrin concentrations.
Here it is interesting to note that intrajejunal beer stimulated acid release without causing gastrin release.
The fact that the beverages with low alcohol content stimulate gastrin release whereas alcohol itself does not do so suggests that this response is mediated by the non-ethanolic component of the beverage.
Mechanism of action of alcohol on gastric acid secretion
It is clear that ethanol has a duel action on the secretory function of the gastric parietal cell; at low concentrations it stimulates gastric secretion and at high concentrations it has no effect or an inhibitory one.
Studies have been done on humans, intact animals, isolated gastric mucosa, and gastric cell cultures to study the effect of ethanol on gastric cell function.
The cellular mechanism of action of ethanol, however, remains to be fully elucidated.
Pure ethanol does not stimulate gastrin release in humans.
Ethanol has a systemic as well as topical action on the gastric parietal cell.
The persistence of the acid secretory response even after complete gastric emptying of ethanol administered by an intragatic rute and the stimulatory action of intravenous ethanol imply a systemic action.
The response to intravenous ethanol seems to be at least partially mediated by cholinergic nerves.
After premedication with atropine intravenous ethanol failed to stimulate acid secretion.
Atropine given during intravenous infusion led to an immediate fall in acid output.
Kölbel et al also found that atropine significantly reduced but did not abolish the effect of intravenous ethanol.
Similar studies need to be done to evaluate the role of the cholinergic nerves in the gastric response to intragastric ethanol.
A topical stimulatory action of ethanol on gastric acid secretion is seen at low concentrations (1%-5%).
Studies with intragastric titration have noted an immediate acid secretory response to ethanol instillation before systemic absorption can occur.
This action is independent of extrinsic innervation.
In a recent study Chacin et al recorded the effect of different concentrations of ethanol and some alcoholic beverages on the isolated toad gastric mucosa.
The responses were similar to those reported from human studies.
They found that low concentrations (1%-5%) of ethanol significantly stimulated acid secretion and cell respiration.
The effect on cell respiration persisted even after blockade of the proton pump suggesting that this effect was primary and not secondary to stimulation of acid secretion.
Low concentrations (1%- 5%) of ethanol caused an increase in the content of cyclic AMP in human corporic gastric mucosa in vitro.
They also caused a dose dependent increase in activity of histamine sensitive gastric adenylate cyclase in guinea pig gastric mucosa.
Thus ethanol, apart from having an overall stimulatory effect on gastric parietal cell metabolism, seems to specifically stimulate gastric acid secretion through an increase in cyclic AMP and subsequently adenylate cyclase.
The mediator for the action of ethanol on the parietal cell is not known.
Histamine has long been considered a putative mediator of the gastric acid secretory response to ethanol.
The stimulatory effect of ethanol on isolated toad gastric mucosa was partially inhibited (-50%) but not abolished by cimetidine, suggesting that the stimulatory action of low concentrations of ethanol on the gastric partietal cell is partly mediated through activation of H 2 receptors.
It is possible that ethanol liberates hstamine from cells containing histamine in the gastric mucosa.
Earlier studies with less accurate methods for measurement of histamine, however, failed to detect increase in histamine in the gastric tissue or venous or arterial blood after stimulation with ethanol.
These studies need to be repeated with presently available more accurate methods for assay of histamine.
In the many stomach histamine is stored predominantly in the mast cells.
It would be interesting to see if ethanol stimulates release of histamine from mast cells in culture.
Because it is also present in some beverages histamine was thought to be responsible for the acid secretory capacity of the beverages.
In our study, however, we found no stimulatory action when the amines present in beer were given at doses present in the beverage.
The concentration seems to be too low to influence gastric acid secretion.
In the study by Chacin et al quoted earlier the stimulatory action of ethanol persisted even in calcium free solutions implying that extracellular calcium is not essential for its action.
Parietal cell cultures could also be used to study the interaction between ethanol and the receptors for acetylcholine, gastrin, and prostaglandins.
Further studies are clearly needed to fully elucidate the effect of ethanol on the gastric parietal cell.
The exact reason why beverages with higher ethanol content do not stimulate acid secretion is also not known.
This could be due to several factors:
(a )
Their inability to stimulate gastrin release.
This could itself be due to a direct damaging or inhibitory effect on antral G cells or a lack of substances present in beer and wine that stimulate gastrin release.
To see whether it is the high alcohol concentration or the possible lack of stimulants or their inability to act in the presence of high alcohol concentrations that is responsible for the absence of stimulatory action of whisky it would be interesting to study the effect of a simultaneous intragastric infusion of beer and whisky.
A lack of response would suggest that the high concentration of alcohol is the principal factor.
The effect of alcohol and the beverages on antral G cells also needs further study.
(b )
Damage to or inhibition of the gastric parietal cell.
Davenport found that ethanol solutions with a concentration above 10% produced mucosal damage.
Beverages with concentrations above that in wine (10%-12%) failed to release gastrin or to stimulate acid.
Therefore, it is possible that back diffusion of H + ions secondary to disruption of the mucosal barrier plays a part in the failure of these beverages to stimulate acid secretion.
In the study by Chacin et al exposure of isolated toad gastric mucosa to 20% ethanol and rum and whisky produced a drastic, partially reversible inhibition of histamine stimulated acid secretion.
Mechanisms for this effect needs further elucidation.
(c )
Release of gastric acid inhibitors such as somatostatin.
Intravenous infusion of ethanol has not been shown to release measurable amounts of somatostatin but this does not exclude the possibility that somatostatin may mediate the inhibitory effect on the parietal cells.
Prostaglandins inhibit acid secretion and their synthesis and release by gastric mucosal cells is enhanced by exposure to ethanol.
(d )
High osmolarity.
Substances with high osmolarity have been found to inhibit acid secretion.
Because the effective osmotic pressure exerted by ethanol is far less than its measured osmotic pressure, however, it is unlikely that high osmolarity plays a major part in the production of acid inhibition by ethanol.
Alcoholic beverages with low ethanol content stimulate gastric acid secretion by additional mechanisms.
This is obvious from the fact that the response to beer and wine is many times higher than that to corresponding concentrations of ethanol.
The strong release of gastrin stimulated by these beverages is clearly an important mediator of this response but it is possible that they may have a direct effect on the parietal cell as well.
In the study by Chacin et al on isolated toad gastric mucosa beer and wine had an effect similar to low concentrations of ethanol.
Beverages with high ethanol content like whisky and cognac have no effect probably because the inhibitory effect of the high concentrations of ethanol present in these beverages overwhelms the stimulatory effect of the non-ethanolic components.
What exactly the non-ethanolic components of beer and wine that stimulate gastrin release are unclear.
Table IV gives the results of recent studies to identify these components.
None of the known stimulants of acid secretion present in beer given alone or in combination could be implicated.
This is because the very low concentrations of these substances present in beer failed to stimulate acid secretion.
Among the various preproducts of beer tests only those products produced after the addition of years — that is, after the onset of fermentation — had any capacity to stimulate acid secretion.
Fermented glucose was the most potent stimulant.
To identify this metabolic product of yeast, fermentation of glucose extracts obtained from fermented glucose by different extraction methods (for example, ethyl acetate extraction, eluate of anion exchange resin) were tested for their ability to stimulate acid secretion and gastrin release.
These preliminary results suggest that the powerful stimulants of gastric acid secretion are thermostable and anionic polar substances.
Further studies need to be done to precisely identify them.
It is also not known if spirits such as whisky also contain these byproducts of fermentation or whether they are removed during the process of distillation.
Because one or more non-ethanolic components of the beverages are responsible for the release of gastric acid and gastrin it is possible that they may be partly responsible for the detrimental effects of alcohol abuse.
Would beer free of these components be less harmful?
As the different alcoholic beverages have not been shown to cause different diseases it is possible that alcohol itself is the most harmful component of the beverages.
Effect of chronic alcoholism on gastric acid secretion
Does chronic alcohol abuse alter the gastric response to alcohol?
All the results found in studies on non-alcoholic subjects may not hold true for chronic alcoholic patients.
The stomach's adaptive capacity may alter its response to alcohol, but, there are few studies that have considered this problem.
The gastric acid secretory capacity in chronic alcoholic patients and those with alcoholic pancreatitis has been studied, with contradictory results reported by different studies.
Chey et al found hyposecretion of gastric acid or achlorhydria in chronic alcoholic patients without clinical or laboratory evidence of pancreatic disease.
Gullo et al studied 20 patients with chronic pancreatitis, of which 18 had histories of heavy alcohol abuse.
About half (55%) had acid secretion in the normal range, one third (35%) had acid hypersecretion, and 10% had achlorhydria.
Piubello et al found acid hypersecretion in a group of 21 chronic alcoholic patients and the peak acid output values in these patients were similar to those measured in patients with duodenal ulcers and was significantly higher than those in control groups.
The study by Dinoso et al possibly gives the reason for these widely varying results.
They studied the acid output in 70 chronic alcoholic patients and age matched normal healthy controls and correlated the results with mucosal histology.
Although the mean maximal acid output of the group of chronic alcoholic patients was no different from that of controls, there was wide variation in the acid output within this group.
The 15 alcoholic patients with atrophic gastritis had very low acid outputs whereas in those with superficial gastritis the values were only slightly lower than in normal subjects.
Eight subjects with normal mucosa had acid hypersecretion (acid output >meq/h) compared with only one of 40 controls.
The percentage of patients with normal mucosa was significantly less in the alcoholic group compared with the normal groups.
Atrophic gastritis and superficial gastritis were more often seen in the alcoholic patients, which accounted for the hypochlorhydria seen in a group of these patients.
When followed up with serial biopsies one third of 12 patients with atrophic or superficial gastritis showed considerable increases in their mascimal acid output, which paralleled the histological improvement seen in these patients.
Further studies are needed to confirm these findings.
Acid hypersecretion found in a subgroup of alcoholic patients in these studies also occurred in dogs chronically given alcohol.
This was attributed to increase in mean parietal cell mass, a threefold increase in mean parietal cell volume accompanied by mitochondrial hypertrophy, and a pronounced increase in the secretory tubular apparatus of the parietal cells.
There are no studies on the effect of acute alcohol intake on gastric secretion in the chronic alcoholic patient.
Effect of chronic alcoholism on gastrin release
There is only one study (published as an abstract) that reports on the effect of alcohol on gastrin release in the chronic alcoholic patients.
In this study Hajnal et al found a noticeably impaired gastrin release in response to a meal, ethanol, and wine.
Although the gastrin release in response to wine was diminished compared with controls it was still higher than the response to ethanol.
Clearly a study needs to be done with chronic alcoholic patients.
This should be conducted soon after admission to hospital to assess the effect of commonly consumed alcoholic beverages on gastrin release and gastric acid secretion and the results should be compared with gastric histology.
It would also be important to know if the changes found reverse with abstinence.
Thus recent controlled studies permit us to draw reasonably firm conclusions about the effect of ethanol and alcoholic beverages on non-alcoholic human subjects.
Similar studies need to be done in chronic alcohol abusers.
Further characterisation of the non-ethanolic component of beer and wine that stimulates acid and gastrin secretion needs to be carried out.
This may throw more light on the mechanism of action of the alcoholic beverages on the gastric mucosa and possibly on other organs.
Dieulafoy's disease controlled by Doppler ultrasound endoscopic treatment
Abstract
Dieulafoy's disease is a gastric vascular malfomation, that presents clinically as acute upper intestinal haemorrhage.
Emergency endoscopy is the most effective method of diagnosing the disease.
Until recently surgical resection was the most usual treatment.
A case is reported of Dieulafoy's lesion with haemodynamically relevant bleeding.
Successful endoscopic treatment was performed with the aid of Doppler ultrasound.
A follow up of 11 months with no haemorrhaging was recorded.
Case report
A 58 year old man presented with severe haematemesis.
The patient was in good health and did not have peptic ulcer disease.
Emergency endoscopy showed a small ulcer along the lesser gastric curvature 2 cm below the gastro-oesophageal junction.
The lesion was 3 mm in diameter and showed an eroded large vessel stump of 2 mm in diameter protruding into the lumen (Fig 1).
Bleeding had stopped spontaneously at the endoscopic examination.
Transendoscopic Doppler ultrasound was performed using a 20 MHz microvascular Doppler device (MF 20, Eden Medical Electronics, Germany).
The flexible Doppler probe (1.6 mm in diameter) was passed down the biopsy channel of the endoscope and was positioned under direct vision over the lesion.
The arterial blood flow was confirmed by an audible Doppler signal and the curve recorded (Fig 2).
Epinephrine (5 ml 1:10000) and polidocanol (3 ml of 1%) were injected around and into the visible vessel to prevent rebleeding.
After prophylactic sclerosing biopsy specimens were taken (Fig 3).
The patient was monitored carefully for recurrent haemorrhage and controlled by endoscopy every day.
No rebleeding occurred and Doppler control detected no further arterial signals from the ulceration.
Histopathological examination showed parts of an abnormal artery with erosion and a new thrombus.
There was no evidence of vasculitis, atheroesclerosis or aneurysm formation.
The ulceration healed completely within two weeks and the patient was discharged on day 16.
There was no relapse bleeding during the 11 month follow up period.
Discussion
Dieulafoy's disease has been given many names, including ‘calibre persistent artery of the stomach’, ‘cirsoid aneurysm’, ‘gastric arteriosclerosis’, and ‘peptic ulcer of peculiar location’.
‘Dieulafoy's vascular malformation’ is the currently accepted term.
It was first discovered by Gallard in 1884, but credit has been given to Dieulafoy who described it in 1889.
Dieulafoy believed that this lesion was an early stage of peptic ulceration, designating it ‘Exulceratio simplex’.
More recently, it has been interpreted as a congenital anomaly related to defective arterial involution.
This lack of involution results in so called calibre persistent submucosal arteries.
The affected vessel is tortuous and enlarged, about 1.5 mm in diameter.
In contrast, the overlying mucosal ulcer is typically small, usually 2 to 5 mm in diameter.
In more than 80% of cases the site of bleeding is found within 6 cm of the gastro-oesophageal junction, particularly along the lesser curvature.
The subsequent events that lead to the rupture of these abnormal vessels are unclear.
It was previously hypthesised that the rupture was related to degenerative changes in the vessel wall, but structural evidence for this conclusion has not been found.
Although thrombosis of the enlarged arteries is generally believed to precede musocal breakdown, some authors regard the ulceration as the primary event in the pathogenesis of the arterial rupture.
The pathological features of Dieulafoy's vascular malformation are controversial.
Histological examination shows medial hypertrophy and adventitial fibrosis.
The wall of the artery has a normal architecture without signs of vasculitis, atherosclerosis or aneurysm formation.
Mucosal erosion as a result of the artery protruding into the overlying mucosa or focal gastritis leads to an exposure of the vessel and results in bleeding.
The haemorrhage is massive because the ruptured artery is usually large.
Repeated bleeding at short intervals is the common pattern if the patient survives the initial haemorrhage.
The condition usually affects middle aged and elderly men.
The median age of the patients is 54 and men are affected twice as often as women.
The disorder has no familial tendency.
Massive haematemesis or, less commonly, melaena, without previous gastrointestinal symptoms, is the typical presentation.
Epigastric pain is uncommon and concurrent peptic ulcer disease may lead to an incorrect diagnosis.
Since its initial description over a century ago fewer than 150 cases of Dieulafoy's disease have been reported.
The lesion is known to be easily overlooked and unrecognised, rather than being rare.
Before the endoscopic era, the diagnosis was rarely made before operation or even at the time of operation and recurrent haemorrhage with a fatal outcome was common.
At present the preferred diagnostic procedure is emergency endoscopy.
The lesion is not always easily detected on endoscopic examination, especially when it is not actively bleeding.
The lesion has been described as a volcano with central whitish discoloration projecting from an otherwise normal gastric mucosa.
Or it may appear as an eroded large artery protruding into the lumen.
The endoscopic Doppler ultrasound may be of diagnostic value in the evaluation of Dieulafoy's disease when bleeding has stopped spontaneously.
This method has proved its efficiency in gastroduodenal ulcer bleeding.
The Doppler allows identification of submucosal arteries inducing haemorrhage.
The technique is also suitable for studying the effectiveness of local endoscopic treatment.
Since 1988 the Doppler technique has been used in diagnosing vascular malformations.
Until recently, surgery has been the only effective management for Dieulafoy's lesions.
Successful endoscopic management of gastric Dieulafoy's ulcer bleeding was first reported by Pointner et al .
In that series, however, 18 f 22 patients were treated with endoscopy without performing Doppler ultrasound investigation.
An attempt was made to stop the bleeding or to prevent further haemorrhage by local injection of polidocanol.
All patients made an uncomplicated recovery and none suffered from relapse bleeding after discharge from hospital.
Based on these findings the Doppler controlled injection treatment of Dieulafoy's disease could be considered an alternative to surgery.
Gold induced enterocolitis complicated by cytomegalovirus infection: a previously unrecognised association
Enterocolitis is a rare compilation of treatment with gold salts.
It was first described in 1935 by Goldhammer and since then only 21 cases have been described.
The mechanism is unclear.
An appreciable proportion of these cases was associated with high morbidity and mortality.
Different treatment regimes including intensive supportive care with a combination of antibiotics, steroids, dimercaprol, and disodium cromoglycate have produced variable success.
No other concomitant infective agents have been implicated in the course of the disease to date.
We report a case of gold induced enterocolitis complicated by cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection that responded to treatment with intravenous gangcyclovir.
Case report
A 44 year old housewife with severe seropositive rheumatoid arthritis was unresponsive to treatment with simple analgesia, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDS), hydroxychloroquine, D-penicillamine, and salazopyrine.
Gold treatment was therefore commenced.
She was given a test dose of 10 mg intramuscular gold (myocrisin) with no major side effects.
Fortnightly intramuscular injections of 50 mg mycocrisin were administered over the next three months.
She developed a mild watery diarrhoea after two months of treatment but this resolved after gold injections were temporarily stopped.
Further gold treatment was recommenced two weeks later and she received a total dose of 372.5 mg Her rheumatoid disease activity responded well clinically.
Unfortunately two weeks after her last gold injection she presented acutely complaining of lethargy, anorexia, weight loss (9.5 kg), abdominal pain, and watery diarrhoea (up to 20 times per day) with a small amount of blood.
She was admitted immediately and no further gold treatment was given.
She was not taking medicines.
She or the family had no history of colitis.
She also had a three to four week history of a productive cough with greenish sputum.
On examination she was unwell with a pyrexia at 38°C, a tachycardia, and chest signs consistent with a left basal pneumonia.
Her rheumatoid arthritis was quiescent and remained so throughout her hospital admission.
Her abdomen was generally tender and rectal examination showed watery stool stained with mucus and a small amount of blood.
Rigid sigmoidoscopy showed pronounced diffuse inflammation with multiple superficial ulceration and a biopsy confirmed severe proctitis (Fig 1).
She showed some response to treatment with supportive measure — namely, oral 20 mg prednisolone daily in a reducing dose and ampicillin.
There was a reduction in her stool frequency, an improvement in her abdominal pain, and a less productive cough.
She was discharged after one week but four weeks later, she relapsed with symptoms of watery diarrhoea and fresh blood, abdominal pain, and a further weight loss of 6.3 kg.
Also, her productive cough had persisted.
Her only medication was dihydrocodeine.
On examination she was moribund and dehydrated.
She was apyrexial and a maculopapular rash was present on her arms.
Chest examination showed left basal crepitations and her abdomen was diffusely tender but bowel sounds were present.
Moderate peripheral leg oedema was also noted.
INVESTIGATIONS
Full blood count showed 12.2 g/100 ml haemoglobin, white cell count, 11.3×10/l with 89% neutrophils and no eosinophils, and platelet count 410×10/l.
C-reactive protein concentration was 75 mg/l (normal <mg/l).
Urea and electrolytes gave a 121 mmol/l serum sodium, 5.6 mmol/l potassium, 5.6 mmol/l urea, and 96 umol/l creatinine.
Liver function tests showed normal bilirubin and transaminases but raised alkaline phosphatase at 1062 IU/l (normal <IU/l).
Serum albumin concentration was 22 g/l.
Urinalysis showed proteinuria and 24 hour urinary protein concentration was 0.4 g/l.
A chest x ray film showed left basal shadowing consistent with infection and an abdominal x ray film was normal.
An infective screen, including midstream urine, stool for culture, ova, cysts, and Clostridium difficile as well as blood culture was all negative.
Colonoscopy showed total colitis with superficial ulceration and oedematous polypoid mucosa extending into the terminal ileum.
Multiple biopsies were taken.
Histology showed severe panproctocolitis and ileitis (Fig 2A and 2B) with scanty intranuclear and cytoplasmic inclusion bodies suggestive of cytomegalovirus infection.
There was no serological evidence f such infection, however, and urine culture failed to show the virus.
CLINICAL COURSE
She was initially treated with intravenous fluids, intravenous ampicillin, and oral prednisolone (40 mg per day).
Her diarrhoea decreased but she became unwell with a pyrexia of 38°C and worsening productive cough with dirty green sputum during her second week in hospital.
Sputum culture grew Pseudomonas aeroginosa that was sensitive to ciprofloxacin.
With a combination of intravenous ciprofloxacin and physiotherapy her condition improved and her temperature settled.
Unfortunately, this was complicated by the development of a left lung abscess on the fourth week that required radiological drainage under ultrasonographic guidance.
Fibreoptic bronchoscopy was performed and revealed no obstructive bronchial lesion.
In view of her deteriorating clinical condition and colonoscopic biopsy findings suggesting cytomegalovirus infection, prednisolone was withdrawn and she was treated with a course of intravenous gangcyclovir (500 mg daily) for two weeks.
Her diarrhoea decreased with improved appetite and weight gain, a rising serum albumin, and resolution of her peripheral oedema.
Her serum alkaline phosphatase fell to normal.
Further results showed that her immunoglobulins were low, particularly IgG with a value of 5.11 g/l, and she was given intravenous immunoglobulin (Gammimmune-N, 25 g) to aid her recovery.
Subsequent investigations showed this to be a transient deficiency attributed to gold and her immunoglobulins returned to normal (IgG 10.6 g/l) with no further treatment.
Cellular immune function was normal.
A repeat flexible sigmoidoscopy showed improvement in her proctocolitis and the histological features showed resolving colitis.
She was discharged home after seven weeks in hospital.
Further colonoscopy after three and seven months showed improvement to normal appearance.
She remained well clinically to follow up at one year after onset of her colitic symptoms.
HISTOLOGY
Initial rectal biopsy and subsequent ileal and colonic biopsies at colonoscopy before treatment all showed similar features (Figs 1 and 2).
There was a severe proctocolitis and ileitis with grandula distortion and surface ulceration.
This was variable with some biopsies showing very florid regenerative features (Fig 2A).
Eosinophils were not evident in the inflammatory cell infiltrate.
A prominent feature was the surviving aggregates of endocrine cells marking the former position of glandular bases where colonic crypts had been destroyed (Fig 2B), a feature characteristically seen in graft v host disease.
Also, apoptotic degeneration was frequent within epithelial cells of remaining crypts further increasing the similiarity to graft v host disease.
Occasional inclusion bodies highly suggestive of cytomegalovirus were seen in the ileal and rectal biopsies at colonoscopy and subsequently on the initial rectal biopsy when more sections were examined.
Although immunoperoxidase was negative, these inclusions were confirmed as containing cytomegalovirus by DNA in situ hybridisation (Fig 3).
The colonoscopic biopsies at seven weeks (on discharge from hospital), three, and seven months showed a progressive improvement in the proctocolitis although a degree of glandular distortion has persisted throughout.
No viral inclusion bodies were seen in biopsies taken after treatment with gangcyclovir.
Discussion
This patient developed a severe debilitating colitis with mainly watery diarrhoea two weeks after stopping a course of parenteral gold treatment with a total dosage of 372.5 mg.
The close temporal relation of initial resolution of her watery diarrhoea on stopping her gold treatment and subsequent development of severe enterocolitis on recommencement taken together with the renal (proteinurial), and skin (maculopapular rash) involvement as well as transient hypo-γ-globulinaemia suggested gold as the primary cause of her colitis.
There are few descriptions of the histological features of gold induced colitis, but a preservation of glandular architecture and diffuse inflammatory cell infiltrate sometimes with a prominent eosinophil component are said to be characteristic.
Although not showing these features, the colonic and rectal biopsies from our patient showed changes unlike those usually seen in idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease.
The striking resemblance to graft v host disease in our case has been described in cytomehalovirus colitis and its occurence here in a non-transplant patient shows it to be a true feature of cytomegalovirus colitis.
Like others, we found in situ hybridisation to be more sensitive than immunostaining for confirmation of cytomegalovirus infection.
This therefore seems to be a case of cytomegalovirus colitis, rather than ulcerative colitis or simple gold induced colitis, complicating gold induced diarrhoea.
Perhaps gold induced immunosuppression contributed to the development of cytomegalovirus infection.
Her improvement on gancyclovir and no further relapse over the subsequent year of follow up would fit with this diagnosis.
Nevertheless the absence of recurrence during long term follow up will be required to exclude underlying idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease.
Gold salts are highly effective in the management of patients with rheumatoid arthritis, most adverse reactions being mild and reversible.
Enterocolitis is one of the rare but potentially fatal manifestations of gold toxicity.
The mortality in reported cases is high, varying between 35% and 42% despite intensive supportive treatment in conjunction with the use of antibiotics, steroids, and dimercaprol.
There was a reported case of gold induced eosinophilic colitis responding to sodium cromoglycate.
Of the survivors, none suffered recurrent symptoms after complete recovery.
None was rechallenged with gold.
The precise mechanism of gold induced enterocolitis is uncertain but seems to be an allergic reaction to elemental gold as various gold salt preparations have been implicated.
All patients except one were women, aged between 24 and 59 years, who received low total doses of gold salts (74–485 mg) before recognition of enterocolitis.
Any site in the gastrointestinal tract can be affected, although the colon is the commonest and two cases of colonic perforation necessitating colectomy have been described.
Patients with gold induced colitis have diarrhoea as a constant feature.
This is usually severe and watery, often bloody, and can last up to three or four months.
Other features include fever, nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, and, less commonly, skin rashes.
Repeated stool cultures for pathogens and parasites are invariably negative.
This, as far as we know, is the first reported case of the combination of gold induced and infective colitis.
In view of the extreme severity of gold induced colitis, the diagnosis should be considered in any patients on gold treatment who present with diarrhoea, particularly bloody diarrhoea as in our case.
Also, concomitant cytomegalovirus infection should be borne in mind in such circumstances.
Relaxation of distal colonic circular smooth muscle by nitric oxide from human leucocyte
Abstract
The role of nitric oxide (NO) as a mediator of colonic circular smooth muscle relaxation by human leucocytes was investigated.
Granulocytes and mononuclear cells were obtained by gradient centrifugation of venous blood from healthy volunteers.
Both cell types relaxed precontracted distal colonic circular smooth muscle in a concentration dependent manner.
Muscle relaxation was inhibited by preincubation of cells with N G -monomethyl-L-orginine (100 µ m/l) but not by preincubation with N G -monomethyl-D-orginine (100 µ m/l).
Muscle relaxation by cells was reduced by 200 nM oxyhaemoglobin and 10 µ M methylene blue but was increased by 60 n/ml superoxide dismutase.
Non-viable cells did not produce muscle relaxation.
Activation of mononuclear cells by incubation with 100 nM/l FMLP increased muscle relaxation, whereas activation of granulocytes did not.
Granulocytes and mononuclear cells relax precontracted distal colonic circular smooth muscle in vitro by the release of NO that may contribute to motility disorders of the gut associated with inflammation.
Colonic smooth muscle adjacent to the inflammed mucosa of patients with ulcerative colitis has diminished spontaneous activity.
This leads to a reduction of muscle tone and loss of colonic segmentation, which are associated with diarrhoea.
In 1980 Snape et al showed that the gastrocolonic reflux of patients with ulcerative colitis was attenuated.
This was thought to result from electromechanical disassociation of colonic smooth muscle.
Later, circular smooth muscle beneath the acutely inflammed mucosa of patients with ulcerative colitis was shown to have reduced contractility.
The mediator of these mechanical abnormalities was not, however, identified.
We have previously reported relaxation of colonic circular smooth muscle by low concentrations of nitric oxide (NO).
This is released by macrophages and neutrophils that infiltrate the colonic mucosa in large numbers during active ulcerative colitis and may affect the function of underlying smooth muscle.
Production of NO is from L arginine via NO synthase.
This reaction is stereospecifically inhibited by N G -monomethy-L-arginine but not N G -monomethy-D-arginine.
Superoxide dismutase prolongs the half life of NO whereas oxyharmoglobin traps free NO.
The activation of soluble guanylate cyclase by NO to produce the second messenger cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) is inhibited by methylene blue.
In this study these agents were used to investigate whether granulocytes and mononuclear cells (collectively termed leucocytes in this paper) relax distal colonic circular smooth muscle by the release of NO.
Materials and methods
MATERIALS
Drugs and solutions were prepared on the day of use.
The following were obtained from Sigma Chemicals Ltd and where necessary dissolved in distilled water immediately before use: acetylcholine, superoxide dismutase, N G -monomethy-L-arginine, N G -monomethy-D-arginine, methylene blue, tetrodotoxin, and hypaque 1017 and 1119.
Indomethacin was initially dissolved in 10 mM NA 2 CO 3 and further diluted in Krebs Henseleit solution.
Oxyhaemoglobin was prepared from bovine haemoglobin (75% methaemoglobin, Sigma Chemicals Ltd) and its purity was assessed spectrophotometrically according to the method described by Martin et al .
Preparations were accepted if their concentrations of oxyhaemoglobin were greater than 90%.
PREPARATION OF TISSUE
Male Wistar rats weighing 250–400 g were killed and strips of colonic circular smooth muscle were attached to isotonic transducers (Harvard, Kent, England) in 2 ml organ baths and perfused by oxygenated (95% O 2 , 5% CO 2 ) Krebs Henseleit solution, composition:(mM/l) NaCl 118; KCl 4.69; MgCl 2 1.13; CaCl 2 2.56; NaHCO 3 20; NaHPO 4 1.15; glucose 5.5.
This had a pH of 7.4 to 7.6 at 37°C.
Muscle strips were mounted with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of the circular muscle bundles.
Temperature was regulated and pH monitored intermittently.
Muscle strips were maintained under a tension of 3 g, which produced near optimal contraction and experiments were commenced after a stabilisation period of two hours, which was found necessary in preliminary studies to ensure consistent muscle performance.
Muscle strips were precontracted by 10 µM acetylcholine and the mean amplitude of steady state contractions was measured for two minutes before and after the addition of leucocytes.
CELL PREPARATION
Venous blood from healthy human volunteers aged between 18 and 70 was collected with EDTA or glass shot beads (Scientific Furnishings, Macclesfield, England) to remove platelets by defibrination.
Blook (5 ml) was layered above an 8 ml bilayer of hypaque 1017 and 1119 in equal volumes and centrifuged at 700 g for 25 minutes.
Mononuclear cells (macrophages and lymphocytes with or without platelets) and granulocytes (neutrophils, basophils, and eosinophils) were aspirated from two distinct layers.
Leucocytes were washed twice in 10 ml solution (37°C) containing 100 nM/l indomethacin (KHI) to inhibit prostglandin synthesis, centrifuged at 200 g for 10 minutes, and resuspended in 5 ml KHI.
Leucocyte suspensions were accepted if red cell corpuscles were <of total and viability was >as judged by a tryphan blue exclusion test (Sigma Chemicals Ltd, England).
This test was used to ensure a 100% death rate of cells frozen in liquid nitrogen.
Cell suspensions were centrifuged at 200 g for 10 minutes and the pellet of cells added to the organ bath the bathing fluid of which was used to resuspend them for transfer.
Experimental controls consisted of a similar procedure without the presence of cells.
STATISTICS
Data obtained from each experiment approximated to a normal distribution and were analysed with Student's t test for paired data.
Data are shown as means (SEM).
Results
EFFECT OF LEUCOCYTES ON PRECONTRACTED MUSCLE
Granulocytes and mononculear cells produced concentration dependent relaxations of circular smooth muscle precontracted with 10 µM/l acetylcholine (figs 1 and 2).
Non-viable leucocytes did not relax muscle.
Removal of platelets did not alter relaxation of precontracted muscle by 1×10/l mononuclear cells which was 22 (7) % with platelets and 26 (10%) without (p, n=7 pairs).
Therefore platelets were not removed from mononuclear cell suspensions in the subsequent experiments as this process reduced cell yield.
Substances known to affect the NO-cGMP pathway affected muscle relaxation by leucocytes (tables I and II).
Addition of 200 nM oxyhaemoglobin and 10 µM methylene blue to the organ bath, one and 10 minutes before cells respectively, reduced muscle relaxation.
Incubation of cells for 45 minutes with 100 µM N G -monomethy-L-arginine reduced muscle relaxation, but 100 µM N G -monomethy-D-arginine had no effect.
Superoxide dismutase (60 units/ml) added one minute before leucocytes produced an increase in muscle relaxation.
Tetrodotoxin (100 nM) did not affect muscle relaxation by leucocytes (n=5, not shown).
Activated mononuclear cells (5×10/l) caused a mean muscle relaxation of 43.6 (15) % compared with 8.3 (4) % by paired non-activated cells (n= 10 pairs, p).
Activation of granulocytes did not increase muscle relaxation (mean relaxation by activated granulocytes 21.3 (10) % compared with 18.4 (6) % by non-activated cells (n=12 pairs, p=0.7)).
Discussion
We have shown that granulocytes and mononuclear cells relax colonic circular smooth muscle strips contracted by acetylcholine.
The mediator of muscle relaxation is unlikely to be a prostanoid as leucocytes were incubated with 100 nM indomethacin.
Leucotrienes produce contraction of this tissue and thromboxane has no effect.
Muscle relaxation was increased by superoxide dismutase and reduced by oxyhaemoglobin and preincubation with methylene blue.
Incubation of effector phagocytes with N G -monomethy-L-arginine reduced muscle relaxation, whereas incubation with N G -monomethy-D-arginine had no effect.
Only viable mononuclear cells and granulocytes caused muscle relaxation, suggesting that the relaxing factor is not stored by these cells.
Muscle relaxation was not affected by tetrodotoxin and therefore unlikely to be mediated by neural elements.
These findings strongly support the suggestion that effector phagocytes relax circular smooth muscle by the release of NO.
Our results are in agreement with those of thers who found that activated and non-activated macrophages and granulocytes relax vascular smooth muscle by release of NO that is synthesised from L-arginine by a stereospecific enzyme, NO synthase.
Release of NO is increased by activation of macrophages, but not granulocytes, possibly because of the stimultaneous increase in production of superoxide anions that react with NO.
Leucocytes forming part of the inflammatory infiltrate of ulcerative colitis and at other sites of inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract may produce smooth muscle relaxation via release of NO.
Diffusion of NO through the submucosa might be facilitated by the formation of a stabilising adduct with a carrier molecule such as cysteine, or a thiol containing protein such as albumin.
Formation of these S-nitrosothiol compounds has been shown to increase the biological half life of NO in physiological solutions from three to five seconds to about 40 minutes.
Pacemaker cells are located on the submucosal surface of the circular muscle.
These cells not only produce electrical slow wave pacemaker activity responsible for the spontaneous mechanical activity of circular smooth muscle but also form a regenerative surface that propagates this activity.
Damage to these cells reduces electrical pacemaker activity and impedes its propogation.
NO or its adduct may inhibit this pacemaker activity or the response of myocytes to it, thus reducing spontaneous mechanical activity and causing a reduction in smooth muscle tone.
In severe inflammation where the muscularis propria is infiltrated by phagocytic effector cells, profound dilatation may occur such as that seen in toxic megacolon.
It has recently been shown that NO relaxes the human internal anal sphincter.
This may contribute to the urgency to stool often associated with ulcerative colitis if inflammatory cells release NO in sufficient amounts to affect sphinteric function.
Smooth muscle relaxation by NO is mediated by raising intracellular cGMP concentration, which inhibits the release of calcium from intracellular stores and may produce mechanical changes without alterations in membrane potential.
This may explain the electromechanical disassociation found by Snape et al as the cause of reduced gastrocholonic reflex in patients with ulcerative colitis.
In conclusion, we have shown that human granulocytes and mononuclear cells generate NO in quantities sufficient to relax distal colonic smooth muscle.
This may contribute to disorders of motility associated with inflammation.
Prospective multicentre study of risk factors associated with delayed healing of recurrent duodenal ulcers (RUDER)
Abstract
Risk factors for delayed duodenal ulcer healing during treatment with ranitidine (300 mg daily) were examined in a multicentre German study of 1923 patients with endoscopically proved, recurrent duodenal ulceration.
Healing rates, per protocol, were 39.5% at two weeks, 70.9% at four weeks, and 93.2% at eight weeks.
Prospective testing of five, predefined risk factors indicated that smoking (p=0.0039) was associated with a decreased healing rate at two weeks.
Frequent prior recurrence (p=0.464), a heavy physical workload (p=0.145), and psychological stress (p=0.062) were not associated with a decreased healing rate and there were too few patients at risk to allow assessment of the effect of regular NSAID intake.
Exploratory analysis identified prior slow healing, a large ulcer, multiple ulcers, and prior ulcer complications, in addition to smoking, as markers of slow healing.
In the absence of these risk factors, the mean healing time was 3.3 weeks (95% confidence interval 3.0, 3.5), rising to 3.7 weeks (3.5, 3.9) for one, 4.4 weeks (4.1, 4.7) for two, and 5.1 weeks (4.5, 5.6) for three to five risk factors.
Delayed duodenal ulcer healing is associated with multiple factors whose effect is cumulative; for patients with two or more of five easily identified risk factors, more than four weeks' treatment with a histamine H 2 receptor antagonist is required to achieve ulcer healing.
Risk factors for delayed duodenal ulcer healing are mentioned in all textbooks as important considerations in the management of duodenal ulcer disease.
Despite numerous published reports, however, the most important risk factors associated with delayed ulcer healing are still undefined.
It is also accepted that the presence of risk factors may affect the length of treatment required to effect healing but the optimal duration of treatment in the presence of specific risk factors has never been investigated.
There is, however, a number of obstacles to the identifications of risk factors for slow healing.
It is, of course, necessary to confirm ulcer diagnosis and healing at endoscopy, and since the expected changes in the healing rate are relatively small compared with changes due to ulcer treatment, it is essential that a large study population be examined to detect appropriate changes in the healing rate.
If the study population is small, type II errors may occur.
Even if the study population is large, however, the additional testing of multiple potential risk factors may result in both type I and type II errors.
Interpretation may also be difficult if risk factors are examined in a protocol which comprises several treatment arms, since the effects of non-pharmacological factors may be obscured by a variety of treatment effects.
To minimise the problems outlined above, the risk factors for delayed ulcer healing were studied during the initial healing phase of a prospective, multicentre study (recurrence of ulcers of the duodenal bulb: epidemiology during ranitidine treatment — RUDER) which was designed to enrol a minimum of 1280 patients suffering from endoscopically confirmed, recurrent duodenal ulceration.
All patients received the same treatment until endoscopically confirmed healing had occurred.
Ranitidine (300 mg daily) was chosen since it is currently the most widely used ulcer treatment.
On the basis of previous studies, five prospectively defined hypotheses were tested; namely, that smoking, a high prior duodenal ulcer recurrence rate, physical workload, mental stress, and intake of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are associated with delayed healing during ranitidine treatment.
Additional potential risk factors for delayed healing were examined in a subsequent exploratory analysis.
Methods
SELECTION OF HYPOTHESES
At the outset, five hypotheses were selected prospectively on the grounds that they were refutable within the context of the study design, that they were of relevance to current duodenal ulcer research, or that they were of potential importance for both ulcer healing and ulcer recurrence.
Specifically, the study tested the hypothesis that the duodenal ulcer healing rates after two weeks' treatment were lower in the presence of:
(1)
A history of smoking, either currently or in the past;
(2)
A high prior recurrence rate (two or more episodes of duodenal ulceration during the previous two years);
(3)
A heavy physical workload;
(4)
Psychological stress: patients were classified dichotomously by their physicians as unstressed or stressed (stressed at one or more follow up appointments);
(5)
Regular intake of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
These factors were investigated since there are conflicting data regarding the effects of smoking, stress, previous duodenal ulcer recurrence rate, and intake of NSAIDs on ulcer healing.
In addition, it was postulated that the reported association of the letter two factors with ulcer relapse might result from changes in healing processes.
The effect of a heavy physical workload was examined because epidemiological data suggest that this, and the associated high salt intake, may have been responsible for the high incidence of peptic ulceration early in the 20th century.
Since only a limited number of hypotheses could be tested prospectively, other potential risk factors, such as a previous history of slow ulcer healing, were tested exploratorily either because it was not felt necessary to confirm their reported effect on healing or because they were considered to be less important to ulcer healing.
SUBJECTS AND SELECTION CRITERIA
Patients were recruited by 546 gastroenterologists at study centres throughout Germany starting in September 1986.
Recruitment was stopped in March 1988, by which time 2109 patients had been enrolled.
Participating gastroenterologists were asked to enrol eligible duodenal ulcer patients consecutively but none was permitted to enrol more than seven patients since the aim was to recruit patients over a short a time period as possible while ensuring that they were also drawn from many different parts of the country.
Patients were recruited and followed ‘en bloc’ bythe physician to maximise physician compliance.
All subjects gave full, informed written consent to the study, which was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki concerning studies in human subjects and was approved after submission to the study chairman's (ALB) local ethical committee at the Triemli Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.
The study was under the general direction of one author (ALB) with the assistance of three regional chairmen (RA, MC, HG) and 40 local medical supervisors.
Day to day supervision was conducted by the IFNS (MF) who collected all documentation and examined it immediately.
If documentation was incomplete, or if inspection by monitoring physicians showed inconsistencies, the treating physician was contacted at once by telephone (and if necessary by the local medical supervisor) to verify any discrepant or missing data.
Patients were invited to participate in the study if endoscopy confirmed an acute, uncomplicated duodenal ulcer greater than 5 mm in diameter, and if there was a history of at least one duodenal ulcer during the previous 12 months.
Additional requirements were that the patients should be over 18 years of age, of fixed abode, and that they should have a prior history of good compliance with treatment.
Patients were excluded from the study if they were pregnant or lactating, if they were expecting to undergo surgery, or if they had a history of concurrent gastric ulceration, renal insufficiency, alcoholism (pure ethanol intake greater than 100 ml/day (women) or 120 ml/day (men), or behaviour consistent with alcohol abuse), drug abuse, or language difficulties.
Alcohol consumption, smoking, and salicylate or NSAID ingestion were not exclusion criteria and physicians were asked not to make specific recommendations with regard to these factors or to diet.
STUDY DESIGN AND PROTOCOL
At enrolment, endoscopic findings (number, size, and site of ulcers; presence of duodenitis and duodenal bulb deformity) and clinical findings (including height and weight) were recorded, as were the subject's ulcer symptoms (epigastric pain, burning, or fullness) and fitness; personal and family ulcer history; and social, occupational, past medical, drug, alcohol, and smoking histories.
The number of duodenal ulcer episodes that had occurred during the previous two years was noted.
Patients were deemed to have had prior slow healing if any previous ulcer had required a repeat course of treatment to effect healing.
The physical arduousness of the patient's occupation was evaluated on a four point scale (light, moderate, heavy, and very heavy).
NSAID intake was noted as either intermittent or regular at the time of the first endoscopy only.
In addition, the physician made a personal assessment as to whether or not the patient seemed to be psychologically stressed at the time of the visit; the physician's evaluation of the patient's status was recorded as ‘stressed’ or ‘unstressed’.
The patient then received a two week supply of ranitidine (300 mg, to be taken every evening after an early supper).
At the first, two week follow up appointment, endoscopy to assess ulcer healing was obligatory.
At this, and all subsequent follow up appointments, the physician also noted concomitant illnesses and medical treatment and repeated his personal assessments of the patient's stress, symptom severity, fitness for work, and compliance with treatment.
If the ulcer had healed, the patient started a maintenance regimen of ranitidine (150 mg at night) otherwise he or she was given an additional supply of ranitidine (300 mg at night).
The timing of all subsequent follow up appointments and endoscopies in the healing phase was discretionary.
The final information sheet for the healing phase was completed only when ulcer healing had been confirmed endoscopically, at which time the patient was transferred to the maintenance treatment regimen.
Overall, patients were deemed to be psychologically stressed if the physician had noted stress at any of the scheduled appointments.
The data relating to the patients' dietary habits were collected after endoscopically confirmed ulcer healing in 985 patients to assess their habitual intake in relation to their normal physical activity, in the absence of active ulceration.
Patients kept a detailed record of their food consumption over a three day period before their first follow up appointment in the maintenance phase of the study and also described their normal physical activity.
An overall activity index (graded from 2 to 9) was then calculated on the basis of the patient's activity (graded from 1 (light) to 3 (heavy)) at work, during their free time and, where applicable, during sporting activity.
Patients were classified into quartiles independently in respect of their energy intake and their physical activity and were then designated as having a low energy intake, a normal energy intake, or a high energy intake with respect to their physical activity.
ENDOSCOPIC EVALUATION
The endoscopic technique and associated sedation or anaesthesia were the responsibility of the treating physician, although, in each case, a full examination of the upper gastrointestinal tract was performed to exclude concomitant peptic disease in the oesophagus or stomach.
A duodenal ulcer was defined as a mucosal defect of greater than 5 mm in diameter, measured by comparison with open biopsy forceps of known size.
The number of ulcers, their site and shape, and any associated duodenitis, erosions, or complicating features such as scarring were noted.
Ulcer healing was reported only if the defect had re-epithelialised completely; associated features, including residual erythema, oedema, friability, or deformation at or near the site of the healed ulcer were also noted.
DATA AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Prospective analysis of two week healing rates
The proportion of ulcers healed after two weeks, in the presence and absence of the five prospectively defined risk factors, was assessed using Fisher's exact test: an alpha level of 0.05, corrected to 0.01 according to Bonferroni to allow for multiple comparisons, was taken to indicate a significant difference in healing rates.
These factors were also incorporated into a stepwise logistic regression model to identify independent risk factors (ACE method: Program PLR; BMDP Statistical Package Release 1987, Cork, Ireland).
Exploratory analysis
Differences in healing rates at two, four, and eight weeks were examined (Fisher's exact test) in the presence and absence of the following risk factors:
Multiple ulcers (two or more at the time of diagnosis);
Ulcer size (greater than 15 mm) at entry into the study;
A history of prior slow ulcer healing;
A history of prior complications;
A history of prior ulcer haemorrhage;
A long history of ulcer disease (more than 10 years);
Duodenal bulb deformation at healing;
Excess dietary energy intake, coffee or tea consumption, wine, beer, spirits or alcohol consumption;
Concomitant disease;
Family history of ulcer disease;
Divorce;
Male gender;
Age (under 40 years old); and
Unemployment and immigrant worker status.
For factors associated with a significant change (p) in healing rate, odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals were calculated for healing rates at two, four, and eight weeks with regard to the individual risk factors and also in respect of all combinations of two of these risk factors.
Factors were considered to be clinically relevant if, alone or in combination with another risk factor, they were associated with an increased odds ratio (lower 95% confidence limit greater than 1.00) at more than two time points.
The mean times to ulcer healing were calculated for patients exposed to different risk factors, and the combined effects of the clinically relevant risk factors were assessed by calculating the two, four, and eight week healing rates and the mean times to healing in the presence of increasing numbers of risk factors.
Results
PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS
Between September 1986 and March 1988, 2109 patients were recruited for the study.
Data were available for 1923 patients after 186 (8.8%) patients had been excluded for one or more of the following reasons: healing not documented (66 patients), patient's first ulcer (61), ulcer diameter less than 5 mm (39), supplementary ulcer medication (23), alcohol abuse (six), patient under 18 years old (three), patient did not take medication (three), ulcer not verified endoscopically (one), anastomotic ulcer (one), gastric ulcer (one), bleeding ulcer at enrolment (one).
The mean age of the patients was 48 years (SD 13 years) and the mean age at which the first duodenal ulcer had been diagnosed was 36 (SD 13) years with a mean disease duration of 12 (SD 10) years and 3 (SD 2) ulcer relapses during the previous two years.
Mean body weight was 73 kg (SD 12) and mean height was 172 cm (SD 8).
Other patient characteristics and details of their past ulcer history and findings at the diagnostic endoscopy are summarised in Tables I and II, respectively.
The time course of the study protocol (Fig 1) indicates when ulcer healing was confirmed or when the patient was withdrawn from the protocol for other reasons.
PATIENT SYMPTOMS AND DIETARY INTAKE
At the time of diagnosis, 1819 (94.5%) patients had typical ulcer symptoms and 1513 patients (78.7%) experienced symptoms when fasted.
Symptoms during fasting were more common in patients who had a high dietary energy intake in relation to their physical activity (83.9%, p=0.0010) than in patients who had a low or appropriate intake (73.8%).
Eating led to improved ulcer symptoms in 76.6% of patients who had a high intake compared with only 67.8% (p=0.0102) of patients who had a low or appropriate dietary energy intake.
An esacerbation of symptoms by eating was comparably frequent in patients whose dietary energy intakes were high (12.9%) and low or appropriate (15.5%, p= 0.3537) in respect of their physical activity.
PATIENT MOTIVATION AND COMPLIANCE
Physicians reported that 1457 patients (75.8%) were highly motivated and that a further 356 (18.5%) were well motivated despite initial reservations at enrolment.
Fifty (2.6%) patients were poorly motivated and information was lacking for another 60 (3.1%).
At the two week obligatory endoscopy, 1887 (98.1%) of the 1923 patients had taken their medication regularly, 29 (1.5%) had taken their medication irregularly, one had stopped medication because of side effects, and information was lacking for the remaining six (0.3%) patients.
At the final endoscopy, 934 (97.1%) of the 962 patients whose duodenal ulcers had not healed at the two week endoscopy had taken their medication regularly, 15 (1.6%) had taken medication irregularly, and information was lacking for 13 (1.4%) patients.
ADVERSE DRUG EVENTS
Potential side effects were noted by 47 (2.2%) patients, some of whom reported several symptoms concurrently.
The most common symptoms were headache (seven patients), constipation (six), dry mouth (five), impotence or decreased libido (five), hair loss (four), diarrhoea (four), and pruritus (four).
Other symptoms including tiredness, exanthemata, and vertigo were noted, although none was reported by more than three patients.
Side effects necessitated stopping treatment in three patients after three, 14, and 21 days, respectively.
OVERALL HEALING RATES
The mean duration of ranitidine therapy was four weeks (SD 3 weeks).
A per protocol analysis showed that two, four, and eight week healing rates were 39.5% (760 patients), 70.9% (1363 patients), and 93.2% (1792 patients) respectively.
After an ‘intent to treat’ analysis, the healing rates at two, four, and eight weeks were 38.3%, 68.6%, and 90.2% respectively.
These latter results exclude data from 34 patients with index ulcers less than 5 mm in diameter who had cumulative two, four, and eight week healing rates of 41.2%, 73.5%, and 97.1% respectively and 54 patients suffering from their first ulcer for whom the equivalent healing rates were 50%, 74.1%, and 94.4%.
By eight weeks, three patients had been withdrawn because of adverse drug side effects while four had been transferred to other medical treatment and two had undergone surgery because of increasing pain or ulcer size.
By the end of the healing phase, 19 (0.99%) of the 1923 patients who had fulfilled the entry criteria had failed to heal: the time to healing was 12 weeks in 76 patients (3.95%), 24 weeks in 29 patients (1.51%), and greater than 24 weeks in seven patients (0.36%).
After eight weeks, a further four patients eventually underwent surgery for failure to heal, two were lost to follow up, and four were deemed to have resistant ulcers (Fig 1).
PROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS
Of the five prospectively defined risk factors, only smoking was associated with a significant increase in the proportion of slow healers after both univariate and stepwise logistic regression analyses (Table III).
Smoking was also associated with a decreased healing rate at four and eight weeks (Fig 2) but neither frequent prior recurrences (four week healing; 71.3%, eight week healing: 93.3%), a heavy physical workload (four week healing: 71.4%, eight week healing: 93.3%), psychological stress (four week healing: 71.2%, eight week healing: 93.0%) nor NSAID intake (four week healing: 64.9%, eight week healing: 90.4%) was associated with a difference in healing rates.
The two week healing rates for patients with one, two, three, four, and five or more recurrences during the previous two years were 42.3%, 40.5%, 40.6%, 34.6%, and 40.6% respectively.
Twelve patients took NSAIDs regularly: the proportion with healed ulcers at two weeks (four of 12), four weeks (seven of 12), and eight weeks (10 of 12) did not differ significantly from the proportion of intermittent NSAID takers with healed ulcers at two (42 of 102; p=0.76 v regular intake), four (67 of 102; p=0.75), and eight (93 of 102; p=0.33) weeks.
DESCRIPTIVE ANALYSIS OF ADDITIONAL RISK FACTORS
Effect of individual risk factors
Exploratory analysis showed another nine risk factors associated with slow healing (Fig 2).
Prior slow healing was associated with decreased two, four, and eight week healing rates while ulcers greater than 15 mm in diameter and multiple ulcers were associated with decreased healing rates at two and four weeks.
Slow healing was also seen:(1) at two weeks in association with prior complications, unemployment, a deformed duodenal bulb at healing, and an excessive dietary intake;(2) at four weeks in association with divorce;(3) and at eight weeks in association with abstention from wine.
Of the 10 risk factors associated with delayed healing, ulcers larger than 15 mm, smoking, multiple ulcers, and prior slow healing were associated with odds ratios for delayed healing which were significantly greater than 1.00 at two or more time points (Fig 2).
The following risk factors were not associated with a decreased healing rate at two, four, or eight weeks respectively: male gender (38.5%, 69.6%, 93.2%); age under 40 years (39.5%, 72.9%, 93.3%); alcohol (40.1%, 71.9%, 93.7%); beer (39.5%, 70.7%, 92.9%); spirits (39.8%, 71.4%, 95.2%); coffee (38.4%, 71.3%, 93.8%); tea (40.8%, 69.8%, 93.4%); a family history of duodenal ulcer disease (37.8%, 68.9%, 93.3%); prior ulcer haemorrhage (34.8%, 68.9%, 94.2%); concomitant illness (37.5%, 68.5%, 92.8%); immigrant worker status (37.5%, 70.5%, 92.1%); shift work (36.5%, 73.0%, 93.8%); or a history of ulcer disease for more than 10 years (39.3%. 68.0%, 91.9%).
Effect of combinations of risk factors
Risk factors identified by univariate analysis were examined in pairs to determine their effect on healing.
Specific combinations of two risk factors associated with delayed healing were:
Prior slow healing plus smoking (two week healing: 29.7%, odds ratio 1.82 (95% confidence interval 1.47, 2.27); four week healing: 61.6%, 1.85 (1.49, 2.26); eight week: 89.2%, 2.23 (1.53, 3.24));
Prior slow healing plus ulcer >mm (two week healing: 28.1%, 1.70 (0.949, 3.07); four week healing: 53.1%, 2.21 (1.30, 3.76); eight week healing: 87.5%, 2.02 (0.867, 4.51));
Prior slow healing plus prior complications (two week healing: 26.8%, 1.90 (1.36, 2.66); four week healing: 60.5%, 1.69 (1.24, 2.30); eight week healing: 90.3%, 1.57 (0.919, 2.64));
Prior slow healing plus multiple ulcers (two week healing: 23.2%, 2.27 (1.46, 3.55); four week healing: 56.8%, 1.94 (1.32, 2.85); eight week healing: 88.0%, 1.98 (1.07, 3.60));
Smoking plus multiple ulcers (two week healing: 27.7%, 1.82 (1.32, 2.51); four week healing: 61.8%, 1.59 (1.18, 2.15); eight week healing: 90.5%, 1.53 (0.908, 2.55));
Ulcer >mm plus prior complications (two week healing: 24.0%, 2.11 (10.6, 4.29); four week healing: 50.0%, 2.50 (1.38, 4.55); eight week healing: 82.0%, 3.15 (1.39, 6.93)).
Thus, smoking, an ulcer diameter greater than 15 mm, prior slow healing, multiple ulcers, and prior complications were considered to be clinically relevant risk factors for slow healing since, alone or in combination with another risk factor, they were associated with decreased healing rates at two or more of the two, four, and eight week assessment points.
The effect of these risk factors was cumulative.
Patients with none of the five risk factors had a four week healing rate of 82.7% (95% CI 77.7, 87.7%) whereas those with two of the five risk factors had four week healing rates ranging from 50.0% to 64.9% (Table IV).
Patients with one, two, and three or more of the risk factors had progressively lower two, four, and eight week healing rates regardless of which specific factors were present (Fig 3).
Effect of risk factors on time to healing
Overall, the mean time to ulcer healing was 4.1 weeks (95% CI 4.0, 4.2).
The mean times to healing were prolonged in patients with an ulcer greater than 15 mm in diameter (5.0 weeks; 95% CI 4.3, 5.7), prior slow healing (4.7 weeks; 95% CI 4.4, 5.0), multiple ulcers (4.8 weeks; 95% CI 4.4, 5.2), prior complications (4.4 weeks; 95% CI 4.0, 4.8), and smoking (4.2 weeks; 95% CI 4.0, 4.4) compared with a mean healing time of 3.3 weeks (95% CI 3.0, 3.5) in patients with none of these risk factors.
The effect of the risk factors on the time to healing was cumulative: patients with one, two, and three or more risk factors needed progressively longer courses of treatment to achieve ulcer healing (Fig 3).
Overall, patients with two risk factors took longer to heal (4.4 weeks; 95% CI 4.1, 4.7) than did those with only one risk factor (3.7 weeks; 95% CI 3.5, 3.9); this was true for all pairs of risk factors with the exception of multiple ulcers plus prior complications and multiple ulcers plus an ulcer greater than 15 mm in diameter (Table IV), which were associated with prolonged healing only in comparison with an absence of risk factors.
Discussion
In the present study, smoking was associated with a decreased duodenal ulcer healing rate at two, four, and eight weeks; no other predefined risk factor — frequent prior recurrences, heavy physical work, psychological stress, or NSAID ingestion — affected the healing rate.
Exploratory analysis identified nine other risk factors: prior slow healing was associated with decreased healing rates at two, four, and eight weeks but the remainder — multiple ulcers, a large ulcer, prior complications, unemployment divorce, excess dietary energy intake in relation to physical activity, abstention from wine, and a deformed duodenal bulb at the time of healing — had less prolonged effects.
Five risk factors, alone or in combination, were associated with a lower healing rate at two or more assessment times and were, therefore, considered to be clinically important; these factors — smoking, large ulcer, prior slow healing, multiple ulcers, and prior complications — had a cumulative effect on ulcer healing.
Most risk factors sought in previous studies were also examined in the present study, with the notable exceptions of Helicobacter pylori infection, gastric acid secretion, pepsinogen, gastrin, and blood group.
In general, these factors were omitted because they ar enot examined routinely in ulcer patients.
H pylori was not examined because its importance in duodenal ulcer disease was not widely recognised when this study was being planned.
However, since only 12% of the duodenal ulcer patients in a parallel, multicentre German study were H pylori negative and since, furthermore, neither the presence not the density of H pylori colonisation affected ulcer healing, it is unlikely that H pylori would have emerged as a risk factor for delayed healing in the present study.
The mechanisms whereby smoking influences ulcer healing are unknown; it probably does not affect gastric acidity, although it may alter duodenal motility and acidity.
Healing rates in ex-smokers who stopped smoking at least one month before the start of treatment, however, are similar to those in smokers, suggesting that smoking also has an indirect effect, associated perhaps with specific behaviour or personality characteristics.
The increased healing rate in wine drinkers is consistent with other reports that moderate alcohol intake may be harmless or beneficial.
The association between duodenal deformation and slow healing cannot be equated with previous reports since deformation in this study was noted after healing.
Thus, scarring may have been the result, rather than the cause, of slow healing.
The decreased healing rate associated with excess dietary intake, assessed after ulcer healing, may inducate that food alleviates ulcer symptoms or that it slows healing by stimulating acid secretion.
Food intake must be evaluated during healing to test these hypotheses.
Many previous studies have sought risk factors retrospectively in the context of trials designed primarily to detect a difference between antiulcer treatments.
In these studies, multiple treatment variables with relatively few patients in each risk factor group have precluded detection of changes in the healing rate associated with non-pharmacological risk factors whose effects are usually smaller than those due to ulcer therapy.
The present study was therefore designed to recruit a large number of patients, all of whom received the same treatment, allowing unequivocal refutation of the prospectively defined hypotheses that a heavy physical workload and a high prior recurrence rate are associated with a decreased healing rate.
Although stress (assessed dichotomously by the physician) was not associated with slow healing, closer analysis of the data showed that continuous, but not intermittent, stress was associated with slow healing.
A deleterious effect of regular NSAID intake on ulcer healing cannot be excluded since there were few patients at risk.
Indeed, there were fewer patients than expected taking NSAIDs, perhaps since intake had been reduced because of chronic duodenal ulcer disease.
That said, the prevalence of NSAID intake was not significantly lower than that reported in an Australian community prevalence study after correction for a lower proportion of women in the present study.
The clinical relevance of the risk factors identified by exploratory statistical testing in the present study should be confirmed in future, prospective studies of appropriate size but factors which were found not to be associated with slow healing can be presumed to be clinically unimportant.
In the present study, five risk factors were considered to be clinically relevant because they were associated, at a minimum of two assessment points, with a decreased healing rate.
The effect of these factors was cumulative in that the proportion of patients unhealed at each time point and the mean time to healing increased progressively with the number of risk factors to which the patient was exposed.
The data from this study confirm that non-pharmacological factors are important determinants of duodenal ulcer healing during treatment with a histamine H 2 receptor antagonist and that healing processes are affected by multiple factors whose effects are cumulative.
With the exception of smoking, the most important risk factors identified in this study are markers of a diathesis for slow healing and are not amenable to modification.
Furthermore, although smoking habits can be modified, this may not affect ulcer healing since the healing rate in ex-smokers was comparable with that in patients who continued to smoke.
Thus, the main purpose of identifying these risk factors in clinical practice is to allow the physician to decide which patients will require more prolonged or more potent ulcer treatment.
On the basis of the present study, patients with two or more of the following risk factors — prior slow healing, smoking, a large ulcer, prior complications, and multiple ulcers — should receive treatment with a histamine H 2 receptor antagonist for more than four weeks.
Nerve mediated relaxation of the human internal anal sphincter: the role of nitric oxide
Abstract
The aim of this study was to determine if nitric oxide (NO) is the non-adrenergic, non-cholinergic neurotransmitter, released by enteric inhabitory nerves, which mediates relaxation of the human internal anal sphincter.
Isolated muscle strips were mounted for isometric tension recording in superfusion organ baths.
Sodium nitroprusside, an exogenous donor of NO, relaxed the strips in a concentration dependent manner.
In the presence of atropine and guanethidine, stimulation of the transmural field produced tetrodotoxin sensitive relaxations, which were inhibited in a dose dependent and enantiomer specific manner by antagonists of NO synthase; completely by L-nitroarginine and partially by L-N-monomethyl arginine.
The effect of these antagonists was reversed by L-arginine but not D-arginine.
Oxyhaemoglobin, a scavenger of nitric oxide, also abolished the relaxations but methaemoglobin had no such effect.
These results strongly suggest that NO is, or is very closely associated with, the non-adrenergic, non-cholinergic neurotransmitter mediating neurogenic relaxation of the human internal anal sphincter.
It has been recognised for over a century that the internal anal sphincter relaxes in response to rectal distension, a phenomenon called the rectanal inhibitory reflex.
The reflex is a component of normal anorectal behaviour and its integrity is assessed routinely during the investigation of patients with disordered anorectal function.
Despite this we know little of the mechanisms, neuronal and muscular, that are involved.
It is established that the nerves mediating the rectoanal inhibitory reflex lie wholly in the wall of the gut and are thus known as enteric (intrinsic) inhibitory neurons.
They descend from the rectum to the internal anal sphincter and do not use the classical neurotransmitter substances, acetylcholine and noradrenaline.
They are thus classified as non-adrenergic, non-cholinergie (NANC) nerves.
Several NANC neurotransmitters have been implicated here, for example adenosine triphosphate and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, but in humans, evidence supporting their involvement has not been substantiated.
Implausible as it might seem at first, there is now good evidence that nitric oxide (NO) is an important endogenous dioactive substance.
It has been identified as a neurotransmitter in the gastrointestinal tract, and has been implicated in nerve mediated relaxation of the internal anal sphincter.
Nitric oxide is synthesised from L-arginine in a reaction catalysed by NO synthase.
This enzyme exhibits a high degree of substrate specificity (NO is not produced from D-arginine) and is dependent on several cofactors, among which are Ca 2 + , calmodulin, and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate.
Nitric oxide is freely soluble, diffuses rapidly, and has a short half life (three seconds), being inactivated by formation of NO 3 -after contact with the superoxide anion, O 2 -.
It exerts its effects by binding to cytosolic guanylate cyclase and stimulating the production of cyclic guanosine monophosphate.
In humans, the hypothesis that NO is an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the internal anal sphincter is based on results presented in a brief report, which showed that N-nitro-L-arginine, a potent antagonist of NO synthase, abolished NANC nerve mediated relaxation in isolated sphincter tissue.
We have investigated the involvement of NO in greater detail and have examined the effects of exogenous NO, inhibitors of NO synthase, and oxyhaemoglobin, a scavenger of NO, on the behaviour of isolated strips of human internal anal sphincter in vitro.
Methods
Sphincter tissue was taken from patients (four men, seven women; median age 69 (range 57–82) years) undergoing abdominoperineal resection of the rectum and anal canal for low lying rectal carcinoma.
With a dissecting microscope, the epithelium of the anal canal was removed together with the submucosa.
Strips of the distal internal anal sphincter measuring 1×1×10 mm and containing parallel muscle bundles were prepared and mounted for isometric tension recording in superfusion organ baths (capacity 0.2 ml).
The strips were continuously superfused with Krebs solution (37°C) at a rate of 1 ml/ min.
Atropine (10 -6 M) and guanethidine (3×10 -6 M) were present throughout to abolish cholinergic and adrenergic neurotransmission.
Drugs and other agents being investigated were added to the Krebs solution before its entry into the baths.
Recessed platinum ring electrodes 1 cm apart were used for intrinsic nerve stimulation (impulses of 10 V, 0.5 ms duration, frequency 1–30 Hz for 1 second — see results).
The apparatus allowed six strips to be studied simultaneously.
Tension was measured by Pioden transducers and recorded by a six channel Teckman pen recorder.
The strips were initially placed under 1.0 g resting tension and allowed to equilibrate for at least an hour before the start of experiments.
During this time, the strips contracted spontaneously and developed a high myogenic tone (mean (SEM) =0.48 (0.04) g/mg tissue; baseline is residual tone present in calcium free solution).
Krebs solution contained 120 mM NaCl, 5.9 mM KCl, 15.4 mM NaHCO 3 , 1 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , 2.5 mM CaCl, and 11 mM glucose.
Solutions were equilibrated with 97% O 2 and 3% CO 2 .
Chemicals used were atropine sulphate and sodium nitroprusside (BDH Chemicals Ltd), D-arginine and L-arginine (Aldrich Chemical Company Inc), bovine haemoglobin, guanethidine monosulphate, N-monomethyl-D-arginine acetate, N-monomethyl-L-arginine acetate, N-nitro-L-arginine, and tetrodotoxin (all from Sigma Chemicals Co).
Oxyhaemoglobin was prepared as described previously, by reduction of bovine haemoglobin (Sigma) with sodium hydrosulphite (10-fold molar excess) followed by gel filtration with a prepacked disposable column (PD-10, Pharmacia), previously equilibrated with buffered Krebs solution.
The concentration of oxyhaemoglobin was then determined spectrophotometrically (E 5 7 6 n m =15.99 mM -1 cm -1 ).
Methaemoglobin was made in a similar fashion, except that two fold molar excess of potassium ferricyanide was used instead of sodium hydrosulphite.
Where appropriate, results are expressed as mean (SEM), and statistical differences were assessed with the unpaired t test; a value of pwas considered to be significant.
Results
RESPONSE TO SODIUM NITROPRUSSIDE
Sodium nitroprusside is an exogenous donor of NO, and its addition to the superfusate caused dose dependent relaxations (n=18)(fig 1).
Sodium nitroprusside was applied for 60 seconds and a maximal response was achieved at a concentration of 5×10 -7 M, when the residual tone in the strips was equivalent to that present in calcium free solution (zero tone).
RESPONSE TO ELECTRICAL FIELD STIMULATION
Muscle strips relaxed in response to electrical field stimulation with a pulse strength of 10 V and a pulse duration of 0.5 ms (n=24).
The relaxations were frequency dependent, reaching a maximum at 8 Hz.
They could be repeated at three minute intervals (fig 2).
Responses occurred in the presence of atropine and guanethidine, and were all (1–30 Hz) abolished by tetrodotoxin (3×10 -6 M), a universal nerve toxin (fig 2).
This confirmed that the relaxations were neurogenic and mediated by a NANC neurotransmitter.
RESPONSE TO INHIBITORS OF NO SYNTHASE
N-monomethyl-L-arginine and N-nitro-L-arginine are synthetic analogues of L-arginine, and competive antagonists of NO synthase.
Figure 3 shows their dose dependent inhibition of internal anal sphincter nerve mediated relaxation (induced by electrical field stimulation (n= 18)).
At a concentration of 5×10 -5 M, N-monomethyl-L-arginine produced a partial but significant inhibition of the nerve mediated relaxations, reducing them to 72.4% (3.5%) of their original size (n=22)(p).
Addition of D-arginine (5×10 -4 M) had no effect upon this inhibition, but it was reversed by L-arginine at the same concentration (fig 4).
N-monomethyl-D-arginine, the enantiomer (steroisomer) of N-monomethyl-L-arginine, had no effect upon the tissue.
N-monomethyl-L-arginine is a more powerful antagonist of NO synthase.
Its addition to the superfusate (10 -5 M) abolished the response of the strips to electrical field stimulation (n=30)(fig 5).
D-arginine (5×10 -4 M) had no effect upon this inhibition but it was reversed by the addition of L-arginine at the same concentration (fig 5).
EFFECT OF HAEMOGLOBIN
Oxyhaemoglobin has a high affinity for NO and scavenges it from extracellular media; methaemoglobin has no such action.
Addition of oxyhaemoglobin produced inhibition of nerve mediated relaxation in a dose dependent manner (n=6), and the neurogenic response was abolished at a concentration of 5× 10 -5 M (n=20)(fig 6).
Relaxations returned after withdrawal of oxyharmoglobin and a period of recovery (fig 6).
Methaemoglobin had no effect on the tissue.
Discussion
Enteric inhibitory nerves, similar to those that subserve the rectoanal inhibitory reflex, are found throughout the gastrointestinal tract and mediate relaxation in both sphincteric as well as non-sphincteric circular smooth muscle.
They release NANC neurotransmitters and attention has previously concentrated on vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and adenosine triphosphate as the agents involved.
To date however, satisfactory pharmacological evidence that either plays a part in neurogenic relaxation of the human internal anal sphincter has been lacking and the identity of the neurotransmitter responsible has remained obscure.
The studies described here clearly indicate the involvement of NO in this process.
The hypothesis that NO or an NO-like substance is an enteric inhibitory neurotransmitter is based on the following evidence:(1) the enzyme responsible for NO production, NO synthase, has been shown within enteric neurons;(2) NO is released onstimulation of enteric inhibitory NANC nerves,;(3) there is a uniformity of action on gut smooth muscle when NO is applied from an exogenous source and when it is released by nerve stimulation; and agents that inhibit or potentiate the effect of inhibitory nerve stimulation have a similar action on exogenously applied NO.
Conventional neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine and noradrenaline are stored in membrane bound vesicles before their release from presynaptic nerves, and they influence postsynpatic cells by interacting with membrane bound receptors on the cell surface.
Nitric oxide does not seem to conform to this pattern of behaviour and indeed challenges classical concepts of neurotransmission.
Firstly, its receptor, guanylate cyclase, is cytosolic rather than membrane bound.
Secondly, NO is both labile and very lipid soluble.
It is thus unlikely to be packaged in membrane bound vesicles before release.
In an effort to consider these conceptual problems, it has been suggested that NO is stored in a more stable form, bound to another molecule such as cystiene, and there is some evidence supporting this.
Alternatively, NO could be produced on demand only, and it is conceivable that depolarisation makes calcium available for NO synthase activation within the presynpatic neuron.
Another possibility is that depolarisation releases NO synthase into the synaptic cleft and it is this free enzyme that produces NO.
This theory is improbable, however, as the proteolytic enzyme, α-chymotrypsin, enhances rather than inhibits nerve mediated relaxation of the internal anal sphincter and this points against release of a peptide or protein.
The mechanism by which NO causes smooth muscle relaxation has not yet been estalished.
It is recognised that, by activating soluble guanylate cyclase, NO increases synthesis of cyclic guanosine monophosphate and this has been shown to produce membrane hyperpolarisation in colonic smooth muscle.
Such membrane changes are the hallmark of NANC nerve mediated relaxation and are thought to result from an increase in potassium conductance.
The processes responsible for electromechanical coupling have not been determined, but possible mechanisms include enhanced Ca 2 + sequestration and reduced sensitivity of the contractile apparatus to Ca 2 + .
In the experiments described here, sodium nitroprusside, an exogenous source of NO, mimiced the effect of electrical field stimulation in producing relaxation of human internal anal sphincter smooth muscle.
These neurogenic responses could be inhibited, and indeed abolished by antagonists of NO synthase.
This action was dose dependent and enantiomer (stereoisomer) specific.
Also, nerve mediated relaxations were inhibited by oxyhaemoglobin, which implies that NO passes extracellularly to exert its effects.
Taken together, these results strongly indicate that in humans, NO mediates neurogenic relaxation of the internal anal sphincter and indeed, with the stimulations described, there is no reason to suggest involvement of other neurotransmitters.
Whether or not their presence can be completely excluded will depend on the results of subsequent studies in which the effects of a range of stimulations will be examined.
Burleigh previously reported similar actions for N-monomethyl-L-arginine and L-arginine on eurogenic relaxation in human internal anal sphincter smooth muscle.
To our knowledge however, the dose dependent effect of sodium nitroprusside, the enantiomeric specificity of the inhibition of NO synthase (and its reversal by substrates), and the action of oxyhaemoglobin have not been described in this tissue before.
Rattan and coworkers have investigated the role of NO in neurogenic relaxation f the internal anal sphincter in the opossum in vitro and have also assessed involvement of NO in the rectonal inhibitory reflex in the same animal in vivo.
In both preparations, NO seems to play a crucial part as N-monomethyl-L-arginine has a profound antagonistic effect on inhibitory nerve stimulation.
As in the human, this action is both dose and enantiomer specific.
Although the opossum is phylogenically disparate from the human, these findings support our conclusions, particularly because they show the importance of NO in this region in vivo.
The immediate significance of establishing NO as the inhibitory neurotransmitter which mediates neurogenic relaxation of the human internal anal sphincter is that it will allow detailed study of the function and morphology of the intrinsic innervation of this tissue as well as its interrelations withother components of the autonomic nervous system.
These aspects of sphincter physiology can be assessed both in vitro and in vivo, and will not only improve our understanding of normal internal anal sphincter function, but will also shed new light on the pathophysiology of conditions such of Hirschsprung's disease.
and idiopathic anorectal incontinence, in which the intrinsic innervation of the internal anal sphincter is known to be abnormal.
Also, it may prove possible to manipulate NO neurotransmission pharmacologically, either inhibiting or enhancing it, and this could have important therapeutic implications in the management of disordered anorectal function.
Acid secretion and sensitivity to gastrin in patients with duodenal ulcer: effect of eradication of Helicobacter pylori 
Abstract
The effect of ulcer healing with eradication of Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) on gastric function was investigated in nine patients with duodenal ulcer disease.
One month after eradication there were significant reductions in both basal plasma gastrin concentration, from a median (range) of 19 (1–22) to 6 (2–15) pmol/l (p), and of basal acid secretion from 8.3 (2.4–24) to 2.6 (1.4–8.1) mM H + /h (p).
The peak acid secretion rate was unchanged from 37 (16–59) to 37 (21–59) mM H + /h.
After treatment there was no change in the parietal cell sensitivity to stepped infusions of gastrin heptadecapeptide: the median concentration of gastrin required for 50% of maximal acid secretion (EC 5 ) was 41 (14.8–126) before and 33 (23–125) pmol/l after eradication of H pylori .
The metabolic clearance rate of gastrin was also unaffected by the eratication of H pylori .
Thus eradication of H pylori infection from patients with active duodenal ulcers is accompanied by falls in both basal gastrin release and basal acid secretion without a change in the parietal cell sensitivity to gastrin.
Cyclical changes in H pylori infection may cause the variations in basal acid secretion that are seen in duodenal ulcer disease.
Despite the strong epidemiological and clinical evidence implicating the bacterium Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) in the pathogenesis of chronic duodenal ulcer disease, the way that the organism promotes recurrence of ulcers remains unclear.
The discovery that H pylori increases plasma gastrin concentrations raised the possibility that H pylori may be responsible for the known abnormalities of gastric acid secretion that have been described in patients with duodenal ulcers.
These include high basal and peak acid outputs, a high ratio of basal to peak acid secretion, increased meal stimulated acid output, and impairment of the normal inhibition of gastrin release and acid secretion by luminal acid.
Helicobacter pylori increases plasma gastrin concentrations by 50% to 100% and values fall to normal after the organism has been eradicated.
Despite this reduction in plasma gastrin, no consistent changes in rates of acid secretion have been documented after eradication treatment.
This has led to the suggestion that H pylori infection might decrease the sensitivity of parietal cells to gastrin, but other evidence did not support this view.
Chittajallu et al were unable to detect a change in the response to stepped infusions of pentagastrin on eradication of H pylori from patients with duodenal ulcer disease, although circulating concentrations of pentagastrin were not measured.
Furthermore, earlier studies of patients with duodenal ulcer disease, who were presumably mostly infected, showed their parietal cells to be, if anything more sensitive to gastrin than those of controls, although it was not known whether the controls were infected with H pylori .
We therefore studied acid secretory responses to gastrin in a series of patients with duodenal ulcer disease before and after treatment to eradicate H pylori .
Because the hypergastrinaemia in H pylori infection is predominantly due to an increase in the antral gastrin form, gastrin heptadecapeptide (G17), we infused G17 intravenously and determined the effect of eradication of H pylori on acid secretion, parietal cell sensitivity to gastrin, and the metabolic clearance of G17.
Methods
PATIENTS AND TREATMENT
The study was approved by the local ethics committee.
Eleven patients were recruited from our outpatient clinic and informed consent was obtained.
The patients, eight men, had a median age of 34 (range 21–76) years; five were smokers, each smoking 20 cigarettes per day.
As entry criteria they all had active uncomplicated duodenal ulceration at endoscopy and H pylori infection diagnosed by a biopsy urease test, histology, and bacterial culture.
At least two of these tests were positive in all the patients studied at entry.
None had any complicating medical condition or previous history of gastric surgery, or had taken antibiotics or bismuth preparations in the previous six months.
Apart from antacids none of the patients had taken any medical treatment during the 14 days before their initial endoscopy.
Acid secretory responses to gastrin (see later) were measured within five days of endoscopy.
Patients were then treated with 120 mg tripotassium dicitratobismuthate (DeNol, Brocades, Weybridge, Surrey, UK) four times daily for one month, 400 mg metronidazole three times daily, and 500 mg tetracycline four times daily taken concurrently for the first two weeks of treatment.
Four weeks after the end of treatment endoscopy was repeated and biopsies were taken.
The acid secretory tests were repeated within five days of the second endoscopy.
G17 DOSE-RESPONSE STUDIES
Patients attended the clinical investigation unit at 9.00 am after fasting overnight.
Indwelling venous cannulae were inserted into the right forearm for infusion of G17 and into the left forearm for blood sampling.
Gastric acid secretion was measured by aspiration as described by Baron.
Briefly, a nasogastric tube was passed, resting juice was aspirated, and the position of the tube was checked by water recovery.
The tube used was a multifenestrated sump tube with a second channel for infusing phenol red into the proximal stomach and a third lumen for equilibration of intragastic and atmospheric pressure.
The patient remained semirecumbent throughout.
Gastric contents were constantly aspirated under 20 mm Hg negative pressure (Air Shields, Hatboro, Pa, USA) and the patency of the tube was ensured by the manual insufflation of 20 ml air every five miniutes.
The G17 (Gastrin I Human; Sigma, Poole, Dorset, UK) made up in 0.15M saline containing 1% albumin was infused continuously by an infusion pump (Vickers Medical, Basingstoke, Hants, UK) at doses of 0, 11, 33, 100, and 300 pmol/kg/h, each for a 30 minute period.
The largest dose produces maximal stimulation of acid secretion.
Gastric acid was collected continuously on to ice and the acid output during each 15 minute period was measured by titration to pH 7 with 0.1M NaOH.
The rate of acid secretion was calculated with correction for pyloric losses and duodenogastric reflux by phenol red recovery and sodium measurement respectively.
Median (range) gastric juice recoveries were 90 (74–100) % before and 85 (78- 100) % after treatment.
Basal acid output per hour was calculated by doubling the acid output during the 30 minutes of infusion of saline only.
Other acid outputs were calculated by multiplying the acid output during the second 15 minutes of each infusion period by four.
Blood samples were taken at the end of each infusion period for gastrin assay.
MEASUREMENT OF GASTRIN
Blood was collected into chilled tubes containing EDTA and the plasma was separated promptly and frozen at -20°C.
Plasma gastrin concentration was measured by radioimmunoassay with antibody G179 provided by Professor Bloom.
All samples were assayed in duplicate and in the same assay.
Individual dose-response curves were then plotted.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The data were analysed with an Arcus 2 statistical package (Medical Computing, Aughton, W. Lancs, UK).
Wilcoxon's rank sum test was used to compare differences before and after treatment and the results are expressed as medians (ranges) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs).
A p value <was considered to signify statistical significance.
Results
CLINICAL
At repeat endoscopy ulcers had healed in 10 of the 11 patients.
The patient with a duodenal ulcr at the end of treatment (man aged 31 years) had positive urease, histology, and bacteriology for H pylori when retested and a woman aged 66 years still had a positive urease test after treatment.
These patients were excluded from further analysis.
In the remaining nine patients H pylori was successfully eradicated, and endoscopic findings were normal.
Data from these nine patients were then analysed further.
BASAL PLASMA GASTRIN
Basal plasma gastrin concentrations fell significantly after the eradication of H pylori (Fig 1).
The median basal plasma gastrin concentration before treatment was 19 (range 1–22, 95% CI 9–20) pmol/l compared with 6 (2–15, 95% CI 4–11) pmol/l after (p).
BASAL AND PEAK ACID SECRETION RATES
Figure 2 shows that after eradication of H pylori there was a reduction of basal acid output in eight patients and no change in one patient.
The median basal acid output fell significantly from 8.3 (2.4–24, 95% CI 4.4–16) to 2.6 (1.4–8.1, 95% CI 2.0–6.0) mM H + /hour (p).
The peak acid output was unchanged, from 37 (16–59, 95% CI 31–45) to 37 (21–59, 95% CI 27–45) mM H + /hour after treatment.
PARIETAL CELL SENSITIVITY TO GASTRIN
Figure 3 shows that for the nine patients as a group, there was a linear relation between the mean plasma gastrin during infusion of G17 plotted on a log scale and the mean acid output at each of the G17 doses.
This relation was linear both before and after treatment, with correlation coefficients of 0.99 (p, 95% CI 0.89–1.00) and 0.98 (p, 95% CI 0.71–1.00) respectively.
The only differences between the two lines is that after treatment there was a lower mean plasma gastrin concentration and a lower mean acid secretion rate under basal conditions.
Consequently, the mean concentration of gastrin necessary to produce half maximal acid secretion (EC 5 ) was identical, both before and after eradication of H pylori .
Individual dose-response curves for each patient were also plotted.
From these the EC 5 for each patient — rather than the group as a whole — was determined, both before and after eradication of H pylori .
In the nine patients in whom H pylori was eradicated, the median correlation coefficient of the individual regression plot of log dose against response was 0.93 (0.85–0.96) before and 0.94 (0.89–0.99) after treatment.
There was no significance difference in the EC 5 after the eradication of H pylori .
The median EC 5 was 41 (14.8–126) pmol/l before and 33 (23–125) pmol/l after eradication.
The basal-subtracted EC 5 — the concentration of gastrin necessary to increase acid secretion from basal to half maximal acid secretion — has been advocated by some workers to be a more appropriate index of parietal cell sensitivity.
This is because this analysis excludes the effect of changes in basal acid secretion, which is thought to be independent of gastrin dependent.
We therefore also plotted individual dose-response curves of log plasma gastrin against the basal-subtracted acid output.
The correlation coefficients for these plots were 0.94 (0.85–0.96) and 0.94 (0.88–0.99) before and after treatment respectively.
In the nine patients in whom H pylori was successfully eradicated the median basal-subtracted EC 5 fell significantly, from 104 (18–171, 95% CI 53–150) to 48 (26–136, 95% CI 34–103) pmol/l (p).
METABOLIC CLEARANCE RATES OF G17
By comparing the infused G17 dose with the plasma gastrin response the metabolic clearance rate of G17 can be calculated by two different methods as described by Blair et al .
The clearance rate can be calculated by the reciprocal of the slope of the regression line between G17 dose and plasma gastrin and by the plateau principle at an infusion rate of G17 of 300 pmol/ kg/hour.
The metabolic clearance rate of G17 was 8 (6–93) before and 8 (6–76) ml/kg.min after treatment when calculated by the first method and 9 (6–74) and 8 (6–62) ml/kg.min respectively by the second method.
Therefore the clearance of G17 was not altered by the eradication of H pylori .
Discussion
Our current results confirm that treatment which both heals duodenal ulcers and eradicates H pylori significantly decreases basal plasma gastrin concentrations.
We have also shown for the first time such treatment also decreases basal gastric acid secretion significantly.
Thus H pylori infection combined with active ulceration may cause the increased basal acid secretion seen in duodenal ulcer disease.
Several previous studies have shown that eradication of H pylori , with or without ulcer healing, produces a fall in fasting plasma gastrin concentrations.
Abolition of the exaggerated gastrin release is probably due to an increase in the synthesis of somatostatin in the antral mucosa.
Despite a fall in the basal plasma gastrin concentration, however, it has not been shown previously that eradication of H pylori can significantly decrease the basal acid output.
Two previous studies, one by outselves in patients with duodenal ulcers and another by Mountbriand et al in dyspeptic patients showed no significant change in basal acid output after anti- H pylori treatment.
In both studies the patients were retested within a week of ending treatment, however, so that in some cases infection may have persisted.
When six patients with duodenal ulsers in whom H pylori had been eradicated were retested after 12 months, we found that the median basal acid output fell by about 40%, although the change was not significant.
Fullarton et al noted a fall of about the same degree, one month after eradicating H pylori from eight patients with inactive duodenal ulcer disease, but again the change was not statistically significant.
We also found the basal acid output to be significantly greater in patients with duodenal ulcers and with H pylori than in patients with duodenal ulcers without this infection.
It is difficult to deduce the physiological effect of H pylori on basal secretion from this and other studies in which patients do not act as their own controls, because other differences between the groups might affect acid secretion.
For example,H pylori is implicated in the pathogenesis of atrophic gastritis, which may have led to decreased acid secretion through loss of parietal cells in groups of chronically infected subjects in some studies.
The fall in basal acid secretion found may not necessarily be due to the eradication of H pylori .
Achord noted that the basal acid output decreased after healing of an ulcer by drugs that do not eradicate H pylori , implying that the ulcer crater is itself associated with increased basal acid secretion.
Further studies will be necessary to determine which factor — the ulcer crater or H pylori — is reponsible for the increased basal acid output.
Our present findings are consistent with the generally accepted view that peak acid output reflects the parietal cell mass and is not altered by eradication of H pylori .
the main purpose of our present study was to determine whether chronic infection with H pylori alters the sensitivity of the parietal cells to gastrin.
This was suggested by the relative lack of change in rates of acid secretion and intragastric acidity on eradication of H pylori despite substantial falls in circulating gastrin concentrations, and by the suppression of acid secretion produced by H pylori on first infection.
We measured circulating gastrin to determine the concentrations of gastrin required to produce half maximal acid secretion.
There has been debate as to whether this should be calculated with or without subtraction of basal acid secretion.
It is widely held that the increased basal acid secretion in patients with duodenal ulcer disease is determined by vagal drive rather than circulating gastrin.
This is the rationale for determining the basal subtracted EC 5 in some previous studies.
We found that basal-subtracted EC 5 does fall significantly on eradication of H pylori , suggesting that the infection initially present did indeed decrease the sensitivity of parietal cells to gastrin.
The effect of eradication of H pylori on basal gastrin and acid secretion is more consistent with the idea that circulating gastrin is responsible for driving basal acid secretion in patients with duodenal ulcer, because the fall in basal gastrin concentration on eradication was accompanied by a proportional fall in basal acid secretion.
Therefore the EC 5 , rather than the derived basal-substracted EC 5 , islikely to be the most appropriate measure of parietal cell sensitivity and the EC 5 did not change after healing with eradication of H pylori .
It is now clear that the change in basal-subtracted EC 5 on eradication plus healing is only a mathematical consequence of the fall in gastrin driven basal acid secretion.
This is best appreciated when the mean acid output is plitted against mean plasma gastrin concentration for each G17 infusion (Fig 3); the two lines are identical when exogenous gastrin is infused.
These graphs are similar to those obtained by Hirschowitz et al and by Blair et al who compared G17 dose-response curves in patients with ulcers and control subjects, after normalising for differences in park acid secretion rates; the only difference between the two groups of patients was under basal conditions.
Balri et al found that the metabolic clearance rate of G17 was lower in patients with duodenal ulcers than in controls.
Our results show no change in the clearance of G17 on eradication of H pylori .
The results that we obtained were similar to the results in their duodenal ulcer group so that the results of Blair et al cannot be explained by the presence of H pylori .
Our present results show that healing of duodenal ulcers with a regime that also eradicates H pylori produces a fall in basal acid secretion that may be due to the concomitant fall in basal plasma gastrin concentration.
Increased basal acid secretion has been implicated in duodenal ulcerogenesis and correction of this abnormality may contribute to the prolonged remissions of this disease seen after eradication of H pylori .
Comparison of bismuth citrate and 5-aminosalicylic acid enemas in distal ulcerative colitis: a controlled trial
Abstract
An enema that contained a complex of bismuth citrate and polyacrylate was compared with 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) enemas for treatment of distal ulcerative colitis.
The multicentre trial involving 63 patients was randomised and double blind with enemas given over four weeks; clinical, sigmoidoscopic, and histological assessments were made.
Improvements were seen in both treatment groups.
Clinical remission was seen in 18 of 32 patients treated with 5-ASA and 12 of 31 patients treated with bismuth citrate — carbomer ().
Sigmoidoscopic remission occurred in 20 of 32 patients in the 5-ASA group and 15 of 31 patients given bismuth ().
Improvement of rectal biopsy histology by at least one grade was seen in 16 of 32 patients in the 5-ASA group and 14 of 31 patients with bismuth ().
Analysis of covariance gave no significant difference between groups, although there was a trend favouring 5-ASA.
There was no evidence of bismuth accumulation during the trial.
Bismuth enemas may offer a new therapeutic option in distal ulcerative colitis.
In recent years enemas of 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) have proved effective for treatment of distal ulcerative colitis and results have been comparable with those from steroid enemas.
In the course of trying to identify therapeutic agents for this disease two recent studies have shown benefit with bismuth preparations.
Encouraged by these findings we have formulated a bismuth enema and compared it with 5-ASA enemas in patients with active distal colitis to examine the therapeutic effect.
Methods
Sixty eight patients with active left sided ulcerative colitis were identified from gastroenterology outpatients in three centres and randomly allocated to receive either 5-ASA enemas (2 g 5-aminosalicylic in 100 ml) or bismuth-citrate-carbomer enemas.
The bismuth enemas contained 450 mg bismuth citrate, equivalent to 216 mg of metallic bismuth with 900 mg carbomer 934P (Carbopol, Goodrich Ltd, UK) in 100 ml with a pH of 6.5 to 7.4.
Patients were instructed to administer the enema once daily before retiring to bed and were warned that they may pass dark stools as a result of treatment.
All had either a rigid or flexible sigmoidoscopic examination and where the upper limit was not identified, extent of disease was established by barium enema or colonoscopy.
Exclusion criteria were the presence of enteric infection on stool culture, inability to retain enemas for at least one hour, hypersensitivity to aminosalicylates, pregnancy or lactation, and use of steroid enemas in the previous two weeks.
The patients' usual dose of other medications taken for colitis such as oral mesalazine, olsalazine, sulphasalazine, and corticosteroids taken in the previous month remained unchanged throughout the trial.
Clinical, sigmoidoscopic, biopsy, haematological, and biochemical assessments were made at the beginning and end of the four week trial period or when patients were withdrawn prematurely.
Serum bismuth concentration was measured initially and after two and four weeks with samples taken 12 to 16 hours after enema administration.
Symptoms were assessed in terms of general health, and the number of stools passed each day, with a note of their consistency and the presence of blood and mucus in the stool.
The occurrence of abdominal pain, anorexia, nausea, and any systemic complications of colitis were noted.
The symptoms were combined with the sigmoidoscopic findings to give a ‘St Mark's score’.
A diary card was kept during the trial to record stool frequency, its consistency, and the presence of blood and mucus.
General wellbeing and urgency were also recorded by a scoring system; wellbeing was scored 1 to 10 (poor to very well) and urgency from 1 to 10 (none to severe).
An overall clinical global grade was given according to Truelove and Witts (table I) At the end of the study patients were asked whether they found the enemas acceptable or whether they had encountered difficulty in their administration.
The severity of inflammatory change was graded visually at sigmoidoscopy with a scale devised by Baron et al (table I).
A biopsy was taken 8 cm from the anal margin on the anterior rectal wall; these were subsequently examined histologically to assess inflammatory activity, which was graded in a standard manner (table I).
All assessments were made without knowledge of the treatment group.
STATISTICAL TESTS
Characteristics of the two treatment groups at entry were compared with the unpaired t test and χ 2 test for the sex ratio.
The paired t test was used to examine changes over the trial period within each group.
As the two treatment groups were not identical in severity of disease at the start of the trial, an analysis of covariance, with corresponding confidence intervals, was used to compare each measure between the groups after treatment, making adjustments for the differences in severity of disease before treatment as measured by the corresponding baseline measurement.
The χ 2 test was also used for proportions exhibiting specified changes.
Results
Although 68 patients were admitted to the trial five were subsequently withdrawn from further analysis.
Three of these had discontinued treatment themselves after only a few days and failed to keep further appointments, one was found to have severe total colonic disease on colonoscopy, and one was found to have Crohn's disease; none of these five patients had side effects from treatment and were deemed unsuitable for analysis.
Of the three who discontinued thier own treatment one had multiinfarct dementia and the other two, contacted by phone, had improved but did not wish to take further part in the study.
Of the remaining 63 patients six were withdrawn before the end of the trial period for reasons given in table II.
The subsequent analyses are based on the principle of intention to treat, applied to the total group of 63 patients.
Thirty two patients were given 5-ASA and 31 bismuth enemas.
Table III gives the concurrent treatment, sex ratios, and means and standard deviations for age, weight, duration of disease, and duration of the recent flare up; the groups were similar in most respects although there was a difference in the sex ratio.
On admission to the trial those given 5-ASA had less severe symptoms than the bismuth group although the differences in symptoms and in both sigmoidoscopic and histological grades did not achieve statistical significance (table IV).
The initial global clinical scores for symptoms were 1.7 (SD 0.5) and 1.9 (SD 0.4) respectively for the 5-ASA and bismuth groups.
These differences were also reflected in the St Mark's score and grades for sigmoidoscopy and histology in the two groups (table IV).
There was a significant improvement in all symptoms with both 5-ASA and bismuth enemas.
The improvement was noted in the global clinical assessment, stool frequency, occurrence of blood, changes in stool consistency, occurrence of abdominal pain, urgency, and the patients overall assessment of general well being.
The St Mark's score, change in sigmoidoscopic grading, and histology all showed significant improvement in both groups (table IV).
The improvement in both treatment groups was compared by analysis of covariance taking into account the differences in severity of disease on entry to the trial.
The only statistically significant difference between the groups was for the presence of blood in the stool; 5-ASA patients had significantly less blood reported than the bismuth group.
The presence of mucus in the stool was not analysed because the bismuth enema itself had the appearance of white mucus, which invalidated any comparison.
A comparison of patients who achieved complete symptomatic relief (global clinical grade of 0; defined as less than three motions per day, with formed stools, no urgency, mucus, or blood) showed 18 of 32 in the 5-ASA group compared with 12 of 31 who used bismuth (χ 2 1.94; p=0.16).
Sigmoidoscopic appearances returned to normal (grade 0) in 20 of 32 taking 5-ASA and 15 of 31 in the bismuth group (χ 2 1.27; p=0.26).
Improvement by at least one histological grade in the rectal biopsy was seen in 16 of 32 who used 5-ASA and 14 of 31 given bismuth (χ 2 0.15; p=0.70).
Among those completing the trial there were no side effects reported.
Although 5-ASA enemas were easier to administer (only one patient had difficulty compared with six in the bismuth group), bismuth was easier to retain (eight patients on 5-ASA had difficulties but only two patients on bismuth).
BISMUTH CONCENTRATIONS IN SEUM SAMPLES
Serum samples for measurement of bismuth were collected from 46 patients of whom 25 were in the bismuth group; only those from the bismuth group were analysed at the end of the study.
Analysis was by atomic absorption spectrophotometry.
After two weeks of treatment median serum bismuth concentration was 3 ng/g (interquartile range 2.0 to 6.0) and at trial exit it was 3 ng/g (interquartile range 1.75 to 6.25).
At two weeks, however, one patient had a serum bismuth concentration well outside this range (44 ng/g); she denied use of any other dismuth medications and the concentration fell to 3 ng/g in the succeeding two weeks.
Discussion
This is the first controlled trial of a bismuth enema preparation in patients with distal ulcerative colitis. 5-Aminosalicylic acid was used as the alternative treatment because it is one of the most effective topical treatments available.
After four weeks there were significant improvements in symptoms as well as sigmoidoscopic and histological grades that were of a similar degree in both groups.
Every attempt was made to ensure that the trial was double blind.
Although enemas did not appear identical they were only labelled with the trial number.
Information about the nature of the enema was withheld from the clinician involved in assessments.
The histological assessments were made without knowledge of either patient group or the order of biopsies.
The improvements that occurred during treatment with both preparations were similar and did not differ statistically between the groups.
The method of analysis of covariance was used to take into account the small, random differences in severity of disease between treatment groups at the commencement of the trial that arise when random allocation is used.
In this respect groups did not differ statistically but the adjustment is standard practice and allows a fairer comparison.
Results with 5-ASA were slightly better, although not statistically significant, than those obtained with the bismuth preparation.
An exception to this was the reporting of blood in motions, where 5-ASA was significantly better.
Table IV gives a comparison of the change in scores during treatment with the two types of enema; negative values from the analysis of covariance favour the 5-ASA enema.
To establish one enema as clearly superior would have required many more patients.
Because of ethical considerations no placebo group was established and it is conceded that this inevitably limits the strength of overall conclusions made.
In particular, spontaneous improvement in both groups, who were recruited in exacerbation, could well occur irrespective of treatment.
The results give further support to previous pilot studies with bismuth preparations.
Srivastava et al used tripotassium dicitratobismuthate equivalent to 432 mg of metallic bismuth, neutralised to pH 7 with a viscious solution of Keltrol given at night and found improvement in nine of 11 patients who used this enema for one month.
Ryder et al used bismuth subsalicylate with a maximum dose of 928 mg metallic bismuth as an enema in 15 patients with colitis unresponsive to conventional treatment; they found oral bismuth subsalicylate ineffective but with twice daily enemas over eight weeks symptoms improved in nine patients and sigmoidoscopy findings improved in 11 patients.
The dose of bismuth in our enema was equivalent to half the recommended dose of DeNoltabs for gastric pathology (432 mg metallic bismuth).
Our aim was to limit any potential toxicity from absorption and allow the possibility of doubling the dose with enemas twice daily should this be required in clinical use.
Measurements of bismuth in serum samples during the trial enabled us to monitor whether significant accumulation occurred.
Median concentrations were low (3 ng/g serum) with narrow ranges.
One patient had higher concentrations after two weeks of treatment but not at the conclusion of the trial.
There was no evidence of accumulation of bismuth from the enemas.
Previous work had suggested accumulation of bismuth in the body when tripotassium dicitratobismuthate was taken orally, although this has been disputed.
Our own unpublished data on absorption from these enemas indicates that less than 0.02% of administered bismuth is absorbed.
This, and the quoted safe level for serum bismuth (10–50 µg/l) reassures us of the low toxic potential for this enema.
The authors of both previous pilot studies of bismuth in colitis were prompted to use the heavy metal because of previous reports of benefit with arsenical compounds.
Bismuth has also become popular in recent years as a treatment in peptic ulcer to eradicate Helicobacter pylori .
It has been used for many years in traveller's diarrhoea, as a colostomy deodoriser, and as an antispirochetal agent in syphilis.
The carbomer 934P is a synthetic polyacrylate characterised by multiple side chains of carboxyl groups.
In the pharmaceutical industry it is used as a suspending agent for liquids and as a binder in tablets.
It has been shown to promote gel formation with mucin monomers from both gastric and colonic mucus.
In the colon it also inhibits faecal protease activity, which is responsible for mucolysis and solubilisation of the adherent layer of mucus gel.
We found that bismuth compounds, both citrate and subsalicylate, formed soluble complexes with the carbomer and at pH 6.4 to 7.5 produced a viscous mucus-like solution that was convenient to administer and retain as an emena.
We used carbomer primarily as a vehicle for the bismuth to try to achieve adherence to the surface mucosa with optimal topical application of the bismuth.
In ulcerative colitis the adherent visible layer of mucus is absent from actively inflamed areas — a feature that does not apply in Crohns disease.
The nature of any factors within the colonic lumen that may be responsible for either the initiation or continuation of inflammation remains unknown but recent attention has focused on the possible role of flora associated with the mucosa.
Support for this comes from the finding that faecal protease activity, largely derived from bacteria, is increased threefold in colitis.
Because bismuth is known to have a toxic effect on some microorganisms its therapeutic benefit in colitis may be related to this.
Whether loss of the adherent mucus is related to anaerobic flora associated with the mucosa is an interesting possibility.
An alternative might be interference with bacterial adhesion by pathogenic Escherichia coli , which have abnormal adherence in ulcerative colitis.
Bismuth, because of its effects on enzyme systems in bacteria, may have a therapeutic effect in colitis through this mechanism.
The carbomer 934P may also have an effect, however, because it inhibits faecal protease activity and facilitates the formation of a viscous gel in vitro.
The possibility that the complex may be effective by all of these mechanisms cannot be excluded.
The relative contribution of each component cannot be clarified from this study.
Our findings suggest that bismuth citrate complexed with carbomer 934P is of therapeutic benefit in left sided ulcerative colitis with results that do not differ significantly from those obtained from 5-ASA enemas.
It may act by a novel mechanism and offers a further therapeutic possibility for those who are intolerant of aminosalicylates.
Down regulation of epidermal growth factor receptors in liver proliferation induced by a mixture of triiodothyronine, amino acids, glucagon, and heparin (TAGH)
Abstract
This study investigated the mechanisms by which TAGH solution (a mixture of triiodothyronine, amino acids, glucagon, and heparin) induces DNA synthesis in hepatocytes in the liver of intact rats, with particular reference to events at the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor.
Both partial hepatectomy and infusion of TAGH stimulated DNA synthesis at 24 hours and both procedures resulted in a reduction of EGF receptors assessed in plasma membranes isolated from rat liver at this time.
In cell cultures, while EGF strongly stimulated DNA synthesis and started EGF receptor down regulation, TAGH had only a minor effect (1.5×basal) on DNA synthesis and did not interact with or down regulate the EGF receptor.
Membrane phosphorylation studies, however, showed that TAGH induced phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in the EGF receptor.
The in vivo action of TAGH seems to entail recruitment of similar changes in the EGF receptor to those that occur after partial hepatectomy.
The factors controlling hepatocyte proliferation are complex and incompletely understood.
Prominent events at the hepatocyte membrane after induction of DNA synthesis in rat livers by partial hepatectomy include down regulation and phosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor.
These events can also be seen when EGF is used to start DNA synthesis in hepatocytes in vitro.
Ligand binding to the EGF receptor therefore seems to be integrally associated with liver cell proliferation.
Short et al described the action of TAGH solution — a mixture of triiodothyronine, amino acids, glucagon and heparin — as an initiator of DNA synthesis, hepatocyte mitosis, and also causing an increase in liver size in intact rats.
The time course of DNA synthesis after the start of the infusion was the same as that following 70% hepatectomy, enhancement of DNA formation occurring within 15 hours.
The mechanism of action of TAGH has not been elucidated.
As the constituents of TAGH solution are readily available as pharmaceutical preparations, this offers a potential treatment for severe liver diseases in which hepatic regeneration would be beneficial.
We therefore investigated the mode of action of TAGH by comparing in vivo and in vitro phenomena induced in hepatocytes by EGF and TAGH.
The findings show that in vivo TAGH results in EGF receptor down regulation; in in vitro hepatocyte cultures TAGH does not induce EGF receptor down regulation, although it was capable of inducing phosphorylation of tyrosine residues of the EGF receptor in liver plasma membrane preparations in vitro.
Materials and methods
ANIMALS
All experiments were performed on male August rats (250–300 g)(National Institute of Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, UK), and all procedures were carried out between 9.00 am and noon.
Seventy per cent hepatectomy was performed as described by Higgins and Anderson under ether anaesthetic.
Sham operations consisted of laparotomy and gentle manipulation of the liver.
The TAGH solution (9 ml) was made up fresh at the time of the experiment and infused by the tail vein from 20 ml hyperdermic syringes mounted in horizontal syringe pumps set to deliver 3 ml/h.
The TAGH solution consisted of 100 µg of triiodothyronine (200 µl), 1 mg of glucagon (1 ml), 100 units of heparin (100 µl) and 7.7 ml of an amino acid mixture (Synthamin 14*).
*Synthamin 14 is a commercial mixture of nine essential and six non-essential L-amino acids (8.5% wt/vol).
The solution was adjusted to pH 7.2 with 0.01 M sodium hydroxide.
MATERIALS
[6- 3 H]-Thymidine (specific activity 25–30 Ci/ mmol) and carrier free Na 1 2 5 I were obtained from Amersham International PLC, Amersham, Bucks, UK.
William's medium E, fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin/streptomycin, fungizone (amphotericin B), gentamycin, and Nunclon microwell plates were obtained from Gibco, Paisley, Renfrewshire, Scotland.
Insulin (human monocomponent, actrapid) and glucagon were purchased from Novo, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Triiodothyronine was from Sigma.
Heparin was from Leo Labs Ltd, Princes Risborough, Bucks, UK.
Collagenase (Clostridium histolyticum ) was purchased from Boehringer Mannheim Ltd, Lewes, East Sussex, UK.
The amino acid solution, Synthamin 14, was purchased from Travenol Laboratories Ltd, Compton, Berks, UK.
Collaborative Research mouse EGF (tissue culture grade) was obtained from Universal Biologicals, London, UK.
Other reagents and chemicals were from Sigma Chemical Company or BDH Chemicals, both of Poole, Dorset, UK.
IN VIVO 3 H-THYMIDINE INCORPORATION
Rats received an intraperitoneal injection of 3 H-thymidine (0.5 µCi/g body weight) one hour before death.
Twenty four hours after partial hepatectomy or the start of the TAGH infusion rats, were anaesthetised and the liver perfused in place with ice cold saline to remove excess blood.
The liver was rapidly removed and placed on ice.
A small section of liver was frozen for measurement of thymidine incorporation.
The remaining tissue was used to prepare liver cell plasma membranes.
3 H-thymidine incorporation into liver DNA was measured biochemically by a modification of the method of Munro and Fleck, as described in Vesey et al .
ISOLATION AND CULTURE OF HEPATOCYTES
Adult rat hepatocytes were isolated using a modification of the Berry and Friend procedure, as described in Vesey et al 1992.
Cells were resuspended at 3×10 5 or 2×10 5 viable cells/ml in William's medium E, without L-glutamine, supplemented with penicillin (200 IU/ml); streptomycin (200 IU/ml); gentamycin (80 µg/ml); fungizone (1.25 µg/ml); 5% (vol/ vol) heat inactivated fetal bovine serum and dexamethazone (10 -8 M)(plating medium) and seeded on rat tail collagen (type-1) coated Nunclon 24-well cluster trays or 96-well microtitre tissue culture plates, at densities of 7.5×10 4 /cm 2 and at 6.25×10 4 /cm 2 respectively.
PLASMA MEMBRANE PREPARATION
Rat liver plasma membranes prepared by the method of Aronson and Touster were resuspended in 5 mM HEPES buffer pH 7.5 at approximately 5 mg/ml and stored in liquid nitrogen until used.
Protein concentrations were determined by a modification of the method of Lowry using BSA as a standard.
IODINATION OF EGF
EGF was iodinated by a modification of the chloramine-T method to give a specific activity of between 20 to 60 µCi/µg as pregiously described.
EGF BINDING STUDIES
On hepatocytes — binding studies on whole cells were carried out in 24 well cluster trays.
For analysis of receptor numbers and affinity cells were incubated with increasing amounts of 1 2 5 I-EGF (30–4000 fmoles) for 2.5 hours, and non-specific binding determined at each point by inclusion of a 1–2 µg/ml of unlabelled EGF in replicate cultures.
This was subtracted from total counts bound to obtain specific binding.
Points represent the means of triplicate measurements.
On plasma membranes — increasing amounts of 1 2 5 I-EGF (50–3000 fmoles) were incubated with between 60 and 100 µg of membrane protein for 60 minutes.
Measurements were made in triplicate.
Binding data were analysed and curves fitted using the GraphPAD Inplot computer programme (San Diego, CA, USA).
IN VITRO 3 H-THYMIDINE INCORPORATION
DNA synthesis was assessed in cultured hepatocytes by measurement of 3 H-thymidine incorporation into cell DNA after stimulation with insulin (10 -7 M) and EGF (20 ng/ml) or plating medium containing the dilutions of TAGH for 24 hours (see Tables).
The amount in quadruplicate of 3 H-thymidine incorporated was assessed biochemically as described by Selden and Hodgson.
EGF RECEPTOR PHOSPHORYLATION STUDIES
Phosphorylation studies were carried out essentially as Rubin et al .
The reaction was performed at 0°C in a total volume of 50 µl, containing 50 µg of membrane protein, 50 mM Pipes at pH 7.0, 30 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, and 0.32 mM EGTA.
Factors, EGF (5 µg/ml in H 2 O), or TAGH solution (10 µl), or water (10 µl) as control were added to the tubes.
After 15 minutes p-reincubation at 0°C the reaction was started by addition of 15 µCi (15 µl) of γ 3 2 P ATP to a final concentration of 2 mM.
It was stopped after one minute with 25 µl of 9% SDS sample buffer (0.0015% bromophenol blue, 10 ml of 2% SDS, 25 mM TRIS pH 6.8, and 20% sucrose).
Tubes were sealed and heated for three minutes at 100°C.
Aliquots (40 nl) were subjected to electrophoresis on 5% SDS PAGE slab gels.
PHOSPHOAMINO ACID ANALYSIS
The band corresponding to the EGF receptor was excised and the protein eluted from the gel strip in 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate containing SDS (0.1%) and Β -mercaptoethanol (5%) at 37°C.
After hydrolysis in hydrochloric acid (5.7 M) at 110°C it was lyophilised and the sample dissolved in a mixture of the phosphoamino acids, phosphoserine, phosphothreonine, and phosphotyrosine.
The phosphoamino acids were separated by high voltage then layer chromatography on cellulose plates in mixture of pyridine, acetic acid, and water in the ratio 5:50:945 for 1000 volt hours.
Standards were visualised with ninhydrin and the radioactive phosphoamino acids by autoradiography.
Results
IN VIVO STUDIES
Liver cells proliferation was stimulated in vivo by both 70% partial hepatectomy and by an intravenous infusion of 9 ml of TAGH solution over three hours.
The mean increase in incorporation of 3 H-thymidine into liver compared with controls was 60-fold 24 hours after partial hepatectomy and eightfold after TAGH infusion (Table I).
The well described fall in EGF receptor numbers after partial hepatectomy was confirmed.
Scatchard analysis (Table II) of binding data (not shown) show a 45% reduction 24 hours following a 70% hepatectomy.
An infusion of TAGH reduced 1 2 5 I-EGF binding to liver plasma membranes, isolated 24 hours after the start of infusion, by 20% compared with saline (Fig 1).
Table II shows the EGF binding parameters of these membranes.
IN VITRO STUDIES — HEPATOCYTE CULTURES
Primary cultures of adult hepatocytes showed EGF binding, but with a progressive reduction with time in culture (Fig 2).
Although there is a slight reduction in the number of cells per well over the culture period this could not account for the reduction in EGF binding seen.
During the period from five to 30 hours in culture the number of receptors per cell fell from 2.3×10 5 to 1.1×10 5 .
Over the same period there was also a slight reduction in receptor affinity; the kilodalton (Kd) changed from 0.83 nM to 1.4 nM.
This reduction was not dependent on the addition of exogenous EGF.
Addition of exogenous EGF to cultured cells resulted in down regulation of the receptors (Table III).
The stimulatory effect of EGF in the dose range was confirmed (data not shown), with a typically increased in DNA synthesis of eight to 12-fold over basal in the presence of 10 ng/ml EGF.
Addition of TAGH to hepatocytes in culture gave a low level of stimulation of DNA synthesis which did not exceed 1.5×basal at any concentrations tested (Table IV).
TAGH did not compete with binding of labelled EGF, or start down regulation of the EGF receptor on the isolated cells (Table V).
MEMBRANE PHYSOPHORYLATION STUDIES
The ability of EGF to induce autophosphorylation of the EGF receptor in plasma membranes isolated from normal rat liver and liver membranes of animals 24 hours after partial hepatectomy and TAGH infusion was compared.
Incubation of normal membranes with EGF (5 µg/ml) in the presence of γ 3 2 P labelled ATP, induced a striking enhancement of phosphorylation of the 170 kDa band corresponding to the EGF receptor.
Less noticeable phosphorylation of the receptor was seen in response to EGF in liver plasma membranes isolated 24 hours after partial hepatectomy and in TAGH infusion (Figs 3 and 4).
Normal plasma membranes were exposed to TAGH to investigate its effects on membrane phosphorylation.
TAGH (1/10 dilution) induced a similar degree of phosphorylation of the 170 kDa band as was induced by EGF (Fig 4).
There was no evidence of enhanced phosphorylation of proteins at other molecular weights by TAGH.
Phosphoamino acid analysis performed on acid hydrolysates of the phosphorylated 170 kDa band, showed that both EGF and TAGH specifically induced phosphorylation of tyrosine residues (Fig 5).
Discussion
A substantial body of evidence implicates events at the EGF receptor as the start of hepatocyte proliferation after partial hepatectomy.
EGF can start liver DNA synthesis when infused into intact rats and when added to primary hepatocyte in cultures — these events are associated with EGF receptor phosphorylation and down regulation; EGF given to partially hepatectomised rats is targeted in enhanced amounts to the nucleus — the site of meximum hepatic uptake corresponds to those areas of the liver where regeneration is most active; partial hepatectomy results in substantial down regulation of the EGF receptor.
Recent studies have suggested that in vivo, at the time of partial hepatectomy, the ligand responsible for down regulation of the EGF is in fact TGFα, which is synthesised in the liver immediately after partial hepatectomy, and is a powerful hepatic mitogen via the EGF receptor.
In this study we have induced hepatocyte DNA snythesis in the intact liver with an infusion of TAGH, and shown similar changes in the EGF receptor to those occurring after partial resection.
Both partial hepatectomy and TAGH infusion lead to EGF receptor down regulation shown by reduced binding of EGF to liver plasma membranes isolated 24 hours later.
In studies on such membranes isolated after partial hepatectomy or TAGH infusion, EGF induced less receptor phosphorylation than in normal membranes: reduced EGF induced autophosphorylation of the EGF receptor in membranes from the livers of hepatectomised rats has previously been attributed to the reduced receptor density on such membranes.
These findings suggest TAGH infusion leads to a similar process of EGF receptor phosphorylation and internalisation as occurs after partial hepatectomy.
One hypothesis for the similarity of the events started by TAGH and liver resection at the EGF receptor is that TAGH (or a component thereof) directly interacts with the EGF receptor at the hepatocyte membrane.
In cell culture conditions, however, in which exogenous EGF can readly be shown to down regulate its receptor and start hepatocyte DNA synthesis, TAGH showed no ability to down regulate the receptor, nor did it competitively inhibit EGF binding.
Thus the modest increase in DNA synthesis started in hepatocyte cultures by TAGH (1:5000) is of similar magnitude to that reported for triiodothyronine alone and must act by a pathway other than that of direct interaction with the EGF binding site of the EGF receptor.
One shortcoming of the experiments reported here is that the effect of TAGH in inducing phosphorlyation of membranes in vitro was only detected at high doses of TAGH.
The necessity for using very high doses of reagents, however, to detect in vitro phosphorylation of membranes, is well recognised.
EGF itself is used, by others as well as ourselves, at doses 100 to 1000 times that used for inducing DNA synthesis in cell cultures, because the phosphorylation is not readily detectable at a lower dose.
The high dose of TAGH, when used in the cell culture system, did not induce DNA synthesis, but in contrast there was a substantial decrease (by greater than 90%) in amino acid incorporation into protein (data not shown), showing that at those concentrations there was local toxicity to the whole cell.
It seems, however, very unlikely that ‘toxicity’ to isolated membranes could induce the specific tryosine phosphorylation of the EFG receptor that we have shown.
If TAGH can cause EGF receptor phosphorylation not only in isolated liver cell membranes, but in vivo, this may constitute the mechanism by which it stimulates DNA synthesis.
TAGH might be acting by enhancing the effect of the physiological levels of ligands of the EGF receptor in the hepatocyte environment by phosphorylation of the EGF receptor.
Our cell culture experiments do not support this suggestion as they did not show the synergy between EGF and TAGH that would be predicted, but because of the inhibitory effect of TAGH alone at the concentrations used, they cannot refute this possibility.
As a direct interaction of a component of TAGH with the EGF binding site on the receptor is not apparent, the mechanism by which TAGH leads to EGF receptor phosphorylation is unclear.
It is possible that the tyrosine phosphorylation caused by TAGH is not autophosphorylation of the receptor — that is, by activation of the receptors own tyrosine kinase, but is induced by other tyrosine kinases.
Whether the tyrosine phosphorylation pattern of the receptor in response to TAGH is the same as that caused by EGF or TGFα was not investigated.
Different sites or patterns of phosphorylation might be expected to result in different secondary events within the hyepatocyte.
Further consideration of this would also require elucidation of whether TAGH induces similar phosphorylation of the receptor in vivo as occurs on membranes in vitro.
It is possible that the striking proliferative events started by TAGH in vivo reflect secondary actions of TAGH.
TAGH might stimulate formation or release of EGF from duodenum, submaxillary glands, or platelets, or stimulate TGFα synthesis or release in the intact liver.
This second possibility is under investigation.
New non-invasive test of gastric acid secretion for use in children
Abstract
Loss of the gastric acid barrier may lead to recurrent enteric infections, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, persistent diarrhoea, and thus malnutrition.
To investigate this possibility, a new, non-invasive test of gastric acid secretion was developed ideal for ield use in the third world, where chronic diarrhoea and undernutrition are common.
The test relies on the capacity of the kidney to retain H + during gastric acid secretion, leading to a postprandial urine ‘alkaline tide’.
Gastric intubation studies of seven healthy adult volunteers showed a direct relation between changes in gastric acid secretion and changes in urine acid output (measured as the H + /creatinine molar ratio in spot urine samples).
Subjects who secreted gastric acid in response to stimulation with a sham feed showed a fall in urine acid output >mmol H + /mmol creatinine.
The most reproducible decrease in urine acid output in response to normal food was observed around the time breakfast was usually eatenand was abolished by 36 hours of treatment with ranitidine.
Breakfast time reductions in postprandial urine acid output in 22 healthy English children were comparable with those in healthy adults, and significantly different from values in achlorhydric adults.
They were much more variable, however, in 106 Gambian children in whom values spanned both normochlorhydria and achlorhydric ranges.
Measuring changes in urine acid output at breakfast time provides a reliable indirect measure of gastric acid secretion that can be used in field conditions, enabling the relation between gastric acid output and the development of diarrhoeal diseases to be investigated.
Gastric acid is the primary barrier against orally ingested enteric pathogens, and a major regulator of small bowel flora.
Defective gastric acid secretion predisposes to abnormal small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and recurrent enteric infections, both conditions that may lead to the development of persistent diarrhoea and malabsorption, resulting in malnutrition and growth failure.
Children who are malnourished with chronic diarrhoea have defective gastric acid secretion.
This may be a result of impaired gastrointestinal function secondary to poor nutritional status, but the role of achlorhydria in the development of malnutrition has not been investigated.
Population studies of gastric acid secretion in children at risk from undernutrition are clearly not possible using conventional intubation techniques.
As parietal cells release acid into the lumen of the stomach, they release bicarbonate into the systemic circulation.
Excess bicarbonate is excreted by the kidney, which means that a transient rise in urine bicarbonate excretion (the urine ‘alkaline tide’) immediately follows maximal gastric acid secretion.
Measurement of the urine alkaline tide as an index of gastric acid output, has been proposed as a non-invasive alternative to conventional gastric secretion studies.
We have adapted this technique and describe a method of measuring changes in urine acid output that is suitable for use in paediatric community studies.
Subjects and methods
Five sets of studies were undertaken on adults and children in England and in the Gambia.
INTUBATION STUDIES
Seven healthy adult volunteers (six men, aged 21–43 years) underwent gastric intubation studies At 07:30, after an overnight fast, approximately 300 ml of water were drunk and a sample of all urine passed subsequently was saved.
At 08:30 a nasogastric tube (10 FG) was passed, and its position was ascertained by the complete aspiration of a test drink of 100 ml of water.
Residual gastric contents were discarded, and basal gastric acid output was determined by collection of gastric contents at 15 minute intervals for 45 minutes.
Subjects then emptied their bladders, saving a sample of urine.
A sham feed, of a sandwich of the subject's own choice, was then masticated.
Subjects were encouraged to chew the food well, and spit it out, rinsing their mouth out with water but not swallowing.
The gastric contents were collected at 15 minute intervals for 45 minutes to determine stimulated gastric acid output, after which the nasogastric tube was removed and subjects once more emptied their bladders.
The procedure was repeated after 36 hours treatment with oral ranitidine 300 mg twice daily.
ASSESSMENTS OF NORMAL URINE ACID OUTPUT
Six healthy adult volunteers collected urine specimens throughout the course of a normal day, noting the time that food and drink were taken.
Fourteen healthy adult subjects then collected urine specimens before and within an hour after their normal breakfast, to assess the fall in urine acid output accompanying the first meal of the day.
ACHLORHYDRIC ADULTS
Nine healthy adult volunteers repeated the collections of urine throughout a morning after 36 hours' treatment with ranitidine 300 mg twice daily.
A further five subjects (four taking ranitidine, one proved to be achlorhydric by intubation studies) collected urine specimens around the time of breakfast.
NORMAL ENGLISH CHILDREN
Twenty two healthy children (age range 1–8 years) collected two urine specimens — one before and one 20 minutes to two hours after breakfast for determination of the change in the H + creatinine molar ratio.
A wide range of personal preferecnes in children across this age range made it impossible to use an absolutely standardised breakfast.
Most children, however, had breakfast cereal with milk, with the addition, or in some cases substitution, of buttered toast.
WEST AFRICAN CHILDREN
Children between 3 and 5 years of age from Keneba village, the site of a Medical Research Council Nutritional Research Station in the Gambia (n=106), collected two urine specimens, one before and one within two hours after a standard breakfast consisting of fried dough, fresh bananas, and water.
DETERMINATION OF GASTRIC AND URINE ACID OUTPUT
The acid content of gastric juice was determined by titration to pH 7.4 with NaOH.
Acid output was calculated by allowing for the amount of juice produced in each time interval, and was expressed as mEq/h.
Urine specimens were processed as soon as possible after collection, both in the UK and the Gambia, and titratable acidity was determined by titration of each urine specimen to pH 7.4.
Creatinine concentrations in urine were determined using the modified Jaffé reaction (Roche diagnostics) on a COBAS BIO centrifugal fast analyser in the UK, and using a bench spectrophotometer in the Gambia.
Urine acid output was expressed as the urinary H + /creatinine ratio for each sample tested.
Results
INTUBATION STUDIES
In six of the seven subjects basal acid output ranged between 2.2 and 13 mEq/h (mean 5.5), and stimulated acid output ranged between 8 and 34.2 mEq/l (mean 17.9).
These six subjects underwent a further intubation test after three doses of ranitidine 300mg over 36 hours.
In one subject intubation failed at the second study, and in the other five subjects basal acid output was 0 to 2.2 mEq/h (mean 0.55) and stimulated acid output rose to between 0.1 and 1.2 mEq/h (mean 0.68).
The remaining subject was achlorhydric during rhe first intubation study (basal acid output 0 mEq/h, stimulated acid output 0.36 mEq/h), and a further test after histamine receptor blockade was not therefore undertaken.
The sham feed produced a transient rise in gastric acid output that was most marked in the 30 minutes after feeding (Fig 1).
The change in gastric acid secretion, between basal acid secretion and stimulated acid secretion, that occurred during the first 30 minutes after sham feeding was compared with the change in urine acid output (DUAO) over the same period.
DUAO was calculated as the difference between the urine H + /creatinine molar ratio of the urine sample collected after basal acid secretion, and that of the first urine sample passed after gastric stimulation.
Pooled results from a total of 12 test days in seven subjects, which include results from the same subjects before and after treatment with ranitidine, are shown in Figure 2.
The relation between the change in gastric acid secretion and DUAO was log/linear, and two discrete populations were seen.
An arbitrary cut off of AUAO= -0.5 separated achlorhydric from normal responses.
NORMAL URINE ACID OUTPUTS IN ADULTS
In six adult volunteers who collected urine specimens throughout the day (noting times of passing urine and of all food consumed), fasting urine acid outputs ranged from 1.46 to 2.14 mmol H + /mmol creatine (mean 1.74).
All subjects showed a fall in UAO after breakfast.
The changes in UAO in relation to food are shown in Figure 3.
The most consistent fall in UAO was seen after breakfast, and suggested that a light meal after a relatively long fast provided the ideal stimulus for observing changes in UAO that reflect gastric acid output.
ACHLORHYDRIC ADULS
The mean change in urine acid output that occurred at breakfast time in 14 normal adults was -0.88 mmol H + /mmol creatinine (95% confidence interval (CI) of mean -0.71, -1.0 mmol H + /mmol creatinine).
Full results are shown in Figure 4.
This change was abolished in all 10 subjects who were treated with ranitidine 300 mg for three doses (mean change after ranitidine -0.05 mmol H + /mmol creatinine, 95% CI 0.33, -0.34 mmol H + /mmol creatinine).
An arbitrary cut off of -0.5 mmol H + /mmol creatinine (roughly equidistant from the 95% CI of both means, and which also corresponded to the cut off value obtained from intubation studies) was chosen to discriminate between normochlorhydric and achlorhydric individuals.
Within this small population of 24 tests in adults, including 10 tests in subjects rendered achlorhydric by ranitidine treatment, the detection of a fall in UAO at breakfast time of greater than 0.5 mmol H + /mmol creatinine demonstrated normochlorhydria with a positive predictive value of 96% and a negative predictive value of 100%.
NORMAL ENGLISH CHILDREN
The mean DUAO at breakfast time in 22 British children was 1.43 mmol H + /mmol creatinine (95% CI -0.47, -2.39 mmol H + /mmol creatinine).
These values are shown in Figure 4 beside adult values for 14 normochlorhydric and 10 achlorhydric tests.
The results in children are similar to those in normal adults (test of hypothesis that groups are different,t =1.32, p=0.27) but significantly different from those in achlorhydric adults (t =2.084, p=0.046).
WEST AFRICAN CHILDREN
Changes in UAO before and after breakfast were measured in 106 Gambian children.
The range of DUAO obtained was much greater than for any other group (Fig 4)(maximum value 1.8, minimum -2.8, mean (SD) 0.04 (1.05)).
Discussion
We have described a series of studies that establishes the use of the measurement of changes in UAO at breakfast time from two spot urine samples, as a reliable guide to gastric acid secretion in response to food in populations with a high prevalence of achlorhydria.
This test is eminently suitable for use under field conditions in developing countries.
Johnson et al suggested that changes in urine and gastric acid output were linearly related.
Our use of creatinine molar ratios has removed the source of experimental error involved in collecting total urine volumes over a relatively short period, and has revealed the existence of a log/ linear relation between concomitant changes in gastric acid secretion and UAO.
This technique allows study of gastric acid secretion in response to physiological stimuli, particularly that of food.
All other established techniques involve the measurement of luminal acidity in response to varied stimuli, none of which can be considered to be truly physiological.
Our interest lies in measuring the gastric secretory response to food, the major source of ingested bacteria.
We have found our technique most useful when the stimulus of a light meal follows fasting, a state that naturally occurs in most people at breakfast time.
We have shown that the fall in breakfast time UAO is a reliable predictor of gastric acid secretion in adult populations with a high prevalence of achlorhydric subjects.
Further studies are planned to assess the predictive values of this test in populations where achlorhydria is less prevalent.
Normal British children form a population whose range of DUAOs is similar to that in normochlorhydric adults but distinct from that of ahclorhydric adults.
Gambian children, however, form a more heterogeneous group with a wider spread of results (Fig 4), despite the fact that these children consumed a standard breakfast, compared with the British children who exhibited a wide range of individual preferences for breakfast foods.
Comparison of these results with those from English children suggests that substantial numbers of rural Gambian children communities may be achlorhydric.
These are two possible explanations for this.
Young children in this environment are prone to recurrent febrile illnesses, known to inhibit gastric acid secretion, and theincidence of acute Helicobacter pylori infection in this particular community is approaching 50% in the first year of life.
Taylor suggests that in more than 50% of cases of acute H pylori infection, hypochlorhydria lasts for several weeks.
If this is true, many young children in the Gambia will have achlorhydria secondary to H pylori infection.
In summary, we have developed a non-invasive test which predicts accurately gastric acid output in populations with high prevalences of achlorhydria and is suitable for field use for population studies of young children in developing countries.
The first field study using this technique suggests that in a population in which persistent diarrhoea and growth failure are endemic, achlorhydria is common.
This observation will be followed by further direct measures of gastric acidity, but should stimulate renewed interest in the potentially crucial relationship between the gastric acid barrier and intestinal flora.
Helicobacter pylori:comparison of DNA fingerprints provides evidence for intrafamilial infection
Abstract
Although a high prevalence of antibodies to Helicobacter pylori has been documented within families, culture and DNA typing of strains from infected children and their parents has not been evaluated.
This study aimed to analyse H pylori infection within family groups.
Endoscopy, gastric biopsy, and H pylori culture were performed on all eight parents of four children who presented with dyspepsia and who had a positive H pylori culture.
All biopsy specimens were cultured on Columbia based blood agar under microaerophilic conditions for four days.
The DNA from each strain was extracted and electrophoretic patterns were compared after digestion with restriction endonucleases Hae III or Hind III.
Ribotyping using a biotinylated cDNA probe prepared from 16S and 23S rRNA of H pylori NCTC 11638 was also used.
Seven of the parents were positive for H pylori on urease testing, histology, and on culture.
DNA typing showed the same or a similar strain to be present in at least two family members in three of the four family groups.
In family 1, the mother, father, and child all had an identical strain; in family 2, father and son had a similar related strain; father and mother had the same strain in family 3; and all strains were unique in family 4.
These data provide evidence for either intrafamilial cross infection or a common source of infection within family groups.
Helicobacter pylori is recognised as a significant cause of chronic antral gastritis and important in the aetiology of peptic ulceration.
There is also evidence to support a role as a risk factor for gastric carcinoma.
It is known that the prevalence increases with age and that while the incidence in children is lower than that in adults, intrafamilial clustering has been shown.
This led us to ask if there was intrafamilial spread of H pylori .
If this does occur it would be expected that more than one member of the same family would be infected and that the same strain of H pylori would be present in more than one member of the same family.
This hypothesis was tested by comparing the DNA fingerprints of each isolate of H pylori in the study to identify any family members harbouring the same strain.
The technique was used in a previous study to show that three members (blood relatives) of a duodenal ulcer family did indeed harbour clonal variants of the same strain of H pylori .
Methods
The parents of four H pylori positive children who had originally presentedat a paediatric clinic with abdominal pain were investigated.
Three antral biopsy specimens were taken — one each for culture, histology, and CLO test (Delta West).
Personal and family history relevant to the gastrointestinal tract was recorded.
CULTURE
Biopsy specimens were transported in sterile normal saline 0.9% and cultured on Columbia agar with 5% horse blood (Oxoid) in a microaerophilic environment (5% O 2 , 10% CO 2 , 85% N 2 ) for four to seven days.
Colonies of typical appearance and Gram stain which produced oxidise, catalase, and urease, were identified as H pylori .
DNA TYPING
H pylori isolates from four children and their parents, plus two isolates chosen randomly from unrelated individuals were incubated on brain heart infusion agar supplemented with 5% v/v horse blood and 1% v/v isovitalex (Oxoid) for 48 hours at 37%, undermicroaerophilic conditions (5% O 2 , 5% CO 2 , 2% H 2 , 88% N 2 ).
Chromosomal DNA was isolated and purified from each isolate using the guanidium thiocyanate reagent method.
The purified DNA was incubated with the restriction endonuclease (Hae III) for four hours at 37°C and the digests were electrophoresed at 30 v for 16 hours in a horizontal agarose gel.
After electrophoresis the gels were stained with ethidium bromide and photographed.
Stain DNAs which did not cut with Hae III were subjected to Hind III digestion.
For ribotyping, the gels were then transferred to nylon membranes by means of vacublotting.
A biotinylated cDNA probe was prepared from 16S and 23S rRNA of H pylori NCTC 11638 using reverse transcriptase.
Biotinylation was achieved by the incorporation of biotin-16-dUPT.
The membranes were then hybridized by standard procedures for 16 hours at 42°C, using the biotinylated cDNA probe.
Restriction digest patterns and ribopatterns were compared.
Details of DNA typing methods have been described elsewhere.
HISTOLOGY
Biopsy specimens were fixed in formalin and examined using haematoxylin and eosin, Giemsa, and Warthin-Starry staining techniques.
Results
Seven of the eight parents tested were currently infected with H pylori .
The one parent who was H pylori negative has histological evidence of mild inflammation.
A course of ampicillin and metronidazole had been taken by this subject within four weeks of endoscopy.
All subjects in the study had antral gastritis.
There was complete concordance between culture, CLO test, and histology for the detection for H pylori .
A combination of the use of total DNA restriction digest patterns (Fig 1) and ribopatterns (Fig 2) showed that the same strain of H pylori or subtype of the same strain was present in more than one member of three out of four families tested.
DNA types were designated by the first initial of each family surname, and DNA subtypes by the addition of ‘a’ or ‘b’(Table I).
DNA from 10 of the 13 isolates of H pylori in the study was digested with the restriction endonuclease Hae III.
After hybridisation with the biotinylated probe, family K isolates F1, F2, and F3 yielded identical ribopatterns (ribotypes).
The ribopatterns gave identical high intensity signals with variation in the minor bands only (DNA subtypes).
Isolates F6, F7 (family B), F12 (family M), and F9 and F13 (both unrelated) had unique ribopatterns.
Family H isolates of H pylori (F4 and F5) were very closely related or subtypes of the same strain since their Hae III digest patterns seemed identical except for the intensity of two bands, and ribopatterns differed on the secondary (lower intensity hybridisation signal) bands, but the main bands were common to both.
DNA extracts from isolates F8 (family B), and F10 and F11 (family M) were not digested by Hae III (Fig 1).
Isolate F8 was therefore different from the other isolates from members of this family (F6 and F7), DNA of which was cut by Hae III.
Also, the Hind III hybridisation pattern showed that F8 was different from F6 and F7.
Family M isolates F10 and F11, however, had the same Hind III ribopattern, but the third member of this family set, F12, harboured a unique strain of H pylori .
Discussion
This study has shown a high prevalence of H pylori infection in the parents of children who are H pylori positive.
No comparison has been made between this group and parents of H pylori negative children, but work from other sources provides serological evidence for an increased prevalence of infection in family contacts.
More importantly it has been shown that an indistinguishable stain of H pylori as assessed by its DNA fingerprint, is present in the gastric mucosa of more than one member of a family group.
Members of some families harbour strains of H pylori with the same DNA fingerprint (family K, three isolates; family M, two isolates); some harbour subtypes or strains with similar DNA fingerpritns (family H, two isolates); and some harbour different strains (family B, three isolates; family M, one isolate).
The molecular techniques used are reproducible and highly discriminatory.
Hae III followed by Hind III have been found to be the most discriminatory restriction endonucleases with which to cut H pylori .
The combination of the use of one or other of these enzymes and the ribotyping technique applied in this study provide a highly discriminatory means of strain comparison.
Thus, we suggest that our results provide strong evidence for a common source of infection with H pylori in some members of three of the four families studied.
This study provides evidence that supports the occurrence of intrafamilial cross infection with H pylori , although no comment can be made from these data about the direction of transmission.
An alternative explanation is that familial infection is occurring from a point source.
In family B, all members had unique strains of H pylori as did one member of family M and the two unrelated individuals.
This suggests that other reservoirs of H pylori infection also play a role in its epidemiology within a family setting.
The finding of identical or similar strains in more than one individual differs from those of Simor et al who included two groups of adult siblings in Canadian families.
In this case different strains were found in the family members.
Others have found similar strains only in repeated samples from the same individual.
The epidemiology of H pylori infection, as far as is known, supports a faecal-oral, or oral-oral route of spread.
The finding of H pylori in dental plaque has also been reported and supports close contact and an oral-oral route as a mode of spread.
Further studies are needed to clarify the presence of H pylori in saliva or plaque, and also in faeces.
This work presents a preliminary investigation into the possibility of cross infection within a family.
Further studies need to be carried out to determine whether the finding of similar strains of H pylori in different members of the same family is a frequent occurrence.
It would also be important to distinguish between children and adults, and to ascertain the route of transmission if this occurs.
In investigations of this type, it is unlikely to be acceptable for children to be subjected to endoscopy as a part of studies in which a parent is the index case.
Studies such as this one where parents become volunteers are probably at the limit of ethical acceptance.
Food intolerance and Crohn's disease
Abstract
It has been claimed that prolonged remissions of Crohn's disease can be achieved after enteral or parenteral nutrition, by identifying and excluding foods that exacerbate a patient's symptoms.
The occurrence of food intolerances were assessed after induction of remission with elemental diet in 42 eligible patients to whom single foods were introduced over five days.
Suspect foods were reinvestigated with open and if possible, double blind rechallenge.
Fourteen patients (33%) dropped out of the study because of relapse of disease unrelated to food (n=8) or because of difficulties in complying with the regimen (n=6).
Twenty (48%) of the patents identified food sensitivities whereas eight (19%) did not.
Seventeen of the patients who identified food sensitivities had an open rechallenge with recurrence of symptoms in 10 (24% of total).
Food sensitivity was confirmed in three patients on double blind challenge.
There was no significant difference in the duration of remission between patients who did or did not identify food sensitivities.
During the study three cases of intolerance to the formula diet, and one of severe salicylate sensitivity were encountered.
In conclusion food sensitivities are evident after treatment of Crohn's disease with elemental diet but are variable, often do not persist, and are of insufficient importance to warrant putting all patients through elimination diets.
It has been claimed that food sensitivities occur often in Crohn's disease and that exclusion of foodstuffs after treatment with elemental diet prolongs remission.
This is particularly intriguing as it incriminates food in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease.
In support of this theory there is evidence of a close correlation between activity of Crohn's disease and conditions within the intestinal lumen.
Thus diversion of faecal stream by split ileostomy may induce remission of resistant Crohn's colitis, and enteral or parenteral nutrition seem to be as effective as corticosteroids in inducing remission whereas both forms of treatment are singularly ineffective in the management of ulcerative colitis.
The main work on the subject of food intolerance in Crohn's disease by Alun-Jones et al has involved the use of elemental diet or total parenteral nutrition to obtain clinical remission from active disease, followed by a daily, single food reintroduction regimen (elimination diets).
Two open studies and a controlled trial report on the treatment of a total of 77 patients all of whom had achieved full clinical remission by means of diet (parenteral nutrition (33), enteral nutrition (25), and 19 simply by the use of elimination diets).
Daily food reintroductions were successfully carried out in 64 patients with subsequent exclusion of suspect foods.
Life table analysis (of all 77 patients) showed a 32% relapse in the first year then an annual relapse rate of 11%.
The controlled trial compared duration of remission on an elimination diet (n=10) with that on an unrefined carbohydrate, fibre rich diet (n=10).
This study, however, had to end prematurely, apparently because of the high relapse rate in the fibre rich group.
It was concluded from these studies that elimination diets induce a prolonged remission similar to that achieved by other methods of treatment.
More recently an independent although smaller study has been reported, which again used a daily food reintroduction programme.
In this study only nine of 20 patients identified food sensitivities.
The four double blind challenges that were done were negative and only 30% maintained remission for longer than 12 months indicating no influence of elimination diets on the duration of remission.
Ginsberg and Albert have described a patient with severe steroid dependent disease who was shown to have milk sensitivity (despite a normal lactose tolerance test) by double blind challenge.
A full remission was maintained by avoidance of dairy products but in long term follow up the sensitivity was not persistent.
Hence, the occurrence of food sensitivity in Crohn's disease after elemental diet, its significance regarding the duration of remission achieved, and its value in the routine management of patients treated with elemental diet is uncertain.
Our aim was to investigate food intolerances in Crohn's disease after treatment with elemental diet and its importance in the duration remission induced by diet in an attempt to determine how valuable such therapeutic dietary manipulation is.
Patients and methods
Patients were selected from a group of 80 who were admitted to Northwick Park Hospital during a five year period for management of active Crohn's disease with an elemental diet.
Thirty eight of these were excluded from this study.
Thirteen would have been unable to cope with the elimination regimen for social reasons or because of poor understanding, eight had tight small intestinal strictures, and eight were on high dose steroids (both of which would have made the results difficult to interpret), four refused, two were treated for postoperative fistulas, two were pregnant, and one was treated for extensive pyoderma gangrenosum and had no gastrointestinal symptoms.
Forty two patients (Table I) who had responded satisfactorily to a four to eight week course of elemental diet proceeded to investigation of possible food intolerances. eight had evidence of stricturing on barium radiographs but none had a history suggestive of obstructive episodes.
All patients gave fully informed consent for these studies that were approved by the Harrow Health Authority ethics committee.
Remission from active disease was achieved with elemental diet (Elemental 028 Scientific Hospital Supplies, Liverpool, UK or Vivonex from Norwich Eaton, Surrey, UK) as the sole source of nutrition for four to eight weeks as previously described.
In the final week of treatment, when remission had been achieved, the patient's normal diet was discussed paying particular attention to any personally suspected good intolerances.
Then an individualised reintroduction programme was designed for each patient, usually starting with rice or potato and lamb or chicken on the first week.
Each food was introduced over five days with suspect foods being left until all other reintroductions were complete.
During the early phase of reintroductions patients continued with elemental diet as a nutritional supplement.
Figure 1 shows the method used for the dietary diagnosis of food intolerances in these patients.
Each patient kept a daily diary to record and score symptoms (nausea, flatulence, pain, bowel openings, etc) and to note other life occurrences (family or work stress, coincidental illness such as flu, menstrual perioc, etc).
Patients were reviewed every week for the first month and every other week until food reintroductions were completed.
If symptoms of disease occurred during any five day reintroduction then that particular food was said to be suspect and was temporarily omitted from the diet.
The patient returned to eating only foods that had been shown to be safe.
When symptoms resolved further reintroductions were commenced.
Suspect foods were tried again in an open reintroduction and if symptoms recurred the patient was offered a double blind challenge all of which were done as inpatient studies.
Suspect food was masked in a meal in which all other constituents were known to be safe.
All challenge and placebo meals were assessed by five volunteers for smell, taste, and texture to determine if the challenge food could be detected.
Meals were checked when fresh, after freezing and thawing, and when appropriate after heating.
When an acceptable formula was found to conceal the suspect food, the test and challenge meals were made up, labelled, and frozen by a person not involved in the study.
Patients received the challenge or placebo for five days with a two week interval between.
At each review particular watch was kept for the development of inappropriate obsession with food or an excessive tendency to limit diet and reintroductions.
Patients developing such features (n=6) were excluded from the study and gradually weaned onto a normal unrestricted diet.
When all reintroductions and challenges were complete the maintenance diet was reviewed in detail to ensure that it was nutritionally adequate.
During the study period three patients were found to be sensitive to the elemental diet formula used to induce remission and a further patient proved to have profound salicylate sensitivity.
The cases of these particular patients are reported in detail.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The long term outcome of groups of patients was compared with log rank significance testing.
Results
EXCLUSION AND CHALLENGE
Figure 2 shows the results of the reintroduction regimen.
Of the 42 patients who began individual food reintroductions 28 completed the regimen.
Eight failed to do so because of a recurrence of their disease that could not be attributed to any particular food constituent.
A further six patients were withdrawn because they could not tolerate the restrictions of the regimen (three of these were teenagers).
During the reintroductions phase, eight (of 28) patients remained symptom free.
Table II shows the foods that the remaining 20 patients identified as causing symptoms.
Figure 3 shows that the highest frequency of intolerances seem to occur in the first eight weeks after completing the course of elemental diet.
Of the twenty patients eligible for phase 2, three refused to try the suspect foods arguing that they were not important in their diets (mushroom, apple, and peanuts) and they did not wish to risk a recurrence of symptoms.
Seven patients had negative food rechallenges and were instructed on healthy eating habits.
Ten patients consistently identified the same foods as causing their symptoms.
Of these three identified one food only, one identified two foods, two identified three foods, two identified four foods, one identified five foods, and one (salicylate sensitivity) identified multiple foods.
Five patients who consistently identified particular foods as causing symptoms did not have double blind challenges.
Three of these had recurrence of their disease despite being on exclusion diet (milk, peanuts, and plums) and rechallenge was inappropriate.
One patient had identified milk as causing symptoms but his lactose tolerance test was positive and he remains well on a lactose free diet.
One patient had identified alcohol to cause diarrhoea.
It was not possible to construct a satisfactory double blind challenge but he did have a positive open challenge to pure ethanol.
Two patients had negative double blind challenges (chicken and haricot beans), four patients (one of the group of five had one positive and one negative double blind challenge) had positive double blind challenge with wheat, milk (lactose tolerance test was normal), peanuts, and salicylate.
The 16 patients who did not identify foods as causing symptoms have been followed up for between nine and 46 months.
Figure 4 shows the duration of remission.
Twelve patients completed the food excluson arm of the study and continued to avoid the foods that had caused symptoms.
Figure 4 shows that their follow up time has ranged from seven to 55 months and the duration of their remission did not differ significantly (p=0.1) from patients who did not have food sensitivity.
SPECIAL CASES
Formula intolerance
There were three cases of formula intolerance.
A 24 year old woman had been diagnosed five years previously and had persistent abdominal pain, diarrhoea, and ill health despite repeated courses of steroids.
She started on ½ strength Vivonex (the carbohydrate source is glucose solids of maize origin and the fat source is safflower oil) orally but her diarrhoea became worse and she began to vomit.
Nasogastric tube feeding was started but symptoms persisted over the next 24 hours.
Intravenous steroids were given but there was no improvement over 48 hours.
Her nasogastric feed was then changed to a modular feed in which the carbohydrate was potato based.
Her improvement was dramatic and within 24 hours.
One week later a double blind challenge with Vivonex resulted in recurrence of vomiting and diarrhoea that resolved immediately when her feed was changed.
As she progressed through elimination diet both wheat and corn caused diarrhoea on first reintroduction but not later.
Four years later she is symptom free and on a normal diet.
A 24 year old man was admitted for teatment for newly diagnosed ileocolonic Crohn's disease.
He started to take oral Elemental 028 (the carbohydrate source is glucose of maize origin and the fat source is arachis oil).
His symptoms worsened over three days and he bagan to vomit.
Nasogastric feeding was started with ½ strength feed but he continued to deteriorate and developed persistent vomiting.
A change to a modular formula diet, as in the previous case, resulted in an immediate loss of symptoms and a 24 month complete remission.
As he progressed through food reintroductions he did not identify anything that caused symptoms.
A 26 year old man was admitted for treatment of newly diagnosed stricturing ileal Crohn's disease associated clinically with an ileovesical fistula.
To improve his nutritional state and get him into clinical remission before surgery he was given Elemental 028 but immediately became systemically unwell and developed diarrhoea and vomiting.
Nasogastric feeding exacerbated matters but his symptoms settled as soon as he was changed to a modular feed.
Elective surgery was carried out six weeks later and he did not therefore proceed through food reintroductions.
He remains well three years later.
Salicylate sensitivity
A man had small bowel Crohn's disease with multiple strictures diagnosed in 1976 at age 18 years.
High dose corticosteroids were unhelpful and he underwent ileal resection with a 12 month remission.
An obstructive episode was treated with bypass enteroenteric anastomosis and maintenance prenisolone and he remained in remission for five years.
Obstructive symptoms then resulted in a further small bowel resection but he did not achieve remission despite prednisolone.
He was referred in 1984 and had a full clinical remission with elemental diet and began single food reintroductions.
Severe reactions were encountered on two occasions to citrus fruits (high in salicylate) but further progress was hampered by obstruction at the old anastomosis that had to be refashioned in 1986.
For the next four years he was symptom free only while on elemental diet despite at least 12 week trials of prednisolone, azathioprine, and methotrexate.
The ileocolic anastomosis required a stricturoplasty without remission.
After a prolonged course of elemental diet an elimination diet was repeated and it became evident that he was profoundly sensitive to salicylate.
Four months after beginning a salicylate free diet a fistula at the site of the stricturoplasty required resection.
He is now (two years later) in complete remission, remains on a strict low salicylate diet, and is on no medication apart from supplements.
Both his double blind challenge and two inadvertent home challenges with salicylate were characterised by violent vomiting and diarrhoea.
Discussion
Out of a group of 80 patients with Crohn's disease treated with elemental diet 48% were judged to be unsuitable for the food exclusion study.
Twenty (47%) of the remaining 42 patients studied were able to identify foods that caused symptoms.
These apparent food sensitivities were often not persistent and only 24% of patients identified the same food on rechallenge, and 15% of patients had positive double blind challenge.
There was only the occasional dramatic response to food exclusion, as shown by the patient with salicylate sensitivity and overall avoidance of suspect foods did not prolong remission.
Formula sensitivity to elemental diet in Crohn's disease has not previously been reported but should be considered when symptoms are exacerbated early in the treatment phase especially if associated with vomiting.
Our indings are similar to those of Giaffer et al but contrast sharply with those of the Cambridge group who found a higher occurrence (83%) of food related symptoms in their patients and a longer remission in those identifying food intolerances.
Both studies, however, are not strictly comparable as we used elemental diet for at least four weeks and had five day introduction cycles with reintroduction of once only identified foods whereas Alun-Jones et al used diet to symptomatic remission only, had a daily introduction programme without repeat exposure to suspect foods, and in one study used a high fibre diet in the control group.
Contrary to previous claims, when food related symptoms are identified after an exclusion diet, this does not seem to prolong remission in most patients.
The reason for this is not clear but it is worth noting that McCamman et al noted that ‘explosive diarrhoea, gas, cramps, sweating, and feeling light headed were common complaints’ after healthy volunteers finished an elemental regimen and started to eat food.
This suggests that some symptoms in patients with Crohn's disease may stem from motility disturbance and such food related symptoms would be unlikely to influence the duration of remission.
There are, however, other possible mechanisms by which food sensitivities are mediated.
The most interesting case was reported by Ginsberg and Albert.
He was a patient with well documented milk sensitivity that was not persistent and may have been related to activity of disease.
It would seem, however, that the occasional patients with such sensitivities (as in our patient with salicylate sensitivity) come to light clinically because of chronic persistent disease activity rather than the more usual relapsing and remitting disease and it is for these patients that the elimination diets may be more appropriate.
Reintroduction of food after elemental regimens must nevertheless be undertaken with the greatest of care irrespective of whether or not elimination diets are used.
Eight patients have required emergency surgery coinciding with the unrestricted reintroduction of food after remission induced by diet.
In two of the studies the details of the individual patients are not reported.
Our own experience (two patients) and that of Morin et al has been that such acute relapses only occur in patients who have strictures or fistulas.
In summary food intolerance occurs in Crohn's disease but is not as frequent as claimed by some previous studies and its occurrence and intensity are variable.
Our study suggests that food sensitivity is of insufficient importance to warrant putting all patients through elimination diets.
Effects of vitamin antioxidant supplementation on cell kinetics of patients with adenomatous polyps
Abstract
Colonic crypt cell proliferation is used as an indicator of risk of colorectal carcinoma.
Subjects with adenomatous polyps and cancer have an increased cell proliferation and a shift of the proliferative zone towards the apex of the crypt.
Epidemiological and in vitro studies have confirmed a link between vitamins A, E, C, β-carotene, and colorectal cancer.
In vitro bromodeoxyuridine immunohistochemical technique was used to assess the effect of daily oral supplementation with vitamin E (160 mg), vitamin C (750 mg), or β-carotene (9 mg) on the colonic crypt cell proliferation in patients with adenomatous polyps (n=40) compared with normal subjects with no colonic disease (n=20).
The patients were given supplementation for one month and colonic biopsy specimens were taken before and at the end of the trial.
Patients with adenomatous polyps had a significantly higher mean labelling index per cent(LI%) than controls (p).
Vitamic C or β-carotene supplementation, however, significantly reduced the total proliferation (p) whereas vitamin E supplementation hadno effect on the colonic crypt cell proliferation.
β-carotene reduced cell proliferation at the base of the crypt only.
Vitamin C reduced cell proliferation in all the crypt compartments from the apex to the base to those values seen in age and sex matched controls.
These findings indicate that prolonged supplementation with vitamin C may reduce the recurrence of adenomatous polyps.
Colorectal cancer develops through a complex process from hyperproliferative mucosa to adenoma and eventually to carcinoma.
The pathogenisis of this sequence of events is largely unknown.
It is generally accepted, however, that hyperproliferation of the colorectal mucosa with a shift of the proliferative zone to the upper portion of the crypt is the first step of the sequence.
One of the primary insults to the colonic mucosa in the complex adenoma-carcinoma sequence may be an increase in free radical activity which has been shown to cause DNA damage and gene mutations.
Antioxidants are a defence against free radical activity and epidemiological studies confirm that populations with a low level of antioxidants may have a higher risk of colorectal cancer.
Vitamins A, E, and C are potent antioxidants and the serum concentrations of these antioxidants have been shown to inversely correlate with the risk of developing colorectal cancer.
Clinical trials have assessed the effect of these antioxidant vitamins as supplements on the risk of colorectal cancer.
The aim of this study was to assess the effect of oral supplementation with vitamin C, vitamin E, or Β -carotene on colonic crypt cell proliferation of patients with adenomatous polyps.
Patients and methods
Sixty nine subjects undergoing colonoscopy were recruited for this study.
These were aged between 34–80, had a complete colonoscopic examination of the large bowel, were capable of following the study protocol, and gave a written informed consent.
Subjects were excluded from the study if they suffered from any debilitating or life threatening disease, including invasive cancer.
Patients with familial polyposis coli, inflammatory bowel disease, malabsorption syndrome, or a personal history of colonic resection were excluded.
Subjects with an incomplete examination of the large bowel, severe dysplasia, or carcinoma in situ were excluded.
Any subjects taking vitamins supplements within a year of entering the trial were not included in this study.
Forty subjects with adenomatous polyps proved histologically of diameter greater than 5 mm were included in the final analysis.
Twenty subjects with normal colonoscopy and histologically normal colonic mucosa were included as a control group.
Table I shows the demographic profile of these subjects.
The patients with adenomatous polyps were assigned to one of four study groups using the random sampling quota technique allowing for 10 subjects in each study group.
Group 1: no supplementation.
Group 2: 160 mg of vitamin E daily.
Group 3: 750 mg of vitamin daily.
Group 4: 9 mg of Β -carotene daily.
The supplementation dose was given for one month, in two or three tablets with meals.
Vitamin supplements were kindly donated by Natures Own, West Malvern, United Kingdom.
Colonic biopsy specimens were taken before and at the end of the supplementation period.
The colonoscopies were carried out between 1100 and 1300 to allow for diurnal variation in proliferation rates.
Four pinch biopsy specimens were taken for cell proliferation analysis from macroscopically normal mucosa in the sigmoid colon, 20 cm from the anus, to control for the anatomical difference in cell proliferation.
These were immediately placed in modified Waymouth's medium.
Twenty mls of whole blood was also collected into empty vacutainers before and at the end of the one month trial period for analysis of serum vitamins, as an assessment of compliance to the supplementation.
Compliance was also confirmed by a tablet count.
CELL PROLIFERATION TECHNIQUE
In vitro incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine was achieved by culturing the biopsy specimens in Waymouth's medium (Flow Labs, Scotland) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 1 mM glutamine and gentamicin, 50 µM bromodeoxyuridine (Sigma Co, Poole, United Kingdom, and 5 µM fluorodeoxyuridine (Sigma Co, Poole, United Kingdom.
The biopsy specimens were incubated in the medium for one hour at 101.3 kPa of pressure ina sealed modular incubation chamber (Flow Labs, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom) previously infused with 95% oxygen and 5% carbon dioxide at a thermoregulated temperature of 37°C.
The biopsy specimens were fixed in Carnoy's fixative overnight and embedded in paraffin wax.
Immunohistochemical detection of the bromodeoxyuridine incorporation was carried out on 4 µm sections.
After deparafinisation and rehydration through alcohol to phosphate buffered saline, endogneous peroxide activity was blocked by immersing the sections in 5% H 2 O 2 in methanol.
The biopsy DNA was denatured by incubation in 1M HCl at 60°C for eight minutes.
The sections were incubated in 5% normal rabbit serum to reduce background staining and then incubated with the monoclonal antibody to bromodeoxyuridine (Dakopatts, Denmark) diluted 1:100 with phosphate buffer for one hour.
The slides were then washed in phosphate buffered saline and incubated with a 1:300 dilution of biotinylated anti-mouse antibody (Dakopatts, Denmark).
After further washings in phosphate buffered saline the slides were incubated with peroxidase conjugated strepavidin diluted 1:400, washed in phosphate buffered saline and the labelled cells were visualised by the diaminobenzidine reaction and lightly counterstained with haematoxylin.
IMMUNOHISTOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
A mean of 20 sections were examined for each subject.
Only crypts longitudinally sectioned and visible in their entire length were analysed.
A mean number of 10 well orientated crypts were examined for each specimen.
Labelling index per cent(LI%) was measured by counting the number of bromodeoxyuridine-positive cells and expressing the result as a percentage of the total number of cells in a crypt.
The relative positions of the positive cells in the crypt were noted.
For cell kinetics evaluation, each crypt was divided into five compartments of equal size.
The compartments were referred to by the ordinal numbers from 1 (apex) to 5 (base) and the labelling index calculated for each compartment.
The samples were analysed blind by a single observer.
SERUM ANALYSIS OF VITAMINS
Serum analysis of vitamins was performed as a method of assessing compliance.
The serum was stored at -20°C until all samples were collected.
Retinol, Β -carotene, vitamin C, and α-tocopherol were analysed using high performance liquid chromatography.
Plasma cholesterol was measured by a Boehringer Mannheim GmbH kit (Mannheim, Germany).
The α-tocopherol values were expressed as a ratio of α-tocopherol to cholesterol values.
STATISTCAL ANALYSIS
The total LI% and the LI% per compartment was compared before and after supplementation in each group.
Serum vitamin values were compared before and after the supplementation period.
The significance was analysed using the Signed Rank Sum test.
Results
Forty nine patients with adenomatous polyps were recruited into this study, nine were not included in the final analysis (five were lost to follow up, two were diagnosed with upper gastrointestinal cancer, one died of a myocardial infarction, and one patient in the Β -carotene group was not compliant).
Patients were deemed compliant for this study on the basis of a significant rise in serum concentrations of the supplemented vitamin and a correct tablet count.
On analysis of the total labelling index per cent(Figs 1 and 2) patients with adenomatous polyps had significantly higher mean (SEM) LI% (6.2 (0.3)) compared with normal controls (3.2 (0.3)), p.
When the LI% was analysed before and after the trial (Table II) it was found that the total LI% or compartmental LI% did not change over the one month period in the absence of supplementation (Figs 1 and 3).
Β -carotene supplementation significantly reduced the total LI% (p)(Figs 1 and 3).
On compartmental analysis (Table II) the proliferation at the base of the crypt (compartments 3, 4, and 5) was significantly reduced, however, there was no significant reduction at the apex of the crypt (compartments 1 and 2).
When the total LI% was compared with that of age and sex matched controls (Table III), it was found that although Β -carotene reduced the total LI% it did not reduce it to control values (Fig 4).
Vitamin C supplementation significantly reduced the total LI% (p)(Figs 1 and 3).
On compartmental analysis, proliferation in all compartments was significantly reduced (Table II).
When these were compared with age and sex matched controls (Table III), no significant difference was seen in any of the labelling indices (Fig 5).
Vitamin E supplementation had no effect on the increased proliferation found in patients with adenomatous polyps.
Discussion
This study assessed the effect of antioxidant vitamin supplementation on colonic crypt cell proliferation in patients with adenomatous polyps of the colon.
In contrast with other vitamin supplementation studies, this study assessed the effect of single vitamin supplements only, the study was prospective with a control group, subjects with familial polyposis coli were excluded and subjects were sequentially assigned to each group.
Subjects with adenomatous polyps had an increased cell proliferation with an increasing trend of proliferating cells towards the apex of the crypt as has been found by thers.
We found that vitamin E supplementation had no effect on this abnormal proliferation.
Β -carotene and vitamin C supplementation significantly reduced the total cell proliferation.
Β -carotene did not change the shift of the proliferative zone towards the apex of the crypt and the indicies of proliferation taken after supplementation were not reduced to those found in age and sex matched controls.
Vitamin C reduced the cell proliferation to that found in age and sex matched controls, it also reduced the upward shift in the proliferative zone.
Although the mean LI% of subjects with adenomatous polyps was significantly higher than those with no colonic disease (p), there was an overlap in the total LI% of both groups (Fig 2).
It is possible that the younger control subjects with a high LI% may develop an adenomatous polyp as an ageing phenomenon.
Paganelii et al found that there was no significant difference in the LI% between subjects with a small adenoma (<cm), single large adenoma, multiple small adenomas, multiple adenomas including at least one large, colorectal cancer, and no colorectal disease.
Our results agree with studies carried out by Roncucci et al , Bleiberg et al , and Terpstra et al , however, who have all found that subjects with adenomatous polyps had a significantly higher labelling index than those with no colonic disease.
The increased proliferation and the significant upwards trend of the proliferating cells towards the apex of the crypt, seen in patients with adenomatous polyps, is a product of the increased S-phase duration of the pre-malignant cells and may be specifically related to cancer.
A mucosa without histological signs of malignancy but with an increased S-phase duration, would indicate that the malignant process has started.
Most studies assessing cell proliferation have used the tritiated thymidine immunohistochemical technique.
The bromodeoxyuridine immunohistochemical technique has overcome many of the problems associated with the tritiated thymidine technique and the accuracy of this technique has been verified by Lacy et al .
They found it to be as accurate and reliable as the tritiated thynidine autoradiography technique the gold standard for the histological study of cell proliferation when examining mucosa of the digestive tract.
The bromodeoxyuridine technique has many advantages over this technique as it is complete in 3–4 days compared with 14 days for tritiated thymidine and furthermore the reaction is found in the plane of the tissue section facilitating rapid cell counting.
Proliferating cell nuclear antigen immunohistochemical technique although a promising method of assessing cell proliferation has yet to be fully standardised.
Evidence linking vitamin antioxidants and cancer obtained from epidemiological studies is conflicting.
We recently assessed serum concentrations of vitamin A and E in Irish subjects with adenomatous polyps and colorectal cancer.
We found lower values of vitamin E in these subjects compared with healthy controls (12.5 µM v 16.4 µM, p) and lower vitamin A values in patients with colorectal carcinoma compared with controls (1.33 µM v 1.5 µM, p).
Stronger evidence provided by in vitro studies has confirmed the link between vitamins A, E, C, and Β -carotene and colonic cancer.
A large prospective study by Wald et al found that serum vitamin E values in subjects who subsequently developed colorectal cancer were no different to those of age and sex matched controls.
In vitro work has also shown that vitamin E has no effect on the regression of induced tumours, which would validate our findings in this study.
Few studies have been carried out assessing the effect of vitamin supplementation on adenomatous polyps or colorectal cancer.
De Cosse et al found vitamin C and vitamin E supplementation had no effect on polyp recurrence, but in that study the supplements were taken in combination with fibre supplementation.
Bussey et al examined the effect of vitamin C supplementation on cell proliferation using the tritiated thymidine technique.
They found that supplementation reduced the total cell proliferation although in contrast with our results, vitamin C did not change the upward shift of the proliferative zone.
In conclusion this study has shown that both Β -carotene and vitamin C supplementation reduce the abnormal colonic crypt cell proliferation found in subjects with adenomatous polyps.
Short term supplementation with vitamin C reduces the cell proliferation to normal values possibly by reducing the S-phase duration.
This may reduce the risk of progression to carcinoma and the recurrence of adenomatous polyps.
Long term studies will be needed to assess if this effect is maintained.
Prospective survey of investigations in outpatients referred with iron deficiency anaemia
Abstract
Recent evidence has suggested that colonic neoplasm may be missed in patients presenting with iron deficiency anaemia unless colonic investigations are performed on all patients even when an alternative cause has been found.
This study prospectively surveyed 114 consecutive patients referred from family practitioners to an outpatient clinic for the investigation of iron deficiency anaemia to determine the diagnoses contributing to the anaemia, the usefulness of certain clinical features, and the role of colonic and other investigations in obtaining the diagnosis.
Upper gastrointestinal lesions contributing to anaemia were identified in 45 patients while colonic lesions were found in 18.
Twenty three patients had a non-gastrointestinal cause for anaemia and in 12 patients no cause was found.
Only two patients were identified as having colonic neoplasia (a small adenomatous polyp in each case) coexisting with upper gastrointestinal lesions.
Symptoms and signs had a sensitivity and specificity of upper gastrointestinal disease of 50% and 83% respectively, and 44% and 80% for colonic disease.
Endoscopy had a high yield (42%) and duodenal biopsy identified coeliac disease in three patients (two were aged >years) each of whom had normal folate values.
Barium enema had a yield of 13%.
All colonic carinomas occurred in patients >years.
The coexistence of colonic cancer or large polyps with an upper gastrointestinal lesion identified at endoscopy was rate in outpatients referred from family practitioners.
Clinical symptoms and signs were poor indicators of the investigations that will detect a cause for the anaemia.
Endoscopy (with duodenal biopsy) should be performed on all patients.
The yield from barium enema is so low in young patients that if an upper gastrointestinal cause is found and there are no clinical indicators it would seem unnecessary.
Iron deficiency anaemia is commonly caused by chronic blood loss from the gastrointestinal tract.
Few papers have been published on the subject since the report of Beveridge et al , which is still quoted in textbooks, though this study was performed before endoscopy was readily available.
Lesions identified at endoscopy are now often suggested as being the cause of anaemia.
More recently a series of anecdotal reports suggested that colonic neoplasia might be missed in patients with upper gastrointestinal symptoms or lesions.
These seemed to be confirmed in an Australian study based on inpatient data.
Sixteen per cent of patients with benign upper gastrointestinal lesions had coincidental colonic neoplasia after excluding those with partial gastrectomies and upper gastrointestinal malignancy.
As a result of this study full colonic assessment seemed to be required in patients with iron deficiency anaemia regardless of the findings of upper gastrointestinal investigations.
The mean age of their population, however, was high and the results cannot be extrapolated to other patient groups.
The need to investigate the colon in outpatients referred with iron deficiency anaemia has not previously been assessed.
This study aimed to assess the frequency of finding unsuspected colonic neoplasia in patients with an upper gastrointestinal cause for anaemia, and also to assess the usefulness of individual investigations and clinical findings in outpatients referred with iron deficiency anaemia.
Methods and patients
The results of investigations in all patients referred by family practitioners to a medical gastroenterology outpatient clinic for the investigation of iron deficiency anaemia were prospectively collected over a 17 month period.
A clinical history including the current or recent ingestion of aspirin or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), iron or ulcer healing treatment was obtained and a physical examination performed.
Gastrointestinal symptoms were grouped into upper gastrointestinal, which comprised dysphagia, heartburn, nausea, vomiting, upper abdominal pain (and its relief by food or antacids) or lower gastrointestinal comprising changed bowel habit, diarrhoea, constipation, rectal bleeding or lower abdominal pain (colicky, associated with changed bowel habit or relieved by passing stool or flatus).
The finding of an epigastric mass or tenderness in the epigastrium was taken to suggest upper gastrointestinal disease while a mass in the right iliac fossa was taken to point to colonic disease.
As gastrointestinal symptoms or signs may be non-specific two or more features related to either the upper or lower tract were considered necessary to suggest the site of possible disease.
The results of automated full blood counts (both lowest documented and on first outpatient attendance) and an assessment of iron store state (with serum iron, total iron binding capacity or ferritin, or both) were recorded.
In addition serum B 1 2 , red cell folate, coagulation studies, serum urea, electrolytes, liver function tests, and urinalysis were performed.
The gastrointestinal investigations comprised sigmoidoscopy, barium enema and upper intestinal endoscopy as these are most readily available in the United Kingdom.
In addition colonoscopy, duodenal biopsies, small intestinal radiology, ultrasound, technetium or chromium labelled studies and other non-gastroenterological investigations (for example intravenous urography) were performed when considered appropriate.
Dietary iron intake was measured by a prospective seven day diary record of weighed and estimated food intake in patients who had not changed their diet before the first attendence or were not admitted for investigations to be performed.
After investigation and treatment follow up data were collected to ensure that no recurrence of anaemia occurred and that the symptoms had resolved.
The mean follow up period in outpatient clinics or by contacting the family practitioner was 13.8 months (standard deviation (SD) 5.1).
Results
One hundred and fourteen patients were referred for the investigation of iron deficiency anaemia.
Three patients were excluded from the subsequent analysis as anaemia (haemoglobin <g/100 ml men, <g/100 ml women) was not confirmed at the hospital or on reviewing the family practitioners' investigations.
Sixty eight of the remaining 111 patients were women.
The mean age of the group was 63 years (SD 17.3, range 20–86).
The mean lowest haemoglobin was 8.6 g/100 ml (SD 1.9) with mean corpuscular volume 74.1 fl (SD 10.9).
Sixty four of the patients had received two or more weeks iron replacement before their first attendence at outpatients.
None the less iron deficiency was proved in 63 of 111 patients (serum iron <µmol/l with iron binding capacity >or ferritin <µg/l, or both).
Forty three patients had partially treated iron deficiency with a typical blood film and microcytosis (mean cell volume <fl) or iron, iron binding capacity or ferritin, or all four at the extremes of the normal range and a response to iron treatment.
Iron deficiency was not proved in five patients who were found to have duodenal ulcer, myelomatosis, giardiasis with partial villous atrophy, hepatocellular carcinoma, and menorrhagia.
The gastrointestinal investigations performed in the 111 patients included sigmoidoscopy (109), upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (108), and barium enema (92).
The presence or severity of the lesions contributing to the anaemia was difficult to interpret at endoscopy in 43 of the patients as they had received a course of H 2 antagonists (n=18) or had reduced or stopped aspirin or NSAIDs (n=32), or both, before the first hospital attendence.
Duodenal biopsy specimens were taken in 50 patients.
Colonoscopy was performed in 25 patients, one with ulcerative colitis as a primary investigation and in 24 to examine areas of uncertainty after the barium enema, to search for other lesions (for example angiodysplasia), or to remove colonic polyps.
The colon was not assessed in nine patients in whom the diagnosis of malignant disease elsewhere had been obtained by other tests.
Three patients refused endoscopy, two refused sigmoidoscopy, and nine patients refused to have a barium enema or colonoscopic examination.
UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL FINDING (TABLE I)
Endoscopy was normal or showed a hiatus hernia without oesophagitis in 66 patients.
Endoscopy was abnormal in 42 patients with more than one diagnosis in many patients.
Peptic ulceration, severe oesophagitis, erosive gastritis, and upper gastrointestinal malignancy were common findings.
Three of the patients with normal endoscopic examinations had coeliac disease proved by duodenal biopsy (one other patient had giardia).
Twenty patients had dyspeptic symptoms while receiving NSAIDs that resolved completely after reduction/cessation of NSAIDs or treatment with H 2 antagonists.
No other cause for anaemia was found in these patients and neither symptoms nor anaemia recurred during the follow up period.
These patients may well have had NSAID induced gastrointestinal bleeding contributing to their anaemia.
LOWER GASTROINTESTINAL FINDINGS (TABLE I)
Barium enema examination showed diverticular disease in 38 patients.
Colonic carcinoma was found in three patients (two caecal and one at the hepatic flexure).
Barium enema also confirmed one sigmoidoscopically identified rectosigmoid carcinoma.
In one case a barium enema failed to identify a carcinoma at the hepatic flexute, which was found at laparotomy sic months later.
Colonic adenomas were found in four cases.
Concern that some areas (typically the sigmoid colon) had been inadequately visualised led to colonoscopy and the discovery of four more patients with small adenomas (<mm).
Angiodysplasia of the caecum was found in one patient who also had a small adenoma.
SMALL BOWEL AND NON-GASTROINTESTINAL FINDINGS (TABLE I)
In this series a proved cause for small bowel blood loss was an infrequent finding.
One patient had ileal (by barium follow through) and rectal Crohn's disease, one had an ileal vascular malformation (showed by angiography and at laparotomy) and one had Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with a slight increase in chromium labelled red cell loss (though he also took aspirin).
The non-gastrointestinal cause contributing to the anaemia included menstrual loss (8), haematological causes (6), and malignant disease (5).
Malignant disease was found in a total of 18 patients (16%).
Fifty five patients had dietary intake of iron assessed and data from 47 were evaluable.
In only four patients was deficient iron intake the sole cause for the anaemia found although 27 (57%) had dietary intakes less than the reference nutrient intake.
In 12 cases no diagnosis was made.
Their anaemia did not recur over the follow up period.
MULTIPLE LESIONS CONTRIBUTING TO ANAEMIA
Two or multiple causes contributing to the anaemia (excluding dietary deiciency) were found in 17 patients.
In all these cases a gastrointestinal cause coexisted either with a second gastrointestinal cause (10) or a non-gastrointestinal factor (seven, including three with non-gastrointestinal malignant disease).
Eleven of 18 (61%) patients with oesophagitis had dual pathology.
Four of 10 (40%) patients with duodenal ulcers and five of 13 (38%) patients with gastric ulcers also had dual pathology.
Only in two of the 93 patients who had both endoscopy and colonic assessment was colonic neoplasia (in each case a small <mm adenoma) found to coexist with an upper gastrointestinal lesion (a gastric ulcer and grade 2 oesophagitis).
CLINICAL FEATURES (TABLE II)
To find out if gastrointestinal symptoms (and signs when present) can accurately predict the need for specific investigations they were related to the endoscopic and colonic findings.
Thirty four of 53 patients who had no specific symptoms or signs of gastrointestinal disease had a lesion found on investigation.
Ten patients had symptoms attributable to both the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract and five had lesions in one site (four upper, one lower gastrointestinal) on investigation.
Only two had both upper and lower gastrointestinal disease that might have contributed to the anaemia.
Thirty two of 40 patients with upper gastrointestinal symptoms had lesions, while eight of 27 with colonic symptoms had lesions.
The sensitivity for upper gastrointestinal symptoms pointing to an upper lesion was 50% with a specificity of 83%.
Similarly the sensitivity of colonic symptoms for colonic lesions was 44% with a specificity of 80%.
If colonic polyps are assumed to be asymptomatic the sensitivity of colonic symptoms predicting non-polypoid lesions rose to 69% (95% confidence interval 44–94%).
The clinical diagnosis of colorectal carcinoma was made after the first assessment by the clinician in 13 cases; four of five cases with carcinoma and nine of 88 without carcinoma giving a sensitivity of 80% and specificity of 90%.
The Figure shows the relation between the age of the patient and the identified cause of anaemia.
Over half the patients in whom no cause for anaemia was found or in whom a non-gastrointestinal cause (excluding malignancy) was found were less than 50 years old.
The age range of the patients with benign gastric or duodenal ulceration was wide (46 to 86 years).
All the upper gastrointestinal malignancies were in patients over 65 years old (range 69–87 years).
Similarly all colonic carcinomas were found in patient over 65 years (range 68–80 years).
Colonic adenomas were found in eight patients over 60 years (range 62–83 years).
The ages of the three patients with coeliac disease were 41, 73, and 80 years.
YIELD OF INVESTIGATIONS
Table III shows the results of the investigations performed with the frequency with which they added information in making a diagnosis in the cases of iron deficiency anaemia.
Serum urea, electrolyte, and liver function tests infrequently pointed to the cause of anaemia though they did identify coexisting disease.
Red cell folate was normal in all cases, even in the three patients with coeliac disease.
B 1 2 was abnormal in 12 patients (13%).
Of these two had gastric carcinomas, one had coeliac disease, one had pernicious anaemia (defined by B 1 2 absorption studies and antibody tests), and one had a gastric ulcer.
No clear cause for the B 1 2 deficiency was identified in the remaining seven patients.
In addition three patients who already had a diagnosis of pernicious anaemia were excluded from this analysis because they were already receiving B 1 2 treatment.
Urinalysis and coagulation studies were seldom helpful in showing the cause of anaemia.
Endoscopy contributed greatly to the diagnosis (39%), even in cases where an alternative cause was also found.
The yield of significant lesions from sigmoidoscopy and barium enema (13%) was lower.
Discussion
This survey had audited the investigations and diagnoses in patients with iron deficiency anaemia referred to a gastroenterology outpatients by family practitioners.
Previous studies have uncertain relevance to the outpatient setting as they either investigated subgroups of patients for example the elderly, or have reported on the findings in hospital inpatients.
In one recent study, in which colonic neoplasia coexisting with upper gastrointestinal lesions was a frequent finding, the authors acknowledge that their results might have little relevance to outpatient practice as patients were selected by reviewing the blood counts of hospital inpatients.
In addition the population was predominantly men and elderly.
Patients referred from family practitioners are likely to be younger and might well have a different incidence of disease causing anaemia.
The frequency of upper gastrointestinal lesions (39%) is in accord with other studies.
A previous study has also shown a similar rate of diagnosis of coeliac disease.
Two of the three patients who were found to have coeliac disease were over 70 years old suggesting that this diagnosis should not be dismissed because of the patients age when iron deficiency is being investigated.
The absence of a low folate value should not deter the physician from obtaining a duodenal biopsy specimen.
The practice of stopping NSAIDs before investigation or starting H 2 antagonists for a clinical diagnosis of peptic ulceration seems to be in the patients' best interests if a delay in endoscopy is unavoidable, but may lead to failure to find a definitive cause for the anaemia.
On the basis of the history, NSAIDs were implicated in 20 patients whose anaemia resolved and whose dyspepsia disappeared when the drug was stopped.
No other cause for anaemia was found and anaemia did not recur during follow up.
The contribution to anaemia made by mild degrees of oesophagitis or small adenomas is unclear.
These diagnoses have been included for completeness and for consistency with previous reports.
This study does not attempt to resolve the problem of whether such lesions contribute to anaemia.
Hiatus hernia and diverticular disease were not considered as sufficient cause for anaemia as there is little evidence that they lead to anaemia unless complicated by oesophagitis or diverticulitis.
The comparative infrequency of colonic carcinoma that we have found compared with other studies is probably because of the differences in the age distribution of the populations studied.
The incidence of colonic adenoma and carcinoma has been shown to be age related.
The patients we identified with colonic cancer were in the older age range of our group with ages comparable with studies with higher incidences of cancer.
The comparative merits of barium enema examination and colonoscopy in the investigation of iron deficiency anaemia have not been assessed in this study.
Reports suggest that colonoscopy fails to reach the caecum in 17 to 45% of cases except in very experienced hands.
As all the carcinomas were located on the right side of the colon, except the rectal carcinoma, which was found by rigid sigmoidoscopy, barium enema would seem to be an appropriate initial method of investigation.
One carcinoma at the hepatic flexure was not identified on barium enema examination.
Four small adenomas were missed radiologically but the importance of such lesions remains debatable and they are unlikely to contribute to substantial blood loss.
Previous anecdotal reports and one study have suggested that colonic investigation should be performed in all patients because of the frequency of dual colonic and upper intestinal disease.
Our survey suggests that in outpatients the yield from barium enema examination is likely to be very low in patients in whom another cause of anaemia has been found.
Only two small colonic polyps were found in patients who had an upper gastrointestinal lesion.
One in a patient of 82 years who had a gastric ulcer and one in a patient with grade 2 oesophagitis, which is unlikely to have contributed substantially to the anaemia.
In previous studies no clearly identifiable risk factors for colorectal cancer have been found except age (94% of new colorectal carcinoma occurs in patients over the age of 50 years), and family history.
Thus the routine assessment of the colon in outpatients when an alternative cause for anaemia has been found must be questioned, especially in younger patients without a family history or previous colonic polyps.
None the less care must be taken in ascribing the cause of the anaemia to any single lesion.
As in previous studies dual disease, which may contribute to the anaemia, was found in 20% of cases.
In addition suboptimal dietary iron intake was found in many of the patients though this was seldom the sole cause for anaemia.
The sensitivities and specificities of symptoms (and signs) show that these are not good indicators of the likely site of a lesion causing anaemia.
The rather low sensitivity of symptoms relating to upper gastrointestinal disease suggests that endoscopy should be performed on all patients with iron deficiency anaemia.
Interestingly the clinical diagnosis of colonic carcinoma made at the first attendance was correct in four of five cases and incorrect in nine of 88 cases suggesting that clinical features are of help in this diagnosis.
This survey also allowed us to analyse the usefulness of investigations in iron deficiency anaemia in outpatients.
Endoscopy has the highest yield for any of the tests performed.
When performed in a patient with upper gastrointestinal symptoms it has a high probability of diagnosis.
‘Routine’ blood tests contribute little in finding the cause of anaemia.
Serum urea and electrolytes, liver function tests, coagulation, and red cell folate were seldom abnormal and when they were it was probably because of an unrelated coexistent disease.
Urinalysis by dipstick testing was abnormal in seven cases, a figure very similar to the 5% documented in unselected out-patients.
This was mainly due to coexistent disease rather than an indicator of the cause of the anaemia.
In contrast rigid sigmoidoscopy had a small but helpful diagnostic rate, which significantly affected outcome, as two patients were found with ulcerative colitis and one patient had a rectosigmoid carcinoma.
Faecal occult blood testing was not used as an entry criteria nor was its usefulness assessed during this study as the investigations to locate a possible source of bleeding would have been pursued even if faecal occult blood tests had been negative.
The coexistence of iron and B 1 2 deficiency has previously been recognised.
Measurement of B 1 2 values showed a high rate of abnormality.
As four patients had pernicious anaemia (three already on treatment), one had coeliac disease and two gastric carcinoma the checking of B 1 2 values in patients with iron deficiency anaemia seems to be a useful test.
Many of the differences between the findings in this study and previous ones are likely to be age related.
Disease is more likely to be identified as age increases.
Malignant disease, especially colonic neoplasia is rare in young subjects so investigations should be tailored to the patients age and the clinical setting.
Mandatory colonic assessment in all patients as recently suggested seems inappropriate.
In conclusion dual or multiple causes contributing to anaemia were present in 20% of cases of iron deficiency anaemia referred from family practitioners.
Upper gastrointestinal lesions that were able to be treated were often found at endoscopy and this should be the primary investigaton in such patients.
The opportunity should be used to obtain duodenal biopsy specimens.
Colonic assessment to detect carcinomas or polyps is warranted in older patients.
The yield in younger patients is likely to be very low and the development of alternative strategies to select those in whom a barium enema or total colonoscopy should be performed would be helpful.
Simple scoring of symptoms and signs is unhelpful in indicating the diagnosis, though a clinical suspicion of colonic carcinoma has reasonable sensitivity and specificity.
Simple indicators of colorectal carcinoma would help to rationalise and improve the efficiency of the investigation of iron deficiency anaemia.
The lack of response to iron treatment or the recurrence of anaemia when iron treatment is stopped may be an indicator of the need for further colonic assessment and requires formal evaluation.
A multicentred audit under the auspices of the British Society of Gastroenterology has now started that should show more clearly the role of barium enema in the investigation of anaemia.
It should also throw light on how lack of response to iron treatment points to the need for further colonic assessment.
Human papillomavirus 16 DNA in NIH3T3 cells transformed by colonic cancer cellular DNA
Abstract
Human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 DNA is closely associated with human cancers.
It has been identified as an aetiological agent in cervical cancers, and recently, in colonic neoplasms.
To further understand the role of HPV 16 DNA in colorectal carcinogenesis, NIH3T3 cells were transformed with high molecular weight DNA from colonic cancer cells and the expression of HPV 16 DNA detected.
Both human Alu and HPV 16 DNA sequences were found in the type II foci of CC-M2T cells by Southern blot hydribisation.
Additionally, 100% tumorigenicity in nude mice was seen.
This study shows the transfection of HPV DNA from colonic cancers into NIH3T3 mouse cells and suggests that HPV type 16 might be associated with the malignant transformation of colonic cells.
Colorectal carcinoma ranks second only to lung cancer in men and to breast cancer in women in the United States.
The specific carcinogens, however, that cause the colorectal cancers in humans remain unknown.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) have been reported to be associated with the genital tract and extragenital tumours in previous studies.
Those works have shown that HPVs are associated with premalignant and malignant lesions of the stratified squamous epithelium.
Nevertheless, reports of HPV infection in the cancer of the columnar epithelium are few.
Recently, Kirgan et al have shown HPV antigen and genome in colon neoplasms.
We have also found HPV DNA sequences in three cell lines of colorectal cancer from Chinese subjects.
These findings might suggest the correlation of HPV with cause of colorectal cancers.
It is uncertain whether HPV DNA acts as a causal agent or a causal passenger in colorectal carcinogenesis.
Therefore, the biological activity of HPV DNA in cells has been studied to investigate this issue.
We extracted the cellular DNA of human colonic cancers to transform NIH3T3 cells and investigated its possible role in colorectal carcinogenesis.
Materials and methods
CELLS
NIH3T3 cells were cultured in Dubecco modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% calf serum (Gibco Laboratories, Scotland).
CC-M2, CC-M3, CC-M4 cell lines were grown in RPMI (Roswell Park Memorial Institute)— 1640 (J R Scientific, Inc, Woodland, CA, USA) medium with 10% fetal calf serum (Gibco) and cultured as previously described.
TRANSFECTION
High molecular weight DNA was extracted from CC-M cells as in previous studies.
All DNA transfers were done by calcium phosphate precipitation.
In brief, about 20 µg cellular DNA in 0.5 ml of 0.5 M CaC12 was mixed with 0.5 ml of 50 mM hydroxyethylpeperazine-ethanesulphonic acid (HEPES)(pH 7.1) and 70 mM sodium phosphate, and then agitated with a gentle stir.
At room temperature, calcium phosphate was precipitated from this DNA solution in 30 minutes.
Then, the solution was added to a 100 mm Petri dish containing 5×10 5 NIH3T3 cells in 10 ml DMEM and 10% calf serum.
Another dish, free of DNA solution, was used as a control culture.
The cells were incubated for 14 hours in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO 2 in air at 37°C.
The DNA solution was then removed and 10 ml DMEM containing 10% calf serum was added.
The medium was changed twice weekly.
After 14 days incubation, the number of transforming foci was obtained from the triplicate assays and the foci were harvested by the cloning cylinder procedure.
According to the description by Reznikoff et al three types of transformed cells were classified.
Type I foci, which was regarded as not significant, consisted of condensed cells with little or no cellular overlap.
Type II foci were formed of piled up cells that stained darkly, but had comparatively smooth edges.
Type III foci had by far the most unusual morphology: highly condensed, heavily piled upon one another, and criss crossed at the edges of the focus.
DNA EXTRACTION
Total cellular DNA from each focus was extracted from these cells and from the normal epithelium of the colon, which was used as a normal control by the method previously described.
Briefly, DNA was extracted and incubated with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and RNase at 37°C for three hours.
Subsequently, proteinase K was added and incubated again overnight.
Cellular DNA was then extracted with phenol/chloroform/ isoamylalcohol (25:24:1), and dialysed with TE (10 mM TRIS-HC1, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) buffer solution.
After centrifugation (1000 g 4°C for 20 minutes) the DNA in the supernatant was preceipitated by the addition of ethanol.
Precipitated nucleic acids were then washed with 70% ethanol and dried in the air.
The absorbance of DNA at 260 nm was determined by a DU-50 series spectrophotometer (Beckman Instruments, Inc, CA, USA) and compared with the absorbance at 280 nm.
the DNA absorbance ratio ranged from 1.8 to 2.0.
SOUTHERN BLOT HYBRIDISATION
Filter hybridisation was carried out as described by Southern.
Briefly, each DNA was cleaved with the restriction enzyme EcoR I and then electrophoresed in 1% agrose gel.
After staining with ethidium bromide, the DNA was denatured in situ and transferred to nitrocellulose filter paper (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmon, CA, USA) with an electroblot apparatus (Bio-Rad).
To show the presence of human genes in mouse cells, the filters were hybridised with a human DNA marker, Alu family sequences, with specific activity ranging 2×10 8 to 2×10 9 cpm/µg in high stringency conditions, then washed several times at 55°C, and finally exposed to an x ray film by an autoradiographic method at -70°C.
In this assay, normal NIH3T3 cells and human leucocytes were used, as negative and positive controls, respectively.
After removal of Alu probes, the filters were also hybridised to nick translated 3 2 P-labelled HPV DNA (2×10 8 cpm/µp) under stringent conditions (50% formamide, 10% dextran sulfate, 5×Denhardt's solution, 1% SDS-1 M NaCl, 50 mM TRIS-HCl, pH 7.4, 500 µg/ml depurinated salmon sperm DNA) at 42°C for 24 hours.
Filters were washed twice in 2×SSC (1×SSC is 0.15 M NaCl plus 0.015 M sodium citrate) containing 0.5% SDS for 30 minutes at room temperature and then in 0.1×SSC containing 0.1% SDS at 50°C for 30 minutes before autoradiography.
Filters were dried and exposed to XAR 2 film (Eastman Kodak Co, Rochester, NY, USA) with an enhancing screen at -70°C.
DNA molecular weight marker was obtained from Bethesda Research Laboratories (Gaithersburg, MD, USA).
TUMORIGENECITY
Transformed cells were subcutaneously injected into bilateral flanks of six adult female BALB/c nude mice.
About 5×10 6 cells were injected per site.
Within one to two months, the newly grown tumours were removed and their representative sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
Results
TRANSFORMATION OF NIH3T3 CELLS
The transforming activity of DNAs, which induced morphological transformation of NIH3T3 fibroblasts in the cancer cells were estimated.
The Table shows that only high molecular DNA isolatedfrom CC-M2 cells was able to induce type II transforming foci of which the transforming efficiency was 0.25 focus per µg of DNA.
In contrast with type II focus, the type I ranged from 0.017 to 0.033.
These results indicate that CC-M2 cells contain activated transforming genes.
The morphology of type II focus was comprised of tightly packed cells, which were extensively piled upon one another and had comparatively smooth edges (Fig 1A).
These cells, however, showed a criss cross appearance after longterm cultivation (Fig 1B).
They were significantly different from non-transformed NIH3T3 cells, which showed contact inhibition of cell growth, strong cell to substrate adhesion, and uniformly flat morphology (Fig 1C).
HPV DNA IN TRANSFORMED CELLS
Cell lines, derived from transformed foci that were induced by CC-M2, CC-M3, CC-M4, were designated as CC-M2T, CC-M3T, CC-M4T respectively.
All transformed cell lines were examined by Southern blot hybridisation.
The results showed that all type Ii foci of CC-M2T cells were the only positive foci in the DNA hybridisation assay of human Alu family sequences (Fig 2).
These results show that human DNAs integrate only into the type II foci of CC-M2T.
CC-M2T that contained Alu sequences was also positive in the hybridisation with 3 2 P-labelled HPV-16 DNA sequences (Fig 3).
Under highly stringent conditions, two important HPV-16 related DNA bands of 7.9 and 2.2 Kb were found in CC-M2T cells.
Other cell lines, however, in this assay were all negative.
TUMORIGENECITY
The Table shows the results of tumour induction.
Tumours developed only from the CC-M2T cell line within six weeks.
The tumorigenecity of CC-M2T in nude mice was 100% (6/6).
The tumours were then removed to establish another cell line for future studies.
The histological examination of these tumours showed a fibrosarcoma like picture.
Discussion
Human papillomavirus has been shown to play a causal part in cervical neoplasia.
It has also been found closely associated with human extragenital cancers.
Few reports, however, have shown the relation between HPV and colonic cancers.
Kirgan et al found that colonic neoplasms contain both HPV antigen and viral genome.
Nevertheless, Southern blot is a well known standard technique in DNA hybridisation.
Therefore, we have shown the expression of HPV-16 and HPV-18 DNA in colonic cancer (CC-M) cell lines by Southern blot hybridisation.
From this study, we believe that HPV may play an important part in colorectal carcinogenesis.
Although a number of studies have described the HPV transforming activity in the transformation of normal cells, the carcinogenic mechanisms of HPV is not yet completely understood.
Also, activated transforming genes in some human tumours have been detected by DNA transfection.
There is still not one study concerning the transmissible condition of HPV DNA in colonic cancers.
To idendity the HPV transfection of human tumour cell lines to normal mouse cells, we have shown the Alu sequences of human DNA marker in the genome of NIH3T3 transformants, although CC-M2 was the only cell line that transfected successfully.
Our transfection rate was higher compared with previous reports Perucho et al have shown that only five of 21 human tumour cell lines contain a gene or genes capable of transforming mouse cells.
In Krontiris and Cooper's series, only two of eight human tumour cell lines and none (0/13) of primary tumours can transform NIH3T3 cells.
The low efficiency of transformation with human tumour DNA may be attributed to the several reasons.
Firstly, the molecular heterogeneity of tumours with the same origin, histological type, and differentiated level.
In other words, cell lines derived from tumours of the same tissue may contain two different transforming genes.
Secondly, the long latency in the transformation of rodent cell lines by HPV.
This suggests that longer than 14 days incubation is required to obtain transforming foci.
Thirdly, the lack of cooperative activated oncogenes.
Matlashewski has described two groups of genes that are required in the morphological transformation of normal primary cells in vitro.
One group is the establishing genes such as myc ,Ela and the other is the transforming genes including ras and polyoma middle T genes.
He has also shown that activated ras gene is required in the morphological transformation of HPV-16 DNA.
In other words, negative cell lines may lack some genes capable of transforming NIH/3T3 cells or contain a set of genes that could transfer 3T3 cells, but at an efficiency of focus induction too low for detection.
Fourthly, the size of transforming genes is too large at transfer.
Perucho and Wigler et al have shown that the efficiency of transformation may be subject to the size and nature of the transforming fragment.
Dürst has reported that the sequences of papillomavirus may be integrated near the cellular oncogenes in some cervical carcinomas.
These activated cellular oncogenes by HPV DNA may participate in the malignant transformation of cervical cells.
Interestingly, in our study, all type II foci of CC-M2T cells contained HPV DNA sequences and showed a 100% (6/6) tumorigenecity in nude mice.
The tumour cells grown from nude mice were also found to have HPV DNA sequences (unpublished data).
This suggests that HPV may be an active gene in carcinogenesis and thus does not lose in in vivo passage.
HPV-16 DNA has been detected in all CC-M colonic cancer cell lines.
Moreover, HPV genomes was found in 43% of colonic carcinomas and none in normal mucosa (unpublished data).
In this study, we have exclusively shown the transfection of HPV-16 DNA from colonic cancer cells to NIH3T3 cells.
Because HPV-16 DNA is known to activate cellular oncogene and is closely associated with malignant transformation, these findings suggest that an association of HPV-16 DNA with the multistep development of colorectal cancers may exist.
As in the report by Reznikoff et al , all the type I foci in this study had a non-tumorigenic character in vivo and were considered to have no transforming response.
In conclusion, the HPV DNA of colonic cancer cells can integrate and induce neogrowth in mouse cells.
These data suggest that HPV-16 may play an active part in colorectal carcinogenesis and may not be simply a casual DNA in transformed cells.
This study provides valuable insight into the association of HPV DNA with colonic cancers.
Further investigations into the mapping of HPV integration sites and nearby activated oncogene will be very helpful in better understanding colorectal carcinogenesis.
Effects of supplemental oxygen on cardiac rhythm during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy: a randomised controlled double blind trial
Abstract
To investigate the effects of supplemental oxygen on cardiac rhythm during gastroscopy, 103 patients aged over 60 were randomised to receive either supplemental oxygen or air at 2 litres/minute during the procedure.
Pulse rate, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and a Holter cardiac trace were monitored before, during, and for one hour after the gastroscopy.
A wide range of electrocardiographic abnormalities were recorded in both oxygen and air groups, of which ventricular and supraventricular ectopic beats were the most common.
There were no significant differences in the rate of occurrence of any clinically important cardiac abnormality either between the oxygen and air groups or between the three monitored periods before, during, and after gastroscopy.
There were significantly fewer patients, however, with supraventricular extra systoles when oxygen was given during gastroscopy (p).
Although supplemental oxygen during gastroscopy significantly improved oxygen saturation (p; 95% confidence intervals for the difference between the means: 2.9 to 4.7), there was no correlation between oxygen saturation and any electrocardiographic changes.
It is concluded that electrocardiographic abnormalities are common in patients over 60, but this study found no evidence that they are induced by gastroscopy.
Supplemental oxygen increases oxygen saturation but does not reduce the incidence of clinically important cardiac arrhythmias.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is a comparatively safe procedure with a mortality of 1–6 in 20000 examinations, and an incidence of serious complications of about 1 in 1000.
Over half the morbidity and mortality is due to cardiopulmonary complications, arrhythmias being the most important.
The reported incidence of arrhythmias during endoscopy varies from 3.5% to 72%, with hypoxia proposed as an important factor in inducing arrhythmias.
It is well established that hypoxia occurs during endoscopic procedures and that oxygen given during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) will significantly diminish the degree of oxygen desaturation.
There has not, however, been adequate assessment of whether improving the oxygen saturation reduces the incidence of arrhythmias.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of supplemental oxygen both during and after upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.
Subjects and methods
All patients aged over 60 years having routine upper gastrointestinal endoscopy were eligible for entry into this study.
Those having emergency gastroscopy were excluded.
Whenever the monitoring equipment was available patients were asked to participate in the study.
One hundred and three patients were enrolled with no refusals.
They were divided by random numbers into two groups, one receiving oxygen during gastroscopy and the other receiving air.
Written informed consent was obtained from each patient before entry into the study, which was approved by the Parkside Health Authority Ethics Committee.
Before the procedure demographic details were obtained from the patient of age and sex, relevant cardiopulmonary history, shortness of breath according to the New York Heart Association criteria, current treatment, and history of smoking.
The indication for endoscopy was noted as well as the dose of sedation, the size of endoscope, and length of procedure.
A ‘Superlite’ Holter monitor (Mortara-Cardiodata, USA) was connected about 30 minutes before gastroscopy and the cardiac recording commenced.
Five minutes before the procedure a pulse oximeter (Model 7840, Konitron instruments, UK) was attached to the right index finger, and a blood pressure cuff for automated readings (Dinamap 1846SX, Critikon, UK) to the right arm.
Baseline measurements of blood pressure and oxygen saturation were recorded on two occasions two minutes apart.
On arrival in the endoscopy suite nasal cannulas were attached and, according to the randomisation, either oxygen or air at 2 litres/ minute was given.
The oxygen and air cylinders were covered and a three way tap attached to the nasal cannulas.
An endoscopy nurse turned on the appropriate cylinder and hence kept the study blinded for the endoscopist, the research nurse, and the patient.
After two minutes a local anaesthetic spray (2% lignocaine 100 mg; Astra Pharmaceuticals, UK) was applied to the back of the throat and intravenous midazolam given to produce a similar level of sedation (usually 2.5–5 mg).
At the start of intubation and at extubation a marker button on the Holter monitor was pressed to show accurately the beginning and end of the gastroscopy.
The ease of intubation was graded by the research nurse (CH) on a scale of one (effortless) to four (traumatic).
During the procedure pulse rate, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation were recorded every minute by the research nurse.
At extubation the oxygen/air was switched off and the pulse rate, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation were subsequently recorded every 10 minutes for one hour.
The Holter recording was then stopped, and the tapes sent for analysis using the Cardiodata computerised analyser by cardiology technicians unaware of the proceedings in the endoscopy unit.
The number per minute of supraventricular and ventricular extrasystoles allowed comparisons to be made between the pre, per, and postendoscopy periods.
Isolated ventricular extrasystoles are frequently found in normal healthy adults, and occur in 1–4% of standard 12 lead recordings, and 39–67% of 24 hour ambulatory studies.
Ventricular extrasystoles may occur more commonly in patients with ischaemic heart disease, and their presence may have more sinister implications.
Lown and Wolf classified ventricular extrasystoles occurring at a rate of less than one per minute as isolated and of little prognostic significance, whereas those occurring at a rate of more than one per minute were more indicative of an unfavourable prognosis.
Supraventricular extrasystoles, on the other hand, occur with increasing frequency throughout life, but there is no evidence of an association with ischaemic heart disease or that their presence is of prognostic importance.
Other electrocardiographic abnormalities, in addition to ventricular extrasystoles occurring at a rate of more than 1/min, regarded as of‘sinister’ importance — that is , markers of potentially serious complications are, ST segment increase or depression of more than 1 mm, supraventricular tachycardia (three or more consecutive supraventricular extrasystoles at a rate of more than 130/min), second or third degree heart block, ventricular bigemini or trigemini, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation or asystole.
With reference to the available published works, it was assumed that ‘sinister’ electrocardiographic abnormalities, as defined above, would occur in 20% of patients, and that supplemental oxygen administration would decrease this figure to 10%.
On this basis to achieve a significant result at the 5% value with a power of 90% 400 patients would be required.
On preliminary analysis of the first 100 Holter cardiac tapes, however, it was apparent that the incidence of these sinister abnormalities was similar between the patients receiving oxygen and those receiving air.
Assuming similar proportions even a study of 5000 patients would not have shown a significant difference between the two groups.
The study was therefore terminated at this stage.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The primary analysis was planned to be a comparison of the numbers of subjects in the oxygen and air treated groups with arrhythmias using the χ 2 test.
The Mann-Whitney U test was used to assess the significance of any difference between the groups in the frequency of those with arrhythmias.
Secondary analyses were to include within group comparisons of arrhythmias, oxygen saturation, pulse rate, and blood pressure between the pre, per, and postgastroscopy periods, using the Wilcoxon matched pairs signed ranks test for the frequecy of arrhythmias, and the Students t test for the remaining normally distributed data.
Spearman's rank correlation was used to look for any relation between oxygen saturation and incidence of arrhythmias.
Finally differences in oxygen saturation, pulse, and blood pressure between the two groups were assessed with the Mann-Whitney U test.
Possible confounding patient variables, such as age, cardiopulmonary history, smoking, and variations in the endoscopic procedure were compared between the two groups using the χ 2 test for categorical variables and the Mann-Whitney U test for continuous variables.
Results
Between November 1990 and June 1991 103 patients were studied.
The two groups, receiving either oxygen or air, showed similar baseline characteristics (Table I).
Supplemental oxygen at two litres per minute resulted in significantly higher oxygen saturation values during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (Fig 1).
In the group receiving oxygen there was a mean saturation of 95.4% before gastroscopy and 97.5% during the procedure when the oxygen was being given — this represents a significant increase (p; 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the difference between the means: 1.47 to 2.73).
In the group receiving air the mean saturation was 95.2% before and 93.7% during the gastroscopy — this represents a significant decrease (p; 95% CIs: -0.63 to -2.03).
The saturation during gastroscopy in the group receiving oxygen was significantly higher than in the group receiving air (p; 95% CIs: 2.94 to 4.68).
After the procedure saturation fell to values significantly below baseline in both groups (p; 95% CIs: 2.4 to 3.5).
The lowest oxygen saturation recorded throughout the study was 86%.
Most of the electrocardiogram abnormalities recorded were supraventricular and ventricular extrasystoles (Table II).
There were significantly fewer patients with supraventricular extrasystoles when oxygen was given during gastroscopy compared with those receiving air — 15 (30%) and 26 (49%) respectively (χ 2 =5.05; 0.01).
The frequency of these extrasystoles, however, when they did occur, on an extrasystole per minute basis was similar both between the oxygen and air groups and between the three monitored periods before, during, and after the gastroscopy (Fig 2).
The number of patients with ventricular extrasystoles of either an ‘isolated’(rate less than 1/min) or ‘frequent’(rate more than 1/min) nature was similar in both groups throughout the study (Fig 3).
Although some ST segment changes were recorded, these occurred equally within the two groups.
Of note, 16 of 23 patients with these changes denied any history of ischaemic heart disease.
Other changes seen were short runs of supraventricular tachycardia (oxygen group 9; air group 3); sinus bradycardia (oxygen group 2; air group 4), axis change (oxygen group 2; air group 1); ventricular bigemini (oxygen group 1; air group 5) and trigemini (oxygen group 3; air group 2); and several cases of atrial ibrillation (oxygen group 2; air group 3), first degree heart block (oxygen group 1; air group 2), and right bundle branch block (oxygen group 1; air group 2) occurring throughout the monitoring.
There were no significant differences in any of these arrhythmias between the two groups.
Combining all the ‘sinister’ abnormalities (as defined earlier) there were no significant differences between the oxygen and air groups at any stage of the study (Table II).
Only six patients in the oxygen group and three in the air group showed no electrocardiographic abnormalities at any stage.
In both groups more patients had a normal cardiac trace during the procedure than before or after gastroscopy.
This probably reflects the shorter period of monitoring rather than any protective effect of the gastroscopy on cardiac rhythm (Table II).
A relative tachycardia was seen during the procedure in many patients, and seemed to be a normal physiological response to the gastroscopy.
The pulse rate subsequently fell to baseline values after gastroscopy in both the oxygen and air groups.
Similarly the blood pressure rose during the procedure and fell to below baseline immediately afterwards, returning to baseline values by the end of the monitoring period.
The rise in blood pressure in the oxygen group was significantly greater than in the air group (Table II).
There was no significant correlation between the frequency of extrasystoles, either supraventricular or ventricular, and oxygen saturation values.
There was no significant relation between cardiac arrhythmias or ST segment change and age, sex, shortness of breath (New York Heart Association criteria), or cardiac history.
Discussion
During gastrointestinal endoscopy hypoxia is well recorded, with many different causal factors.
This study shows that supplemental oxygen improves oxygen saturation values during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, which is in keeping with previous studies of both gastroscopy and ERCP.
A wide range of electrocardiographic abnormalities were recorded before, during, and after endoscopy, although there was no significant difference in the number of arrhythmias seen during these three periods (Table II).
Most arrhythmias recorded were supraventricular and isolated ventricular extrasystoles, which are of little prognostic importance.
There were significantly fewer patients with supraventricular extrasystoles when oxygen was given during gastroscopy (χ 2 =5.05; 0.01).
Their frequency, however, when present on an extrasystole per minute basis was similar both in the oxygen and air groups, and between the three monitored periods (Fig 2).
Therefore this apparent reduction in their rate of occurrence is a reflection of the comparatively shorter period of monitoring during the procedure.
Supraventricular extrasystoles occur with increasing frequency throughout life, but there is no evidence of an association with ischaemic heart disease or that their presence is of prognostic importance.
There were no differences between the two groups for any sinister electrocardiographic abnormality, as defined earlier, when looked at either individually or in combination.
In addition there was no correlation between the oxygen saturation and the frequency of supraventricular and ventricular extrasystoles.
There was no demonstrable relation between medical history, smoking habits, age or sex and the development of arrhythmias or ST segment change in either group of patients.
This study has shown a larger proportion of electrocardiographic changes (91%) than previous studies, even though some of these included sinus tachycardia as an arrhythmia.
This, defined as sinus rhythm with a rate of greater than 100 beats per minute, was present in many of our patients with or without oxygen and seems to be a normal physiological response.
Many of the studies showing a low incidence of electrocardiographic abnormalities included cardiac monitoring only during the endoscopy procedure itself.
In addition our study included only patients over 60 years, specifically to maximise the pick up of cardiac abnormalities.
There was no evidence in this study that endoscopy induced electrocardiographic abnormalities, although to pick up significant numbers of serious arrhythmias the trial would have had to be considerably larger.
Most of the electrocardiographic changes seen were clinically not important.
During this study oxygen saturation values did not fall below 86%, which is at variance with some studies, although in agreement with others.
Readings were taken only at one minute intervals, and therefore saturation values may have fallen lower inbetween, although the automatic alarm set at 85% was never activated.
More importantly, other studies have used higher doses of benzodiazepine and also given opiates before treatment, which is likely to explain the lower oxygen saturation values.
It is of interest that the postgastroscopy oxygen saturation values were significantly less than baseline even 60 minutes after the procedure.
This would imply that if supplemental oxygen is given its administration ought to be extended into the postgastroscopy period.
As in previous studies there was a significant difference in the oxygen saturation values between the patients receiving oxygen and those given air, but we were unable to show any correlation between oxygen saturation and electrocardiographic abnormalities.
In addition, there was no relation between cardiac arrhythmias or ST segment change and age, sex, shortness of breath or cardiac history.
It was therefore not possible to predict, on the basis of patient characteristics, those who would develop cardiac arrhythmias.
The Endoscopy Committee of the British Society of Gastroenterology recently set out guidelines for monitoring patients during endoscopy, and included the recommendation that ‘high risk’ patients, a definition which included the elderly, should receive supplemental oxygen.
From our study, however, there was no evidence that supplemental oxygen led to any reduction of clinically important cardiac arrhythmias in patients over 60.
Our results do not, therefore, support the BSG guidelines that supplemental oxygen should be routinely used in the elderly.
This study, however, excluded other ‘high risk’ patients, as defined in the BSG guidelines, such as those having emergency procedures, because the study was underway before their publication.
We therefore cannot comment on the use of supplemental oxygen in these patients.
In conclusion electrocardiographic abnormalities are common in atients over 60, but this study found no evidence that they are induced by gastroscopy.
Supplemental oxygen increases oxygen saturation but does not reduce the incidence of clinically important cardiac arrhythmias or ST segment changes.
Serum carnitine concentrations in coeliac disease
Abstract
Carnitine is essential for muscle energy production and is required for the transport of long chain fatty acids and acyl co-enzyne A derivatives across the inner mitrochondrial membrane.
Recently, an absorptive transport mechanism was discovered at the small bowel level suggesting the possibility of a carnitine deficient state in patients with mucosal damage.
Therefore, this study investigated carnitine concentrations in serum of patients with coeliac disease.
Serum samples were obtained from 12 patients with active coeliac disease and seven with non-active disease, and compared with serum samples of 17 children with gastrointestinal symptoms but with a small bowel normal unbiopsy examination and 33 normal controls.
Total serum carnitine concentration was significantly lower in the patients with coeliac disease compared with the other two groups and to reference values.
When the degree of atrophy of coeliac intestinal mjcosa was numerically graded, serum carnitine concentrations did not correlate to the degree of the intestinal lesion but were significantly lower in the damaged intestine compared with the group with normal mucosa.
It is suggested that coeliac disease should be considered as a potential cause of secondary carnitine deficiency.
Carntine is requred for the transport of long chain fatty acids into the mitochondrial matrix, thus allowing their catabolism by Β-oxidation.
Carnitine also transports shortened acyl co-enzyme A compounds from peroxisomes to mitochondria.
Thus carnitine is crucial for mitochondrial energy production, and this is of particular importance in skeletal and heart muscle.
Despite its importance, the regulation of carnitine metabolism is not completely understood.
Its endogenous synthesis and urinary excretion have been well established, but no consensus exists concerning the mode of intestinal absorption.
Carnitine absorption from the gut is indirectly suggested by a carnitine deficiency state during carnitine deficient diets.
Oral supplementation with L-carnitine can correct the deficiency.
In addition, evidence has been provided for an active transport mechanism in the human intestinal mucosa.
More recent investigations with rat jejunal brush border membrane vesicles, however, have found evidence only for passive transport.
This controversy and the importance of intestinal carnitine handling prompted us to investigate carnitine concentrations in malabsorption.
Coeliac disease is a reversible, gluten dependent condition with decreased intestinal absorptive surface.
We suspected that the carnitine deficiency would be found in patients with active coeliac disease, and it would resolve on a gluten free diet after the recovery of mucosal absorptive capacity.
Furthermore, if secondary carnitine deficiency exists in patients with coeliac disease, it might explain some of the symptoms of this condition.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
Nineteen children with coeliac disease who fulfilled the diagnostic criteria of the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition were divided into two groups.
Group 1 comprised 12 children who were not healed (mean age 11.3, range 5–18 years, girl:boy 1:1) on a gluten containing diet.
Group 2 comprised seven children with coeliac disease (mean age 9.0, range 4–15 years, girl:boy 1.2:1) in remission, on a gluten free diet for at least one year.
The coeliac patients were compared with a third group of 17 children (mean age 9.7, range 3–10 years, girls:boys 1.4:1) with various diseases or symptoms, such as chronic abdominal pain (n=8), failure to thrive (n=6), peptic ulcer (n=2), and immune deficiency (n=1).
A group of 33 normal children (mean age 9.5, range 3–16 years, girl:boy 1.2:1) was studied after eight hours of fasting as reference group.
Informed consent was obtained from parents and the study was approved by the hospital institutional review board.
INTESTINAL BIOPSY
All patients (except for the reference group) had upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with a GIF-XQ-10 endoscope (Olympus, Japan).
A small intestinal biopsy specimen was taken from the third part of the duodenum, and routinely processed for histological examination.
The specimens were graded 1–4 according to the degree of intestinal atrophy.
CARNITINE DETERMINATION
On the day of endoscopy, 5 ml of blood was drawn after eight hours of fasting and the serum was frozen at -70°C until assayed.
Serum carnitine was measured by a modified radiometric assay: total and free carnitine were measured and acyl carnitine was derived from the difference between total and free carnitine.
Two ml of ethanol were added to 0.5 ml of serum.
After vortexing, the tubes were centrifuged (3000 g for 20 min).
The supernatant (0.5 ml) was placed in each one of four tubes (two for total and two for free carnitine).
For the determination of total carnitine, 150 ml of ammonia (33%) was added to two tubes and incubated for an hour at 37°C.
The contents of the tubes were dryed by evaporation.
Free carnitine was converted to C acetyl carnitine and measured in a scintillation counter.
The carnitine concentration was expressed in µmol/l.
Table I shows the reference values for children and adolescents.
STATISTICS
Comparison of means was analysed by one way analysis of variance.
Correlation between variables was calculated by Spearman's rank correlation.
Results
Serum carnitine concentrations were lowest in the group with active coeliac disease (Table I).
Total carnitine concentration was significantly lower in the group with symptomatic coeliac disease compared with the three other groups (p).
Comparing free and acyl carnitine concentrations between the groups, the patients with active coeliac disease had the lowest concentration.
This trend did not reach a significant value.
Small intestinal biopsy specimens were histologically normal in the coeliac disease patients on a gluten free diet and in the symptomatic control group.
In contrast, intestinal biopsy specimens of the coeliac disease patients not receiving treatment had grade II atrophy in two cases, grade III atrophy in five cases, and total atrophy (grade IV) in five children.
The Figure shows the relation between serum carnitine concentrations and the degree of intestinal atrophy.
Patients with grade II-IV of atrophy had significant lower concentrations of total, free, and acyl carnitine in their serum compared with patients with normal intestine (p, p, p, respectively).
No correlation was found between the serum carnitine concentration and the degree of intestinal atrophy in active coeliac disease.
In three coeliac disease patients serum carnitine was measured serially on gluten containing and gluten free diets for at least one year on each of the diets (Table II).
In all three, serum total, free, and acyl carnitine concentrations while on a gluten containing diet were lower in comparison with a gluten free diet.
Discussion
Patients with coeliac disease who are not receiving treatment have low serum carnitine concentrations.
The lower carnitine concentrations seems to be secondary to the mucosal injury found in these patients, as a gluten free diet restored not only the injured mucosa, but also returned to normal the serum carnitine concentration.
This study is not longitudinal.
The children in group 1 and 2 are not identical, but are demographically comparable.
Three patients, however, were followed serially and showed that serum carnitine concentrations are gluten dependent in coeliac disease patients.
To strengthen the validity of this conclusion, a group of symptomatic patients without coeliac disease with normal intestinal mucosa was added as a second control group, in addition to age matched normal controls.
Despite the fact that carnitine has not been studied in coeliac disease patients in other geographical areas and dietary carnitine was not studied in our population, it seems that this population does not have nutritional carnitine deficiency.
The only diet restricted group in our study, the coeliac disease patients in remission, had normal serum carnitine concentrations, whereas decreased serum carnitine concentrations were found only in patients with symptomatic coeliac disease with intestinal injury.
It thus seems that a histologically normal intestine is a prerequisite for adequate carnitine absorption.
Regardless of whether the mechanism of absorption is active or passive, the decrease in absorptive surface area, such as occurs in coeliac disease patients, predisposes these patients to carnitine deficiency.
Furthermore, carnitine deficiency secondary to poor dietary intake or abnormal intestinal absorption suggests that exogenous carnitine is important in maintaining body carnitine equilibrium.
Carnitine plays a major part in cellular energy production.
The insufficiency of long chain fatty acid assimilation in carnitine deficiency may produce lack of energy, weakness, difficulties in gaining weight, and muscular hypotonia.
All these features are commonly found in coeliac disease.
Myopathy, non-ketotic hypoglycemia, disturbed liver functions and encephalopathy, which are clinical features of carnitine deficiency, are also among the rare extraintestinal manifestations of coeliac disease.
A future study, possibly showing improvement of the above symptoms after exogenous carnitine treatment, may validate the association between carnitine deficiency and part of the clinical picture of coeliac disease.
In conclusion, coeliac disease should be added to the increasing list of causes of secondary carnitine deficiency.
Some of the clinical manifestations in the coeliac disease patient may be a result of carnitine deficiency.
Carnitine supplementation for alleviation of some of the symptoms is a subject for further investigation.
Influence of preoperative radiotherapy on DNA ploidy in squamous cell carcinomas of the oesophagus
Abstract
The influence of preoperative radiotherapy on the prevalence of DNA aneuploidy and the prognostic significance of tumour DNA ploidy was evaluated in 126 patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus.
Preoperative radiotherapy with 30 Gy was performed in 52 patients.
DNA ploidy was analysed by flow cytometry on nuclei isolated from paraffin embedded tumour tissue.
DNA aneuploidy was identified in 75 tumours (61%) and found to correlate significantly with tumour stage.
The percentage of aneuploid carcinomas was significantly reduced by preoperative radiotherapy (surgery only group, 71%; radiotherapy group, 47%, p=0.01).
Although the median survival time was slightly better in the diploid than in the aneuploid group (11.3 and 8.0 months respectively), this difference was not statistically significant.
A curative tumour resection was the most important prognostic factor.
Preoperative radiotherapy did not prolong survival in oesophageal cancer.
Despite efforts at early diagnosis and advances in surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy, the prognosis of squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus remains poor.
Because chromosomal aberrations are a marker of malignancy and have been shown to correlate with changes in DNA content, DNA flow cytometry is widely used in the analysis of neoplasia.
Several studies on gastrointestinal cancers have shown that flow cytometric detection of an abnormal DNA content may provide additional prognostic information.
The objective of this flow cytometric study was to evaluate the impact of preoperative radiotherapy on the prevalence of DNA aneuploidy and to analyse the prognostic significance of DNA ploidy in oesophageal squamous cell cancer.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
One hundred and twenty six patients (103 men, 23 women) with a squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophageal treated at the Department of Surgery of the Heinrich-Heine-University until December 1986 entered the study.
Mean (SD) age of the patients was 56.2 (SD 9.9) years.
In 86 patients, complete resection of the tumour was performed.
In 52 patients, radiotherapy with 30 Gy was performed before surgery.
The mean time interval between completion of radiation treatment and surgery was 10 days.
At the end of the study 119 patients had died.
All histological tumour sections were reclassified according to the 1987 updated tumour node metastasis classification by one of the authors (FB).
Table I shows tumour characteristics.
Tumour length ranged from 0.5 to 13 cm (median, 3.0 cm).
FLOW CYTOMETRY
Formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tumour tissue was prepared and stained for flow cytometric analysis according to the slightly modified procedure described by Hedley et al .
To decrease nuclear debris sections of 80 µm were cut from tumour blocks stored at the Department of Pathology.
Sections were deparaffinised by treatment with xylene overnight, rehydrated through a series of graded ethanol solutions and washed with distilled water.
A nuclear suspension was prepared by incubating the sections in 0.5% pepsin (Sigma, St Louis, Missouri) in 0.9% NaCl solution (pH 1.5; 37°C).
After filtration through a 50 µm nylon mesh nuclei were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline.
The sediment was resuspended in a 0.1% Nonidet P 40 — trisodium citrate solution.
After addition of ribonuclease A (Sigma, St Louis, Missouri; final concentration 0.1%) nuclear DNA was stained with propidium iodide (Sigma, St Louis, Missouri; 50 µg/ml).
Nuclear DNA content of at least 10000 tumour cells in each block were measured with an EPICS C flow cytometer.
One to six paraffin embedded blocks were measured for each patient (mean 2.5 blocks).
Two to three sections were measured in each block.
In three patients, no analysable DNA histogram could be generated because their tumours had been fixed in Bouin's solution.
Tumours were either classified as diploid or aneuploid.
Samples with more than one G /G 1 peak in the DNA histogram were judged as aneuploid.
In these tumours, the first peak on the left of the histogram was considered to represent diploid G /G 1 cells.
For DNA aneuploid samples a DNA index was calculated as the ratio of the abnormal G /G 1 mean peak channel number to the diploid G /G 1 mean peak channel number.
Histograms were classified without previous knowledge of the pathological or survival data.
We restricted our flow cytometric analysis to the determination of DNA ploidy because increased amounts of nuclear fragments after enzymatic digestion reduce the accuracy of cell cycle analysis accounting for the relatively poor correlation between proliferative activity in unfixed compared with paraffin embedded material.
Furthermore, because of the higher coefficient of variation paraffin embedded material cell cycle analysis is not as reliable as in fresh tissue of solid tumours.
The mean (SD) coefficient of variation of the G 1 peak in this study was 5.9% (1.5%)(range 3.6% to 8.8%).
STATISTICS
Frequency tables were analysed by the χ 2 test.
Survival time was defined as the period between surgery and death.
Three patiets were lost to follow up and have been excluded from the analysis of survival.
Patients dying as a result of postoperative complications (within 30 days) were excluded from the survival analysis.
Univariate survival analysis was performed with the BMDP 1L computer program by the life table method.
Data are presented as median (SE).
The significance of differences was calculated with the generalised Wilcoxon test (Breslow) and the generalised Savage test (Mantel-Cox).
The Cox proportional hazard model was used in multivariate regression analyses of survival data (BMDP 2L).
Variables entered into the model were sex of the patients, age of the patients (<; >years), tumour site, tumour grading, tumour stage, radicality of surgery, radiotherapy, DNA ploidy, and tumour length (<cm; >cm).
Results
DNA PLOIDY
DNA diploidy was detected in 48 cancers of the oesophagus (39%) and aneuploidy in 75 tumours (61%).
In four patients, more than one aneuploid peak was present.
The DNA indices ranged from 1.0 to 2.64.
Tumour DNA content was not significantly related to gender of the patients, tumour site, or tumour differentiation (Table II).
DNA ploidy significantly correlated with the invasion of the primary tumour.
The percentage of aneuploid tumours rose from 20% in T1 tumours to 69% in T4 tumours.
The percentage of diploid carcinomas was significantly higher in stage I and II tumours (51%) than in stage III and IV tumours (30%).
The association with lymph node metastasis was of borderline statistical significance (p=0.07).
DNA ploidy did not influence the result of surgery (curative v non-curative).
Prevalence of DNA aneuploidy, however, was significantly influenced by preoperative radiotherapy.
The percentage of aneuploid tumours decreased from 71% in unirradiated tumours to 47% in irradiated tumours (p=0.01).
Tumour diameter decreased from 4.2 (2.8) cm to 3.1 (1.6) cm after irradiation (p=0.02).
Preoperative radiotherapy did not change the percentage of curative resections.
SURVIVAL
After exclusion of postoperative deaths the overall five year survival rate was 6.5%.
Median survival time of the whole study population (n= 101) was 9.2 (1.4) months.
In univariate survival analysis the presence of lymph node metastasis (N0: median survival, 13.8 months; N1: 7.3 months), the presence of distant metastasis (M0: 10.6 months; M1: 6.0 months), and tumour stage (I: 51.6 months; II: 11.8 months; III: 8.3 months; IV: 6.0 months) were highly significant prognostic variables for the whole study group.
Radicality of surgery had a considerable influence on survival (curative resection: 11.8 months; non-curative: 4.6 months; Fig 1).
One year after surgery, survival rate was 49% after curative resection in comparison to 11% after non-curative surgery.
Tumour grading and tumour invasion were of borderline statistical significance.
Preoperative radiation treatment did not result in a significant prolongation of survival (surgery group 8.5 months; radiation plus surgery group 10.5 months).
Female patients (15.0 months) tended to survive longer than male patients (8.3 months, NS).
Patients with diploid tumours (median survival, 11.3 (1.2) months) survived longer than patients with aneuploid tumours (8.0 (1.3) months).
This difference in survival time was not significant (Fig 2).
These univariate survival analyses were also separately performed for the group of patients with preoperative radiotherapy and the group with surgery only.
Radicality of surgery remained the most important survival factor.
After surgery alone, patients with diploid tumours (15.0 (12.0) months) survived longer than patients with aneuploid tumours (7.3 (0.9) months; p=0.09 by generalised Wilcoxon test, p=0.06 by generalised Savage test).
In the radiotherapy group there was a non-significant DNA diploid survival advantage (19.5 (2.0) months v 12.0 (2.0) months).
After a curative tumour resection, female patients (23.1 (4.3) months) survived significantly longer than male patients (11.2 (0.9) months; p=0.03 by generalised Wilxocon test, p=0.05 by generalised Savage test).
Preoperative radiotherapy did not prolong the median survival time.
DNA ploidy did not have a significant prognostic influence on survival after a curative resection.
When the pronostic impact of the different clinicopathological and flow cytometric variables on survival was evaluated in a multivariate regression analysis, radicality of surgery emerged as the most important factor (χ 2 =22.5) followed by tumour grading (χ 2 =7.1), sex of the patients (χ 2 =7.1), and tumour stage (χ 2 =5.0).
DNA ploidy did not confer independent prognostic information for survival.
Discussion
Squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus remains one of the deadliest malignent neoplasms because patients often present with advanced disease at the time of diagnosis.
The prognosis of patients with carcinoma of the oesophagus mainly depends on pathohistological and surgical criteria.
As in our study, their is a clear difference in survival between the curative and non-curative groups.
In the multivatiate regression analysis, radicality of surgery was the most important prognostic variable.
After the development of lymph node metastases and distant metastases, median survival of patients declined significantly.
Our observation that female patients carry an improved survival after a curative tumour resection is supported by data from Japan.
There is considerable variability and heterogeneity in the clinical course of patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus.
Beside the TNM classification system additional variables, such as biological staging for the intrinsic malignant potential of the tumours, might be useful for determining long term survival.
Several studies have shown that flow cytometric detection of DNA aneuploidy might reflect the malignant potential of gastrointestinal cancers.
Flow cytometry of archival tumour material offers the advantage that long term follow up is available.
Comparative studies of fresh and paraffin embedded tumour tissue have shown that accurate determination of DNA ploidy in archival tumour tissue can be performed reliably in most tumours.
In our series, DNA aneuploidy was detected in 61% of all patients and in 71% of the unirradiated patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus.
Because of the known heterogeneity of DNA aneuploidy in oesophageal carcinomas tumour blocks were analysed until DNA aneuploidy was detected in at least one block or was excluded by measuring all available tumour blocks in one patient.
This percentage is in accordance with other flow cytometric studies in oesophageal cancer that have reported rates of aneuploidy in the range of 57% to 91%.
Prevalence of DNA aneuploidy was comparable in fresh (83/112 tumours (74.1%) and in paraffin embedded material (77/108 tumours (71.3%).
The percentage of aneuploid tumours increased according to tumour invasion and the development of lymph node metastasis reflecting an increased genomic instability.
Conflicting results concerning the relation between the degree of differentiation and abnormalities of DNA content have been reported.
As in our study, Kaketani et al and Edwards et al did not find a significant correlation whereas this was found by three other groups.
Although a trend for an increased survival time in patients with diploid tumours was found this difference was not significant.
These results are supported by the findings from English and Italian groups.
DNA distribution patterns analysed by cytophotometry, however, have been shown to relate to survival in patients from Japan.
Because the definitions of DNA aneuploidy differ between these flow cytometric and cytophotometric studies, the results cannot be compared directly.
In these cytophotometric studies, aneuploidy was defined by the DNA distribution pattern that was largely determined by cells with DNA values beyond the 4c region.
In flow cytometry, DNA aneuploidy is defined by the presence of a distinct second G /G 1 peak.
After preoperative radiotherapy the percentage of aneuploid tumours decreased significantly, from 71% to 47%.
This result should be interpreted cautiously because serial biopsies were not available in these tumours.
This results, however, most probably reflects local response to treatment with the eradication of aneuploid tumour cells in a proportion of carcinomas.
This interpretation is supported by data in rectal carcinomas.
Jones et al showed significant differences in DNA ploidy state between preoperatively irradiated and non-irradiated rectal cancers.
Similar changes werefound in serial biopsies taken during radiotherapy in rectal carcinomas.
It has been suggested that aneuploid cervical tumours are more radiosensitive than diploid tumours.
In squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck and in high grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma aneuploid tumours are most responsive to chemotherapy.
In oesophageal cancer, the effect of hyperthermochemo-radiotherapy is more pronounced in aneuploid than in diploid tumours.
Therefore, it can be hypothesised that DNA aneuploidy might be an indicator for response to preoperative radio or chemotherapy.
This assumption, however, has still to be supported by prospective studies.
The preoperative radiotherapy did not result in a significant prolongation of survival time.
This also applied to the subgroup with a curative tumour resection and is in accordance with other studies that used preoperative radiotherapy.
Although the reduced percentage of aneuploid tumours can be interpreted as a local response to radiotherapy the missing effect on survival points to the fact that oesophageal cancer is often diagnosed at a locally advanced or even disseminated stage.
In patients who undergo surgery recurrence and death are often attributed to unsuspected early metastatic disease the presence of which has been documented in necropsies performed relatively soon after surgery.
In conclusion, DNA ploidy was not identified as a prognostic factor in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma in this flow cytometric study.
Survival of patients was not improved by preoperative radiotherapy, but was significantly associated with a radical tumour resection.
Although the percentage of aneuploid carcinomas was significantly reduced after preoperative radiotherapy this local response did not convert into a prolongation of survival.
These results support the necessity of combined modes of treatment including chemotherapy for the eradication of metastatic disease unsuspected at the time of diagnosis.
Anthranoid laxative abuse — a risk for colorectal cancer?
Abstract
Anthranoid-containing laxatives — aloe, cascara, frangula, and rhubarb — may play a role in colerectal cancer.
This risk is particularly important in view of the wide abuse of self administered laxatives for chronic constipation.
There are data on the genotoxic potential of anthranoids and there is evidence of a tumourigenic potential in rodents.
A case reports and clinical-epidemiological studies have evaluated the cancer risk in patients who have abused anthranoid laxatives over a long period.
Pseudomelanosis coli is a reliable parameter of chronic laxative abuse (>months) and is specific for anthranoid drugs.
In a retrospective study of 3049 patients who underwent diagnostic colorectal endoscopy the incidence of pseudomelanosis coli was 3.13% in patients without pathological changes.
In those with colorectal adenomas, the incidence increased to 8.64% (p), and in those with colorectal carcinomas it was 3.29%.
This lower rate was probably caused by incomplete documentation of pseudomelanosis coli in those with carcinoma.
In a prospective study of 1095 patients, the incidence of pseudomelanosis coli was 6.9% for patients with no abnormality seen on endoscopy, 9.8% (p=0.068) for patients with adenomas, and 18.6% for patients with colorectal carcinomas.
From these data a relative risk of 8.04 (1.18, 4.90; 95% confidence interval) can be calculated for colorectal cancer as a result of anthranoid laxative abuse.
The main anthranoid containing herbal drugs that are used as stimulant laxatives are senna, aloe, cascara, frangula, and rhubarb.
Their principal glycosidic ingredients and their known aglycosidic intermediates are listed in Table I. Moreover, danthrone (chrysazine; 1, 8-dihydroxyanthraquinone) and purified sennosides A+B have been or are active ingredients of laxative drugs.
These drugs are recommended for the short term treatment (one to two weeks) of acute constipation and as a purgative before diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopy.
Assessment of the current risk of anthranoid laxatives and their possible role in colorectal cancer has to consider the following:
(1)
There is worldwide abuse of laxatives, self administered for chronic constipation associated with a high fat and low fibre diet;
(2)
Data have accumulated on the genotoxic potential of anthranoids in bacterial and mammalian studies (for a review see);
(3)
There is evidence of a tumourigenic potential for danthrone and 1-hydroxyanthraquinone in rodents;
(4)
A case report and clinical-epidemiological studies in patients who have misused anthranoid laxatives over a long period should be considered in a final risk assessment for colorectal cancer in man.
Several health problems may arise from the uncontrolled ong term abuse of self administered laxatives but this study focuses only on anthranoid laxatives and their relation to the development of colorectal cancer.
The results of our own clinical-epidemiological studies, based on the coincidence of pseudomelanosis coli and colorectal diseases in patients undergoing endoscopy, are reported.
Clinical-epidemiological studies
Since a patient's recall of drug history over the years is an unreliable measure for determining the extent of laxative abuse, we endeavoured to correlate the incidence of pseudomelanosis coli with the endoscopic diagnosis of colorectal diseases.
Pseudomelanosis coli is regarded as a more reliable indicator of chronic anthranoid laxative abuse of more than nine to 12 months.
The incidence of pseudomelanosis coli in patients undergoing endoscopy of ar autopsy is reported to be between 1 and 5.9%.
RESULTS OF A RETROSPECTIVE STUDY
Retrospective analysis of more than 4000 patients undergoing endoscopic control between 1981 and 1987 showed an incidence of 3.5% for pseudomelanosis coli.
Table II shows the main diagnosis in a total of 3049 patients and the frequency of pseudomelanosis coli as a coincident factor.
Patients with no abnormal changes in the colorectal mucosa (n=1151) showed a pseudomelanosis coli incidence of 3.13%.
In those with inflammatory large bowel diseases (colitis; n=742) the incidence was only 1.89%, whereas in those with diverticuloses (n=321) it was 4.98%.
In patients with adenoma (n=683) the pseudomelanosis coli incidence was high at 8.64% but in those with colorectal carcinomas (n=152) it was 3.29% only.
Statistical evaluation of the data overall showed significant differences in the incidence of pseudomelanosis coli for all diagnoses (p, χ 2 test).
(When differences were checked between diagnostic groups and patients with no abnormality there was a significantly higher pseudomelanosis coli incidence (p, according to the Fisher test) for adenoma bearing patients only.
RESULTS OF A PROSPECTIVE STUDY
A prospective study in 1095 patients who underwent endoscopy between October 1989 and March 1991 was conducted to check the results of the retrospective study.
The age and sex of the patients included in the study are given in Table III.
The doctors undertaking the endoscopy were trained and instructed to document the endoscopic evaluation of pseudomelanosis coli in every case, even after detection of a malignancy.
The incidence was verified by macroscopic and microscopic inspection.
Table IV gives the results of the prospective study.
In patients with no abnormal changes a pseudomelanosis coli frequency of 6.9% was detected, indicating more reliable documentation of this observation than in the retrospective study.
In patients with inflammatory diseases the pseudomelanosis coli incidence amounted to 2.3%, and in those with diverticulosis to 9.1%.
In patients with adenoma the incidence was increased to 9.8% (p=0.068), and in those with carcinoma it was 18.6% (p= 0.0008).
Statistical evaluation of these data indicate a significantly higher incidence of pseudomelanosis coli in patients with tumours of the large bowel.
From these data a relative risk of 3.04 (1.18, 4.90; 95% confidence interval) for colorectal cancer can be calculated for patients who misuse anthranoid containing laxatives.
Analysis of incidences of adenoma, carcinoma, and pseudomelanosis coli was also performed in relation to sex and age groups.
As expected, the carcinoma incidence in the under 50s (0.6%) was very much lower than that observed in the 50 to 70 years age group (7.5%) or the over 70 years group (11.6%) The incidences of adenoma in these age groups were 6.2, 31.5, and 32.2% respectively.
The pseudomelanosis coli incidence also showed an increasing trend with age.
It was 3.5, 8.1, and 12.3% respectively.
The carcinoma incidences were essentially similar in men (5.2%) and women (5.7%) but the incidence of adenoma was slightly higher in men (23.6%) than women (18.2%).
The incidence of pseudomelanosis coli was considerably higher in women (9%) than in men (4.5%).
In patients who had both tumour disease and pseudomelanosis coli, significant correlations were observed only in the cases of adenoma and pseudomelanosis coli incidence in men, and carcinoma and pseudomelanosis coli incidence in both men and those aged under 70 years.
To obtain summarising estimates of the mutual effects of age and pseudomelanosis coli, and sex and pseudomelanosis coli, logistic regression analysis was applied.
The logarithms of both adenoma and carcinoma quotients in all cases were found to be linear functions of age, sex, and pseudomelanosis coli.
For adenomas there was a significant influence of age (factor 2.47), sex (factor 0.71), and pseudomelanosis coli (factor 4.57).
For carcinomas there was a significant influence of age (factor 6.14), but neither a sex influence nor a mutual effect could be shown.
Discussion
Risk assessment for anthranoid laxatives is based on accumulated evidence for a genotoxic potential of some aglycosidic anthranoids and on in vivo carcinogenicity studies in rodents.
In a recently published case report an association between danthrone exposure and human cancer was suggested.
An 18 year old girl treated for five years with a lazative containing danthrone died from a leiomyosarcoma of the small intestine.
In a clinical study of 614 hospital patients with a history of laxative abuse and 1313 control patients, no higher incidence of cancer was found in the laxative abuse group.
In a further analysis of 100 patients with colorectal carcinomas and 100 control patients, no higher intake of laxative drugs int he carcinoma group was detected.
A retrospective cohort mortality study in 1975 dyestuff workers exposed to substituted anthraquinones showed no excess in total or cancer related mortality.
Data from the Melbourne Colorectal Cancer Study, which investigated 685 colorectal cancer cases and 723 age/sex frequency matched controls showed no higher risk related to laxative use.
Self reported chronic constipation, however, together with high fat intake increased the relative incidence of colorectal cancer to 1.88 (95% CI 1.26, 2.88).
It is evident that this study did not differentiate between the intake of bulk laxatives and stimulatory laxatives of the anthranoid type.
The conclusions of our own clinical-epidemiological studies are based on the coincidence of pseudomelanosis coli and endoscopically verified abnormalities, assuming that pseudomelanosis coli is a reliable marker of chronic anthranoid type laxative abuse.
This was confirmed by asking all patients with adenomas or carcinomas (n=33) included in the prospective study for their drug history.
All patients except two acknowledged abuse of anthranoid laxatives for between 10 and 30 years.
The discrepancy between the retrospective and prospective studies in the incidence of pseudomelanosis coli in colorectal carcinomas may be explained by incomplete documentation of pseudomelanosis coli during the endoscopic detection of a carcinoma, whereas adenomas are easily detected as depigmented white areas in a mucosa of brown-black pigmentation.
The prospective study, however, indicated a clear cut association between pseudomelanosis coli and colorectal tumours in man.
Nevertheless, current retrospective and prospective clinical-epidemiological studies are contradictory, as chronic constipation per se together with dietary factors such as low fibre and high fat intake increase the risk for colorectal cancer in man.
These confounding factors may largely be excluded by future case-control studies.
At the moment, experimental data on genotoxicity and carcinogenicity in rodents alone allow us to assume a carcinogenic risk for anthranoid laxatives in man.
Lithotripsy of an impacted calcified stone in the cystic duct accompanied by cholecystitis in severe Crohn's disease
Abstract
A 35 year old women patient with Crohn's disease and previous multiple abdominal operations presented with a calcified stone of 12 mm diameter in the cystic duct giving rise to cholecystitis.
The surgeons declined to operate because of extensive intra-abdominal adhesions caused by multiple intestinal resections and chronic enterocutaneous fistulas.
It was possible to fragment the stone in three lithotripsy sessions.
The fragments were excreted spontaneously through the ductus choledochus and the cholecystitis was cured by antibiotic treatment.
The patient remained symptom free after 12 months.
Biliary extracorporeal lithotripsy has been considered as one of the alternatives to surgery for the treatment of stones in the bile ducts and in the gall bladder in selected patients.
Although fragmentation of slightly calcified stones in the gall bladder has been described, usually these patients were excluded from shock wave lithotripsy.
Lithotripsy of a densely calcified gall bladder stone has been described in a case report.
Obstruction of the cystic duct and cholecystitis are regarded as absolute contraindications for gall stone lithotripsy.
We report for the first time the successful lithotripsy of a calcified cystic duct stone despite these relative and absolute contraindications in a patient with Crohn's disease.
Furthermore, we followed up the course of the accompanying cholecystitis for 12 months and describe its complete cure.
Case report
At the time of presentation, the women patient was 35 years old.
Since 1981, she suffered from Crohn's disease, which had had a complicated course.
Multiple operations were necessary because of enterocutaneous, enteroenteral, and rectovaginal fistulas, a fistula perforation with faecal peritonitis, ileum and colon stenosis, and abscess formations of the abdominal wall.
In total, 30 cm of ileum, 60 cm of jejunum, and the complete colon had been resected and an ileosigmoidostomy was performed.
Crohn's disease was treated with 50 mg/d azathioprine and 8 mg/d methylprednisone.
The chronic enterocutaneous fistula system was drained by a stoma bag.
The patient had a five year history of cholecystolithiasis.
The reason for hospital admission was severe colicky pain in the right upper abdomen for two months.
Intake of food by mouth was nearly impossible because of postprandial vomiting with pain.
Furthermore, fever attacks with temperatures up to 39.5°C occurred.
On admittance, the laboratory findings were as follows: white cell count 7.9×10/l, red blood cell count 3.4×10/l, haemoglobin 103 g/l, platelet count 720×10/l, alkaline phosphatase 342 U/l, gammaGT 42 U/l.
Serum activities of asparate transcininase alanine transaminase, amylase, lipase, the concentrations for total bilirubin, glucose, potassium, sodium, creatinin, and the prothrombin time were in the normal range.
Sonography showed a thickened gall bladder wall with a halo of oedema around the gall bladder.
In projection onto the cystic duct, a stone of 12 mm diameter with acoustic shadowing was seen (Fig 1).
The abdominal x ray film of the upper right abdominal quadrant showed a round calcification figure (Fig 2).
The endoscope retrograde cholangiography confirmed the diagnosis of an occluding stone in the cystic duct (Fig 3).
A sphincterotomy was not performed.
During her clinical treatment, the patient was fed artificially and repeatedly received 15 mg doses of pentazocine intravenously for pain relief.
Cefotiame 2 g intravenously two times daily was used for antibiotic treatment of the cholecystitis.
Methods
For lithotripsy, a combination lithotriptor MPL 9000 (Dornier) was used.
The shock waves were produced by spark discharge, focused by a reflector, and transmitted by a coupled waterpillow.
In total, three treatments with 1600, 1650, and 3010 shock waves with a mean voltage of 17 kV were necessary.
The patient was treated in prone position without narcosis.
The stone was positioned in the hock wave focus under continous sonographic control.
Before each session the patient received 40 mg promethacine by mouth and 15 mg piritramide intravenously for analgesia.
Results
After the second treatment we saw by sonography a splitting of acoustic shadowing into three parts as a sign of fragmentation.
On the day after the third treatment, the stone in the cystic duct was not detectable and the gall bladder had collapsed.
The gall bladder wall was laminated and thickened.
Three days after the last lithotripsy, the plain abdominal x ray showed no calcifications in the right upper abdomen.
From these findings and from the clinical course, we concluded that the fragments had passed spontaneously into the duodenum.
After the third treatment, colic in the right upper abdomen stopped and food by mouth was started without problems.
While the serum activities of alanine transaminase and asparate transaminase remained normal during and after lithotripsy, the activities of the slightly raised alkaline phosphatase and gammaGT persisted.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography showed the cystic duct and the ductus choledochus to be free of stones.
An oral cholecystogram was not performed after lithotripsy.
The thickening of the gall bladder seen by sonography subsided after two weeks.
Oral antibiotic treatment was continued while the patient was ambulant after admission for one month and ursodesoxycholic acid 750 ng/d was given permanently for the prevention of gall stone recurrence.
So far we have continued to study the patient for 12 months.
She had already gained 5 kg in weight four months after treatment.
Monthly sonographic controls showed an inconspicuous gall bladder.
Discussion
The usual treatment for cholecystitis with occlusion of the cystic duct is surgical cholecystectomy.
Because of several previous abdominal operations including colon resection and removal of a total of 90 cm of small intestine, extensive abdominal adhesions and a system of enterocutaneous fistulas secondary to severe Crohn's disease, the surgeons in our hospital refused to operate.
Therefore, we carried out a shock wave lithotripsy of the impacted stone in the cystic duct despite contraindications.
Endoscopic retrograde stone extraction was a possible alternative, although difficulties in cannulating the cystic duct and a high risk of sphincterotomy because of complicated Crohn's disease were to be expected.
Furthermore, the endoscopic mobility was limited as a result of duodenal adhesions.
Vermeersch et al have reported on a case of successful percuitaneous endoscopic removal of an impacted stone in the cystic duct accompanied by cholecystitis.
Although cholecystitis stopped in the three months follow up in that case, we did not consider this technique for our patient because of her history of fistulas.
Obstruction of the cystic duct accompanied by cholecystitis is seen as an absolute contraindication and a calcified stone as a relative contraindication for lithotripsy.
Our results show that even under these conditions a successful treatment of cholecystitis with stone obstruction of the cystic duct is possible without operation in carefully selected patients.
Is sclerosant injection manadatory after an epinephrine injection for arrest of peptic ulcer haemorrhage?
A prospective, randomised, comparative study
Abstract
A prospective, randomised, comparative study was performed to assess the need for a pure alcohol injection after an epinephrine injection in the arrest of active peptic ulcer bleeding.
Sixty four patients with active ulcer bleeding were enrolled in the study.
The two groups (epinephrine and epinephrine plus pure alcohol) were matched for sex, age, site of bleed, endoscopic findings, shock, haemoglobin, and concomitant illness at randomisation.
The volume of injected epinephrine in the epinephrine and the epinephrine plus pure alcohol groups mean (SD) was 6.0 (3.0) ml and 5.5 (3.0) ml respectively (p).
The volume of injected pure alcohol in the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group was 1.9 (1.1) ml.
Bleeding was initially controlled in 31 (97%) of the epinephrine group and all of the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group.
Rebleeding occurred in 11 (36%) of the epinephrine group and in five (16%) of the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group (p).
Rebleeding was successfully controlled in some patients with treatment by a second injection.
Other patients had heat probe thermocoagulation or surgery.
Ultimate haemostatic rates were 69% (22/32) and 88% (28/32) for the epinephrine and the epinephrine plus pure alcohol groups respectively (p).
The epinephrine plus pure alcohol group achieved a better haemostatic effect for spurting haemorrhage (9/10 v 5/11, p).
The need for emergency operations and blood transfusions were comparable in both groups.
The stay in hospital were less in the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group (mean 4.3 v 7.1, p).
It is concluded that pure alcohol injection after an epinephrine injection can improve the harmostatic rate in patients with spurting haemorrhage and shorten the hospital stay for patients with active ulcer bleeding.
The death rate for bleeding peptic ulcers has averaged between 6% and 10% over the past 30 years.
It occurs almost exclusively in patients over 60 years as a result of the postoperative complications of surgery performed for continued or recurrent bleeding.
Although various endoscopic treatments have been developed in the past 10 years, heat probe thermocoagulation and multipolar electrocoagulation are the two most promising techniques for treating bleeding peptic ulcers.
Endoscopic injection, however, is still the most convenient and cost effective means for the arrest of peptic ulcer haemorrhage.
In two prospective, randomised trials, endoscopic injection and multipolar electrocoagulation are concluded to be equally effective in the arrest of massive peptic ulcer bleeding.
Further study of endoscopic injection is needed.
Among the various solutions, epinephrine and pure alcohol are proved to be effective in the arrest of peptic ulcer haemorrhage.
Controversy still exists concerning the need of sclerosing agents injection after epinephrine injection.
Some authors supported combined use of both agents with good results, while others found that a sclerosing agent does not improve haemostatic rates.
The purpose of this article is to evaluate is a pure alcohol injection is required after an epinephrine injection to arrest peptic ulcer haemorrhage.
Patients and methods
Patients were accepted for endoscopic injection if an active bleeder (spurter or oozer) was seen during an emergency endoscopic examination after resuscitation.
The possibility of complications of endoscopic injection were discussed with the patients or their relatives, or both and written informed consent was obtained before the trial.
All haemostatic treatments were performed by Lin and Perng who had experience of at least 5000 cases in endoscopic examination and experience of 300 cases in treatment with endoscopy.
Patients were excluded from the study if (1) they were unable or unwilling to give written informed consent,(2) had bleeding tendency (platelet count ≤50000/mm, prothrombin time less than 30%, or taking anticoagulants),(3) had a non-bleeding visible vessel,(4) had a bleeding gastric cancer, or (5) had more than one bleeding source.
For every patient enrolled in the study, a sealed envelope was opened before performing an endoscopic injection to decide the injected solution.
Two forms of injection were arranged by a statistician who was not involved in the study.
The study was approved by Clinical Research Committee in the Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Republic of China.
We used an Olympus GIF P-10 or PQ-20 end view endoscope and an NM-8L injector to perform endoscopic injection.
The following solutions were used for endoscopic injection: for the epinephrine group, we injected 0.5–1.0 ml of 1:10000 epinephrine at 2–3 mm around the bleeder with a maximum volume of 15 ml; for the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group, we injected the same volume of 1:10000 epinephrine followed by 0.3–0.5 ml of alcohol (99.8%) around the bleeder with maximal volume of 3 ml.
Failure was defined for patients who could not obtain initial haemostasis with the above injected volume.
For those, we tried heater probe thermocoagulation or surgical intervention.
Rebleeding was suspected if we found fresh blood in the stomach six hours after entry into the study, presence of unstable vital signs and continued tarry, bloody stools or haematemesis.
For these patients, we performed an emergency endoscopy.
If active bleeding or a fresh blood clot was found at the ulcer base, rebleeding was confirmed.
For ethical reasons, treatment regimens were discussed with patients who rebled.
They might receive a second injection with the same solution or other solutions, heater probe thermocoagulation or surgery.
The vital signs of the patients were checked every hour for the first 12 hours, every two hours for the second 12 hours, and every four hours for the following 24 hours until they became stable, and then four times daily.
A nasogastric tube was inserted and maintained until 24 hours after treatment.
The haemoglobin and packed cell volume were checked at least once daily, and a blood transfusion was given if the haemoglobin dropped to less than 9 g/dl or if the vital signs deteriorated.
H 2 blockers (ranitidine 100 mg or cimetidine 400 mg intravenously every 12 hours) were given routinely.
The physicians or surgeons were made aware of the exact endoscopic findings and treatment given in each case.
Endoscopy was followed 72 hours later.
If no blood clot or haemorrhage was seen in the ulcer base, the patient was discharged and followed up with an endoscopy on the seventh day, the first month, and every month until scarring of the lesion ensued.
H 2 blockers (ranitidine 150 mg or cimetidine 400 mg twice daily) were given orally to every patient for at least two months at the outpatient department.
Shock was defined as systolic pressure less than 100 mm Hg and pulse rate greater than 100 bears/min accompanied by cold sweating, pallor, and oliguria.
Initial haemostasis was defined as no haemorrhage persisting for five minutes after injection.
Ultimate haemostasis was defined as lack of rebleeding for 30 days after treatment.
We used Student's t test to compare the basic data of age, volume of blood transfusion, haemoglobin, and length of hospital stay; χ 2 test with or without Yates' correction and Fisher's exact test when appropriate to compare the haemostatic effects among the two groups of patients.
A probability value of less than 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Between December 1990 and May 1992, a total of 1520 patients whose main complaint was haematemesis or tarry stools, or both attended the emergency department.
A total of 1240 patients had an emergency endoscopic examination within 12 hours of arrival at the emergency department.
Eight hundred and ninety eight patients had peptic ulcers.
We failed to identify a source of bleeding in 40 patients.
Peptic ulcers with bleeding (oozing or spurting) were found in 100 patients.
A total of 36 cases were excluded from the study: 20 patients refused to give informed consent, eight has bleeding gastric cancers, and eight had a bleeding tendency.
There were 64 patients enrolled in the study, 32 patients in each group.
The two groups were well matched for factors affecting outcome (Table I).
For the epinephrine group, we found visible vessels in 23 cases (15 cases with oozing, eight cases with spurting).
For the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group, we found visible vessels in 21 cases (14 cases with oozing, seven cases with spurting).
Table II shows the clinical outcome of the patients studied.
In the epinephrine group, patients received a mean volume of 6.0 ml of 1:10000 epinephrine, while the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group received a mean volume of 5.5 ml 1:10000 epinephrine and 1.9 ml of pure alcohol.
Both groups received a similar volume of blood transfusion.
We failed to achieve initial haemostasis in one patient (3%) of the epinephrine group, and none of the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group (p).
A rebleeding episode occurred in 11 patients (36%) of the epinephrine group, and five patients (16%) of the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group (p).
In the epinephrine group, the only case who failed to achieve initial haemostasis received surgical intervention.
Spurting haemorrhage was seen during operation.
Of 11 rebleeders, three received a second epinephrine injection and two of them achieved haemostasis (the failed case had successful surgical intervention); six received epinephrine injection followed by pure alcohol injection and all achieved haemostasis; two received surgical intervention directly (one emergency operation because of massive bleeding and one elective operation because of adenocarcinoma of the stomach as well as a bleeding duodenal ulcer).
For the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group, all achieved initial haemostasis.
Of the five rebleeders, two received a second injection with the same solution and one achieved haemostasis, the other refused an operation and died soon afterwards; one received heater probe thermocoagulation and achieved haemostasis; and two received surgical intervention (one of them died of wound infection with sepsis, the other had an uneventful course).
Rebleeding occurred within three days in eight (78%) of the epinephrine group and three (60%) of the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group.
No complications of perforation or aspiration could be seen in both groups.
Finally, we achieved ultimate haemostatic rates of 69% (22/32), and 88% (28/32) in the epinephrine and the epinephrine plus pure alcohol groups respectively (p).
For spurting bleeders, we achieved a significantly better harmostatic rate in the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group (9/10 v 5/11, p).
The stay in hospital was significantly shorter in the epinephrine plus pure alcohol group (mean 4.5 v 6.7, p).
The number of emergency operations because of bleeding and the number of patients who died were comparable in both groups.
Discussion
Death from peptic ulcer haemorrhage can be lowered with better hospital care including combined medical and surgical teams and the latest endoscopic treatment.
Recent attention has focused on endoscopic injection with encouraging results.
There are, however, only a few controlled trials.
Patients with peptic ulcer and spurting haemorrhage have an 85% incidence of further haemorrhage and a death rate of 50%.
They usually need surgery or endoscopy treatment.
Peptic ulcer patients with oozing haemorrhage have a death rate of 13.3% — four to five times that of patients whose ulcers have a clean base.
We have proved that endoscopy treatment can improve haemostatic rate in patients with active ulcer bleeding.
Therefore, we enrolled patients with spurting or oozing haemorrhage in this comparative trial.
Most episodes of haemorrhage from peptic ulcers should becontrolled at first without surgery.
A skilled endoscopist is essential, but the equipment can be as simple as a standard endoscope and an injection needle.
In this study, all endoscopic injections were performed by two endoscopists who had at least five years' experience of endoscopic examination and one year's experience of endoscopic injection.
The ultimate success rate and rebleeding rate of these two endoscopists were comparable.
It is difficult to determine the most effective and safest solution for the arrest of peptic ulcer haemorrhage because of the wide variation in results from different investigators and the lack of comparative or controlled trials.
Epinephrine or pure alcohol was commonly used as the solution for injection for the arrest of peptic ulcer haemorrhage in the past 10 years.
The primary mechanism of arterial haemostasis for epinephrine is compression of the artery in the serosal space.
It is also associated with severe focal mucosal damage but no thrombi are found in the submucosal vessels.
Therefore, significant bleeding can not be arrested with epinephrine alone.
Pure alcohol, by in situ tissue fixation and arterial compression, which causes arterial coagulation and tissue injury, is proved to be the most efficacious sclerosing agent in the arrest of arterial bleeding.
Epinephrine can localise the sclerosant to the injected area, and maximise its effect.
The combination of both agents may be superior to either one.
Rebleeding is the most important predictor for death from bleeding ulcer.
Although epinephrine was effective in achieving initial haemostasis (97%) in our series, the rebleeding rate was high (11/31, 36%).
This is higher than that reported by Leung et al .
Pure alcohol injection after an epinephrine injection tended to decrease the rebleeding rate in our series.
It is possible that epinephrine can only temporarily stop bleeding and keep vessel existent, while a sclerosing agent can actually clot the vessel, and thereby decrease rebleeding.
Because of ethical reasons, not all rebleeders in both groups received a second injection with the same solution.
Rebleeders who did not receive a second injection with the same solution were defined as failed cases.
Therefore, the ultimate haemostatic rate may be higher if they all received the same injection again.
Nine rebleeders of the epinephrine group received a second injection (3 cases) or epinephrine plus pure alcohol (6 cases) and eight achieved ultimate haemostasis.
This may explain the low number of emergency operations and death in the epinephrine group.
We conclude that epinephrine could achieve a high initial haemostatic rate.
The rebleeding rate was high, however, and this could be decreased with pure alcohol injection after the epinephrine injection.
The stay in hospital could be shortened for patients as well.
For patients with spurting peptic ulcers, we suggest pure alcohol injection after an epinephrine injection instead of epinephrine injection alone.
Constipation in early childhood: patient characteristics, treatment, and longterm follow up V Loening-Baucke
Abstract
Little is known about chronic constipation in infants, toddlers, and preschool children and longterm outcome after treatment.
The symptoms of 174 children who were evaluated for chronic constipation, are reported in this study together with the longterm outcome in 90 of them.
Initial symptoms were infrequent bowel movements in 58%, painful bowel movements in 77% often with screaming, and severe stool withholding manoeuvres in 97%.
The treatment of chronic idiopathic constipation consisted of education, faecal disimpaction, prevention of future impaction, and promotion of regular bowel habits with dietary fibre and milk of magnesia, and finally toilet training of the preschool child.
Longterm outcome could be evaluated in 90 patients (52%)(mean (SD) 6.9 (2.7)) years after initial evaluation.
Fifty seven children (63%) had recovered, defined as no soiling with 3 bowel movements per week, while not receiving treatment.
The recovery rate of children ≤2 years of age was significantly higher than in children >to 4 years of age.
Thirty three children (37%) had not recovered.
Constipation recurred as soon as laxatives were discontinued in 31 (94%) of them.
Laxatives were still used by 33% of the children wh had not recovered, 39% had <bowel movements per week, 48% had faecal soiling, 45% had stool withholding, 27% complained of abdominal pain, 73% passed large stools, and 45% still on occasions clogged the toilet with their large stools.
Symptoms of chronic constipation persisted in one third of our patients, 3–12 years after initial evaluation and treatment.
Children who had not recovered deserve continued follow up, to reinforce and adjust treatment and to prevent faecal soiling.
Constipation represents a common problem in children, accounting for 3% of visits to the Pediatric Outpatient Clinic at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics as well as to a large general paediatric clinic in Boston, but little is known about longterm outcome in young children.
Estimates of constipation have varied from 0.3% of the paediatric population to as high as 8%.
In a study by Issenmann et al , 16% of patents of 22 month old children reported constipation in their toddlers.
Constipation is usually defined in terms of changes in the frequency, size, consistency, or ease of passage of stool.
Stool frequency depends on age in children.
A number of studies show a decline in stool frequency from more than four stools per day during the first week of life to 1.2 per day at four years of age with a corresponding increase in stool size.
Weaver and Steiner found that 85% of 1 to 4 year old children passed stools once or twice a day, and 96% did so three times daily to once every other day.
Fontana et al showed that in the first three years of life 97% of helthy children had at least one vowel movement every other day and after the third year, 95% of the children had this pattern.
Constipation in young children can be defined by a stool frequency of <per week, but passage of painful bowel movements and stool retention are symptoms of constipation even when the stool frequency is 3 per week.
Difficulties with defecation are common in infants and children.
Most often the problem is short lived and of little consequence, but chronic constipation most often follows an inadequately managed acute problem.
Constipation develops gradually in some children as a result of a progressive decrease in the frequency of bowel movements and a progressive increase in the difficulties in passing an excessively firm stool.
In others, an acute episode of constipation may follow a change in diet or environment, a febrile illness, a period of dehydration, or bed rest.
Little is known about the pathogenesis of constipation in childhood.
Several factors most likely contribute to the development of chronic constipation such as intrinsic slow colonic motility and stool withholding secondary to painful large bowel movements.
Symptoms of constipation are often different in very young children than in older children and adults, and data on longterm treatment outcome in young children are lacking.
Therefore, the aims of this report are (a) to describe the patient characteristics and the characteristic behaviour with respect to passing bowel movements of constipated infants, toddlers, and preschool children,(b) to describe our treatment programme, and (c) to report on the longterm outcome in these children.
Methods
STUDY POPULATION
Two hundred and eighty five children, 1 month to 4 years of age, were evaluated between 1980 and 1989 by the investigator for difficulties in defecation because of underlying constipation, which is not due to Hirschsprung's disease, anal atresia, or spinal disease.
These children were evaluated in the Encopresis Clinic, a clinical service that provides education and management of children of all ages with defecation problems.
For this report we excluded patients who had disease states that placed limitations on the act of defecation such as hypotonia, cerebral palsy, and severe mental retardation and patients who were less than 6 years at the time of follow up, because our intend was to evaluate outcome in school age children.
This report is about 174 children ≤4 years of age with idiopathic chronic constipation who were 6 years and older and had entered school at the time of follow up in May 1991.
These 174 children were evaluated initially by the investigator for infrequent bowel movements, painful bowel movements (often with screaming and severe stool withholding manoeuvres), or stool soiling.
The study was approved by the Institutional Human Research Review Committee in April 1991.
All patients were evaluated by the investigator.
Histories were obtained and a complete physical examination was performed including an anal and rectal examination in the left lateral position.
All children were considered to be constipated because they had either <bowel movements per week or painful bowel movements, or a rectal impaction, or an abdominal faecal mass on physical examination, or all four.
Painful bowel movements were thought to be present if the child complained of pain during defecation or when the child exhibited screaming or crying in anticipation of, or during, defecation, if the parent reported blood on the stool or if the child had an anal fissure present at the time of examination.
Stool withholding was thought to be present if the child exhibited a certain behaviour at the time of defecation, often termed ‘the duty dance’.
Infants tended to extend the body and contract the anal and gluteal muscles.
Toddlers often rose on their toes, held their legs stiffly, and rocked back and forth holding on to a piece of furniture or onto the parent.
Some children retired to a corner or another room to hide while standing stiffly or squatting.
TREATMENT
Our treatment of chronic constipation consisted of education, faecal disimpaction, prevention of future impaction, and promotion of regular bowel habits, and finally toilet training of the preschool child.
Our treatment protocol was similar to the treatment approaches by Davidson et al and Levine and Bakow, and others, except we used a different laxative.
We educated all parents and preschool children that the defecation problem is caused by the underlying chronic constipation and they were not to blame.
Parents needed to be reassured that, although it is a significant chronic problem, it is not life threatening.
They were told that the underlying constipation cannot be treated in a short period of time.
We used a drawing of a normal colon and a distended colon to help them understand the problem.
Understanding the disorder and a detailed treatment plan usually eliminated the parents' frustration, improved compliance, and allowed them to adjust and modify the treatment to provide for regular elimination.
Initial disimpaction was accomplished in the clinic.
A hypertonic phosphate enema was used, with 2 oz/5 kg body weight in very young infants and an adult sized enema (4.5 oz) for children over 10 kg.
In most children, one to two enemas resulted in good bowel clean out.
Daily defecation was maintained by daily administration of laxatives beginning on the evening of the clinic visit.
Milk of magnesia, an osmotic laxative, was used according to age, body weight, and severity of the constipation.
In severe constipation with rock hard stools, the starting dose of milk of magnesia was approximately 2 ml/kg body weight per day.
In children who had faecal retention of mostly soft formed stools, usually 1 ml milk of magnesia/kg body weight daily was adequate.
The starting dose was adjusted to induce one to two bowel movements per day, loose enough to ensure complete daily emptying of the lower bowel and prevent pain or stool soiling, or both.
We did not recommend fibre supplements or purified fibre to our young children.
They are not suitable for young children.
We recommended fibre found naturally in many foods to parents of infants <year of age, such as in pureed fruits, vegetables, and infant cereal.
The parents of toddlers and preschool children were encouraged to give several servings daily from a variety of fibre rich foods such as whole grain breads and cereals, fruits and vegetables, and legumes.
Initial toilet training attempts in a toddler or preschool child who resisted toilet sitting was discouraged.
The child was put back into nappies.
A normal bowel pattern was accomplished first then toilet training was restarted.
Rewards for toilet sitting and later for bowel movements into the toilet were given.
The child was encouraged to sit on the toilet for up to five minutes, three to four times a day, after meals.
Many patients returned until the constipation had resolved, others continued treatment after two visits with their local physician.
At least one more visit to the Encopresis Clinic was accomplished with all patients after the initial evaluation to review the stool records, assess progress, and repeat the abdominal and rectal examination and to discuss the treatment plan.
This was done to be sure that the constipation was and would be adequately treated.
Dose adjustment was made if necessary.
The laxative dose was gradually decreased after two to three months to a dose that maintained one bowel movement daily.
Above 50% of infants and toddlers were able to discontinue the laxative after three to four months.
FOLLOW UP QUESTIONNAIRE
The follow up questionnaire was sent to the parents of the 174 children with idiopathic chronic constipation who were of school age.
This questionnaire included questions on the present history of abdominal pain, stool withholding, constipation, frequency and consistency of bowel movements, size of the bowel movements, and if the bowel movements occasionally clogged the toilet.
It included questions on the presence and frequency of stool soiling, and treatment being given such as stool softeners, laxatives, suppositories, enemas, or others, and their dose and frequency of use and if day wetting or night wetting was present at the time of follow up.
It contained questions on the grade in school, current school performance, and if the child was in a special class, to verify normal development.
Ninety parents and patients (52%) returned the follow up questionnaire or completed the questionnaire by telephone.
Information on 84 children chould not be retrieved for follow up.
The parents of the 33 children who had not recovered were interviewed a second time to answer the question whether the constipation/soiling problems had persisted or recurred, because we were not able to determine this from the initial questionnaire.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical methods included the Wilcoxon non-paired rank sum test and Fisher's exact probability test, analysis of variance, and Pearson's χ 2 test with significance accepted at 5% value.
Results were expressed as mean (SD).
Results
Table I shows the age distribution and patient characteristics at the initial evaluation of the 174 children with idiopathic constipation.
There were 87 boys and 87 girls in the study.
Their mean age at the time of evaluation was 2.2 (1.3) years with an age range of one month to four years.
The mean age at onset of symptoms of constipation was 11 (13) months.
Stool frequency was difficult to assess.
It could be elicited in 168 children and was 4 (5) bowel movements per week.
The difficulty arose in that some of the children had several stools per day, but apparently evacuated incompletely, as shown by periodic passage of very large amounts of stool or the presence of a faecal impaction.
Stool frequency was <per week in 13% of children, ≤1 per week in 32%, and <per week in 58%.
The parents described stool withholding behaviours in 97% of the children but often misinterpreted this behaviour as extreme efforts to pass stool.
Nine per cent of patients had at least one urinary tract infection.
The physical examination provided information on the constipation.
A large abdominal faecal mass was palpated in 42% of patients, indicating a severe form of constipation.
The mass rarely extended throughout the entire colon.
Commonly the faecal mass was felt suprapubically and midline.
The percentage of children with an abdominal faecal mass present at initial evaluation increased significantly from 19% in children ≤1 year of age, to 28% in children >to 2 years of age, to 51% in those >to 3 years of age, and to 60% in those >to 4 years of age (p; Pearson's χ 2 test), suggesting that the severity of constipation increased with the duration of constipation (see Table I).
Inspection of the annal canal showed protruding faecal material in only a few patients.
The rectum was packed with stool in 64% of patients, either of hard consistency, or more commonly the outside of the faecal impaction felt like clay and the core of the impaction was hard.
No rectal stool mass was felt in 36% of children, 13% being already started on laxatives and others having had a recent bowel movement.
A palpable abdominal faecal mass or a large amount of stool in the rectal ampulla was felt in 77% of patients.
Painful bowel movements assessed by reports of pain complaints, screaming and sweating, presence of an anal fissure or blood on stool were reported in 77% of patients.
Stool soiling was difficult to assess, many children were not at an age to be toilet trained.
No soiling was present in 12 of 55 children (22%) >to 4 years of age.
The age at attempted follow up was 9.9 (2.8) years with a range of 6 to 16 years, this was 6.9 (2.7) years with a range of 3 to 12 years after the initial evaluation.
Follow up by questionnaire was accomplished in 52% of eligible patients; in 28% of those ≤1 year of age, 55% of those >to 2 years of age, 53% of those >to 3 years of age, and 67% of those >to 4 years of age.
To evaluate the possibility of bias in the group with follow up, the data from the initial history and physical examination of the 90 children in whom we obtained a follow up were compared with those from the 84 children with no follow up .
There was a significant difference in age at initial evaluation, with the children with follow up being significantly older (2.5 (1.5) years) than those without follow-up (1.8 (1.3) years; p).
There were no other significant differences between these two groups (p).
Tables II, III, and IV gave the outcome results.
Fifty seven children (63%) had recovered, defined as no soiling with 3 bowel movements per week and receiving no drugs or treatment.
The recovery rate in children ≤2 years was significantly higher than in children >to 4 years of age (p).
Only 28% of children ≤1 year of age could be re-evaluated, and therefore, the 92% recovery rate in this age group needs to be viewed with caution.
The frequency of bowel movements in the recovered children ranged from 3 to 14 per week, mean 5.8 (2.4).
As can be seen in Table II, 33 children (37%) were still constipated, on laxatives or soiling.
Seventeen (19%) had no soiling, eight were still constipated with <bowel movements per week, and 11 were receiving treatment (laxatives, stimulants, suppositories or occasional enemas) to prevent constipation.
Two of these 17 children were constipated despite the use of laxative.
Sixteen children (18%) had faecal soiling with soiling frequency ranging from once a week to daily, mean 3 (2) soilings per week, despite some treatment in four patients.
Constipation or faecal soiling, or both recurred and persisted until follow up as soon as the laxatives were discontinued in 31 of 33 children who did not recover.
Only in two patients did problems with constipation recur after they had been successfully treated.
Table III gives the patient characteristics of children who recovered and those who did not as noted in the initial history and physical examination.
As can be seen in Table III, children who recovered were similar to both groups of the children who did not in sex distribution, age at initial evaluation and onset of constipation, stool frequency, percentage of patients with stool withholding, history of urinary tract infection, and stool retention.
Painful bowel movements during the initial evaluation were reported significantly more often in children who recovered than in the soiling group (p).
Table IV shows that children who recovered were similar to both groups of children who did not in age at follow up, years of follow up , and frequency of day or night wetting.
A few recovered children occasionally clogged the toilet with their stools (4%), had abdominal pain (9%), and still exhibited stool withholding (5%).
Stools with very large diameters, very hard stools, and stools that clogged the toilet were reported significantly more commonly in both groups of children who did not recover than in the recovered group (p).
There was no correlation between the number of visits to our Encopresis Clinic and treatment outcome (p).
As expected, the data from the 33 children who did not recover when compared with the data from the 57 recovered children showed significantly higher incidence rates of symptoms of constipation at follow up; very large diameter stools, very hard stool consistency, stools that clogged the toilet, stool withholding (p), abdominal pain (p), and a significant decrease in the number of bowel movements per week (p).
Discussion
A group of 174 infants, toddlers, and preschool children is presented who showed evidence of constipation early in life.
Painful bowel movements were present in 67%, stool withholding in 97%, and a rectal/abdominal stool mass in 77%.
Similar findings were made by Partin et al who reported that 86% of their 74 patients <years of age presented with pain, 97% had stool withholding, and 71% were impacted.
Patients were disimpacted and then treated with dietary fibre and daily milk of magnesia, and the laxative was slowly discontinued once normal bowel movements had been accomplished.
Longterm outcome could be evaluated in 90 patients.
Fifty seven children (63%) had recovered, defined as no soiling with 3 bowel movements per week and not receiving treatment.
By our definition these children had recovered, but their parents still reported that 5% of recovered children had stool withholding, 9% had abdominal pain, and 24% occasionally passed large stools.
Thirty three children (37%) had not recovered.
In 31 of these 33 children the constipation returned as soon as the laxative was discontinued.
Abdominal pain was still present in 27%, stool withholding in 45%, constipation with <bowel movements per week in 39%, bowel mvoements that clogged the toilet in 45%, laxative use in 33%, and soiling in 48% of the children who did not recover.
In a study by Issenmann et al , 16% of parents of 22 month old children reported constipation in their toddlers.
We can only speculate why such a large number of young children experiences chronic constipation.
It is probably because an episode of acute constipation had not received adequate treatment.
Attention must be paid not only to stool frequency and stool consistency, but to painful bowel movements, the degree of straining, and the time it takes to evacuate stools in younr children.
Many of our patients had unsuccessful interventions for months before our evaluation.
Most often the intervention did not change stool frequency or stool consistency, or both.
Some children had received a laxative, and when given, it was either given in minimal dose or given for too short a time.
The laxative dose required to treat constipation in the young child is much higher than the suggested doses on the label.
In addition, the wearning on the label may lead to doubts about the safety of its use in young children.
Sometimes parents had stopped the laxative because the stool withholding manoeuvres or screaming did not stop as soon as loose stools were induced.
The actual choice of drug is not as important as an adequate dose and the child's and parents' compliance with the treatment regimen.
Suggested doses of commonly used laxatives are given in reference 17.
Our outcome data cannot be compared with the existing published works because previous reports on chronic constipation with and without faecal soiling often combined younger and older children or children with idiopathic constipation and anorectal disorders, or both.
Therefore, no outcome data for a similar young patient group can be found.
In addition, our study is the first to present longterm follow up data in a large number of constipated children ≤4 years of age.
Similar to Fitzgerald, I had retreated a few patients months to years after their initial management, but one third of patients still had symptoms of constipation 6.8 (2.8) years after initial evaluation.
None of the children who did not recover were receiving medical care for symptoms of constipation at the time of follow up.
Poor patients/parent compliance has been blamed for less than ideal results in major series on constipation in children.
Ideally, all patients should have had the same number of follow up visits.
Unfortunately, some of the patients could not return for frequent follow up visits to our clinic because of distance and also health care costs and were therefore referred back with our treatment plan to their own physicians.
We can not completely rule out that treatment outcome would have been better if all patients would have received continued care and reinforcement by the investigator, but our study showed that there was no correlation between the number of visits to the Encopresis Clinic and treatment outcome (p).
Our study showed that constipated children <years of age responded better to treatment than children >years of age, supporting the conclusion by Clayden that treatment should be given early to prevent development of severe constipation or faecal soiling, or both.
In our young constipated children, the ratio of boys to girls was 1:1, while the ratio in our patients 5 years of age was 3–4:1, and in other centres 6:1.
We evaluated as many young boys as young girls for constipation, but twice as many boys than girls had soiling at follow up, while 1.8 times more girls than boys were still constipated or receiving laxatives for constipation at follow up .
We found that chronic constipation in young children can persist for many years.
Our study showed that 37% of them were still constipated, receiving laxatives, or soiling 3 to 12 years after start of treatment, or all three.
Children who have not recovered deserve continued follow up, to reinforce and adjust treatment and to prevent faecal soiling.
Fate of Nissen fundoplication after 20 years.
A clinical, endoscopical, and functional analysis
Abstract
Of 46 patients who had Nissen fundoplication for proved gastro-oesophageal reflux, 25 were available for follow up after a median of 20 years, 15 had died of unrelated causes, and six could not be traced.
All 25 patients in the follow up study were personally interviewed: 21 consented to an endoscopy, 14 to 24 hour recording of oesophageal pH and monometry, and 15 to radionuclide transit test.
Repeat fundoplication for recurrent reflux was performed in two cases during the study.
Heartburn and regurgitation were significantly lessened (p), but the incidence of dysphagia was slightly increased.
Endoscopy showed six of 21 fundic wraps to be defective.
Erosive oesophagitis was seen in two patients, and Barrett's oesophagus (histologically confirmed) in one of them and six other patients.
Total reflux time was abnormal in four of the 14 patients.
No patient with an intact fundic wrap seen on endoscopy, only two of seven with Barrett's oesophagus, and one of four with abnormal reflux had oesophagitis.
Fundoplication in itself did not affect oesophageal motility or transit, provided that the wrap was intact.
It is concluded that Nissen fundoplication gave a reasonably good longterm effect in chronic reflux disease, with the state of the fundic wrap as the main determinant of outcome.
Good longterm results of Nissen fundoplication have been reported, with disappearance of reflux symptoms in 80–97% of cases.
Postfundoplication symptoms such as dysphagia, gas bloat, and epigastric pain may occur in variable degree, however, sometimes in a substantial umber of patients.
Previous studies on longterm results of fundoplication were based mainly on questioning patients, with only sporadic endoscopical examination.
Only a few reports concerned the fate of oesophagitis, and then with relatively short follow up, although the typical patient is young or middle aged and thus has a life expectancy of several decades.
While short term evaluation after fundoplication, as a rule, shows normal values of 24 hour oesophageal pH measurements, rise of lower oesophageal sphincter pressure and probably correction of reflux induced disturbances of motility. little is known of the longterm effects of fundoplication on oesophageal function.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the longterm clinical and endoscopical effects of Nissen fundoplication performed for reflux, including assessment of oesophageal function.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
The study group was taken from 46 consecutive patients operated on at our hospital for gastro-oesophageal reflux during a two year period up to 1972.
Evaluation before operation in all cases included upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, usually with oesophageal biopsy, cineradiography of the cardiac region, standard reflux test, and Bernstein-Baker test.
In the standard test the oesophageal pH was monitored 5 cm above the manometrically defined lower sphincter during four provocations (deep breathing Valsalva manoeuvre and cough, for three times, and Trendelenburg position for three minutes), when a fall to pHwas considered to indicate reflux.
Coronary disease as the cause of retrosternal symptoms was excluded in all cases by exercise electrocardiography.
Reflux was seen in the standard test or at cine-cardiography, or both in all cases, endoscopic oesophagitis in 16 (12 histologically confirmed), and 36 had positive Bernstein-Baker test.
The median age of the 29 men and 17 women was 52 (range 26–69) years at the time of fundoplication and their median weight 78 (56- 103) kg.
None had connective tissue disease then or in the follow up period.
All of the operations were performed by one of the authors (HM), using the Rossetti-Hell modification of the Nissen operation with concomitant hiatusplasty and pyloroplasty in all 46 patients, non-absorbable sutures and fixation of the fundic wrap to the oesophagus.
An 18 French gauge nasgastric tube was retained in the oesophagus during fundoplication.
Five patients had additional selective gastric vagotomy because of excessive gastric acid or a history of duodenal ulcer.
FOLLOW UP
The median study time after fundoplication was 20 (range 18–20) years.
During this time 15 of 46 patients died of causes unrelated to the gastro-oesophageal disease.
Six others could not be traced.
All the remaining 25 patients (54% of the original 46 and 81% of the survivors) were interviewed according to a standard formula, using Visick grading of general clinical condition, recording heartburn, regurgitation and dysphagia with DeMeester-Johnson reflux scale.
Postfundoplication increase of flatus, bloating, or epigastric pain was assessed by the patient as none, mild, moderate, or severe.
Twenty one of 25 patients consented to have endoscopy, and 14 to 24 hour pH recording, standard reflux test, and oesophageal manometry.
Oesophageal radionuclide transit was evaluated in 15 patients and a barium meal was performed in five cases to confirm endoscopical findings.
During the study time two patients had had repeat funcoplication for recurrent reflux and oesophagitis associated with defective fundic wrap.
Before the second operation all examinations except 24 hour pH measurements and radionuclide transit were repeated and the results are included in the analysis of the subgroup with defective fundic wrap.
All the postoperative endoscopies were performed by one of the authors (ML).
Savary-Miller grading of the oesophageal mucisa was confirmed by biopy specimens taken from all macroscopic lsions and also a few centimetre proximal to them or, if no lesions were visible, from a site 3–5 cm above the oesophagogastric junction.
Presence of gastric type epithelium (histologically confirmed) more than 3 cm above the most cranial fold of the gastric mucosa was considered to indicate Barrett's oesophagus.
The state of the fundic wrap was checked with retroflexed endoscope.
Slipping was registered when there was a distinct gastric pouch above the narrowing caused by the folds of the wrap, and disruption implied no visible folds or only distorted, loose folds at the oesophagogastric junction.
Abnormal reflux was defined as pH <for more than 4.2% of the recording time.
Non-specific disorders of motility were manometrically classified with Castell criteria.
The pressure in and length of the lower oesophageal sphincter were assessed with rapid pull through technique.
In radionuclide transite the calculated indices were the time when 5% and 90% of the radionuclide dose appeared in the stomach, emptying time of the distal oesophageal third to 25% activity value, mean transit time, and residual activity in the distal fluid.
The values were compared with findings in 10 healthy controls.
Two standard deviations above the control means constituted the upper limit of normality.
STATISTICS
Differences between scored data were checked with Fisher's exact test.
Wilcoxin signed rank test was used to compare pre with postoperative figures and the Mann-Whitney U test to analyse differences between subgroups and controls in symptom scores and results of function tests.
Results
At follow up the Visick symptom grade was excellent in five of 25 patients and good in nine, while eight patients had grade 3 and three grade 4.
Reflux symptoms were the main reason for unsatisfactory grades (Table I).
All but the patients with grade 4 had subsjectively benefited from the operation, and 19 of 25 unhesitatingly declared willingness to repeat the operation in a similar preoperative situation.
Heartburn and regurgitation were significantly (p) diminished (Figs 1 and 2).
On DeMeester-Johnson clinical score, 15 of 25 patients had no reflux, while eight reported mild and two moderately severe symptoms.
Heartburn or regurgitation, or both were less common in the patients with endoscopically intact fundic wrap than in those with defective wrap (15% v 50%).
The onset time of recurrent symptoms could be identified by five patients,— that is 4 months, 15, 17, 19, and 19 years after fundoplication.
The incidence of dysphagia was slightly increased (Fig 3), especially in the patients with intact v defective wrap (60% v 33%).
Dysphagia was only occasional, except in four patients with regular (daily or weekly) episodes.
All patients ate normal food, but some reported more thorough mastication and slower swallowing than before.
Twelve patients had increased flatus (nine cases) or bloating), or both (nine cases) at follow up.
Three of the total 12 with these symptoms assessed them as moderately disturbing and only one as severe.
Ten were unable to vomit (62% of those who had tried), and 15 had impaired belching (described as impossible by seven and difficult by eight).
Only inability to belch was associated with the state of the fundic wrap, being twice as common in cases with intact v defective wrap.
Sliding hiatel hernia had been seen at preoperative cineradiography in 16 of 21 patients with follow up endoscopy, but no paraoesophageal hernia.
Two recurrent hiatal hernias were now found, both together with defective fundal wrap, and one paraoesophageal hernia associated with epigastric pain.
Preoperatively seven patients had endoscopic oesophagitis (Savary-Miller grades 1–2), histologically confirmed in six cases.
At follow up abnormal oesophageal mucosa was seen in eight patients, all with corresponding histology (Fig 4), and including two cases of grade 2 oesophagitis, one of them concomitant with Barrett's oesophagus.
Three of the fundic wraps in these 21 cases had slipped and three were disrupted.
Chronic superficial gastritis was seen in 12 patients and atrophic gastritis in two.
Free duodenogastro bile reflux was seen in two cases, but the pylorus was deformed in all 21 and was wide open constantly in 16.
Standard reflux test had been positive before operation in 16 of 21 patients with follow up endoscopy.
One patient had had a positive test before repeat fundoplication, but was now reflux free, and the test was positive in only two patients.
In 24 hour pH recording the total reflux time was abnormal at follow up in four of 14 patients, including three with defective fundic wrap (Fig 5).
Two of four, and one with 3.1% total acid reflux time and defective wrap, clearly had alkaline reflux (pHfor 3.1–6% of the recording time).
At oesophageal manometry the values for lower oesophageal sphincter pressure and peristaltic amplitudes were higher in patients with intact v defective fundic wrap, but the differences were not statistically significant (Table II).
In radionuclide transit the times of the appearance of 5% and 90% of the isotope in the stomach differed significantly (pand p) between the 15 patients who were tested and the healthy controls (Fig 6).
Most of the abnormal values were found in patients with defective fundic wrap.
Barrett's oesophagus was associated with slightly (p=0.03) enhanced residual activity in the distal oesophagus: median 4.3% (interquartile range 2–5.6%)v 8.3% (4.6–14%).
Discussion
Good antireflux effects of Nissen fundoplication were evident 20 years after the operation, provided that the fundic wrap was still intact.
Objective recurrence of reflux was found in only one patient with endoscopically intact wrap.
Defective wrap was found at follow up in six of 21 patients who were examined.
For the following reasons this case series seems suitable for evaluating the longterm results of Nissen fundoplication.
The patients were consecutively referred for surgery by the same gastroenterologist (OK), thorough investigations before operation objectively confirmed gastro-oesophageal reflux, all operations were performed with standardised technique by one surgeon, and all revisional oesophageal surgery in the region was done at our hospital.
This makes it highly unlikely that any further operations would be unknown to us.
The use of concomitant pyloroplasty (no longer recommended) and retention of a relatively small-bore sound in the oesophagus during fundoplication may have been contributing factors in some postoperative conditions such as dysphagia and gastritis, but should not have influenced the antireflux efficacy of fundoplication.
It seems noteworthy that these patients were operated on before the advent of H 2 blocker treatment, and consequently the indication for surgery, in contrast with current practice, tended to be intractable symptoms more than teratment resistant oesophagitis.
In the total series of 46 patients from which the 25 patients were taken, there was no periperative death, the postoperative morbidity was similar to previous reports, and the 4% reoperation rate compares favourably with earlier figures after Nissen fundoplication (5.9%) or Belsey Mark IV operation (4.8%).
Moreover, the study time was longer in our series.
The 56% excellent or good overall results in Visick grading was lower than the 67–87% previously reported.
Visick grading seemed to enhance the patients' subjective estimation of postoperative symptoms.
A measure of the relief from intractable heartburn and regurgitation was the patients' expressed willingness to repeat the operation given circumstances similar to those before the first fundoplication.
Wide variations in rates of persistent or recurrent symptoms, or both (3–37%) were previously reported.
Total 360° Nissen fundoplication was used in all these series, though some differences in mobilisation of the stomach, length of the wrap, and diameter of the calibrating gastric sound may have contributed to the discrepancies seen.
Differences in criteria for symptoms and methods used to obtain clinical data cannot be ruled out.
Our patients were interviewed individually before endoscopy or function tests.
Our finding of slow accumulation of cases confirmed earlier results, with regard to the interval to the start of recurrent symptoms.
Symptoms, however, do not always imply objectively demonstrable reflux, particularly after antireflux surgery.
In one series only one third of patients complaining of heartburn or regurgitation two years after fundoplication and had abnormal 24 hour pH score.
In two of our symptomatic patients endoscopy and 24 hour pH recordings were normal.
Two others refused function tests, but were endoscopically normal.
Dysphagia among our patients was similar to figures stated after similarly modified fundoplication.
Shorter and floppier fundoplication gave distinctly lower figures.
Dysphagia caused by an excessively tight wrap should be most evident when the wrap is intact, but in all of our patients with dysphagia and intact wrap the symptoms were occasional and not disturbing unless there was some other abnormality (Barrett's oesophagus, oesophagitis or impaired gastro-oesophageal function).
The state of the fundic wrap can be accurately assessed with the retroflexed endoscope, and shortly after fundoplication 8–9% of wraps were found to be defective.
In a previous study from our hospital, 24 of 105 fundoplication wraps were defective about 6.5 years postoperatively.
The 29% after 20 years in this series implies further increase with time, but with less upward slope of the curve.
The incidence of oesophagitis was previously stated as 6–8% six months after fundoplication and 18% after 6.5 years.
Erosive oesophagitis was seen in two of the 21 patients who had endoscopy.
Including cases of Barrett's oesophagus, 38% of these patients in total had abnormal oesophageal mucosa.
Possibly some of the Barrett's cases were recognised before fundoplication, as oesophageal biopsy specimens were not taken then in five of 25 patients, including two of those in whom follow up endoscopy showed the condition.
On the other hand, most patients with Barrett's oesophagus had defective fundic wrap and most of the cases with objectively seen reflux were in this group.
Long follow up time or concomitant pyloroplasty, or both, and thus possibly increased bile reflux, may have influenced the incidence of Barrett's oesophagus.
Abnormal total reflux time (24 hour pH recording) in four of 14 patients studied contrasts with about a 10% incidence 6 months- 2 years after fundoplication.
One of the patients with normal test result at follow up had had erosive oesophagitis before repeat funcoplication, presumably with abnormal reflux (not measured).
Inclusion of this case brings the total with abnormal reflux time to five (about 33%).
Although many patients refused pH recording, this figure seems reliable, as only one patient with defective wrap was not studied and the incidence of reflux symptoms was equal in the groups with and without pH measurement.
The fact that only one patient with intact wrap had abnormal reflux accords with a previous report of such reflex in only about 3% patients with endoscopically intact wrap.
Partially defective wrap, however, did not inevitably lead to abnormal reflux in our patients.
Good results seen after partial fundoplication show that a full 360° wrap is not the only condition needed for effective antireflux action.
That fundoplication in itself does not always disturb oesophageal motility or emptying, even longterm, was evident from manometry and radionuclide transit.
Almost all the abnormal values were found in patients with defective fundic wrap.
The slight increase of residual activity associated with Barrett's oesophagus may have been partly a result of the uptake of isotype by the Barrett mucosa, and this residual activity did not interfere with calculation of the transit indices.
In conclusion, the results of Nissen fundoplication for chronic gastro-oesophageal reflux were reasonably good 20 years after the operation.
The recurrence rate was similar to that reported after two years' treatment with omeprazole.
As recurrence may appear many years after the operation, however, long — though not particularly frequent — follow up is required.
Fundoplication has some adverse effets, but in most cases these are mild and well compensated by lasting relief of heartburn and regurgitation.
Some reported postoperative symptoms are related to surgical technique, and seem able to be reduced by slight modifications, which probably also lessen the risk of wrap disruption.
We therefore recommend Nissen fundoplication in the management of gastro-oesophageal reflux as giving better subjective and objective longterm relief than any other antireflux measure.
If oesophagitis is not relieved by conservative treatment, the operation should be performed before oesophageal function is severely damaged.
Painful rib syndrome — a review of 76 cases
Abstract
The painful rib syndrome consists of three features: pain in the lower chest or upper abdomen, a tender spot on the coastal margin, and reproduction of the pain on pressing the tender spot.
This is a common cause for referral to a general medical/gastroenterology clinic, accounting for 3% of new referrals in Lincoln.
Seventy six consecutive patients were studied.
The mean age was 48 years and 70% were women.
Forty three per cent had been investigated, often extensively, before referral, and eight had had a non-curative cholecystectomy.
The case notes from all patients were reviewed and a follow up questionnaire was sent after a mean period of four years to those 72 still alive, of which 56 replied.
Thirty nine (70%) still had the pain although all except six had learnt to live with it.
Despite a firm diagnosis being given, 25 (33%) patients were referred again to hospital by their general practitioner.
All further investigations were negative apart from the finding of gall stones in three patients.
The four patients who died had died from unrelated causes.
The painful rib syndrome is common but underdiagnosed.
It is a safe, clinical diagnosis requiring no investigation.
Systematic firm palpation of the costal margin in recommended in all patients presenting with pain in the lower chest or upper abdomen.
Pain arising from the costal margin has been recognised in medical studies for many years.
This has sometimes been attributed to abnormal mobility of the lower intercostal joints and the term ‘slipping rib’ was coined by Davies-Colley.
‘Clicking rib’, ‘twelfth rib’, ‘rib-tip syndrome’, ‘syndrome of the hypersensitive xiphoid’ are other names which have been applied.
The various names have tried to indicate both the nature of the problem and the various sites where the condition occurs.
This may have led to some confusion and may explain why the condition, though acknowledged to be common, is not widely recognised.
The most useful report was that of 46 patients by Wright in 1980.
This, as well as characterising the symptomatology, showed that the condition accounted for nearly 5% of referrals to a gastroenterology clinic.
Despite this report, the condition is still rarely diagnosed and is not mentioned in standard medical textbooks or taught in our local medical schools.
It was therefore thought important to publicise again the condition and at the same time characterise it and discover its natural history using a larger number of cases.
Because the cause is not understood, the non-commital name ‘painful rib syndrome’ was chosen to include the previously mentioned terms.
It also has the advantage of including the main symptom — that is, pain, and being readily understood by patients.
It was precisely defined as comprising all of the three features: pain in the lower chest or upper abdomen, a tender spot (or spots) on the lower costal margin (including the xiphoid); reproduction of the pain by pressing on the spot.
This syndrome does not include pain and tenderness of the upper costal cartilages such as costochondritis, which is also common.
Methods
Seventy six consecutive patients attending the general medical clinic of a physician with a special interest in gastroenterology, in whom the principal diagnosis of painful rib syndrome was made, were selected for study.
These accounted for 3% of all new patients.
The case notes of each patient were examined and a simple questionnaire sent to all 72 patients who were still alive.
The patients were asked whether they still had the pain and if so whether they had learnt to live with it.
Those who had lost the pain were asked how long it had lasted.
Finally they were asked to select the description that best fitted their pain from ‘minor nuisance’, ‘moderately severe’, and ‘interferes with activities’.
Fifty six patients replied giving a response rate of 77%.
The mean follow up period was four years (range 1–7 years).
Results
CLINICAL FEATURES
The mean age at presentation was 48 with a range of 12–79 years.
Fifty three (70%) were women and the mean age was the same for men and women.
the pain was eight sided in 34 (45%), left sided in 33 (43%), on both sides in 4 (5%), and at the xiphoid in 5 (7%).
The mean duration of pain at presentation was 32 months (range 1 month to 28 years).
Twenty six (46%) of the 56 respondents described their pain as a minor nuisance, 23 (41%) as moderately severe, and six (11%) as interfering with their activities.
One respondent was uncertain.
Thirty three (43%) of the total had been investigated, often extensively.
Investigations included barium meal, barium enema, endoscopy, ultrasound scanning, intravenous urography, spinal radiology, and laparotomy before referral, and eight had had a non-curative cholecystectomy.
The pain was usually intermittent although some thought it was continuous.
Many patients said that they had had to avoid lying on one side (not always the side of pain) from the onset of their symptoms.
Some said the pain was provoked or made worse by lifting, twisting or bending.
Some were worse after sitting for a while (for example when driving) and the pain was then sometimes relieved by stretching.
It was not unusual for patients to relate the pain to meals, or some particular food.
No patient said that they had noticed a click from their ribs but this question was not routinely asked.
A history of chest trauma was not a feature.
Twenty three patients also had symptoms of gastro-oesophageal reflux and nine had an irritable bowel.
Twenty one (28%) gave a history of anxiety or depression.
OUTCOME
Three patients had died from unrelated causes.
One died seven years later of disseminated malignancy; one after three years from alcoholism, another after one year from colonic carcinoma.
One other patient had died but, regrettably, it was not possible to trace the record of her cause of death.
Thirty nine (70%) of the respondents still had the pain.
They had had the pain for a mean of 40 months (range 2 months-28 years) at presentation and a mean total duration at follow up of eight years (range 2.5–35 years).
All, apart from three patients, said they had learnt to live with the pain.
Seventeen (30%) had lost the pain after a mean of 16 months (range 2–36 months).
their mean duration of pain at presentation was 11 months (range 1–24 months).
Eleven of these 17 had lost their pain within three months of the consultation when the nature of the problem was explained.
Despite a firm diagnosis and explanation being given to both the patient and referring general practitioner, 25 (33%) of all patients were referred again to hospital for the same problem.
Further investigation in other clinics were negative except for ultrasound scanning which revealed gall stones in three and they had a cholecystectomy.
One patient lost the pain after the operation but the other two did not.
The following case reports show the tendency to doubt the diagnosis and over investigate such patients.
CASE REPORT 1
A 79 year old woman was referred with left upper quadrant and epigastric pain, which she had had intermittently for 28 years.
It was worse on sitting forward and lying down.
At the onset she had been referred to a surgeon and had a normal barium enema and chest x ray.
She was then seen by a gynaecologist and had a normal intravenous urogram.
The following year the surgeon arranged an x ray of her lumbar spine and a barium meal, which were normal.
A year later she had a normal dorsal spine x ray.
Three years later the surgeon arranged another negative intravenous urogram.
Later that year she had a negative laparotomy and it was concluded that her pain was psychological.
She continued to have pain and had a cholecystectomy 14 years after the onset of symptoms.
On examination the only abnormality was marked tenderness of the left costal margin in the mid clavicular line and pressure there reproduced her pain exactly.
The diagnosis was explained and she was reassured that there was no serious disease.
She continued to have the pain and was referred back four years later to a different surgeon who did a normal barium meal and barium enema.
The pain persisted on follow up two years later.
CASE REPORT 2
A 45 year old woman with a strong family history of ischaemic heart disease was referred with left sided chest pain, which she had had for six years.
It had been worse for ten days.
It went into the back and arms and was worse on lifting, coughing, yawning, and on lying on her right side.
She had had a cholecystectomy for epigastric pain seven years before.
She had been referred to a physician the year after surgery with chest and epigastric pain.
A barium meal showed no definite abnormality.
She continued to have the pain and a repeat barium meal four years later was normal.
The next year she was referred to a cardiologist.
Angina was excluded by a negative treadmill exercise tolerance test.
Despite this, her general practitioner gave anti-anginal medication without benefit.
She was referred again to the same cardiologist the next year and the exercise test was again negative and she was reassured.
On examination there was a tender spot on the left costal margin in the mid-clavicular line and pressure there reproduced her pain exactly.
Despite reassurance and explanation she was referred to a surgeon the next year who arranged a negative barium meal.
She was referred back to the medical clinic after a few months with the same clinical findings.
She was given further reassurance.
The next year she was admitted to the coronary care unit and myocardial infarction was excluded.
The rib tenderness was still present.
The next year she was referred to both a chest physician and a cardiologist but no further investigations were done.
TREATMENT
Emphasis was made on explaining the benign nature of this common problem.
For persistent troublesome pain paracetamol was recommended.
None were referred for rib resection, an option often described in surgical publications.
The possibility of injection with local anaesthetic was mentioned to the referring general practitioner in some cases to be considered if the pain remained a problem.
Five were referred to the pain clinic but without relief of symptoms.
Discussion
The cause of the painful rib syndrome is not known and this study has not thrown any light on the pathogenesis.
Where there is a definite clicking, which was not found in our patients, the pain is presumably because of the movement of one rib upon another.
There are synovial joints between the fifth to eighth costal cartilages and it is possible that in some of the patients in this series the pain was a result of inflammation in one of these joints.
Unvortunately there are no controlled histological studies of resected specimens to confirm this.
The high occurrence of this condition in medical clinics has been confirmed.
Wright found the condition in 1% of new patients in general medical clinics and in 5% of new patients attending gastroenterology clinics.
We found 3% of new patients attending a mixed general medical/gastroenterology clinic had the condition.
In none of the patients had the diagnosis been considered by the referring doctor and many patients had been subjected to extensive investigations.
The diagnosis was easy to make and seems to be a safe one.
In none of the patients had the syndrome been a masquerade for a more serious disease.
No investigation is needed for the pain in this condition but of course other symptoms may coexist and they will need managing on their own merits.
With firm reassurance and explanation the pain either disappears (usually within three months) or the patient learns to live with it as a minor nuisance.
If the pain does not settle within three months it will become chronic in the vast majority (87%).
A few patients remain very troubled and perhaps threse should be referred to a pain clinic for injection of local anaesthetic (as there are published reports of its benefit) or, rarely, to a surgeon for excision of the offending rib.
It is very important that the condition be recognised so as to avoid the expense and trouble of investigations and multiple consultant referrals.
The condition should figure prominently in undergraduate clinical training and in medical textbooks.
All doctors should be advised to systematically palpate the costal margin firmly in all patients complaining of pain in the lower chest or upper abdomen.
Transforming growth factor α is trophic to pancreatic cancer in vivo 
Abstract
Pancreatic cancer cell lines overexpress epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptors and also have the capacity to produce transforming growth factor α (TGF α), the altrnate agonist of the EGF receptot.
The purpose of this study was to determine if TGF α had a trophic effect on the growth of pancreatic cancer in vivo.
Syrian golden hamsters were inoculated with 50000 H2T hamster ductal pancreatic cancer cells.
The hamsters were then randomised to three equal groups: the groups received either saline (control), EGF, or TGF α, each by intraperitoneal injection, three times a day.
Treatment continued for seven weeks, and each day the hamsters were weighed and tumour areas were measured.
The hamsters were then killed and the tumours were excised, weighed, and extracted for assay of DNA content as a measure of cellularity.
From week four onwards both EGF and TGF α significantly stimulated tumour growth.
Although tumour weights were not significantly different, tumour DNA content had nearly doubled after exposure to both EGF and TGF α.
It is concluded that like EGF, TGF α can stimulate pancreatic cancer growth in vivo, and this may in part explain the aggressive nature of these cancers in cliical practice.
Pancreatic carcinoma is now overtaking gastric cancer as the fourth leading cause of death from malignancy in the United Kingdom.
Most patients are dead within a year of the diagnosis and overall, less than 1% live more than five years.
The outlook for patients after the diagnosis of cancer of the exocrine pancreas is uniformly poor and suggests the existence of a mechanism(s) that may have a role in promoting tumour growth.
Korc and colleagues have shown that human ductal pancreatic cancer cell lines may overexpress the receptors for epidermal growth factor (EGF).
The EGF receptor is a product of the erb-B oncogene.
These cell lines can also produce the alternate agonist of the EGF receptor, transforming growth factor α (TGF α).
Furthermore, it has been shown in several of these cell lines that this TGF α does not have to leave the cell to actively bind to transmembrane fragments of the EGF receptor and stimulate the cell.
Therefore a potential growth stimulatory autocrine cycle may exist to explain the aggressive nature of these cancers.
The growth of established pancreatic cancers is promoted and pancreatic carcinogenesis is accelerated by EGF in animal mdels.
The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of TGF α on the growth of hamster ductal exocrine pancreatic cancer cells in vivo.
Methods
H2T hamster ductal pancreatic cancer cells (a gift from Dr Courtney Townsend Jr, Department of Surgery, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA), which possess 5000 EGF receptors per cell, R Beauchamp, Departmento of Surgery, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA, personal communication), were grown (in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) containing 10% serum) for three days at which point they had achieved 80%-90% confluence.
The cells were then treated with trypsin and suspended in a solution of DMEM at a concentration of 500000 cells per ml.
Eighteen six week old Syrian golden hamsters (mean weight 70 g) were anaesthetised with intraperitoneal ketamine (100 mg/kg), their cheek pouches were everted and 50000 H2T cells (volume 0.1 ml) were inoculated under the mucosa of both cheek pouches.
The hamsters were then randomised into three equal groups, housed throughout the study at 70°C in a 12 hour light/dark cycle, and given regular hamster food and tap water ad libitum.
UKCCCR guidelines n the handling of animals for laboratory studies were rigorously adhered to throughout these investigations.
The three groups of hamsters received either saline, EGF (10 µg/kg)(Peninsula, Warrington) or TGF α (10 µg/kg)(Peninsula, Warrington), each by intraperitoneal injection three times a day throughout the seven week course of the study.
The dose regimen was based on that previously cited for EGF as stimulating pancreatic carcinogenesis in hamsters.
Each week the hamsters were weighed under ketamine anaesthesia, and the tumour areas calculated by measuring the bipendicular diameters with Vernier callipers.
The hamsters were killed during week seven, the tumours were excised, weighed, and extracted for DNA estimation according to the ethod of Burton.
Statistical comparison of tumour growth rate was by two way analysis of variance (time and treatment regimen) and tumour weight and DNA content by one way analysis of variance, p values <were considered significant for the two way analysis and p values <for the one way analysis.
Results
All three groups of hamsters increased their body weights at the same rate during the study and there were no differences in final mean body weights between the groups.
All hamsters produced tumours.
From week four until death both EGF and TGF α stimulated tumour growth at a significantly greater rate than that in the control group (Figure).
Mean tumour doubling time was reduced from 18.9 days in the control tumours to 12.6 days in those hamsters receiving TGF α and halved to 9.1 days in the hamsters receiving EGF.
At the time of killing most tumours had developed central ulcers with loss of tumour volume.
Although tumour wet weights were not significantly different (Table), tumour DNA content was significantly higher in both treatment groups compared with the control group (Table).
Discussion
This study clearly shows that like EGF, TGF α will stimulate the growth of ductal exocrine pancreatic cancer in vivo.
This is the first demonstration of a trophic effect for TGF α on a tumour in vivo.
Moreover, the study also shows that TGF α has the capacity to act in an endocrine manner, being biologically effective at a site remote from the site of administration.
Although it is not yet known if the H2T cell line expresses TGF α, these findings go some way to support the hypothesis proposed by Korc and others that TGF α may have a role as an autocrine growth stimulator in pancreatic cancer.
If H2T cells are shown to produce endogenous EGF or TGF α, then our studies show an additional capacity to respond to further exposure to these agonists in vivo.
Complimentary studies are now necessary to examine the effect of exogenously administered TGF α on the growth of the cell lines studied by the group of Kork et al when these cells are inoculated as xenografts into nude mice.
Clinically useful EGF antagonists do not exist.
Schally and colleagues have proposed that the growth inhibitory effect of somatostatin and its long acting analogues may by via a tyrosine phosphatase receptor.
This in turn dephosphorylates the EGF receptor, which is a member of the tyrosine kinase receptor family.
If this is the case, then there may be a clinical role for somatostatin analogues in the treatment of cancers that express both somatostatin and EGF receptors, regardless of their capacity to locally produce TGF α or EGF.
Myofibroblasts in hollow visceral myopathy: the origin of gastrointestinal fibrosis?
Abstract
A patient with hollow visceral myopathy is reported in whom light microscopical studies of the small and large intestine showed typical features of degeneration, thinning, and fibrous replacement of smooth muscle of the gastrointestinal tract.
Electron microscopy showed a striking increase in collagen with minimal fibroblast proliferation.
Smooth muscle fibres had a range of ultrastructural abnormalities including myofilament disarray, electron lucency of the cytoplasm, and proliferation of the endoplasmic reticulum.
Some fibres seemed to have typical ultrastructural characteristics of myofibroblasts, and others to be transition forms between typical smooth muscle cells and typical myofibroblasts.
It seems likely that the fibrosis typical of this disorder has its origin in the transformation of smooth muscle fibres from a purely contractile to a myofibroblast collagen synthetic phenotype.
We report detailed ultrastructural studies on tissue from a patient with visceral myopathy in whom there were prominent alterations in smooth muscle fibres of the muscularis propria, which included the presence of cells with the typical appearance of myofibroblasts.
It is suggested that the fibrosis seen in this disorder has its origin in the transformation of smooth muscle fibres from a purely contractile to a myofibroblast collagen synthetic phenotype.
Case report
A 14 year old girl presented with constipation, intermittent abdominal pain, and vomiting.
She underwent appendicetomy at age 17.
She continued to experience abdominal pain and at age 18 was admitted with absolute constipation and intestinal obstruction.
At laparotomy she was noted to have thickened bowel loops and a thickened dilated colon.
No structural obstruction was noted.
Investigation over the next two years showed intestinal hypomotility, with formal small bowel motility studies showing uncoordinated phase 3 propagation.
She had difficulty with micturition, but no haematuria or dysuria.
No other abnormalities were present on examination or investigation.
At age 20 she became pregnant and the pregnancy was complicated by episodes of small and large bowel obstruction.
A colostomy was performed in an attempt to relieve her large bowel symptoms, and subsequently closed.
The labour was uneventful and the child, now aged 10, shows normal development.
During the next 10 years the patient suffered bouts of subacute obstruction and frequent faecal impaction with admissions for abdominal pain, absolute constipation, and vomiting, necessitating left extended hemicolectomy at the age of 22.
At age 29 she underwent successful parathyroidectomy for primary hyperparathyroidism with nodular hyperplasia.
No other endocrine abnormalities were present and calcium concentrations returned to normal after surgery.
Her intestinal symptoms progressed and she vomited copious amounts of fluid every two to three hours.
She had no appetite and her food intake declined to zero.
A central venous line was inserted for hom total parenteral nutrition.
By the age of 30 she was still maintained on home total parenteral nutrition, and continued to vomit fluid.
She also had gross abdominal distention and absolute constipation.
She underwent further ileal resection to reduce her distention and tubal ligation for sterilisation.
Resection specimens of colon and ileum from the abdominal operations at ages 22 and 30 were studied histologically.
Specimens were taken fresh and samples fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde for transmission electron microscopy and 10% formol saline for light microscopy.
Samples from each specimen of bowel were taken at 5–10 cm intervals.
All specimens of colon and ileum showed similar features.
At light microscopy (haematoxylin and eosin, and elastic Van Gieson stains) there was thickening of the bowel wall by fibrous tissue with abnormalities of the muscularis propria, especially the external longitudinal layer (Fig 1).
This showed loss of smooth muscle fibres, with remaining fibres showing hypertrophy, vacuolation, or degenerative features (Fig 2).
Mucopolysaccharide and amyloid deposition was not detected with Alcian blue-periodic acid Schiff and Congo red stains.
The submucosal and myenteric neural plexuses seemed normal in number and morphology with no intraneuronal inclusions or vacuolation present.
Staining with neuron specific enolase and neurofilament antibodies (Sigma, UK) by indirect immunoperoxidase methods showed no abnormalities of distribution or morphology of neuronal cell bodies or axons.
Ultrastructural studies showed increased collagen in the muscularis propria with alterations in smooth muscle fibres including elongation, cytoplasmic vasuolation, proliferation of rough endoplasmic reticulum, myofilament disarray with increased lucency of myocyte cytoplasm, and prominent focal densities.
Fibroblast infiltration was not prominent, with occasional fibroblast-like cells seen but not in abnormal numbers (Figs 3, 4).
All nerve fibres and terminals present seemed normal in number and morphology.
Similar ultrastructural features were present in the ileum and colon, with the most noticeable abnormalities present in the muscularis propria.
Light microscopical studies of smooth muscle of the fallopian tubes showed no histological abnormalities.
Sections of the appendix and bladder biopsies were not available.
Discussion
Primary chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction occurs without underlying systemic disease.
This syndrome is characterised clinically by abnormalities of gastrointestinal and, in some cases, bladder motility.
When thought to involve abnormalities of smooth muscle without abnormalities in myenteric neurons the syndrome is termed hollow visceral myopathy.
This is considered to be the commonest cause of chronic primary intestinal pseudo-obstruction.
Different patterns of clinical involvement with genetic transmission or sporadic occurrence are recognised.
The histopathological findings are similar in all types.
At light microscopy smooth muscle layers show fibrosis with vacuolar and other degenerative changes in smooth muscle fibres in the circular and longitudinal muscle layers.
Ultrastructural abnormalities in smooth muscle fibres have been recognised, including myocyte damage with perinuclear vacuolation, disorientation and dissolution of myofilaments, electron lucency of the cytoplasm, and swelling of mitochondria.
The origin of the fibrosis in this condition is unclear.
Our findings suggest an explanation.
The typical clinical and histological features of hollow visceral myopathy, including pseudo-obstruction of the bowel with fibrosis, thinning, and vacuolation of the smooth muscle of the muscularis propria were present in our case.
It is likely that our case represents the sporadic type of the disorder, in the absence of any family history.
The familial form cannot be excluded, however, without full investigation of other family members, which is not possible here.
At the ultrastructural level alterations of smooth muscle fibre included vacuolation, proliferation of the rough endoplasmic reticulum in the perinuclear region, disturbances in the distribution of myofilaments and electron-lucency of the myocyte cytoplasm.
All of these changes are recognised in hollow visceral myopathy.
We found, however, that the pronounced fibrosis was not accompanied by fibroblast infiltration.
Also, the changes in smooth muscle cells consisted of a range of phenotypic alterations including forms showing features consistent with myofibroblast differentiation.
These included elongation, notching or convolution of the nucleus, proliferation of rough endoplasmic reticulum, and electron lucent cytoplasm containing prominent 6–10 nm filaments with prominent focal densities.
Pinocytic vesicles were present near the plasma membrane and basement membrane was present around these cells.
Such myofibroblast type cells were focally surrounded by mature collagen fibres.
The concept of a mesenchymal cell with features of both fibroblast and smooth muscle cells — termed a myofibroblast — was introduced in 1971 gy Gabbiani et al and Majno et al .
Since that time there has been an increased awareness that myofibroblast type cells are part of the normal structure of many tissues, including the umbilical cord, lung, and colon.
Myofibroblasts have been implicated in fibrous reactions in a wide range of pathological conditions, including fibrosing conditions of the large bowel.
The origin of these cells has been the subject of much debate.
It has been suggested that myofibroblast type cells may originate from Ibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, pericytes and, in thrombus, from circulating blood cells.
In our case the origin of the myofibroblasts is not clear but the presence of transitional forms of smooth muscle cells strongly suggests an origin from such cells rather than extension of pericrypt cells or infiltration of circulating blood cells.
Experimental models in which the oestrogen stimulated rat uterus was seen to develop smooth muscle cell alterations resemboing the ultrastructural characteristics of fibroblasts emphasised the relation between the two cell types and the presence of intermediate forms, and these studies also documented the production of connective tissue proteins by such transformed smooth muscle cells.
The changes seen in smooth muscle cells of the muscularis propria in our case may thus be adaptive, rather than of primary pathogenetic significance, as the innervation of the bowel seems morphologically normal and the response of the smooth muscle seems to follow a recognised pathophysiological response.
The precise stimulus to such alteration and the reversibility of the change, however, is not clear.
Duodenogastric reflux after gastric surgery and in gastric ulcer disease: continuous measurement with a sodium ion selective electrode
Abstract
Duodenogastric reflux (DGR) was investigated with a sodium ion selective electrode in 10 normal controls, 10 patients with persistent pain after gastric surgery, and five patients with gastric ulcer.
During an average study time of two and a half hours, normal controls had reflux for 12% of the study, whereas patients after gastric surgery had reflux for 91% of the study time (p).
Patients with a gastric ulcer had reflux on average for 67% of the study (p).
The patients who had had gastric surgery had several symptoms, but there was no association between the number or nature of symptoms and the severity of DGR as determined by the sodium electrode.
Patients with positive bile provocation tests did not show any significant difference in the duration of reflux compared with those with a negative provocation test (79% and 87%).
There was also no relation between the results of the provocation test and the number and nature of symptoms.
Continuous monitoring of intragastric sodium ions with a selective electrode is a practical means of assessing DGR.
Results suggest that symptoms due to DGR may be related to the sensitivity of the gastric lining as well as the amounts of duodenal contents flowing back into the stomach.
Reflux of duodenal content into the stomach may be an aetiological factor in the development of gastritis, gastric ulcers, and gastric neoplasia.
Also bile reflux is a common endoscopic finding in patients with dyspepsia.
Previous studies have attempted to evaluate the severity of duodenogastric reflux (DGR) and to determine whether specific constituents of duodenal juice are responsible for symptoms.
The methods used have included radiological assessment or measurement of duodenal markers such as total or individual bile acid concentrations or pancreatic enzymes such as phospholipase A2.
These assessments are often difficult to perform and involve complicated and dificult analyses.
We have investigated the sodium concentration of gastric juice as a marker of DGR, with a sodium ion selective electrode.
Depending on the rate of gastric secretion, the concentration of sodium ions in gastric juice varies between about 5 and 50 mmol/l, whereas the concentration of sodium ions in bile and duodenal and pancreatic juices remain constant at about 150 mmol/l.
Duodenogastric reflux is indicated when sodium concentrations rise above 50 mmol/l.
This was shown by synchronous measurement of gastric bile acid concentration and pencreatic enzyme acitivity, which are other indices of reflux into the stomach.
Measurement of sodium concentrations is simple to perform and offers the possibility of prolonged continuous monitoring.
The aim of the present study was to assess DGR with the sodium selective electrode in normal subjects, in patients with benign gastric ulcers, and in patients with persistent pain after gastric surgery.
The relation between DGR and symptoms in patients with pain after gastric surgery was also investigated by a provocation test with the patient's own bile enriched duodenal juice.
Patients and methods
Studies were carried out on 10 healthy normal control subjects,(six men, four women, age range 28–72 years) five patients with benign gastric ulcer (three women, two men, age range 42–81 years), and 10 patients (seven men, three women, age range 44–73 years) who had persistent pain (>months) after vagotomy and pyloroplasty, vagotomy and antrectomy, vagotomy and gastroenterostomy, or Bilroth 1 gastrectomy.
This group had no evidence of ulcer on endoscopy but showed varying degrees of gastritis.
Ultrasound examination was normal.
Ethics committee approval was obtained for all studies performed.
MEASUREMENT OF DUODENOGASTRIC REFLUX WITH THE SODIUM ION SELECTIVE ELECTRODE
Subjects were fasted overnight and given 800 mg of cimetidine (SKB, Welwyn, UK) orally, one hour before the test, to avoid interference with the electrical signal from hydrogen ion activity.
After anaesthetising the subject's pharynx with 4% lignocaine spray, gastric sodium and pH microelectrodes (Ingold Messtechnic, Zurich, Switzerland) were introduced high into the stomach about 48 cm from the incisors (this precluded entry into the duodenum after operations such as gastrectomy).
The electrodes were connected to a portable data logger (Synectics Medical, Stockholm, Sweden).
A continuous recording of both sodium concentration (mV) and pH was obtained (at intervals of two seconds) for up to three and a half hours (median value=two hours 27 minutes, range from 56 minutes to 3 hours 32 minutes).
Millivolt readings were converted to mmol/l for analysis of data.
Subjects were asked to note any pain during the study.
BILE PROVOCATION TEST
This was performed on the 10 patients with pain after gastric surgery who also carried out the sodium probe study.
A careful history of symptoms was taken from each patient.
Patients were fasted overnight and an AN20 radio-opaque tube (Anderson Products Inc, Chapel Hill, USA) was passed into the upper small intestine under fluoroscopic control.
A dose of 0.05 µg/kg body weight of ceruletide (Farmitalia Carlo Erba Ltd, St Albans, UK) in 10 ml saline was then given by intravenous injection over a 10 minute period.
Ceruletide contains amino acid sequences that correspond to physiological hormones in humans that cause contraction of the gall bladder and bile duct and relaxation of the sphincter of Oddi.
About 70 ml of bile rich duodenal juice was collected by continuous low suction, and the AN20 tube was then repositioned into the stomach, about 48 cm from the insicors.
After a 10 minute rest period 0.9% saline was infused in the stomach at a rate of 4 ml/minute for 15 minutes with a syringe pump (model 355, Sage Instruments).
Any symptoms of discomfort were noted.
The stomach was washed out with water during a 10 minute rest period and the procedure was repeated with the patient's own bile stained duodenal juice.
The patient was unaware of which order the solutions were infused.
A positive provocation test was documented if upper abdominal pain was present with or without nausea after introduction of duodenal contents.
Results
DUODENOGASTRIC REFLUX
Monitoring of intragastric sodium concentration was well tolerated.
Duodenogastric reflux was identified when intragastric sodium concentrations exceeded 50 mmol/l.
All subject groups had DGR for some of the study period; however, both groups of patients had reflux for a significantly longer proportion of study time than the normal controls (12% of study time for normal controls, 67% for gastric ulcer patients, and 91% for gastric surgery patients; pgastric ulcer v controls and pgastric surgery v controls; Fig 1).
Figure 2 shows typical sodium profiles from subjects in each of the three groups.
The normal subject displayed only short bursts of reflux with a maximum duration of four minutes.
The patient with a gastric ulcer had intermittent episodes lasting up to an hour, whereas continuous reflux occurred in the patient after gastrectomy.
RELATION BETWEEN PAIN AND DGR AFTER GASTRIC SURGERY
Patients with persistent pain after gastric surgery often had several symptoms (Tables I and II).
Nine out of 10 patients had three or more symptoms as well as pain; the main additional problems were nausea, vomiting, bile reflux, and weakness.
(Bile reflux was usually identified by a particular taste in the patients mouth, which was recognised from previous bile vomiting.)
There was no association between the number of symptoms and the severity of DGR as determined by the sodium electrode (Table I).
Neither was any particular symptom present in patients with a positive bile provocation test that was not present in those patients with a negative result (Table II).
There was no correlation between the results of provocation testing and the severity of DGR as determined by the sodium electrode.
Five out of 10 patients had a positive result on provocation with their duodenal aspirate, developing epigastric pain.
The mean duration of DGR (sodium >mmol/l) was 79% of study time for patients with a positive result and 87% for patients with a negative result.
There was no relation between the results of provocation testing and thenumber or nature of symptoms (Table II).
All three patients after vagotomy and pyloroplasty had negative provocation tests and average gastric sodium concentrations were above 100 mmol/l for only 16% of the study.
Conversely, three our of four patients after Billroth 1 gastrectomy had positive provocation tests and sodium concentrations above 100 mmol/l for an average of 57% of the study time.
Discussion
Clarification of the role of DGR in gastric pathology is limited by the techniques available for its measurement.
This study show that continuous monitoring of the sodium concentration in gastric juice with a sodium ion selective electrode is a practical means of assessing fasting DGR, as it is well tolerated and suitable for ambulant use.
The important findings are that although transient DGR is present in healthy subjects, it occurred for a significantly greater proportion of the study time in patients with gastric ulcers and in patients with persistent pain after gastric surgery (Fig 1).
There has been conflicting evidence concerning the occurrence of DGR in both normal controls and in association with gastric ulcers.
In our study continuous monitoring showed that DGR occurred in all patients with gastric ulcers, and that it occurred for a significantly greater proportion of the study time than in normal controls.
This is consistent with the suggestion that DGR is involved in the aetiology of gastric ulcers.
Persistant pain is often reported after gastric surgery and management is difficult.
These patients have been reported to have greater amounts of duodenogastric reflux than controls, and some surgeons have relied solely on evidence of DGR to select patients for remedial surgery.
Others have used provocation testing to identify those patients in whom DGR is actually responsible for symptoms.
We have combined these approaches by examining both the degree and duration of DGR and the response to provocation testing in the same subjects.
The results indicated that although all patients with persistent pain after gastric surgery had DGR, there was no correlation between symptoms and the severity of DGR (Table I).
There was also no correlation between severity of DGR and results of provocation testing.
It was interesting that all three patients after vagotomy and pyloroplasty had negative provocation tests and only short periods in which DGR fluid contained high concentrations of sodium (Table I) compared with three out of four patients after Billroth 1 gastrectomy who had positive provocation tests and high sodium concentrations.
More studies are needed to investigate this finding.
Symptomatic patients with excessive DGR and a positive provocation test might be expected to benefit from treatment designed either to prevent DGR or to protect the gastric mucosa.
Conversely, a negative provocation test suggests that the patient's pain is not due to the presence of irritant duodenal juice in the stomach, but could be associated with abnormal motility associated with DGR, or might be due to an unrelated cause.
Trials with cytoprotective agents or prokinetic drugs — for example, cisapride — may clarify these issues.
Fibrinolytic activity of ascites caused by alcoholic cirrhosis and peritoneal malignancy
Abstract
Coagulopathy is a well recognised complication of peritoneovenous shunting for ascites.
The relative contributions of promary fibrinolysis and disseminated intravascular coagulation remain controversial.
Plasminogen activating activity was significantly lower in malignant ascites (n=10, median <(range <) IU/ml) than in alcoholic ascites (n=10, 1.07 (0.30–1.49) IU/ml)(p).
Fibrinolytic activity was determined by a balance between tissue plasminogen activator and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1.
There was no significant difference between the two groups in the concentration of tissue plasminogen activator (34 (12–64) ng/ml in malignant ascites v 29 (12–43) ng/ml in alcoholic ascites), but the concentration of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 was significantly higher in malignant ascites (736 (213–1651) ng/ml) than in alcohol ascites (29 (12–43) ng/ml)(p).
Malignant ascites contained significantly higher concentrations of urokinase (0.7 (<1.3) ng/ml v 0.2 (<) ng/ml in alcoholic ascites) and plasminogen activator inhibitor 2 (33 (<) ng/ml v 9 (<) ng/ml alcoholic ascites).
The plasminogen activating activity of alcohol ascites may lead to primary fibrinolysis after peritoneovenous shunting.
The considerably lower activity found in malignant ascites may explain why coagulopathy after shunting is less pronounced in this group of patients.
The peritoneovenous shunt is an established method of palliation for intractable benign and malignant ascites.
Coagulopathy is a well recognised complication after the insertion of these shunts.
The manifestations range from subclinical derangements of coagulation tests to life threatening haemorrhage.
Controversy exists as to the relative contributions of primary fibrinolysis and disseminated intravascular coagulation to this coagulopathy.
The increase concentrations of fibrin degradation products and concommitant reductions in the concentrations of plasminogen and fibrinogen in ascites compared with plasma, has provided indirect evidence that ascitic fluid posseses fibrinolytic properties.
This has been confirmed by direct measurement of ascitic plasminogen activating activity and has led to speculation that an infusion of plasminogen activators could stimulate a coagulopathy mediated by primary fibrinolysis.
Increased concentrations of cross linked fibrin and fibrinogen degradation products and decreased platelet counts found in the plasma after peritoneovenous shunting has led others to suggest that the coagulopathy is secondary to disseminated intravascular coagulation induced either by fibrin degradation products or thromboplastin-like substances, and that ascitic plasminogen activators would be neutralised on entry into the systemic circulation.
At present, the only agreement is that increased plasma concentrations of fibrinogen degradation products after insertion of a peritoneovenous shunt are an indication of shunt patency.
The aim of this study was to measure the overall plasminogen activator activity and concentrations of individual fibrinolytic system mediators in ascites secondary to alcoholic liver disease or malignancy to gain a greater understanding about the aetiology of this condition.
Patients and methods
Ethical approval was obtained from the hospital ethics committee.
Ascitic fluid was aspirated from 10 patients (nine men, one woman; age range 37–62 years) with alcohol induced ascites and 10 patients (four men, six women; age range 31–85 years) with sytologically confirmed malignant ascites (six ovarian; one oesophageal; two stomach, and one colonic carcinoma).
A specimen of the fluid was used for bacteriological studies including microscopy and culture on plates for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria.
The total white blood cell count in the sample was measured by coulter counter (STKR).
Aspirates were immediately treated with anticoagulant (9:1 v/v 10% EDTA) and centrifuges at 3500 rpm at 4°C for 10 minutes.
The supernatant was then removed and stored at -20°C until analysis.
Tissue plasminogen activator, urokinase, and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and inhibitor-2 were measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (Tintelize, Porton Cambridge Ltd, Maidenhead, UK).
The lower limits of sensitivity for the assays were 1.5 ng/ml (tissue plasminogen activator), 0.1 ng/ml (urokinase), 2.0 ng/ml (plasminogen activator inhibitor-1), and 6.0 ng/ml (plasminogen activator inhibitor 2).
Plasminogen activating activity was determined by the fibrin plate method after incubation for 24 hours at 37°C and the results expressed as IU tissue polasminogen activator/ ml ascitic fluid (lower limit of detection 0.02 IU/ ml).
Statistical analysis was performed with the Mann Whitney U test and values of pwere considered to be significant.
Results
Micro-organisms were not present in any of the samples.
The white blood cell count was significantly lower in alcoholic ascites (median 0.3 (range 0.2–1.0) ×10/ml) than in malignant ascites (0.8 (0.4–2.3) ×10/ml, p).
The plasminogen activating activity was significating higher in alcoholic cirrhotic ascites (median 1.07 (range 0.30–1.49) IU/ml) than in malignant ascites (<(<) IU/ml, p).
There was no significant difference in the concentration of tissue plasminogen activator (29 (12–43) ng/ml in alcoholic ascites v 34 (12–64) ng/ml in malignant ascites).
A significantly higher concentration of urokinase was found in malignant ascites (0.3 (<) ng/ml) than in alcoholic ascites (0.7 (<) ng/ml, p).
The concentration of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 was significantly higher in malignant ascites (736 (213–165) ng/ml) than in alcoholic ascites (16 (<) ng/ml, p), and a similar but less pronounced pattern was found for plasminogen activator inhibitor-2 (43 (<140) ng ml in malignant ascites v <(<) ng/ ml in alcoholic ascites, p).
The plasminogen activator activity of alcohol induced ascites correlated with the excess (in molar terms) of tissue plasminogen activator over plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (r =0.71, p; Figure).
There was no positive correlation between the plasminogen activating activity and the severity of alcoholic liver disease in the cirrhotic group, based on serum albumin (r = 0.04), bilirubin (r =0.45), or prothrombin time (r =0.24).
Discussion
The incidence and severity of coagulopathy after insertion of peritoneovenous shunts are greater in patients with alcohol ascites than in those with malignant ascites (Table).
The incidence of coagulopathy (prolongation of the prothrombin time or activated partial thromboplastin time) after peritoneovenous shunting in patients with malignant ascites is 0% to 10%.
By comparison, the incidence of coagulopathy in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis ranges between 40% and 91% and a higher proportion of these patients develop clinical problems.
Our results confirm that alcoholic ascites contains plasminogen activating activity.
Patrassi et al postulated that the enhanced fibrinolysis in ascites induced by alcohol was due to increased release of tissue plasminogen activator from the mesothelium, and Wilde et al were able to quench this fibrinolytic activity with the addition to the ascites of antibody to tissue plasminogen activator.
Neither study, however, directly measured the ascitic concentrations of tissue plasminogen activator.
Although it has been shown experimentally that alcohol can enhance the endothelial cell secretion of plasminogen activator, it seems that the difference in plasminogen activator activity between the two groups is secondary to changes in the concentration of plasminogen activity inhibitor-1 than tissue plasminogen activator.
The significantly lower plasminogen activator activity of malignant ascites is associated with greatly increased concentrations of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1.
This confirms the results of previous studies.
Huber et al showed more plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in malignant ascites than in alcoholic ascites and Casslen and Astedt found significantly higher concentrations of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in malignant ascites than in benign ascites.
Neither study, however, quantified the overall plasminogen activator activity of malignant ascites.
We have shown that the overall ascitic plasminogen activator activity is largely determined by a balance of tissue plasminogen activator and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1.
The increased concentration and urokinase in malignant tissues may partly explain the finding of increased concentrations of urokinase in malignant ascites.
The concentration of tissue plasminogen activator, however, was 20 to 70 times greater than that of urokinase in both groups of patients and therefore urokinase probably contributes little to the overall fibrinolytic activity.
Equally, a significantly higher concentration of plasminogen activator inhibitor-2 in malignant ascites confirms previous work, but as it is a weaker inhibitor of tissue plasminogen activator and is present in much lower concentrations than plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, it probably plays only a small part in the overall inhibition of fibrinolytic activity.
These studies show that the plasminogen activating activity of ascites is primarily mediated by tissue plasminogen activator and that it is also probably responsible for a coagulopathy mediated by primary fibrinolysis after insertion of a peritoneovenous shunt.
Moreover, the reduced plasminogen activator activity of malignant ascites is caused by increased concentrations of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, which may account for the lower incidence of coagulopathy after insertion of shunts seen in this group of patients.
Molecular biology of colorectal neoplasia
Large bowel cancer is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in the western world.
In England and Wales approximately 8500 men and 9000 women die of the disease every year.
Yet despite this, relatively little is known of its pathogenesis in the vast majority of sporadic cases.
In 1954, Armitage and Doll proposed that common cancers arise as a result of the accumulation of as many as seven events.
Most scientists now believe that the molecular substrate for these critical events in tumorigenesis are genes that regulate cell proliferation and fifferentiation — that is, oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes.
Alterations to the expression or structure of these genes may result in the perturbation of cell growth, which is the hallmark of neoplasia.
The past 10 years has seen an explosion in our knowledge of the molecular biology of cancer, and nowhere has this been as exciting as in the field of large bowel cancer.
Research into colorectal tumours has directly or indirectly contributed to the discovery of three new tumour suppressor genes; APC, DCC, and p53, the latter probably representing the commonest genetic adnormality so far described in human cancer.
Therefore, despite being unclear about the environmental agents that promote genetic changes in the large bowel, in few other tumour systems are we as close to identifying the critical events which underlie malignant, neoplastic behaviour as we are in colorectal cancer.
Oncogenes
Originally described as retroviral genes responsible for in vitro cell transformation and the development of certain animal tumours (v-onc), homologs have subsequently been identified in normal human cells (proto-oncogenes) and, in activated form, in human tumours (cpones).
Many have a physiological role in the regulation of cell division and differentiation.
It is not surprising therefore that they are a common target for mutagenesis in neoplasia.
Most frequently altered in large bowel tumours are c-Ki-ras and c-mye, c-Ki-ras, one of the family of ras oncogenes, encodes a 21kD G-protein involved in the transduction of mitogenic signals across the cell membrane.
Point mutations in codons 12, 13, or 61 have been identified in 39 to 71% of large bowel cancers, as well as 42% of adenomas.
This results in the inability of the protein to hydrolyse bound GTP to GDP, and since GTP-ras is believed to be the active form of the protein this many deliver a continual signal to the cell to divide.
Apart from point mutation, another way in which oncogenes can be activated is by over expression.
This seems to be the mechanism for c-myc activation in colorectal tumours.
C-myc encodes a nuclear phosphoprotein that is induced during cell proliferation, and is probably necessary for DNA synthesis.
Several groups have reported raised c-myc RNA values in 60–70% of carcinomas.
Similar levels have also been described in adenomas.
While in some cases this may merely reflect the larger growth fraction found in tumours compared with normal mucosa, genuine over expression does seem to occur in a proportion of cases.
Amplification of c-myc has been described in a minority (7%) of tumours but correlates poorly with RNA content.
The reason for deregulated expression of the gene is therefore presently unknown.
Other oncogenes less frequently altered in large bowel tumours include c-src, raised in 62% of cancers; c-myb, deleted in 9%, and c-erbB-2, amplified in 4%.
Tumour suppressor genes
Numerically a much smaller group, tumour suppressor genes inhibit cell proliferation and tumorigenicity.
Whereas oncogenes classically act in a transdominant fashion — that is alteration to one allele is sufficient to cause transformation, suppressor genes are recessive.
Loss of tumour suppressor function requires inactivation of both alleles, usually by chromosomal deletion or point mutation, or both.
Tumour suppressor genes seem to be very important in colorectal carcinogenesis.
The hereditary condition, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), which confers susceptibility to colonic cancer, is determined by point mutations in a tumour suppressor gene, APC, inherited through the germ line.
Localised to chromosome 5q.21 by Bodmer et al in the United Kingdom, and Leppert et al in the United States, the candidate gene encodes a large 2843 amino acid protein, whose function is, as yet, poorly understood.
While the inherited allele is mutated, the normal allele is subsequently deleted in a somatic, mitotic event involving variable sized fragments of the long arm of chromosome 5.
This acquired loss of heterozygosity for chromosome 5q can be detected using restriction fragment length pholmorphism (RFLP) markers in 36% of sporadic cancers, as well as FAP carcinomas.
In a suvery of 79 unrelated FAP patients, mutations were found in the APC gene in 67%.
More than two thirds of mutations were located in the 5' half of the last exon, and over 90% resulted in truncation of the APC gene product.
Miyoshi has described similar mutations in sporadic adenomas and carcinomas.
Inactivation of the APC gene therefore seems to play an important role in sporadic colorectal tumorigenesis as well as in FAP.
Interestingly, a murine counterpart of human FAP exists.
Mice expressing the Min trait (multiple intestinal neoplasia) develop large numbers of adenomas in the small and large bowel and are susceptible to gastrointestinal cancer.
The trait is transmitted as an autosomal dominant, and linkage analysis has shown cosegregation with a nonsense mutation in the murine homolog of the APC gene.
During the exploration of the long arm of chromosome 5 for the APC locus, deletions and point mutations were identified in a second large gene named MCC (mutated in colorectal cancer).
Up to 55% of cancers have subsequently been found to contain deletions involving MCC.
Although now believed not to be the gene responsible for FAP, MCC still clearly represents a common site for mutagenesis, and may therefore be another colorectal tumour suppressor gene.
One intriguing possibility is that the proteins encoded by MCC and APC interact to form a biologically active complex.
Mutation of either gene would then be sufficient to inactivate the complex.
DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) is a candidate tumour suppressor gene located on chromosome 18.
Deletions affecting the DCC locus have been found in 73% of cancers, but only 11% of adenomas.
Parallel studies of expression of the DCC gene confirm that while mRNA transcripts are present in normal colonic mucosa and adenomas, the gene is frequently unexpressed in carcinomas.
Preliminary characterisation suggests that the gene product resembles a cell adhesion molecule and may therefore regulate the interaction of a cell with its environment.
When DCC was first localised to chromosome 18q, it was suggested that it may determine HNPCC (hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer) in the same way that APC determines FAP, since HNPCC shows linkage to chromosome 18 markers.
This has not, however, proved to be the case.
In 1989 Baker et al showed that deletions of the short arm of chromosome 17 were associated with point mutations in the p53 allele on the homologous chromosome.
Since then much evidence has accrued that p53 is a tumour suppressor gene involved in a wide range of human malignancies.
Deletions of chromosome 17p are found in 75% of colorectal cancers and are highly correlated with mutation of the remaining p53 gene.
Nineth five per cent of large bowel cancers showing loss of heterozygosity for 17p alleles also contain a point mutation.
A similar association hasbeen described for adenomas where deletion is much less common.
Many of the mutations in colorectal cancer are of a dominant-negative type — that is, not only do they result in loss of tumour suppressor activity, they also confer the ability to transform NIH/3T3 cells.
This is probably achieved by mutant p53 binding wild type p53 protein and sequestering it in a biological inactive oligomer.
Consequently, unlike other tumour suppressor genes, only one allele need be mutated to produce a phenotypic effect.
Mutation of the gene frequently results in stabilisation of the normally short lived protein.
Immunocytochemistry can then be used as a marker of p53 mutation, although DNA sequencing remains the gold standard.
Using immunohistochemistry, over expression of nuclear p53 protein has been found in 42% to 67% of carcinomas compared with 8% of adenomas and 0% of normal mucosa.
The presence of other chromosomal deletions in colorectal cancer suggests that several more tumour suppressor genes have yet to be identified.
Of particular interest is the frequent loss of alleles from chromosomes 1p, 8q, 13q, and 22q.
Adenoma-carcinoma sequence
Comparison of the frequency with which tumour suppressor and oncogenes are altered in adenomas and carcinomas suggests that there is a preferred order for their occurrence in the adenoma-carcinoma sequence (figure).
For instance, while deletion of DCC on chromosome 18q is present in 75% of cancers, only 11% of adenomas show allelic loss.
A similar trend is seen for p53 gene mutation, whereas mutations of APC, MCC, and c-ras are equally common in premalignant and malignant tumours.
Exceptions to the rule clearly exist, however, and Fearon has emphasised that it is the accumulation and not the order of these changes which is important.
Nevertheless, the differences in prevalence of p53 mutation and 17p and 18q deletions between premalignant adenomas and adenocarcinomas is striking, and cannot easily be dismissed.
It may be that p53 or DCC inactivation have no effect until other constraints on cell behaviour are removed — for example by APC inactivation, and that in their absence alterations to p53/DCC are not selected for.
Alternatively, changes to p53 and DCC may be much more closely related to malignant behaviour than c-ki-ras or c-myc activation.
Changes to other genes may be implicated in metastasis, which depends upon the ability of a tumour cell to invade blood vessels, survive the host immune response, and grow in a foreign microenvironment.
Key determinants of metastatic behaviour include production growth and tumour angiogenesis factors; modulation of cell surface receptors and adhesion molecules; secretion of enzymes such as collagenase and plasminogen activator, and changes in the expression of MHC antigens.
Pignatelli et al have, in particular, highlighted the importance of ECM (extracellular matrix) receptors to tumour behaviour.
In 1988, Steeg et al identified a gene, nm23, whose expression correlates strongly with the ability to metastasise.
Deletion of nm23 may be a critical event in the lymphatic and haematogenous dissemination of carcinomas.
Consideration of the genetic lesions in any one tumour makes it apparent that carcinogenesis is a heterogenous process.
No one oncogene or tumour supporessor gene has yet been implicated in all large bowel cancers.
In a study of some of the commonest abnormalities found in colorectal cancer, Vogelstein found that while over 90% of carcinomas contained two or more alterations, a minority, constituting less than 10% of the total, contained none.
Which genes are involved in the malignant conversion of this unusual subgroup of tumours presently remains a mystery.
In vitro certain combinations of oncogenes cooperate to transform primary rat cells.
One of these combinations is p53 and c-ras, both frequently activated in large bowel cancers.
It might be anticipated that tumour cells possessing a mutant p53 and a mutant K-ras allele would have a growth advantage and be selected for during in vivo tumorigenesis.
This does not seem to be the case, however.
In a series of 100 colorectal cancers analysed for K-ras mutation and p53 over expression, the proportion of tumours showing both abnormalities was only that to be expected by chance.
Adenoma-carcinoma sequence: an in vitro model
Recent work in which an adenoma cell line was exposed to chemical carcinogens has duplicated many of the in vivo genetic findings.
Adenoma cells converted to anchorage independent growth and tumorigenicity by MNNG (N-methy-N-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine), display aneuploidy, allelic loss on chromosome 1p, and deletion of chromosome 18.
The same cells also become less responsive to the growth inhibitory effect of transforming growth factor beta (TGFΒ).
Ulcerative colitis
Several studies have now shown identical genetic lesions in ulcerative colitis associated dysplasias and cancer to those found in sporadic adenomas and carcinomas.
Bell et al described mutations of c-Ki-ras in 24% of ulcerative colitis associated cancers, while Greenwald et al reported ras mutations, p53 gene delitions, and MCC/APC deletions in both carcinomas and premalignant dysplasia.
Clinical implications
What are the implications for clinicians of the wealth of information now available?
The impact of molecular biology will eventually revolutionise our whole way of thinking about cancer and is management, but for the time being three areas are receiving particular attention:
SCREENING
Screening for FAP in affected families presently involves annual endoscopic examination starting from 14 years of age.
This inevitably results in unnecessary inconvenience and distress for those not carrying the gene, not to mention the expense of regular colonoscopies.
Use of microsatellite probes mapping within APC, and eventually gene sequencing, will permit early, possibly even prenatal diagnosis of FAP.
This will save time and money and enable a more economic allocation of clinical resources.
Similar strategies may eventually also allow screening for NHPCC, peutz-jeghers, and juvenile polyposis one the responsible genes have been identified.
Can molecular biology help in the screening of other high risk groups?
Almost certainly, yes!
Detection of genetic alterations in ulcerative colitis associated carcinomas and dysplasia provides a range of potential markers for early diagnosis.
Sidransky et al have recently screened the stools of nine patients with large bowel tumours containing mutant K-ras alleles, and identified mutant DNA in eight faecal samples.
The survey of exfoliated cells in stool samples for mutated DNA or tumour cell products, or both, should theoretically provide an alterative approach to periodic colonscopy which would be more acceptable to both patient and clinician.
At present, however, screening for c-ras mutations on their own is too insensitive to procide any more than an auxiliary technique to colonoscopy, since mutant alleles are found in only 24% of carcinomas, and between 0% and 33% of high grade dysplasia.
Nevertheless, the identification of more common alterations such as p53 mutation or screening for a panel of genetic lesions, or both, may in future make genetic screening of stool samples a viable proposition.
While faecal occult blood testing is likely to prove the most cost effective method of screening large populations, genetic tests could initially be targeted at selected high risk groups.
This would include patients who had undergone previous surgery for large bowel cancer and individuals with a strong family history of colorectal neoplasia, as well as those with chronic ulcerative colitis.
PROGNOSIS
In spite of the vast array of clinical and pathological features which help predict patient outcome, individual tumour behaviour can still not be accurately determined for the most patients who fall into Dukes's stage B and C1, with 77% and 41% 5 year survival respectively.
Radiological investigation of the liver by ultrasound, ulcerative colitis, or magnetic resonance image scanning can help identify individuals with small hepatic metastases while pathological examination of the circumfrential resection margin may predict local recurrence of rectal cancers.
Nevertheless, more subtle prognostic indicators are urgently needed to assess a tumour's capacity for metastatic spread, and to plan adjuvant radio- or chemotherapy.
A special example of this is the small, mobile cancer in the rectum which is amenable to local excision.
Up to 12% of these tumours still confined to the bowel wall have already spread to regional lymph nodes.
A new way of predicting lymphatic metastatis is needed to avoid undertreatment of these patients.
Analysis of oncogenes and tumour suppressor genesmay provide a better guide to tumour behaviour than conventional techniques.
Two large studies have shown genetic lesions, including chromosome 17p, 18q, and 1p deletion, to be prognostic indicators.
In multivariate analysis, chromosome 17p deletion proved to be independent of Dukes's stage or grade.
In vitro, oncogenes cooperate to transform cells and render them tumorigenic.
It is possible that in the future combinations of oncogene and tumour suppressor gene alterations may yield a unique insight to the invasive or metastatic capability of a tumour.
For instance we have recently shown that colorectal cancers that contain c-Ki-ras mutations and over express p53 have a far worse prognosis than those showing either alteration on its own.
Nm23 is one possible example of an antimetastasis gene.
Deletion of the gene in breast cancer is associated with reduced patient survival and increased risk of lymph node metastasis.
Recently Cohn et al found that 73% of 11 large bowel cancer patients whose tumours had lost the nm23 allele developed metastatic liver disease compared with only 20% of the remainder.
Inactivation of nm23 may therefore prove a useful guide to the risk of distant metastasis.
THERAPY
Very much in the future, but potentially the most exciting aspect of cancer biology, is the prospect of gene therapy.
Supplementation of tumour suppressor genes or the use of specific oncoprotein antagonists may inhibit tumour cell growth in vivo in the same way that they do in vitro.
Recent work suggests that correction of any one tumour suppressor gene defect is suficient to inhibit tumorigenicity, even in the presence of several other abnormalities.
This would greatly facilitate the treatment of genetically complex tumours like colorectal cancer.
Obviously, there are still many other problems to be overcome, including the possible effect of targeting genes and proteins which normal cells depend on for their own growth control.
However, the challenge is there to be met and oncogene manipulation may provide the next real step forward in a disease which has proved largely refractory to radio- or chemotherapy, and in which prognosis has changed little over the past 40 years.
Effect of age,Helicobacter pylori infection, and gastritis with atrophy on serum gastrin and gastric acid secretion in healthy men
Abstract
Gastric asic dsecretion has been considered to decline with increasing age but this view is being re-evaluated as the importance of Helicobacter pylori infection emerges.
This study aimed to determine the effect of age,H pylori , and gastritis with atrophy on the serum gastrin concentration, gastric secretory volumes, and acid output in healthy, asymptomatic men.
Young men (mean (SD) age 22.9 (0.6) years; n=22) were compared with old men (72.9 (1.2) years; n=28) in respect of basal serum gastrin and basal, sham fed, pentagastrin stimulated maximal and peak acid secretion studies.
Antral, corpus, and fundal biopsy specimens were taken for histology and H pylori status (histology, culture, and rapid urease test).
H pylori associated gastritis was present in three of 22 young (13.6%) and 16 or 28 old men (57.1%).
Gastritis with atrophy was present in 11 old subjects, 10 of whom were H pylori positive.
These subjects had higher mean (SD) serum gastrin concentrations than old subjects without atrophy and young subjects (61.8 (9.2); 40.0 (2.9); 36.8 (2.3) pmol/l respectively; p).
H pylori infected subjects had higher gastrin values than uninfected subjects, overall (55.3 (5.9); 36.0 (1.8) pmol/l; p) and in subjects without atrophy (45.3 (4.2); 36.0 (1.8) pmol/l; p).
In subjects without H pylori infection, gastrin values did not differ with age (old 37.1 (1.7); young 35.4 (2.1) pmol/l).
The maximal gastric secretory volume was lower in old subjects with atrophy.
Acid output (mmol/h) in subjects with atrophy was lower than in subjects with no atrophy (basal: 3.0 (1.1); 5.1 (0.7); p=NS; sham fed: 5.4 (1.4); 9.3 (0.8); p; maximal: 18.9 (4.0); 31.4 (1.8); p; peak: 25.1 (5.3); 43.4 (2.7); p).
However, acid secretion in old subjects without atrophy was not different to that in young subjects, irrespective of H pylori status.
These results did not differ when acid output was expressed as mmol/h/kg lean body mass or mmol/h/kg fat free body weight.
Using multiple linear regression analysis, gastritis with atrophy was the only factor that had an independent negative effect on acid secretion.
In healthy men without atrophy, gastric acid secretion is preserved with ageing and is independent of H pylori status.
Atrophy, which is closely related to H pylori infection, is associated with a decline in acid secretion.
Increased basal serum gastrin is related to both atrophy and H pylori infection but not to ageing per se.
Declining gastric acid secretion has been considered a consequence of ageing but this view is being reconsidered as the importance of Helicobacter pylori infection to gastroduodenal function is recognised.
Early studies predated recognition of H pylori and did not define the contribution of age per se.
Moreover, much of the work was methodologically flawed by small numbers of subjects, many of whom were hospital patients rather than healthy volunteers.
Proximal migration of the fundic-pyloric junction has been documented with ageing, associated with an increase in the prevalence of chronic gastritis and gastric atrophy.
The relationship between H pylori , age, and gastric acid secretion is important as H pylori infection causes active chronic gastritis which may progress to gastric atrophy.
However, an age dependent reduction in secretory volume and gastric acid concentration in the presence of histologically normal mucosa has also been reported, suggesting that a reduction in acid secretion with age may result from attenuation of secretory pathways or from end organ resistance to physiological stimuli.
H pylori has variable effects on serum gastrin concentrations and gastric acid secretion.
A raised basal and exaggerated meal stimulated gastrin response have been noted in infected duodenal ulcer patients and it has been suggested that hypergastrinaemia is one mechanism whereby H pylori contributes to the ulcer diathesis.
Serum gastrin concentrations may also rise with age, probably because of the increased prevalence of gastric atrophy with consequent loss of acid mediated inhibition of gastrin release.
H pylori may cause transient hypochlorrhydria in acutely infected subjects but normal levels of gastric acidity have been observed in asymptomatic, presumably chronically infected subjects.
The long term sequelae of infection on acid secretion have not been well defined but epidemiological evidence suggests that longstanding H pylori infection may result in a reduction of acid secretion through the development of atrophic changes in the gastric mucosa.
Recent studies have examined separately the influence of H pylori and age on both gastric function and histology but the complex inter-relationship between H pylori infection, gastric morphology, gastric secretory function, and ageing have not been well defined.
In particular, there are no data in subjects greater than 60 years of age.
This study aimed to determine the effect of age on basal serum gastrin concentration, gastric secretory volumes, and acid secretion in healthy, asymptomatic men and to evaluate the role of H pylori infection and gastric atrophy on these parameters.
Methods
Approval for the study was obtained from the Ethical Review Board of Concord Hospital.
All subjects gave informed written consent before the study.
SUBJECT ENROLLMENT
Volunteers were enrolled over a nine month period.
The study was confined to white men.
Young adult subjects were recruited from advertisements placed around the hospital and also by work of mouth.
Young adulthood was defined as between 18 and 30 years of age.
Old subjects were recruited from local senior citizens' social clubs and defined as those greater than 65 years of age.
Before entry to the study, volunteers underwent a thorough medical interview and physical examination.
For inclusion in the study subjects had to be considered healthy and asymptomatic with no major medical illnesses and in particular, no past or present history of gastroduodenal disease or dyspeptic symptoms.
Subjects who had recently taken antibiotics or ulcer medication, including antacids, were excluded.
Seven subjects smoked (six old, one young), but no subject drank alcohol to excess.
STUDY PROTOCOL
Serum gastrin and gastric acid secretion studies
All studies were performed in the morning after an overnight fast.
A venous blood sample was taken for blood typing, parietal cell and intrinsic factor antibodies, and for determination of basal serum gastrin concentration, which was measured by radioimmunoassay.
After this a 16F nasogastric tube was inserted and the overnight secretions were aspirated.
Adequacy of tube placement was determined by obtaining <return of a 50 ml aliquot of instilled water.
The stomach was aspirated for 10 minutes before the start of the study.
Gastric secretions were then aspirated continuously using a suction pump, with suction applied for 50 out of each 60 seconds and secretions collected in 15 minute aliquots.
Secretions were obtained for 60 minutes for estimation of basal acid output.
After this, subjects were sham fed a standard test meal for determination of sham fed acid output, as previously described.
Sham fed acid output was measured for 60 minutes (30 minutes during and 30 minutes after feeding).
After this, pentagastrin (6 µg/kg) was administered subcutaneously and gastric juice was collected for a further 60 minutes for estimation of maximal and peak acid output.
Gastric secretory volume was measured in each phase.
The hydrogen ion concentration was measured by the glass electrode method with an Orion autotitrator.
Acid output was calculated by multiplying the hydrogen ion concentration by the volume of the gastric aspirate.
Gastric acid secretion was expressed as mmol/h, mmol/h/kg lean body mass, and mmol/h/kg fat free body weight according to formulae previously described.
Basal, sham fed, and maximal acid output were defined as the sum of the four 15 minute outputs in each period.
Peak acid output was defined as the two highest consecutive 15 minute outputs after pentagastrin, multiplied by two to express the results as mmol/h.
Endoscopy
On a separate morning, within one week of the acid secretion studies, each subject underwent oesophagogastroduodenoscopy.
Six mucosal biopsy specimens were taken from the antrum and four from both the corpus and fundus of the stomach.
HISTOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT
Biopsy specimens were examined with haematoxylin and eosin and modified Giemsa stains by a single histopathologist who was unaware of the age, acid secretion, or urease test results of each subject.
Gastritis, including the presence and severity of gastric atrophy, was assessed using the Sydney system classification and the presence of H pylori was also recorded.
DETECTION OF H PYLORI
One biopsy specimen from the antrum and another from the corpus were used for rapid urease testing (CLO test, Delta West).
Another of the antral biopsy specimens was Gram stained and cultured.
The remaining specimens were examined histologically.
A subject was considered H pylori positive if the organism was detected by any test from any region of the stomach.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results for each continuous variable are expressed as mean (SEM).
Fisher's exact test was used to determine the differences in proportions of H pylori positive and negative subjects with and without atrophy in old subjects.
Differences between subgroups of subjects for each continuous variable were compared using two tailed Student's t tests and analysis of variance where appropriate.
Pearsons correlation coefficient was calculated to measure the association between continuous variables.
These analyses were done using several variables, including age (young or old), height, weight, lean body mass, fat free body weight, blood type,H pylori status, and presence of atrophy to determine the relationship of each to subgroups of subjects, serum gastrin concentrations, and acid secretion.
Variables that showed any significant differences (p) were entered into a stepwise multiple linear regression analysis.
For basal serum gastrin as the dependent variable, three variables — age,H pylori status, and atrophy — were considered.
For gastric acid secretion, basal serum gastrin was considered in addition to these three variables.
Results
SUBJECTS
There was a mean of 50 years age difference between the 22 young subjects and the 28 old subjects studied.
Young subjects were taller and had greater fat free body weight than old subjects but the two groups did not differ in total body weight or lean body mass (Table I).
H PYLORI AND GASTRIC HISTOLOGY
H pylori infection was present in three of 22 (13.6%) young subjects and 16 of 28 (57.1%) old subjects.
All infected subjects had active chronic gastritis on histological examination.
Gastritis with atrophy was present in 11 old subjects.
Atrophy of mild to moderate severity was present in the antrum, corpus, and fundus in eight of 11 subjects and in the antrum only in the remaining three.
Analysis of acid output including or excluding these three subjects did not significantly alter the results.
Parietal cell and intrinsic factor blocking antibodies were not detected in any subject with atrophy.
The presence of atrophy was strongly associated with H pylori infection: 10 of 11 old subjects with atrophy were H pylori positive whereas only one of 12 who were H pylori negative had atrophy (p).
No young subject had evidence of atrophic changes.
Smokers were distributed randomly among subgroups.
BASAL SERUM GASTRIN CONCENTRATIONS
Mean basal serum gastrin concentrations were significantly higher in old subjects than young subjects overall (48.8 (4.4)v 36.8 (2.3) pmol/l respectively, p).
Subjects with atrophy had significantly higher serum gastrin concentrations than all other subjects and higher than old subjects without atrophy.
In old subjects without atrophy, serum gastrin values were not different to those in young subjects (Fig 1).
H pylori infected subjects (young and old) had higher serum gastrin concentrations on average than uninfected subjects.
This was still the case when subjects with atrophy were excluded from this analysis.
In H pylori negative subjects, however, serum gastrin concentrations did not vary with age (Fig 2).
Using multiple linear regression, atrophy had an independent positive effect on basal serum gastrin concentrations whereas age did not (Table II).
GASTRIC SECRETORY VOLUMES
Mean basal secretory volume was less in old subjects overall (71 (7) ml; p), and in old subjects without atrophy (66 (8) ml; p) than in young subjects (110 (14) ml).
Subjects with atrophy had lower maximal secretory volumes than those without atrophy (188 (26) ml v 261 (15) ml respectively; p), while maximal volumes were not different between old subjects with normal histology and young subjects.
H pylori infection did not seem to affect secretory volumes (data not shown).
GASTRIC ACID SECRETION
Subjects with atrophy had lower mean sham fed, maximal, and peak acid output than all other subjects (Fig 3).
This was also true when only old subjects with and without atrophy were compared: sham fed acid output: 5.4 (1.4); 9.4 (1.2); p; maximal acid output: 18.9 (4.0); 31.8 (3.35); p; peak acid output: 25.1 (5.3); 44.1 (5.0); p.
There was no significant difference in acid secretion between H pylori positive and negative subjects overall (not shown), or between H pylori positive and negative subjects without atrophy (Fig 4).
There was no age related difference in acid secretion in old men without atrophy and young men, irrespective of H pylori status (Table III).
Basal serum gastrin concentratiown was negatively associated with maximal acid output (r=-0.36; p) and peak acid output (r=-0.34; p).
Using multiple linear regression, only the presence of gastritis with atrophy was independently and negatively associated with sham fed, maximal, and peak acid output (Table II).
When acid secretion was expressed corrected for lean body mass and fat free body weight these findings did not differ to those using acid output expressed as mmol/h (Table III).
Discussion
This work shows that gastric acid secretion does not decline as a result of healthy ageing, but rather as a consequence of the development of atrophic changes of the gastric mucosa.
The belief that acid secretion declines with advancing age has been widespread.
Early studies supporting this concept were done using suboptimal techniques on small numbers of subjects, most of whom were hospital inpatients or outpatients with a variety of medical conditions, rather than healthy asymptomatic subjects.
These studies preceded the recognition of H pylori and its role in gastroduodenal disorders, and most did not consider the effect of the histological condition of the gastric mucosa on gastric function.
Furthermore, the findings conflicted in that some studies did not show an age related decline in acid secretion.
More recently, a decrease in pentagastrin stimulated acid output in older subjects was associated with an increasing incidence and severity of atrophic changes to the body mucosa with advancing age.
However, a decline in pentagastrin stimulated gastric acid secretion with age was seen in those subjects with superficial gastritis also.
In another recent study, age was reported to have an independent positive effect on gastric acid secretion while H pylori infection (measured by ELISA) had an independent negative effect.
The mean age difference between old and young subjects in this study, however, was 24 years compared with 50 years in the present study.
Furthermore, the state of the gastric mucosa was not described.
The prevalence of active chronic gastritis and subsequent gastric atrophy increases with age.
It is known that this is almost exclusively the result of the age related increase in the prevalence of H pylori infection.
As virtually all H pylori infected subjects have active chronic gastritis which precedes the development of atrophic changes, it is not possible to assess the direct effect of H pylori infection on acid secretion from that study without knowing which subjects had developed atrophy.
In this study H pylori infection was present in all old subjects with atrophy with one exception.
The exception is not remarkable as H pylori has been reported to disappear from the stomachs of subjects in whom atrophy, with consequent hypochlorrhydria, has supervened as the organism requires acid secreting mucosa to survive.
An age dependent decline in acid output and gastric secretory volume has been reported in old subjects with normal gastric mucosa.
If this were true, it would suggest an attentuation of neural pathways mediating acid secretion or end organ (parietal cell) resistance to stimulation.
We have not found a diminution in gastric acid output in old subjects with histologically normal stomachs under basal or stimulated conditions.
Acid output and secretory volumes were preserved during sham feeding, which is considered to assess cholinergic (vagal) pathways and after gastrinergic stimulation with pentagastrin.
Thus, in health, there does not seem to be either an attenuation of secretory pathways mediating gastric acid secretion or end organ resistance to stimulation.
Lean body mass (expressing acid secretion as mmol/h/kg) is considered to avoid the bias caused by variation in parietal cell mass because of differences in the gastric surface area, as this accounts for differences in height and weight.
A change in body weight with ageing may be partly the result of an increment in fat mass.
The fat free body weight, expressing acid secretion as mmol/h/kg, will take this into account.
In this study, fat free body weight (but not lean body mass) was lower in old subjects, but the comparison of acid secretion between the two groups did not change when the data were analysed corrected for fat free body weight or lean body mass.
Serum gastrin concentrations have been reported to rise with age.
On the basis of the present study, this seems to be caused by two factors.
Gastritis with atrophy and the consequent loss of acid mediated inhibition of gastrin release contributes most to this increase.
Basal serum gastrin, however, was also high in H pylori infected subjects without atrophy, supporting the concept of an independent stimulatory effect of the organism of gastrin release.
The interactions of H pylori with gastrin release and gastric acid secretion are complex and seem to depend, in part, on the duration of infection.
Transient hypochlorrhydria because of H pylori in acutely infected subjects has been noted in studies that included healthy volunteers.
Raised basal gastrin and exaggerated meal stimulated gastrin responses have been described in infected duodenal ulcer patients.
This hypergastrinaemia may account for the increased acid secretion seen in some duodenal ulcer patients and may be one mechanism whereby H pylori contributes to the ulcer diathesis.
Normal levels of 24 hour intragastric acidity have been observed in asymptomatic, presumably chronically infected, subjects, and acid secretion was not raised in H pylori positive subjects in the present study.
Subjects will have been infected for varying lengths of time, which may affect these findings.
The long term sequelae of infection on acid secretion are not well defined but longstanding,H pylori , chronic active gastritis does result in atrophy which in turn results in a reduction in acid secretion.
In summary, the prevalence of both H pylori infection and gastritis with atrophy increase with age but in healthy men without these pathological conditions, gastric acid secretion does not decline with ageing.
Diminished gastric acid secretion is related to the presence of atrophy.
Similarly, basal serum gastrin concentrations do not alter with ageing in healthy men.
Increased basal serum gastrin is related to atrophy and to infection with H pylori .
Effects of Ranitidine and cisapride on acid reflux and oesophageal motility in patients with reflux oesophagitis: a 24 hour ambulatory and pH manometry study
Abstract
The effect of ranitidine and cisparide on acid reflux and oesophageal motility was investigated in 18 patients with endoscopically verified erosive reflux oesophagitis.
Each patient was treated with placebo, ranitidine (150 mg twice daily), and ranitidine (150 mg twice daily) plus cisapride (20 mg twice daily) in a double blind, double dummy, within subject, three way cross over design.
Oesophageal acidity and motility were monitored under ambulatory conditions for 24 hours on the fourth day of treatment, after a wash out period of 10 days during which patients received only antacids for relief of symptoms.
Acid reflux was monitored by a pH electrode located 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter.
Intraoesophageal pressure was simultaneously recorded from four transducers placed 20, 15, 10, and 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter.
Upright reflux was three times higher than supine reflux (median (range) 13.3 (3.7–35.0) % v 3.7 (0–37.6) %of the time with pH, p, n=18).
Compared with placebo, ranitidine decreased total reflux (from 10.0 (3.2–32.6) % to 6.4 (1.2–22.9) %, p), upright reflux (p), supine reflux (p), and postprandial reflux (p), but did not affect oesophageal motility.
The combination of ranitidine with cisapride further diminished the acid reflux found with ranitidine — that is, cisapride led to an additional reduction of total reflux (from 6.4 (1.2- 22.8) % to 3.7 (1.0–12.7) %, p), supine reflux (p), and postprandial reflux (p).
Cisapride also reduced both the number (p) and duration (p) of reflux episodes and significantly increased amplitude, duration, and propagation velocity of oesophageal contractions (p) but did not affect the number of contractions.
The findings show that the 30% reduction of oesophageal acid exposure achieved by a conventional dose of ranitidine (150 mg twice daily) can be improved to more than 60% by combination with cisapride (20 mg twice daily).
The cisapride induced increase in oesophageal contractile force and propagation velocity seems to enhance the clearance of gastrooesophageal reflux.
Combination of a histamine H 2 receptor antagonist with a prokinetic agent may therefore provide an alternative treatment for reflux oesophagitis.
Several factors are responsible for recurrent exposure of the distal oesophagus to gastric contents and the subsequent development of reflux oesophagitis.
Among these factors, a reduced basal tone and frequent episodes of inappropriate relaxation of the lower oesophageal sphincter are regarded as the most important.
Other motor abnormalities of the oesophagus that may contribute to the development of reflux oesophagitis are diminished peristaltic pressure amplitude, shortened duration and slowed propagation of the contraction waves, reduced peristaltic frequency, and delayed oesophageal transit.
The importance of delayed gastric emptying in the pathogenesis of reflux oesophagitis is still controversial.
Inhibition of gastric acid secretion has become the traditional medical treatment for reflux oesophagitis.
The healing rates achieved by a six to eight week treatment of erosive reflux oesophagitis are about 50% for potent histamine H 2 receptor antagonists (for example, ranitidine (150–300 mg twice daily)) and up to 90% for omeprazole, a proton pump inhibitor.
Although these drugs are effective, they do not reduce the reflux of other gastric contents (pepsin, bile) and they do not modify the underlying causes of the disease by restoring lower oesophageal sphincter pressure or improving oesophageal clearance and gastric emptying.
The newest prokinetic agent, cisapride, a cholinomimetic drug, has been shown to improve function of the lower oesophageal sphincter and to improve oesophageal and gastric clearance.
Also, cisapride produces healing rates of up to 50% in erosive oesophagitis that are comparable with histamine H 2 receptor antagonists.
As cisapride and histamine H 2 receptor antagonists exert their effects by affecting different mechanisms, they may have an additive effect and produced higher healing rates than either medication alone.
If this is the case, the combination of cisapride and ranitidine should produce a greater diminution in oesophageal exposure to acid than ranitidine alone.
This hypothesis was tested in patients with confirmed reflux oesophagitis by performing 24 hour ambulatory monitoring of intraoesophageal pH and pressure during treatment with placebo, rantidine, and ranitidine combined with cisapride.
The use of simultaneous 24 hour intraoesophageal pH measurement and four channel manometry, objective and highly reproducible techniques for assessing acid reflux and oesophageal motor function, allowed us to find whether the effect of treatment onoesophageal pH was attributable to changes in oesophageal body motility.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS AND STUDY PROTOCOL
Nineteen patients enrolled into a study protocol approved by the ethics committee of the University of Bern, Switzerland.
Each patient provided written consent after being fully informed about the study and the freedom to withdraw.
The presence of reflux oesophagitis was confirmed by fibre endoscopy and classified according to Savary and Miller — namely, grade I (isolated erosions), grade II (linear confluent erosions), and grade III (circumferential erosions).
Patients with reflux oesophagitis grade IV (oesophageal ulcer, Barrett's oesophagus, stenosis), concomitant gastrointestinal disease (active duodenal or gastric ulcer, pyloric stenosis, malignancy), other serious illness (cardiovascular, pulmonary, metabolic, hepatic, renal), intake of a proton pump inhibitor within the last four weeks, or intake of drugs affecting gastrointestinalmotility were excluded from the study.
The median (range) time interval between endoscopy and entering the study was 10 (1–18) weeks.
For control of reflux symptoms, the patients were allowed to take H 2 receptor antagonists or antacids until 10 days before the start of the study after which they received only antacids.
From the 19 patients with reflux oesophagitis, one subject did not arrive for the second measurement and dropped out.
In two subjects, the first combined pH and manometry recording was incomplete due to technical problems (failure of pressure recording).
These patients were dropped from the study but were allowed to re-enter eight weeks later.
Therefore, complete sets consisting of three combined 24 hour pH and manometry recordings were taken from 18 patients (17 men, one woman, median age 49.5 (range 31–72) years).
From the 18 patients, three had the endoscopic diagnosis of reflux oesophagitis grade I, 12 patients had reflux oesophagitis grade II, and three patients presented with reflux oesophagitis grade III.
No drug related adverse effects were found during and after completion of the study.
STUDY DRUGS
According to a double blind, double dummy, within subject, three way cross over design, patients were allocated to receive treatment with (a) placebo (one placebo tablet matching ranitidine and two placebo tablets matching cisapride twice daily),(b) ranitidine (one tablet ranitidine (150 mg) and two placebo tablets matching cisapride twice daily), and (c) ranitidine plus cisapride (one tablet ranitidine (150 mg) and two tablets cisapride (10 mg) twice daily).
The study drugs (three tablets each time) were ingested at 0915 (before breakfast) and 2200 (bedtime).
Each treatment period lasted four days and the wash out periods before starting and during the study lasted 10 days.
During the wash out period, the patients were allowed to take antacids (Maalox, Rorer GmbH, Bielefeld, Garmany) up to a maximum of two tablets four times a day, whereas during the treatment period, no drugs were taken except the study medication.
Ranitidine (ranitidine hydrochloride, Zantac) and matching ranitidine placebo were provided by Glaxo Group Research, Greenford, United Kingdom.
Cisapride (Prepulsid) and matching cisapride placebo was provided by Janssen Research Foundation, Beerse, Belgium.
The treatment packs were prepared by Glaxo Group Research, Greenford, United Kingdom, in accordance with the randomisation code.
STUDY DAYS
Intraoesophageal pH and motility were investigated on day four of each treatment period.
Patients attended the clinic at 0800 after an overnight fast.
After local anaesthesia, two catheters (one for pH, one for pressure recording) were inserted transnasally and their tips placed 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter (described later).
At 0900, continuous 24 hour recording of intraoesophageal pH and pressure was started.
At 0915, all patients ingested their study medication and received a standard breakfast (bread, butter, marmalade, and coffee, tea, or milk).
At 1200, a standardised lunch was served consisting of lasagna (baked layers of noodles, meat, cheese, and tomato sauce), bread, salad, and cake for dessert.
At 1600, the patients received a snack (tea or coffee with cake), and at 1800, a standard dinner was served (Swiss style muesli, consisting of cereals, milk, yogurt, fresh fruits).
Identical meals were prepared for each study day and they were eaten within 30 minutes of serving.
Free access to water was allowed.
Smoking was permitted but the number and timing of cigaretteswere noted on a diary sheet and had to be similar on all study days.
During the study days, the patients were fully ambulatory and could follow their preferred daily routine except that they had to return to the laboratory for their meals.
After dinner, each patient returned home.
The times of retiring and getting up on the next morning were noted on the diary sheet and marked electronically by pushing the appropriate buttons on the recording unit.
At 0800 on the next morning, the patients returned to the laboratory and shortly after 0900, the probes and recording equipment were removed.
PROBES AND PLACEMENT
A combined glass electrode (Ingold LOT 440-M4, Ingold Messtechnik AG, CH-8902 Urdorf, Switzerland) was used for intraoesophageal pH monitoring.
Beforeand after each recording, the probe was standardised against buffer solutions at pH 1.7 and 7.0.
The drift found after the 24 hour measurement period never exceeded 0.2 pH units.
For intraoesophageal pressure monitoring, a catheter with four piezoresistive pressure transducers (Sentron, 9300 AC Roden, The Netherlands) mounted at the tip, and 5, 10, and 15 cm proximal to the tip of the catheter were used.
The pressure sensors were calibrated before and after each recording with mercury columns of zero and 250 mm.
There was no detectable drift of the pressure sensors after the 24 hour measurement period.
The two catheters were taped together and passed through the nose into the stomach.
Throughout the insertion procedure, pressure and pH were displayed continuously on a computer monitor for identification of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
The tips of both catheters were then placed 5 cm above the manometrically determined lower oesophageal sphincter and the probes taped to the nares, cheek, and neck.
Based on the marks on the catheters, the distance between the tip of the probe and the nares was determined and an identical distance was used in subsequent measurements.
Therefore, the pH recordings were taken from 5 cm above and intraoesophageal pressure monitored at 20, 15, 10, and 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter (four channel manometry).
RECORDING DEVICE
A portable eight channel datalogger (GastroScan II, Medical Instruments Corporation, CH-4502 Solothurn, Switzerland) was used for ambulatory 24 hour recording of intraoesophageal pH and pressure.
The data logger has three buttons to mark events (upright, supine, pain) and a liquid crystal display to check time and recorder function.
The storage capacity of two megabytes random access memory allowed a sampling frequency of 5 Hz for each pressure sensor and 2.5 Hz for the pH probe.
DATA ANALYSIS
For analysis of acid reflux and oesophageal motility, a software program running on IBM compatible computers was used (GastroScan Version 3.0, Medical Instruments, CH-4502 Solothurn, Switzerland).
Comparison of the results obtained by this commercially available program with those obtained by a previously described and validated computer program showed good correlation.
To measure acid reflux, several were used:(1) total reflux time (min), defined as the time with an intraoesophageal pH <;(2) total reflux time (%), defined as the total time with an intraoesophageal pH <expressed as a percentage of the analysed period;(3) reflux episodes >s, defined as the number of episodes with an intraoesophageal pH <lasting longer than 6 s;(4) reflux episodes >min, defined as the number episodes with an intraoesophageal pH <lasting longer than 5 min;(5) mean reflux duration (min), defined as the mean duration of all reflux episodes;(6) maximal reflux duration (min), defined as the longest single reflux episode.
To measure oesophageal body motility, variables measured were:(1) amplitude of contraction (mm Hg), defined as the difference between the baseline pressure and the maximal pressure during the pressure event;(2) duration of contraction (s), defined as the time elapsed between the start and the end of the pressure event;(3) area under the pressure curve (mm Hg×s), calculated from the sum of all pressure values between the start and the end of the pressure event, multiplied by the sampling interval;(4) propagation velocity (cm/s), defined as the speed of a contraction and calculated from the delay time and the distance between the sensors;(5) contractility (mm Hg/s), defined as the maximal increment between consecutive pressure values divided by the sampling interval;(6) total contractions (No/24 h), defined as pressure curves that are not rejected as artifacts;(7) propagated contractions (No/24 h), defined as contractions that are detected by a proximal pressure transducer and followed by a contraction at the distal sensor.
Propagation velocity had to be neither more than 8.3 cm/s nor less than 1 cm/s;(8) non-propagated contractions (No/24 h), defined as contraction waves that are not associated with a proximal contraction wave or have an apparent propagation velocity >cm/s.
Several periods of interest were defined before analysis — namely, 24 h, upright, supine, postprandial breakfast (0945–1145), postprandial lunch (1230–1430), and postprandial dinner (1830–2030).
STATISTICS
The results are shown as median (range).
For statistical comparison, the non-parametric Wilcoxon signed rank test for paired observations was used.
To avoid multiple testing, only the major variables of interest were analysed — that is, for acid reflux: total reflux time, number and duration of reflux episodes; for oesophageal motility: contraction amplitude and duration, area under the curve, propagation velocity, contractility, and number of contractions. p Values <were considered as significant.
Results
OESOPHAGEAL ACID EXPOSURE
With placebo treatment, the pH in the distal oesophagus (sensor position 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter) remained below 4.0 during 10 (3.2–32.6) % (n=18) of the 24 hour recording period (Fig 1).
During treatment with ranitidine, reflux time fell to 6.4 (1.2–22.9) % (pv placebo) with a further reduction to 3.7 (1.0–12.7) % (pv placebo, pv ranitidine) during treatment with ranitidine plus cisapride.
Upright reflux was more than three times greater than supine reflux (p)(Figs 2 (A and B), Table I).
Ranitidine reduced both upright and supine reflux and an additional reduction of supine reflux was produced by the combination with cisapride.
The highest values for oesophageal exposure to acid were found during the postprandial periods (Table II).
Ranitidine diminished the postprandial reflux found after breakfast and lunch but had no effect on postprandial reflux after dinner.
The addition of cisapride ed to a further reduction of postprandial reflux after lunch.
Whereas ranitidine only slightly decreased the number and duration of reflux episodes, the combination of ranitidine plus cisapride reduced the number and maximal duration of reflux episodes during the 24 h, upright, supine, and postprandial periods after breakfast and lunch (Fig 3 (A and B), Tables I and II).
OESOPHAGEAL MOTILITY
Table III shows the various measures of oesophageal contraction, analysed for the entire 24 h recording period.
During placebo, the median amplitude of oesophageal contractions was higher in the proximal than the distal oesophagus (35.0 mm Hg (19–53)v 26.8 mm Hg (13–54), p) in the upright period.
By contrast, the median amplitude of contraction was higher in the distal than in the proximal oesophagus during the supine period (33.3 mm Hg (18–71)v 29 mm Hg (19–56), p).
Compared with the proximal oesophagus, the median duration of oesophageal contractions (p) and the median area under the pressure curve (p) were also higher in the distal oesophagus.
The total number and the number of propagated and non-propagated contractions were two to four times higher during the upright than the supine period (p).
Propagated contractions were more often recorded in the proximal oesophagus (p), whereas non-propagated contractions occurred about twice as often in the distal as in the proximal oesophagus (p).
Ranitidine did not affect oesophageal motility.
Compared with ranitidine, the addition of cisapride led to an increase of contraction amplitude during the upright period (from 28.0 (14–54) mm Hg to 32.5 (13–56) mm Hg, p), and the postprandial periods after breakfast (from 27.0 (14–56) mm Hg to 33.5 (12–72) mm Hg, p) and lunch (from 27.9 (15–44) mm Hg to 35.5 (19–46) mm Hg, p).
During the upright period, cisapride further enhanced the duration of oesophageal contractions (from 3.2 (2.8–4.2) s to 3.6 (3.0–4.4) s, p).
A cisapride induced increase in the area under the pressure curve was found during the 24 h period (Table III) and the postprandial periods after breakfast (from 41.6 (20–82) mm Hg×s to 55.0 (23–144) mm Hg×s, p) and lunch (from 37.5 (21–103) mm Hg×s to 50.5 (23–81) mm Hg×2, p).
These effects of cisapride were confined to the mid and distal oesophagus.
Table III shows that cisapride further increased the orpoagation velocity of oesophageal contractions but had no significant effect on oesophageal contractility (slope of the contraction curve) or on the number of total, propagated, and non-propagatd contractions.
Discussion
This is the first study presenting 24 hour combined pH and four channel manometry of the oesophagus in patients with reflux oesophagitis.
The most important and novel findings are that the combination of the histamine H 2 receptor antagonist ranitidine and the prokinetic agent cisapride greatly reduced oesophageal exposure to acid, and the addition of a standard oral dose of cisapride increased amplitude, duration, and propagation velocity of oesophageal contractions compard with placebo and ranitidine alone.
In our study group of 18 patients who had endoscopically confirmed reflux oesophagitis, we found a total reflux time ranging from 3.2% to 32.6% in the absence of treatment (Fig 1).
Therefore, our patients represent the full range from slight to severe gastroesophageal reflux.
Sixteen of our 18 patients had combined reflux (reflux occurring in upright and supine positions), a pattern that is closely related to the development of oesophagitis.
The highest reflux values were found during the postprandial periods (Table II).
This has been explained by an increased number of transient sphincter relaxations after a meal.
The overall reduction of acid reflux by ranitidine (150 mg twice daily) was about 30% (Fig 1), which is comparable with the decrease found in other 24 hour oesophageal-pH measurement studies.
Although ranitidine reduced both daytime (upright) and nocturnal (supine) reflux, it led to a more pronounced decrease of nocturnal reflux.
During the postprandial periods, reduction of reflux was most pronounced after breakfast, less pronounced after lunch, and no effect was found after dinner (Table II).
These variations reflect the pattern of gastric acid secretion under treatment with ranitidine and are consistent with the studies measuring the effect of ranitidine on 24 hour intragastric acidity in patients with reflux oesophagitis.
Four channel manometry of the oesophagus with sensors located at 20, 15, 10, and 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter permits analysis of contraction characteristics for different parts of the tubular oesophagus.
With placebo treatment, the duration of contraction was higher in the distal oesophagus, a finding that confirms earlier studies in healthy volunteers.
During the upright period, contraction amplitude was higher in the proximal than the distal oesophagus, which contrasts with healthy volunteers and may indicate a reduced contractile force of the distal oesophagus and thus impaired acid clearing in patients with reflux oesophagitis.
The addition of cisapride led to a significant increase of median contraction amplitude and duration, but only in the mid and distal oesophagus.
This may be explained by the selective cholinomimetic action of cisapride on the smooth muscle in the mid and distal oesophagus whereas the striated muscle of the proximal oesophagus has not been affected.
As cisapride increased both contraction amplitude and duration, the significant increase found in the area under the pressure curve could be expected.
Our data extend the knowledge of the effects of cisapride on oesophageal motility.
They confirm the reports from short term stationary manometry studies indicating an increase of contraction amplitude and duration after intravenous injection of cisapride.
By contrast with our study, the available data for oral cisapride do not suggest that cisapride affects characteristics of oesophageal contraction.
These differences might be due to lower doses used insome of the studies, short measurement periods after oral ingestion that might not have been sufficient to reach effective drug concentrations, and the fact that we investigated oesophageal motility on day four of oral drug treatment.
Considering the controversial data on the effects of cisapride on characteristics of oesophageal contraction, the influence of the recording technique is another important point.
In our study, the combination of ranitidine and cisapride led to an increase of propagation velocity as calculated from the propagation of the pressure wave over the four sensors located 20, 15, 10, and 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter (Table III).
When two channel manometry was simulated by analysing only the recordings from two sensors (15 and 5 cm above the lower oesophageal sphincter), the significant increase of propagation velocity induced by cisapride could not be detected.
Four channel rather than two channel manometry should therefore be used for reliable recording of oesphageal motility.
As expected, contraction frequency was considerably higher during the day.
Propagated contractions, which are thought to be predominantly under voluntary control, were detected more often in the proximal oesophagus whereas non-propagated contractions prevailed in the mid and distal esophagus.
It has been suggested that the distal non-propagated contractions are incomplete secondary contractions induced by gastrooesophageal reflux.
The finding that their number is neither affected by ranitidine nor by cisapride treatment does not support this hypothesis.
Although the combination of cisapride and ranitidine significantly increased amplitude, duration, and propagation velocity of oesophageal contractions, the changes in oesophageal motility seem small when compared with the considerable reduction in acid reflux.
Therefore additional effects of cisapride on gastrooesophageal motility such as an improvement of lower oesophageal sphincter function and an acceleration of gastric emptying might contribute to the reduction in acid reflux.
On the other hand, the increase found in the contractile force of the oesophageal body together with an accelerated propagation of the contraction waves may be responsible for the acceleration of acid clearance.
In conclusion, the combination of cisapride with ranitidine leads to a considerable and additional reduction in oesophageal acid exposure compared with that achieved by ranitidine alone.
Combined treatment with a histamine H 2 receptor antagonist such as ranitidine and a prokinetic agent such as cisapride is a promising alternative for medical treatment of reflux oesophagitis and such be further tested in clinical trials.
Isolated primary oesophageal involvement by lymphoma: a rare cause of dysphagia: two case histories and a review of other published data
Abstract
Primary oesophageal involvement by lymphoma in two patients, one with Hodgkin's disease and one with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is reported.
In both, there were no manifestations of the disease outside the oesophagus, which is exceptionally rare.
In the patient with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, the oesophageal tumour was the first manifestation of lymphoma.
Shortly after admission he developed a tracheo-oesophageal fistula from which he died before treatment could be started.
In the patient with Hodgkin's disease, isolated oesophageal lymphoma was the first relapse after a 13 year interval free of disease.
As he had previously received mediastinal irradiation he was treated with combination chemotherapy that resulted in long term survival (>years).
Several other long term survivors have been described but only after radiotherapy or surgery.
These findings suggest that systemic chemotherapy may be equally successful in treating isolated primary oesophageal lymphoma, thus offering an alternative for those patients in whom local treatment is contraindicated.
Lymphomatous involvement of the oesophageal wall is rare.
According to published studies, it is mainly associated with Hodgkin's disease, where it has been reported in up to 6% of cases in postmorten studies; the incidence of oesophageal invasion by non-Hodgkin's lymphoma does not exceed 1.6%.
Since 1935, only 90 cases of oesophageal lymphoma (53 Hodgkin's disease, 37 non-Hodgkin's lymphoma) have been described worldwide.
In most patients, secondary involvement as a result of enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes was either shown or implied.
Primary involvement, however, defined as lymphoma developing in the oesophageal wall itself, seems to be exceptionally rare, especially in its isolated form: we have been able to identify only six cases in which patients presented with oesophageal tumour as the only manifestation of lymphoma (five Hodgkin's disease, one non-Hodgkin's lymphoma).
In this report we present two other patients from The Netherlands Cancer Institute with isolated primary oesophageal involvement by lymphoma.
Their case histories show the diagnostic problems that may be associated with this disease.
Case 1
In September 1976 a 59 year old man was admitted to a local hospital for evaluation of intermittent complaints of retrosternal pain related to the ingestion of food, but sometimes also occurring at night.
Barium swallow showed an irregular mucosal pattern in the midoesophagus.
Endoscopy disclosed abnormal mucosa at 26 cm from the incisors; biopsies showed chronic inflammation.
While being evaluated for dysphagia he developed symptoms of intestinal of intestinal obstruction with severe vomiting, caused by a large tumour in the sigmoid colon.
A negative metastatic survey was followed by resection.
Pathological examination showed a Dukes's C adenocarcinoma.
The patient made an excellent recovery from this operation.
Apart from relief of intestinal obstruction he also experienced relief of dysphagia that supported the hypothesis that oesophagitis had developed secondary to vomiting in the presence of large bowel obstruction.
He enjoyed good health until his initial complaints recurred one year later.
Apart from retrosternal pain and discomfort there were also complaints of fatigue, anorexia, and intermittent fever.
No abnormalities were found on clinical examination.
Blood tests were normal with the exception of a slightly raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Barium swallow showed midoesophageal ulceration (Fig 1).
Again, biopsies showed only chronic inflammation.
Afterwards, oesophagoscopy was repeated twice as he failed to respond to conservative management.
After a third attempt at oesophogoscopy in March 1978 a picture consistent with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma was found.
The patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment.
Endoscopy showed two small tumours at 21 cm from the incisors and a pedunculated polyp at 34 cm.
Biopsies were positive for malignancy at both positions, defined as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (Fig 2), mainly small cleaved according to the Working Formulation (1982), mainly centrocytic with the Kiel classification (1988).
Routine staging procedures showed no manifestations of lymphoma outside the oesophagus, so a diagnosis of stage I extranodal non-Hodgkin's lymphoma was made.
Radiotherapy was considered the best option for treatment but before this could be started, rapidly progressive dysponea developed.
Bronchoscopy showed a narrowed left main bronchus apparently due to tumour compression.
As an emergency measure, chemotherapy was applied (10 mg mitoxine, 2 mg vincristine, and 100 mg prednisolone).
Further problems emerged the next day when a barium swallow (Fig 1).
showed a broncho-oesophageal fistula, which was treated with antibiotics, a nasogastric tube for continuous suction, and a gastrostomy for feeding.
Further radiotherapy was cancelled, as the clinical condition of the patient deteriorated rapidly; he died from septic shock three weeks after admission.
Necropsy disclosed malignant lymphoma in the distal 15 cm of the oesophagus associated with extensive fistula formation, mainly to the left main bronchus.
Microscopy confirmed earlier findings.
No manifestations of lymphoma were found outside the oesophagus.
Case 2
In June 1986, a 34 year old man presented with a three month history of progressive dysphagia and an associated weight loss of 10 kg.
On admission he was unable to swallow anything but liquids and mashed solids.
Thirteen years earlier he had been treated in our hospital for stage IIA nodular sclerosing Hodgkin's disease with pathological lymph nodes in the left superaclavicular region, both axillary regions, and the mediastinum.
He was treated with irradiation: mantle field 40 Gy, submantle region 35 Gy, para-aortic region and spleen 40 Gy.
A complete remission has been achieved; follow up was uneventful until current admission.
Apart from dysphagia there were no complaints of night sweats, fever, or pruritus.
A chest x ray film and physical examination were normal.
Although erythrocyte sedimentation rate and alkaline phosphatase were slightly raised the other relevant laboratory values, including lactate dehydrogenase, were within normal limits.
Barium swallow showed severe stenosis of the distal oesophagus of about 8 cm in length associated with polypoid mucosal lesions.
Computed tomography scanning showed malignant involvement of 12 cm of the oesophagus with infiltration of the aortic arch (Fig 3).
Endoscopy showed a stricture with friable mucosa and ulceration, 7 cm long, at 28 cm from the incisors.
Biopsies showed chronic inflammation but no evidence of malignancy.
This was surprising: in our experience, patients with a history of mediastinal irradiation are at risk for developing a squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus and the clinical picture was highly suggestive of this type of malignancy.
After repeated biopsies, evidence of malignancy was found.
Contrary to our expectations, microscopy showed recurrent Hodgkin's disease.
The mononuclear Hodgkin's cells and binuclear Sternberg Reed cells (Figs 4 and 5) showed the following immune marker pattern: CD 30 (syn BerH2, Ki1) and CD 15 (syn Leu m1) positive; LCA MT1, UCML1, L26, MB1, and MB2 negative.
Staging bone marrow biopsy and CT scanning of the mediastinum showed no extraoesophageal manifestations of lymphoma.
Endoscopic ultrasonography was attempted but the instrument could not be passed through the stenotic area.
Based on these findings, extranodal recurrence of Hodgkin's disease, limited to the oesophageal wall, was considered to be the most likely diagnosis.
Radiotherapy was, at most, only a limited option in view of the dose applied to the mediastinal area in 1973.
We decided to treat the patient with combination chemotherapy (MOPP =mitoxin, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisolone).
In response to the first cycle, dysphagia improved dramatically.
After the second course he was back on a normal diet, gaining weight rapidly.
A repeated Barium swallow showed almost complete disappearance of the tumour; only a slightly narrowed segment with a length of 2 cm remained at the level of the carina (Figs 6 and 7).
Endoscopic ultrasonography, successfully performed on this occasion, showed that this was due to minor local thickening of the oesophageal wall.
The radiological appearance of this area after eight cycles was virtually unchanged; a CT scan was compatible with either asmall tumour remnant or fibrosis.
As originally planned, MOPP was discontinued at this stage; even assuming that tumour was still present, a further reduction of its volume as a result of more than eight cycles was considered unlikely.
Follow up was uneventful; CT scans continued to improve until finally, four years later, the aspect of the oesophageal wall was completely normal.
Now, almost sic years after presentation, this patient is alive and well with no signs of recurrence.
Discussion
Oesophageal involvement by lymphoma is, in most cases, secondary.
Affected mediastinal lymph nodes may either cause narrowing of the lumen due to external compression or the oesophageal wall may be invaded directly when tumours spread beyond their anatomical boundaries.
Primary involvement, defined as lymphoma developing in the oesophageal wall itself, is rare, especially in its isolated form when it is the only focus of the disease.
Including our two patients, only eight cases of isolated primary oesophageal involvement by lymphoma have been published.
Tables I and II summarise their main characteristics.
As shown, recurrence of Hodgkin's disease, 10 or more years after initial treatment for this condition, was diagnosed in most cases.
The nodular sclerosing form was the dominant histological sybtype, although this was not specified in all patients.
Isolated primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the oesophagus seems to be exceptionally rare; in both reported cases, oesophageal lesions were the first manifestation of the disease.
Presenting symptoms were not specific as neither patient initially complained of dysphagia.
An atypical presentation may contribute to a diagnostic delay, although this also occurred in patients with more specific symptoms.
Diagnostic difficulties in those cases were related to confusing radiological and endoscopic appearances or failure to obtain histological confirmation of lymphoma.
A picture at barium swallow typical of malignancy, similar to that described in our case 2 patient, was only reported by Berman et al .
Other authors were confronted with a much more puzzling radiological picture, especially in early stages of the disease: a nodular aspect or irregular narrowing of the oesophagus due to submucosal tumours was mentioned most often and interpreted as either peptic stricture, radiation stricture, or external compression.
Such interpretations seemed justified as all initial biopsies, with one exception, were negative, indicating either no abnormalities or merely chronic inflammation.
Eventually the correct diagnosis was made in seven patients after repeated endoscopic biopsies (case 1 and 2, Hambly and Blundell), open biopsy or examination or surgical specimens.
Negative endoscopic biopsies can, to some extent, be explained by the specific growth pattern of the tumour; primary lymphoma arises in submucosal lymphoid patches, hence not within easy reach of biopsy forceps.
Accessibility may improve when the tumour grows towards the oesophageal lumen, but matters become more complicated when growth is primarily directed in the opposite direction, towards the surface.
Fistula formation — for example to the trachea — may then be the first sign of the true nature of the disease.
Radiological and endoscopic appearances are mainly dependent on the presence of intraluminal lesions.
Submucosal swelling may be localised, circumferential, or nultifocal, resembling benign conditions like fibrotic strictures, leiomyoma, achalasia, or varices.
Polyps or papillomatous lesions may develop as a result of pronounced local proliferation.
Such lesions are by no means unique and similar patterns may be found when other parts of the gastrointestinal tract are affected by lymphoma.
Although difficult, an early diagnosis of primary oesophageal lymphoma seems to be vital as the response to treatment is often good.
Table 2 shows that this is well documented for Hodgkin's disease.
Four of the six patients survived five years; two of these four patients were still alive beyond that period, including our case 2 patient, the only long term survivor treated exclusively with combination chemotherapy.
Of the three patients that died, the cause of death was not mentioned in one case, a second patient died of oesophageal recurrence, the third succumbed to systemic lymphoma five years after irradiation of a single oesophageal manifestation; local treatment had been completely successful, as indicated at necropsy, which failed to reveal any signs of malignancy in the oesophagus.
With the few data presently available, it is difficult to assess whether isolated primary involvement by non-Hodgkin's lymphoma would be equally responsive to treatment; our case 1 patient died of complications before any relevant treatment could be undertaken, whereas follow up in the case reported by Berman et al was too short; only successful local excision of the tumour was reported although ‘radiotherapy and chemotherapy were recommended to the patient’.
long term survivors (six to nine years) after irradiation or chemotherapy have been described in patients in whom primary oesophageal non-Hodgkin's lymphoma was part of more widespread disease.
We have little reason to assume that the response of solitary lesions would be fundamentally different.
Given the rarity of isolated primary oesophageal involvement by lymphoma, one may question its clinical significance.
Nevertheless, it is our opinion that clinicians should be familiar with its clinical picture as much is at stake; the diagnosis is easily missed, which may have far reaching consequences in terms of prognosis.
Dysphagia or, occasionally, more atypical complaints related to the upper gastrointestinal tract developing in young patients with a history of lymphoma warrants suspicion, even in the absence of specific symptoms, enlarged lymph nodes, or a long disease free interval.
Histological proof may be difficult to obtain but should be vigorously pursued.
Lacking sufficient data, specific advice about treatment cannot be given; both local and systemic approaches have resulted in long term survival.
Our findings suggest that MOPP combination chemotherapy may be successfully applied.
It presents a useful alternative for patients in whom a local approach is contraindicated — for example, those with a history of mediastinal irradiation, when more radiotherapy is not an option.
Gastric metaplasia and Helicobacter pylori infection
Abstract
Duodenal and antral mucosal biopsy specimens were obtained from 139 patients with dyspeptic complaints to study the prevalence and extent of gastric metaplasia in the duodenal bulb in relation to Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) infection and duodenal ulcer disease.
On logistic regression, the presence and extent of gastric metaplasia was not significantly associated with H pylori infection.
The prevalence of gastric metaplasia, however, was found to be higher in patients with current or past evidence of duodenal ulcer disease in comparison with subjects with functional dyspepsia (p=0.01).
A follow up study on 22 patients before and at least one year after eradication of H pylori showed that the mean extent of gastric metaplasia did not change significantly after eradication and did not differ when compared wth 21 patients with persisting infection.
It is concluded that the unchanged gastric acid output after eradication of H pylori is a more important factor in the development of gastric metaplasia than the H pylori related inflammatory process.
Gastric metaplasia or the appearance of patches of gastric type mucous cells interspersed between the duodenal epithelial cells, is a common finding in biopsy specimens from patients with duodenitis and duodenal ulcer disease.
It may also be seen in helthy subjects, but usually to a more limited extent.
Gastric metaplasia is considered to be an acquired change of the surface epithelium.
In contrast, gastric heterotopia represents a presumably congenital misplacement of fully developed gastric mucosa, including chief cells and parietal cells.
Heterotopia is less common than gastric metaplasia and not associated with duodenal inflammation or ulceration.
It is assumed that gastric metaplasia arises from the necks of Brunner's glands and is the result of a persistently high concentration of acidity in the duodenal bulb.
As such, it can be seen as an adaptive defence response to adverse conditions.
Experimental and human studies support this hypothesis.
But gastric metaplasia may also develop as a non-specific response to mucosal injury not associated with acid peptic damage.
Wyatt et al found gastric metaplasia to be more extensive in patients with Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ) associated gastritis than in patients without H pylori infection.
As H pylori colonisation is restricted to gastric type epithelium, the presence of gastric metaplasia in the duodenum would allow H pylori to colonise the duodenum and to produce active inflammation.
As a result, the inflamed duodenal mucosa may then become susceptible to acid and this may ultimately lead to ulceration.
Thus both H pylori infection and acid induced gastric metaplasia are considered to be prerequisites for the development of duodenitis with polymorphonuclear activity and duodenal ulcer.
It has previously been shown that the prevalence of gastric metaplasia in H pylori positive duodenal ulcer patients is significantly lower after highly selective vagotomy than in patients with duodenal ulcer before operation.
It has also been found that duodenal ulcer patients on continuous pharmacological acid suppression exhibit a lower prevalence of gastric metaplasia in comparison with intermittently treated patients.
These findings suggest that gastric metaplasia is potentially a reversible disorder.
Eradication of H pylori is accompanied by a rapid disappearance of signs of acute gastritis and a gradual resolution of chronic inflammatory changes.
Furthermore, many studies have shown that the naturally occurring relapse rate of duodenal ulcers is considerably reduced after eradication.
There is also evidence that gastrin release returns to normal after successful treatment of H pylori infection.
It is as yet unknown, however, whether eradication of the organism influences the presence and extent of gastric metaplastic tissue in the duodenal bulb.
This study was designed to investigate the prevalence and distribution of gastric metaplasia in relation to H pylori infection and duodenal ulceration and to examine whether a reduction in the extent and prevalence of gastric metaplasia occurs after eradication of H pylori .
Patients and methods
One hundred and thirty nine adult patients with dyspeptic complaints had upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with multiple biopsies performed at defined sites in the gastric antrum and duodenal bulb.
Oral informed consent was granted for all biopsies.
Antral biopsy specimens were taken from the lesser and greater curvature, approximately 2 cm from the pylorus.
Two specimens were placed in 2 ml of saline for bacteriological examination and two specimens were fixed in 10% neutral formalin for histopathological examination.
To determine the extent of gastric metaplasia, multiple biopsy specimens were collected from standardised sites of the duodenal bulb.
In patients without focal abnormalities, specimens were taken from the roof, the floor, the anterior, and the posterior wall of the bulb.
In patients with an ulcer crater, erosion or scar, two specimens were taken approximately 1 cm from the edge of the lesion and two from the opposite wall or an area clear of any macroscopically recognisable abnormality.
The specimens were fixed in McDowell or Karnovsky's solution.
Follow up endoscopies were performed within one year in a subgroup of 43 patients.
These patients received treatment for H pylori infection and returned for endoscopy to investigate either the result of treatment or for the purpose of this study.
Treatment consisted of combinations of CBS, metronidazole, or amoxicillin, or all three.
The mean extent of gastric metaplasia in all biopsy specimens collected before eradication was compared with the extent of gastric metaplasia at least one year after eradication (group 1).
In patients with persisting H pylori infection (group 2) the mean extent of gastric metaplasia during the first 12 months of follow up was compared with the extent during the second year or later.
HISTOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
All antral biopsy specimens were stained with haematoxylin and eosin to detect the presence and severity of gastric inflammation and to identify H pylori .
Duodenal biopsy specimens were stained with periodic acid Schiff (PAS) for the detection of metaplastic gastric epithelium.
The presence and degree of duodenal inflammation were graded according to Wyatt's classification.
Gastric metaplasia was defined as the occurrence of foci of gastric epithelial cells containing apical PAS positive neutral mucin together with the absence of a brush border.
The extent of gastric metaplasia was estimated independently by two investigators as nil, <, 5–20%, 20- 50%, 50–75%, or >of the epithelial surface of each biopsy specimen.
After grading gastric metaplasia and counting the number of villi in each specimen, the mean extent of gastric metaplasia for all specimens taken at each session was calculated in relation to the number of villi in each specimen.
STATISTICS
Statistical analysis was performed using logistic regression analysis, two tailed χ 2 test, the Wilcoxon signed rank sum test and the Kruskal-Wallis test.
k Statistics were used to determine interobserver agreement.
Results
A total of 927 duodenal biopsy specimens from 139 patients were studied (89 men, 50 women, aged 20 to 79 years, mean age 48.2 years).
H pylori infection was proved by positive cultures or histological identification, or both in antral specimens from 113 patients.
Gastric metaplasia was found in 88 of 113 (78%)H pylori positive and 22 of 26 (85%)H pylori negative patients.
Logistic regression analysis showed no statistically significant differences in the prevalence of gastric metaplasia in different age groups, between sexes, and H pylori state (Table I).
The metaplastic cells usually presented in patches and did stand out clearly because of the presence of abundant PAS positive mucin in their cytoplasm.
In some cases gastric metaplasia was only seen at the tips of (stunted) villi (Fig 1).
In other cases the surface epithelium was more affected (Fig 2).
The average extent of gastric metaplasia was calculated to be 19% in H pylori positive patients and 16.2% in H pylori negative patients.
No relation between the extent of gastric metaplasia and the presence or absence of H pylori could be shown (Mann-Whitney U test, p=0.2)(Fig 3).
Gastric metaplasia was present in 55 of 61 (90%)H pylori positive patients with current or past evidence of duodenal ulceration and 31 of 44 (70%) of patients with functional dyspepsia (χ 2 test, p=0.01).
In 38 patients endoscopy showed focal abnormalities or signs of diffuse inflammation of the duodenal bulb.
Samples taken from the edges of ulcer craters in 15 of these patients or scars in six patients contained more extensive gastric metaplasia (mean extent 19%) in comparison with specimens from the opposite, macroscopically normal looking wall (mean extent 10%).
This difference, however, did not reach statistical significance with the signed rank sum Wilcoxon test (p=0.13).
In 17 patients with an endoscopic picture of diffuse duodenitis the average extent of gastric metaplasia was 15%.
Histological examination of the biopsy specimens from macroscopically abnormal tissue showed a picture of chronic duodenitis in 18 (47%) and active duodenitis in eight (21%) patients.
Only four patients (11%) with endoscopic abnormalities had a normal duodenal histology.
Fourteen patients had a distorted bulb without focal abnormalities.
The other patients (n=87) had a normal endoscopical appearance of the bulb.
Microscopic examination of specimens from the second group of patients showed active duodenitis in nine patients (10%), whereas a mononuclear infiltrate without intraepithelial neutrophils was found in 32 (37%).
Thirty five (40%) of these patients had normal duodenal histology.
Gastric metaplasia seemed to be significantly more extensive in patients with microscopic evidence of chronic or active duodenitis (23%) in comparison with histologically normal mucosa (13%)(p=0.02).
A follow up study of at least 12 months was performed in 43 patients.
In 22 of these patients H pylori was successfully eradicated (group 1) and follow up biopsy specimens were obtained 13–60 months (median 18 months) after eradication.
In the remaining 21 patients H pylori was not eradicated (group 2) and these patients were followed up for 12–54 months (median 24 months).
There were no significant differences with regard to age, sex, and number of patients with a history of duodenal ulcer disease between both groups (Table II).
At the start of follow up, the mean extent of gastric metaplasia was 25% (range 0 to 88%) in group 1 and 12% (range 0 to 63%) in group 2.
This difference, however, did not reach statistical significance (Mann-Whitney test, p=0.08).
During the period of follow up, no significant decrease of the median extent of gastric metaplasia occurred in both groups (Wilcoxon rank sum test for paired data, p=0.08 for group 1 and pfor group 2).
Comparison of the changes in gastric metaplasia of group 1 with group 2 showed no significant difference between both groups (Mann-Whitney U test, p=0.3)(Fig 4).
Eight patients of group 1 and seven patients of group 2 were followed up for a period of >years (mean follow up 47 (range 37–60) months for both groups).
Again, the Mann-Whitney U test showed no significant change in the mean extent of gastric metaplasia in both groups (p=0.31 for both groups).
The mean extent of gastric metaplasia in 39 patients who were treated continuously (>year) with H 2 receptor antagonists was 19% (range 0–88%) and 15% (range 0–88%) in 53 patients who did not take these drugs.
In 38 patients who were treated intermittently (<months/year) with these drugs the mean extent was 21% (range 0–72%).
The Kruskal-Wallis test did not show a significant correlation between the extent of gastric metaplasia and the use of H 2 receptor antagonists.
In sic patients, however, who were receiving omeprazole treatment the extent of gastric metaplasia was significantly lower than in patients using no acid reducing drugs or H 2 receptor antagonist (mean 1%, range 0–7%)(p=0.035).
A limited extent of gastric metaplasia (of 1% in two and 16% in one patient respectively) was also found in three patients who had had highly selective vagotomy in the past.
During follow up 13 patients in group 2 continued anti-secretory treatment.
In these patients the extent of gastric metaplasia hardly changed (from 9 to 8%).
INTEROBSERVER AGREEMENT
The two investigators agreed over the presence or absence of gastric metaplasia in 92% of all biopsy specimens (k value=0.83).
In 79% of the biopsy specimens there was concurrence over the grading of the extent of gastric metaplasia.
Only in two cases was a difference of more than one grade in the extent of gastric metaplasia found.
This gave a k value of 0.72, which shows a very high level of agreement over the six categories.
Discussion
Duodenal ulcer disease has traditionally been associated with excess secretion of gastric acid.
The correlation, however, is incomplete implying the existence of other pathogenic factors.
It is now widely accepted that H pylori is one of the most important factors in the pathogenesis of duodenal ulcer disease.
Only a minority of patients infected with H pylori will eventually develop a duodenal ulcer.
According to previous studies, gastric metaplasia is an almost constant finding in patients with duodenal ulceration.
It is considered to be an acquired condition, as it seems to be comparatively rare in children without a history of duodenal ulceration.
An important problem in the detection of gastric metaplasia is its patchy distribution.
Wyatt et al calculated that a single anterior biopsy detected only 63% of patients with gastric metaplasia proved by multipoe biopsy.
This may partly explain the lower prevalence rate found in several previous studies in comparison with our results.
In addition, underestimation of gastric metaplasia may occur if biopsy specimens have been collected from the distal bulb.
Overestimation is possible in studies where bopsy specimens from the pyloroduodenal transition zone have been included.
To limit sampling error, we took multiple biopsy specimens at standardised sites.
Other factors may also have contributed to the large variability in prevalence rate of gastric metaplasia as mentioned in published works.
These include differences in the prevalence of duodenal ulcer disease, consumption of alcohol, and the use of anti-secretory drugs in different populations.
In this study, the extent of gastric metaplasia was estimated independently by two investigators to limit interobserver variability.
We found good agreement between the two different investigators.
In agreement with previous studies, we found that gastric metaplasia was significantly more prevalent in patients with duodenal ulcer disease than in patients with functional dyspepsia (Table III).
In contrast with some of these studies, we also found a comparatively high prevalence of gastric metaplasia in the second group of patients.
This discrepancy may be explained by a more sensitive method of collecting biopsy specimens and is in agreement with the results of Kreuning et al who also investigated multiple biopsy specimens from the proximal duodenum.
Marshall et al detected gastric metaplasia at the margin of ulcers in 92% v 63% elsewhere in the bulb.
In accordance with Wyatt et al we found a significant association between the extent of gastric metaplasia and microscopic signs of duodenitis.
We could not show a significant difference between the extent of gastric metaplasia at sites around ulcer craters or scars and macroscopically normal appearing mucosa.
Sampling error because of an insufficient number of biopsy specimens may have been responsible for the fact that this difference did not reach significance.
It has been suggested that gastric metaplasia develops as a result of high intragastric acidity or rapid gastric emptying, or both.
This, in association with H pylori infection, allows H pylori to colonise the duodenum.
Duodenitis follows and this inflammation inpairs mucosal defences, ultimately leading to ulceration.
That gastric metaplasia develops in response to acid hypersecretion has been found both experimentally and in human studies.
Additional support for an acid induced mechanism comes from the finding that gastric metaplasia is quite extensive in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
In contrast with one previous report, we found no evidence that the chronic use of H 2 receptor antagonists influenced the extent of gastric metaplasia.
In a limited number of patients, however, who were treated continuously with omeprazole, we found an appreciably reduced extent of gastric metaplasia.
Gastric metaplasia is probably a non-specific response to injury.
Heavy alcohol consumption may also cause gastric metaplasia in humans and a similar phenomenon may occur in Crohn's disease anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract.
It has recently been suggested that chronic inflammation in patients with Crohn's disease as well as peptic ulceration induces buds at the bottom of gastrointestinal crypts in the mucosa adjacent to ulcers.
These buds are composed of columnar cells.
They produce neutral mucin and develop into a new small gland.
Further studies indicate that these cells are derived of a novel cell lineage.
If this theory is correct, the term ‘metaplasia’ is a misnomer: metaplasia implies a change from one differentiated cell type to another and not the induction of a novel cell lineage.
After eradication of H pylori , duodenal ulcers do not usually recur and the associated chronic gastritis gradually disappears.
Several investigators have discovered ablation of the exaggerated gastrin release after eradication of H pylori .
Gastric acid output, however, is not changed by treatment of the infection.
The question has been raised whether these changes result in restoration of the duodenal mucosa and disappearance of gastric epithelium from the duodenal bulb.
Although the extent of gastric metaplasia decreased during follow up of group 1, this difference did not reach statistical significance (p=0.08).
Even among subjects examined at least three years after successful treatment of H pylori infection, the extent of gastric metaplasia did not change significantly.
In our opinion, a more appropriate comparison concerns the changes seen during follow up in group 1 v the changes in group 2.
As stated before, these changes were statistically indistinguishable between the groups (p=0.3).
We do realise that the large variability when estimating the extent of gastric metaplasia is one of the important limitations of any endoscopic study.
It may well be that because of this large variation and the comparatively small numbers of patients in this study a possible correlation between the presence of H pylori and the development of gastric metaplasia could not be shown.
The lack of regression of gastric metaplasia in the bulb, however, is biologically compatible with the current data on the evolution of acid secretion after eradication of H pylori .
Almost all studies show that acid secretion remains at the same rate.
This would show that acid secretion is of superior importance compated with H pylori .
So far, no prospective study has been performed to investigate the natural history of gastric metaplasia.
ONly in one report was it suggested that ‘fundic gland metaplasia’ was a transient lesion, which tended to disappear spontaneously within a few months.
This paper, however, describes heterotopia and, although the number of biopsy specimens taken at endoscopy are not mentioned, the transient character of heterotopia may be a result of sampling error.
This study suggests that both acid induced injury and H pylori infection may play a part in the pathogenesis of duodenal ulcer disease.
Both factors may be part of a complex cascade of events that ultimately leads to the development of duodenal ulceration.
Gastric metaplasia and H pylori infection are prerequisites, but evidence exists that mucosal production of cytokines,H pylori specific toxins and other, still unknown factors may all play a part in possible ulcer formation in the duodenum.
As the acid secretory capacity does not change after H pylori eradication, it would seem that the former is the more important determinant factor in the development of gastric metaplasia and the H pylori related inflammatory process is of less importance.
Proliferation cell nuclear antigen (clone 19A2) correlates with 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine labelling in human colonic epithelium
Abstract
Measurements of cell proliferation can be used as biomarkers of preneoplastic change.
In this study, two immunocytochemical methods that measure different components of the cell cycle were compared to assess cell proliferation on biopsy samples from human colonic mucosa.
These methods are based on a monoclonal antibody against 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU), which is confined to S phase cells, and a more broad assessment of proliferation based on an antibody against proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA, clone 19A2).
In the PCNA assay, only strongly immunostained nuclei were included.
The proliferation index was assessed in colonic mucosa from patients with no colonic disorders.
Correlation between individual total proliferation indices determined by either method was significant with r s =0.6 (p).
The mean proliferation index in the study group was 7.79% using BrdU and 7.64% using PCNA immunocytochemistry.
Distribution of labelled cells within crypts was similar with respect to the two methods with a peak at the 18th and the 24th percentile in the case of BrdU and at the 23rd percentile for PCNA.
Variance component analysis showed that at least two biopsy specimens should be evaluated per subject to allow a precise individual characterisation.
It is concluded that PCNA (19A2) immunocytochemistry may be used as an operational marker of cell proliferation in normal colonic mucosa.
A significant correlation and an agreement in the mean proliferation index between PCNA (19A2) and BrdU can only be achieved by a strictly standardised enumeration of labelled cells limited to strongly stained nuclei in the PCNA evaluation.
Biological markers are becoming increasingly important for early detection of an increased cancer risk and as intermediate end points for chemoprevention trials.
Many studies have shown the importance of cell kinetic parameters in the progression of colorectal cancer.
Methods that detect the incorporation of a DNA precursor such as[3 H]-thymidine labelling or immunocytochemical detection of 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) are direct and confine measurements of DNA synthesis in active S phase proliferating cells.
They are labour intensive, however, and complex to perform on a large scale, for example, in clinical regimens.
Proliferation markers based on the immunocytochemical finding of endogenous antigens such as Ki67 or proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) generally express a wider range of the cell cycle, but their application in clinical practice is considerably less complex.
The simplicity is particularly true for PCNA, because the antibody can be applied in paraffin wax embedded tissue.
PCNA is a cell cycle related protein, which is expressed increasingly through G1 phase, reaching its maximum in early S phase, and persisting with decreasing detectability in G2 phase.
Bravo and MacDonald-Bravo described a soluble form of PCNA, which is lost on fixation in organic solvents and does not participate DNA replication, and an insoluble form, which is associated with the sites of ongoing DNA synthesis and is expressed particularly during S phase and is detectable by immunofluorescence.
Bravo and MacDonald-Bravo report that the soluble form is not detected by immunofluorescence if methanol is used for fixation.
Moreover, various PCNA antibodies define different epitopes of PCNA and fixation conditions may affect epitope location within cells.
Therefore, PCNA may serve as a useful marker for proliferation if the conditions of fixation are held constant and the same antibody is used throughout the experiment.
Use of a monoclonal antibody to PCNA in investigative studies requires standardisation of the method in relation to established methods for measuring cell proliferation.
Comparative studies have shown that PCNA provides a strong correlation with [3 H]-thymidine labelling and flow cytometric assessment of S phase fraction in rat colon and with autoradiographic labelling in human tissue.
The determination of proliferation indices in colonic epithelium by BrdU incorporation in colonic biopsies and subsequent immunocytochemical detection has been found to be equivalent to the standard autoradiographic method by our group (unpublished data).
In this study, we describe use of a monoclonal antibody (19A2) against PCNA on methanol fixed, paraffin was embedded human colonic biopsy specimens using a routine biotin streptavidin immunocytochemical system.
Measures of proliferative activity were compared with results obtained by BrdU incorporation and subsequent ABC immunocytochemistry in the same group of patients.
We decided to use the term ‘proliferation index’ to describe the results of the PCNA assay because the antibody to PCNA does not label only S phase cells; we use the same term for the results of the BrdU assay, although the term ‘labelling index’is frequently used by other groups.
The aim of this study was to evaluate how the proliferation index obtained by PCNA (19A2) correlates with that determined by conventional BrdU immunocytochemistry.
Subjects and methods
SUBJECTS
The study group consisted of 17 subjects (10 women, 7 men) with a mean age of 47 years (range, 19–75).
All subjects had a normal diet and were free of inflammatory bowel disease and of benign and malignant tumours at the time of complete colonoscopy.
Personal and family anamnesses for colorectal cancer (first degree relatives) were negative in all patients.
Histological evaluation showed normal mucosa.
Bowel preparation was performed by oral administration of two litres of a PEG electrolyte solution.
This preparation has been shown not to affect epithelial cell proliferation.
The study was approved by the ethical committee of the University of Heidelberg.
A minimum of four biopsy samples were obtained from each patient from macroscopically normal mucosa at the rectosigmoidal junction (about 20 cm from the anal verge), using standard forceps.
The samples were distributed equally to the BrdU and PCNA protocols.
BRDU PROTOCOL
The biopsy specimens were immersed immediately in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (Serva, Heidelberg), prewarmed to 37°C, with the mucosal side upwards and placed on a filter paper under a dissecting microscope.
Incubation was conducted in small Petri dishes containing 10 ml of Eagle's medium containing 10% fetal calf serum and 160 µM BrdU (Amersham, Braundschweig, Germany) for two hours at 37°C.
The biopsy specimens were then washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and fixed overnight (at least 18 hours) in absolute methanol at 4°C.
After dehydration and removal of the filter paper, the flat, fixed biopsy specimens were oriented in a vertical position in one paraffin block.
Specimens were embedded in paraplast with a melting temperature of 54–56°C (Klinipath, Zevenaar, Netherlands).
Between 80 and 100 serial sections (3 µm thick) were cut on a rotary microtome and mounted on glass slides.
Because the lumen of the same crypt is visible within a maximal range of 50 µm, every 15th section was stained and counted to ensure that the same crypt was not counted twice.
The slides were dried overnight at 37°C for better adherence of the sections.
Sections were dewaxed in xylene and rehydrated through graded ethanol to 0.01 M PBS, pH 7.4.
Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in 0.1% sodium azide for 30 minutes at room temperature.
After rinsing in PBS, acid hydrolysis was performed by incubating the sections in 2 N HCl for 30 minutes at room temperature followed by washing in two successive baths (three minutes each) of 0.1 M borax (Na 2 B 4 O 7 ) at pH 8.5 to neutralise the acid.
After being washed in PBS (twice for five minutes), the slides were incubated overnight with mouse monoclonal antibody against BrdU (Amersham, Braundschweig, Germany) at 4°C in a humid chamber.
The sections were then incubated with biotinylated anti-mouse immunoglobulins from sheep (1:50 for 30 minutes; Amersham), followed by incubation with streptavidin biotinylated peroxidase complex (1:100 for 30 minutes; Amersham).
Biotinylated anti-mouse immunoglobulins and streptavidin biotinylated peroxidase complex were diluted in PBS containing 1% human IgG.
After each step, the sections were rinsed in PBS (3×5 minutes).
The reaction product was visualised using a substrate solution containing 0.05% 3,3-diaminobenzidinetetrahydrochloride (DAB)(Serva, Heidelberg, Germany), 0.01% hydrogen peroxide, 0.01% nickel chloride, and 0.01% cobalt chloride in TRIS buffered saline (pH 7.6) with a usual reaction time of 10 minutes under microscopic examination.
After being washed in distilled water, the slides were counterstained with 0.1% nuclear fast red in 5% aluminium sulphate for five minutes, dehydrated, and mounted using a synthetic mounting medium (Vitro-Club, Langenbrink, Emmendingen, Germany).
PCNA PROTOCOL
For the PCNA immunoreaction, biopsy specimens were washed in PBS, flattened on a filter paper for better orientation after fixation, and fixed overnight in absolute methanol at 4°C.
Before establishing the final protocol, various tissue fixation methods were compared to investigate their influence on staining intensity for both the PCNA and the BrdU protocol.
As an alternative to absolute methanol, biopsy samples were subdivided and fixed for 18–24 hours in 10% buffered formalin, 70% ethanol, 70% methanol, and a commercially available alcoholic fixative called ‘Primafix’.
Subsequent tissue handling was the same as that in the BrdU protocol.
In the immunocytochemical staining procedure, sections are digested gently by incubation in 0.02% Saponin for 30 minutes at room temperature (Wargovich, personal communication).
This step replaces DNA denaturation by acid hydrolysis with subsequent neutralisation in the BrdU protocol.
After the sections had been washed in PBS, a mouse monoclonal antibody against PCNA (IgM isotype, clone 19A2; Camon, Wiesbaden, Germany) was applied and incubated overnight at 4°C in a humid chamber.
Biotinylated anti-mouse immunoglobulins, streptavidin biotinylated peroxidase complex, DAB reaction, and the final counterstaining were conducted as described for the BrdU protocol.
DETERMINATION OF PROLIFERATION INDEX
All sections were examined by one observer (RN) who had no knowledge of the clinical features or the histological diagnosis (magnification ×1000).
At least 15 crypts were evaluated per subject and per method in sections from one or two, and rarely three different biopsy.
A crypt was analysed if the entire length of the crypt was visible in the longitudinal section and the base of the crypt contacted the muscularis mucosa.
In each crypt column — that is the single column of epithelial cells lining one side of a sectioned crypt meeting the criteria — the total number of cells and the number of labelled cells and their position in the crypt column relative to the base of the crypt were noted.
In the BrdU assay, a cell was considered positive if there was any nuclear staining present.
For the PCNA assay faint staining was seen frequently, probably reflecting the relatively long half life of immunoreactive PCNA and the fact that PCNA is expressed in phases of the cell cycle other than S phase.
For comparison with BrdU, therefore, only the strongly stained nuclei, which are assumed to be in S phase, were counted.
The total number of cells, the number of labelled cells, and the proliferation index, which is the ratio of labelled cells to the total number of cells, were determined for each crypt column.
The proliferation index was also calculated separately for each of five compartments of equal size into which each crypt column was divided.
The same procedure was repeated for percentiles of the crypt column, and a running mean over five percentiles was calculated to smooth the distribution.
To estimate intraobserver variation, four randomly selected cases were counted on two separate occasions by the same observer.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Non-parametric statistical methods were used whenever possible, because neither the basic data nor the log transformed data were normally distributed.
Correlation coefficients were calculated as Spearman rank correlations and comparison between the two methods by the sign test.
Variance component analysis was used to estimate the number of crypts and the number of biopsy samples that must be evaluated for each method to classify an individual correctly.
A nested variance component model with random effects was calculated with the patient as unit and crypt and biopsy specimens as classification variable.
The coeficient of variation (SD (100%) /mean) was calculated from this variance component model for each variable of the model.
The variance within a patient was calculated by:
Results
PROLIFERATION INDEX
About 37000 colonic epithelial cells were evaluated per method and more than 15 crypts were evaluated per subject.
When scoring only the strongly reactive nuclei in the PCNA assay, which were assumed to represent the S phase cells, the individual proliferation indices between the two methods showed a Spearman correlation coefficient of r s =0.6 (p=0.011)(Fig 1).
The regression equation was estimated as PCNA=0.0459+0.3912 BrdU (p=0.015).
The mean proliferation index in the study group obtained by the BrdU technique (7.79%) was virtually equivalent to that obtained by the PCNA technique (7.64%)(p=0.8).
Inclusion of the minor reactivity in the PCNA assay gave a mean proliferation index of 9.1% and the correlation failed to be significant.
A statistically significant difference between the two methods was found in the total number of cells per crypt column, the crypts appearing longer in the PCNA assay (Table I).
The mean proliferation indices within compartments were nearly identical for both assays.
Slightly higher proliferation indices were found for the 4th and 5th compartments with the BrdU than with the PCNA technique.
Figure 2 shows the percentile proliferation indices obtained with the two methods.
The proliferation index peaked at the 23rd percentile with the PCNA method.
BrdU showed two peaks at the 18th and the 24th percentile.
The proliferation index was slightly lower with BrdU than with PCNA between the 20th and 42nd percentiles and higher between the 60th and the 80th percentile.
INTRAOBSERVER VARIATION
Re-evaluation of four randomly selected subjects showed a 94.9% agreement on proliferation index in the case of BrdU and a 90.3% agreement in the case of PCNA.
The percentage value of agreement on the total number of cells per crypt column, was 99.1% for BrdU and 97.3% for PCNA.
INDIVIDUAL VARIATION
Variance component analysis was used to calculate the contribution of the variations within subjects, biopsy samples, and crypts to the total variation of the proliferation index per method.
The variance within subjects and within biopsy samples was found to be higher for the BrdU method than the PCNA method, but the variance within crypts was equal (Table II).
Variance component analysis was also used to calculate the required number of crypts (equation [1]resolved for n) to estimate the proliferation index for a subject within a 95% confidence interval with one, two, or three biopsy samples separately for each method (Table III).
The gain in precision by taking two biopsy samples compared with one is striking for both methods; this effect is because of variation between biopsy specimens within subjects.
The difference between the two methods is most obvious, when the precision of the point estimate is allowed to include a 95% (SD) confidence interval of (2.5) %.
such a precision cannot be achieved by using one biopsy sample with the BrdU method, whereas PCNA can provide a point estimate within (2.5) % by using one biopsy sample with 30 evaluated crypts.
Estimation of a sybject's proliferation index with the same precision using two biopsy samples requires 10 crypts in total for PCNA and 14 for BrdU.
Evaluating more than two biopsy samples leads to an alignment in the number of crypts required to achieve a certain precision.
METHODS
Differences in time and type of fixation affect the intracellular staining pattern — that is, the strength of the staining and therefore the number of labelled cells.
Various fixatives were tested (Table IV).
The best results were obtained using both methods with absolute methanol fixation at +4°C for 18–24 hours.
Staining intensity in the PCNA assay also depended on the length of fixation, before we introduced the Saponin digestion step before application of the PCNA antibody.
Staining was optimal after 18–24 hours of fixation, but less intense after more than 48 hours of fixation.
This effect was no longer seen when the DNA denaturation step in the PCNA protocol was replaced by the Saponin digestion step.
Saponin pretreatment also resulted in an augmentation of PCNA staining and a decrease in background staining.
Discussion
In this study on biopsy samples from colonic mucosa of patients with no colonic disorders, the comparison between two methods of assessing cell proliferation showed a significant correlation (r s =0.6, p).
Mean proliferation index (7.79, 7.64 respectively) as well as its distribution within crypts was similar with the two methods in the study group.
The BrdU index obtained in this material was higher than that reported by Risio et al , and lower than that reported in other studies.
Different laboratory practices do not permit direct comparison of values; for example, Wilson et al used hyperbaric gas phase during incubation but a lower BrdU concentration in the medium, Risio et al did not add fluorodeoxyuridine to the medium to enhance BrdU uptake.
Our results agree in the distribution of proliferation indices by compartments, in that mostly the highest proliferative activity was found in the second compartment when five compartments were calculated.
In this comparative study PCNA data resembled BrdU data when scoring was restricted to the more strongly reactive PCNA nuclei.
Inclusion of all reactive nuclei gave PCNA values, which were on average about 20% higher than BrdU labelling.
This variability in strength of nuclear reactivity has also been briefly reported by Battersby et al .
On the ther hand, Galand et al showed in their comparison with [3 H]-thymidine labelling that 19A2 resulted in S phase cells becoming stained, when methanol fixation was used.
But, they did not report a great variability in theintensity of nuclear staining.
The variance component analysis shows that the variation between biopsy specimens of one subject is larger for the BrdU method compared with the PCNA method.
Basically, the intraindividual variability can be caused either by real variability from site to site within the circle of the rectosigmoidal junction or by variability in the sample preparation.
The higher variability between biopsy samples in the BrdU method is likely to be because of the second reason — that is, this method is more affected by the conditions of incubation and subsequent processing.
Therefore, in terms of precision for a given combination of crypts and biopsy specimens from a subject, the PCNA method seems preferable.
Because of the variability between biopsy samples, the gain in precision of defining a subject's proliferation index by taking two biopsy samples compared with one is remarkable for both methods.
This finding implies that not only is the total number of evaluated crypts a crucial criterion for a precise estimation of a proliferation index, but also the number of biopsy samples per subject being used for the evaluation.
It seems worthwhile to include at least two biopsy samples in the evaluation, for the additional gain in precision s the highest when increasing the number of biopsy samples from one to two samples.
Type of fixation may influence the accessibility of the PCNA protein to antibody detection although results from other studies do not support this conclusion.
The use of absolute methanol in the PCNA protocol for fixation of the tissue yielded the most consistent staining results in our study.
This finding is in line with the hypothesis that with this fixation the insoluble form of PCNA, which is associated with the DNA replication sites, can be detected.
Galand et al also found that PCNA shows best agreement with [3 H]-thymidine labelling when using methanol fixation.
Our finding concerning dependency of staining intensity on duration of fixation has also been made by Battersby et al .
The introduction of Saponin in the PCNA protocol before the application of the PCNA antibody was helpful in that PCNA could be identified even after more than two weeks of fixation.
This step prolonged the localisation of PCNA immunoreactivity in time, which is especially useful in multicentre studies, where biopsy specimens have to be sent from several endoscopy units to a central laboratory.
The higher total number of cells per crypt column in the PCNA assay compared with the BrdU assay was suspected to be as a result of an observer effect during the counting process.
The slightly stronger staining of labelled cells in the case of BrdU compared with PCNA may facilitate the identification of labelled nuclei.
The faster counting could then lead to fewer actually seen nuclei in the BrdU assay compared with PCNA.
Re-examination of four randomly selected patients for both methods showed a high agreement on the average total number of cells for each subject.
Thus, the observer effect is not a plausible explanation of the phenomenon.
A difference because of the handling of the specimens can also be excluded, because speciments for both BrdU and PCNA assay were equally flattened on a filter paper before fixation.
An increased cell loss during incubation with BrdU as another possible explanation is not supported by published works.
The significant difference in the number of cells per crypt column needs further investigation with regard to its cause and its possible confusing effects on the analysis of labelled cell distribution.
It is concluded that assuring nuclear non-S phase staining is faint comparative to staining of replicating cells, PCNA antibodies may be reliable markers to detect in situ cells with S phase contents.
To detect S phase cells by means of PCNA assay, scoring procedures have to be strictly standardised to consistently score only strongly stained nuclei, which may be achieved best by using image analysis.
If these conditions are not met, we assume that it might be more reliable to regard PCNA as a marker with its own evidence to characterise proliferative activity by scoring all PCNA reactive nuclei as positive regardless of staining intensity.
Phlegmonous gastritis: an unusual presenting symptom of Sjögren's syndrome
Abstract
This case report describes the histological and macroscopic changes seen within a few months in the gastric mucosa of a 28 year old woman patient with upper abdominal symptoms.
With hindsight these changes were the first signs of Sjögren's syndrome.
The Sjögren syndrome is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune disorder usually affecting middle aged women.
The syndrome is either primary or secondary.
The secondary type is associated with other autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus erthematodes.
The damage to the exocrine glands is as a result of infiltration and destruction of the gland tissue by lymphocytes.
This is shown clinically by the decrease or total loss of secretion of the affected glands.
Many organs can be affected in the disease.
Lymphocytic infiltration can occur in all exocrine glands, including those of the gastrointestinal mucosa.
We describe a patient with Sjögren's syndrome and an uncommon gastric mucosal lesion shown to be a phlegmonous gastritis.
This phlegmonous gastritis evolved later into a chronic atrophic gastritis, which has frequently been reported as a symptom of Sjögren's syndrome.
Case history
A 28 year old Turkish woman was admitted to our ward complaining of severe upper abdominal pain.
She also reported anorexia and nausea without vomiting.
One year earlier she had been seen in our hospital for joint pain and skin lesions on the lower legs which resembled erythema nodosum.
At that time a diagnosis of sarcoidosis was considered but could not be proved.
No specific treatment was given and her symptoms subsided spontaneously.
Before this admission she had taken no drugs.
Physical examination showed no abnormalities.
Laboratory results showed an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 44 mm in the first hour, a raised C reactive protein value of 49 mg/l.
The angiotensin converting enzyme activity in serum was normal.
A gastroscopy showed a severely swollen, red mucosa on which a large number of small white fibrin dots were seen, the macroscopic aspect resembling ‘raw minced meat’(Fig 1).
The lesions extended into the duodenum beyond the papilla of Vater.
Extensive and deep biopsy specimens were taken, the gastric mucosa felt infiltrated at biopsy.
The endoscopical differential diagnosis comprised lymphoreticular malignancy, such as α chain disease or a non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, while clinically sarcoidosis was considered because of the previous medical history.
In the gastric mucosal biopsy specimens a severe phlegmonous inflammation was found.
A cellular infiltrate, containing neutrophilic and lymphoid cells with fields of plasma cells that were located in and around the glandular tissue was found, causing glandular destruction.
Crypt abscesses were also seen (Fig 2).
A histological diagnosis of phlegmonous gastritis was made.
This is known to be a life threatening condition and antibiotic treatment was started while awaiting bacterial cultures of the biopsy specimens and gastric contents.
Firstly amoxycillin, then cefuroxim and metronidazol were given for 14 days.
During this antibiotic treatment the patient experienced no relief of symptoms.
A repeated endoscopy and biopsy specimens of the gastric lesions showed no change.
Multiple cultures (of the gastric contents and gastric mucosa) showed no growth of any micro-organism.
During antibiotic treatment thepatient developed a severe generalised rash as an allergic reaction for which 30 mg prednisolon was given.
Both the rash and the gastric symptoms disappeared immediately after corticosteroid treatment.
A somatostatin scan was performed as part of an ongoing research project because the diagnosis sarcoidosis was considered.
This scan showed a high uptake of radioactive labelled somatostatin in the areas around the eyes and parotid glands, no uptake being seen in the gastric region.
These typical localisations suggested Sjögren's syndrome.
Specific questioning showed symptoms of dry eyes and dry mouth.
The Schirmer and break up time test confirmed a decrease of tear secretion.
A sublabial gland biopsy showed more than three lymphocyte foci per 4 mm confirming Sjögren syndrome according to the criteria of Chisholm and Mason.
A pentagastrine test showed the presence of achlorhydria.
Serological indices, such as antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, antibodies to SS-A and SS-B, and also antibodies against parietal cells and intrinsic factor were negative.
The steroid treatment was continued, with 30 mg prednison orally once every day.
A gastroscopy two months later showed an extensive atrophic gastritis.
The signs of inflammation had vanished.
Histological examination confirmed a severe chronic atrophic gastritis.
One and a half years later gastroscopy showed some slight fasting gastric secretion.
In the fundus and corpus of the stomach an increase in superficial vascular pattern was visible.
The mucosa at the small curvature and at the antrum still showed some areas with slightly red swollen mucosa containing white ‘point like’ fibrin patches.
Histological examination of these areas at this time confirmed a chronic gastritis and atrophic gastric mucosa.
The patient was taking 5 mg prednisone and had no complaints.
Discussion
The Sjögren or Sicca syndrome usually presents clinically with symptoms of a dry mouth and dry eyes.
These phenomena are a result of infiltration by lymphocytes of the affected exocrine glands.
The initial symptom in our patient was upper abdominal pain.
A gastroscopy showed a severe inflammation of the stomach and proximal duodenum.
Histological examination showed what seemed to be a life threatening phlegmonous gastritis.
In the same biopsy infiltration of the mucosal stroma by a large number of lymphocytes and plasma cells were seen.
The differential diagnosis of phlegmonous gastritis consts of bacterial infections especially staphylococcus aureus and including tuberculosis.
Bacterial phlegmonous gastritis either responds to antibiotic treatment or results in death of the patient.
In our patient all cultures were negative and antibiotic treatment had no effect.
Other diseases such as sarcoidosis, lymphoreticular malignancies, Crohn's disease, and non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug induced gastropathy were ruled out in our patient.
The diagnosis of primary Sjögren's syndrome was finally made on the typical symptoms of dry eyes, dry mouth, the abnormal Schirmer test, and a positive labial salivary gland biopsy.
In this patient Sjögren's syndrome presented with a phlegmonous gastritis that responded promptly to steroid teratment.
To our knowledge this presentation has not been described previously.
Gastrontestinal involvement is reported to occur frequently in the Sjögren syndrome.
Some authors have described an incidence of chronic atrophic gastritis in more than 65% of all cases of Sjögren's syndrome.
The macroscopic aspect of the stomach is described as atrophic or having a cobble stone aspect.
Immunohistological investigation shows the same changes in the gastrointestinal mucosa as seen in the salivary glands.
The positive somatostatin scan was caused by a high expression of somatostatin receptors on the lymphocytes infiltrating the salivary and tear glands.
This phenomenon has been found in some patients with Sjögren's syndrome in our hospital (unpublished data).
This deserves further investigation, especially because salivary scintigraphy using technetium-99m pertechnetate in patients with proved primary Sjögren's syndrome is of limited discriminative value.
In conclusion phlegmonous gastritis was found as the presenting symptom in a case of Sjögren's syndrome and reacted well to steroid treatment.
An atrophic gastritis, which is a more usual finding in Sjögren's syndrome, developed subsequently.
Coeliac disease in the elderly
Abstract
Of 228 patients with adult coeliac disease, 42 (19%) were diagnosed aged 60 years or over.
In this series of 35 patients, who did not have dermatitis herpetiformis, 15 had attended family doctors and hospital outpatient departments for an average of 28 years with unexplained symptoms or abnormalities in blood tests but the diagnosis of coeliac disease had been missed.
This is unsatisfactory because these patients can both manage and respond to a gluten free diet.
Thirty eight patients complied strictly with the diet with resolution of symptoms.
Significant improvement in weight, haemoblobin albumin, calcium, and alkaline phosphatase values after a year on the diet also occurred.
Clinicians should be alert to the possibility of coeliac disease in the elderly particularly in patients with non-specific complaints in the presence of unexplained anaemia.
Coeliac disease has traditionally been regarded as a disorder of childhood and early adult life.
Increasing numbers of patients, however, are being diagnosed in the elderly.
The aim of this study was to analyse an unselected series of coeliac disease patients presenting in their seventh decade or beyond to a District General Hospital.
The mode of presentation, laboratory findings, and compliance and response to a gluten free diet were assessed.
Patients and methods
By the end of December 1991, 259 patients were on the coeliac register at the Derbyshire Royal Infirmary, of whom 228 were diagnosed in adult life (aged 15 years or over).
The first adult diagnosis by biopsy was made in 1958.
Forty two patients from this group were diagnosed in their seventh decade and beyond and form the basis of this study.
These cases were diagnosed between 1963 and 1991 but 35 were diagnosed in 1980 or later.
All but three of the 42 patients were regularly reviewed in the coeliac clinic, which was established in 1978.
Of the three not seen in the clinic, one died in 1978 and the other two died in 1981 and 1982 under the care of other physicians.
Hospital notes were available for all patients.
Details of their clinical presentation, past medical and family history were recorded together with haematological and biochemical results obtained from profiles produced by laboratories at the hospital.
IgA antigliadin antibody concentrations were measured by a method developed and validated in the department, the upper limit of normal being 90 arbitrary units/l.
Compliance and response to a gluten free diet were assessed at each visit by careful questioning.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of coeliac disease was based on the finding of a flat small intestinal mucosa or clinical response to a gluten free diet, or both.
A flat biopsy specimen was obtained from each of the 42 patients.
In 30 cases the first biopsy was taken using a fibreoptic endoscope.
In 20, the biopsy was repeated and showed improvement after the beginning of a gluten free diet.
Of those without repeat biopsy, four had associated dermatitis herpetiformis and 11 considerably raised concentrations of antigliadin antibody, which fell after gluten withdrawal, thus supporting the diagnosis of coeliac disease.
In 11 patients, all of whom showed a good clinical response to a gluten free diet, repeat biopsy was deemed unwise because of frailty or associated health problems.
Clinical response was assessed by analysing changes in weight, haemoglobin, albumin, calcium, and alkaline phosphatase values after one and two years on gluten free diet.
AGE AND SEX
Of the 228 patients diagnosed in adult life, the age at diagnosis ranged from 15 to 82 years.
The 42 cases diagnosed aged 60 years or over represent 19% of all those diagnosed in adult life.
In this group there were 19 men and 23 women.
The ratio of men to women in the whole clinic was 1:1.7 compared with 1:1.2 in the elderly group.
MODE OF PRESENTATION
The development of gastrointestinal symptoms was the commonest reason for presentation and led to the diagnosis in 25 patients.
In 19 of these, diarrhoea and abdominal pain and discomfort were the predominant symptoms while six patients complained only of vague abdominal bloating and flatulence.
A further 10 cases did not report gastrointestinal symptoms but presented with non-specific complaints of fatigue and lassitude only and were investigated because of unexplained anaemia.
The mean haemoglobin concentration in this group was 9.7 g/dl.
In four of these 10 patients the anaemia was due to folate deficiency, in three to iron deficiency, and in the remaining three to a combination of these deficiencies.
Dermatitis herpetiformis led to the diagnosis of coeliac disease in seven patients.
Overall 80% ofmen had a haemoglobin concentration of 12.5 g/dl or less at diagnosis and 75% of women had a concentration of 11.5 g/dl or less.
The Figure shows the harmoglobin values for all the 42 cases at diagnosis.
DELAY IN DIAGNOSIS
It was noted that of those 35 patients who did not have dermatitis herpetiformis, 15 had attended their general practitioners and hospital outpatient clinics on several occasions over an average period of 28 years (0.5–50 years) with unexplained symptoms or abnormalities in blood tests but the diagnosis of coeliac disease had been missed.
The interval between the diagnosis of dermatitis herpetiformis and coeliac disease in one instance was 34 years.
One patient was only diagnosed when he presented with small bowel lymphoma.
A small intestinal biopsy specimen was obtained in another only when diarrhoes developed.
Two patients were invited to attend the coeliac clinic when perusal of their hospital notes showed that dermatitis herpetiformis had earlier been diagnosed in the skin clinic.
Coeliac disease was confirmed in both of these by biopsy.
Six patients who ultimately presented with gastrointestinal symptoms reported long histories from 9 to 50 years.
Three were misdiagnosed as having colitis; one in childhood, and two others at age 38 and 42 years respectively.
Another patient was considered to have irritable bowel syndrome at the age of 54 years.
Two patients had experienced diarrhoea for 25 and 27 years respectively, which had remained unexplained.
Review of the case notes showed that coeliac disease had not been considered in any of these patients and the diagnoses that had been made were not supported by satisfactory evidence.
Fourteen patients gave histories of unexplained anaemia.
Three remembered having iron injections in childhood, two had received iron during pregnancy, and the other nine had taken courses of iron or folic acid, or both for many years.
In nine of these cases it was the added development of gastrointestional symptoms that finally led to small bowel biopsy and the diagnosis of coeliac disease.
One female patient diagnosed as coeliac at the age of 65 years, was noted to be ‘a sickly child with short stature’.
GLUTEN FREE DIET — COMPLIANCE AND RESPONSE
Only two of the 42 patients continued on a normal diet.
One of these presented with a perforated small bowel lymphoma and died shortly after diagnosis.
A second patient, who presented with anaemia, lived alone and in poor social circumstances and could not manage a gluten free diet.
Of the remaining 40 cases, 38 complied strictly with their diet and this was supported by an improvement in the morphology of repeat small intestinal biopsy specimens or symptoms, or both and weight and laboratory indices.
All 38 patients who complied strictly with the gluten free diet reported a considerable improvement in wellbeing and resolution of symptoms after starting the diet.
Weight and haematological and viochemical indices were analysed at diagnosis and after one and two years on the diet by means of the paired t test (Table).
Weight increased by an average of 5.2 kg.
The indices examined all improved significantly to within the normal range after one year on diet.
These improvements were maintained after two years.
Discussion
Estimates of the proportion of patients with coeliac disease who present in their seventh decade or beyond have increased from 4% in 1960 to 27% in 1980.
In 1991, of 2312 new coeliac disease patients joining the Coeliac Society of the United Kingdom, 541 (21%) were aged 60 years or over.
It is probable that patients join the Coeliac Society at the time of diagnosis so that this figure gives an accurate measure of those diagnosed in this age group and is very similar to our value of 19%.
These findings almost certainly reflect an increased awareness of coeliac disease in recent years and the greater use of fibre optic endoscopes to obtain small intestinal biopsy specimens.
Swinson et al showed a bimodal distribution with a peak in the fourth decade mainly of women and a later peak in the sixth and seventh decades consisting mainly of men.
The ratio of male to female new members of the Coeliac Society also suggests a tendency towards later diagnosis in men with a ratio of 1:2.9 in patients presenting before the age of 60 years, compared with 1:1.2 in those presenting over this age.
Our figures also support this view, the male to female ratio falling from 1.17 to 1.12 over the age of 60 years.
Possible explanations for these findings are that women are more likely to consult their doctors and so have blood tests, which may lead to an earlier diagnosis of coeliac disease than in men.
Also, the extra nutritional demands brought about by pregnancy may precipitate symptoms and is another factor contributing to earlier diagnosis in women.
Few studies have looked specifically at the elderly.
Kirby et al reported 18 patients aged 40 years or over although these could hardly be classed as elderly subjects.
Symptoms attributable to the gastrointestinal tract were present in 56% compared with 59% in our study, although 14% of our group complained only of abdominal distension and flatulence.
Anaemia occurred frequently in this elderly group affecting 80% of men and 75% of women.
In studies that have considered all ages at presentation, anaemia affects about half of cases, although exact comparisons are difficult because of the different criteria that have been used to define anaemia.
In this study about a quarter of patients had a biopsy for a sole haematological abnormality.
It is particularly in this age group that coeliac disease may easily be overlooked, for anaemia may be dismissed as occurring secondary to dietary insufficiency without further investigation.
Linaker and Calam found coeliac disease in 12% of patients aged 65 years or over having jejunal biopsy for anaemia.
About half of our patients had attended hospital on several occasions when either no satisfactory diagnosis was established or an erroneous diagnosis was made.
The delay in diagnosis was because even the possibility of coeliac disease was not considered in these cases and this prolonged patient misery and uncertainty.
The value of diagnosing a condition that presents late in life with often only trivial symptoms, may be questioned especially when this entails changing long established eating habits.
A counter tot his viewpoint is that patients often only realise how unwell they were in retrospect after commencing a gluten free diet and had come to accept quite marked ill health as normal.
The patients in our series who started on a gluten free diet, all benefited clinically and it was possible to show improvement objectively when weight and other indices were analysed.
The ability of the elderly to manage a glute free diet has been shown in that 38 of 40 patients who started a gluten free diet complied well and benefited clinically.
In addition they maintained improvement in the haematological and biochemical indices studies.
The reduction of alkaline phosphatase, pointing to healing of osteomalacia, is noteworthy and man offer some protection against fractures, which is a particular problem in later life.
There may be a reluctance to carry out endoscopy in the elderly to obtain small bowel biopsy specimens on the grounds that the procedure is unsafe in the old and frail.
It has been shown that endoscopy is safe even in high risk groups if performed by a skilled practitioner.
In this series one patient suffered a bowel perforation as a result of an endoscopic biopsy that was done to check response to the gluten free diet.
She made a complete recovery without recourse to surgery and is reported elsewhere.
When a repeat biopsy was taken in these patients it did not affect management and this practice, which has often been followed just to satisfy some definitions of coeliac disease, should be reviewed.
In 11 patients it was difficult to justify repeat biopsy especially when they had shown a very good clinical response to gluten withdrawal.
Antigliadin antibody concentrations were measured in 17 patients and the question arises if the diagnosis of coeliac disease could have been made with these results alone.
It has been shown that measuring these antibodies to establish the diagnosis of coeliac disease is helpful but not completely reliable as a few cases would be missed.
Of 61 adult patients with untreated coeliac disease, 57 had abnormal results giving a sensitivity of 0.93.
Those without coeliac disease may also have an abnormal result although in those with a normal small bowel on biopsy examination, or not suspected of having intestinal disease the specificity is 0.95.
In this series antigliadin antibody concentrations were abnormal in 13, thus supporting the diagnosis.
The test therefore, from this and other evidence cannot be relied on completely.
Finally, it is important to consider the diagnosis of coeliac disease in the elderly not only in those with gastrointestinal symptoms but more so in those with non-specific complaints and particularly unexplained anaemia.
Clinicians need to be aware that this condition is not a rarity in later life but is a quite common cause of ill health and misery.
The old adage that ‘if you think about it, you will diagnose it’, especially applies here.
In this series coeliac disease could have been diagnosed and treated much earlier in some patients.
Apart from rendering patients asymptomatic, earlier treatment with a gluten free diet might also protect them from developing malignant complications in old age.
Primary culture of bovine gall bladder epithelial cells
Abstract
Gall bladder epithelial cells serve numerous biological functions and abnormalities in their function are important in the pathogenesis of several gall bladder diseases.
Direct studies on cell function are rare due to lack of reliable methods to culture this epithelium.
This study reports a reliable and reproducible method of harvesting and culturing gall bladder epithelial cells.
Normal bovine gall bladder epithelium, obtained within 20 minutes of slaughter, was rinsed with modified Hanks's balanced salt solution, the mucosa separated and incubated in trypsin — EDTA solution at 37°C.
The cells were isolated and resuspended in Dulbeco's modification of Eagles' medium containing 10% fetal calf serum and, after filtration and centrifugation, were plated under aspetic conditions.
The growth rate was established by flow cytometry and the morphological characteristics of the growing cells by electron microscopy.
Gall bladder epithelial cells grew successfully and visible clusters of cells were present by day two, confluency being reached at 8 to 10 days in collagen coated plates and 12 to 14 days in uncoated plates.
Electron microscopy showed typical gall bladder epithelia with microvilli, tight junctions, and mucus droplets.
This method proved reliable and reproducible for the culture of gall bladder epithelial cells and should allow direct studies of the biological properties of these cells in human tissue.
The gall bladder epithelium has been considered for many years to be an excellent model for the study of the physiological properties of epithelial cells and in particular ion transport.
More recently it has been appreciated that the mucosa significantly changes the composition of gall bladder bile by either the absorption or secretion of several constituents of bile.
The gall bladder epithelium has one of the highest rates of water absorption of body tissues, which is achieved by the coupling of active sodium transport and passive water absorption.
Chloride is actively absorbed in exchange for bicarbonate.
Potassium and calcium move according to electrochemical gradients.
Most of the organic components of bile, namely bile acids, lecithin, bilirubin, and cholesterol are absorbed to a limited extent by the gall bladder mucosa.
In addition, the gall bladder epithelial cell secretes biliary proteins, mucin, and more recently it has been shown to secrete hydrogen ions.
As such, its role in the pathogenesis of gall stone formation is being increasingly recognised.
Furthermore, study of the immunologial characteristics of gall bladder and biliary epithelial cells should help elucidate the pathogenesis of biliary tree disorders.
Until recently, all studies on gall bladder epithelial cells have been restricted to using part or whole of the gall bladder.
Several physiologists have used gall bladders from animal species to study ion transport and the electrical properties of the epithelium by applying either the Ussing chamber technique or whole organ preparation technique.
More recently, other research workers used human and animal gall bladders to study aspects of epithelial cell function in relation to gall stone formation.
Although these techniques are valuable for transport studies, they provide little information on the biological properties of the gall bladder epithelial cell itself.
Anther limiting factor in studying the properties of human gall bladder epithelium has been the lack of normal tissue.
This has now become more readily available with the development of liver transplantation programmes.
Alternatively, many animal models have been used to overcome the lack of availability of normal human tissue.
The development of a simple and reliable method of obtaining and culturing gall bladder epithelial cells from a readily available source would permit a detailed study of the biological functions of these cells and would contribute to our understanding of the pathophysiology of diseases of the biliary tree.
In this paper we describe a simple, reproducible method of culturing gall bladder epithelial cells from a readily available source, the bovine gall bladder.
Methods
CELL ISOLATION
Bovine gall bladder was obtained from the local abattoir and transferred on ice to the Laboratory within 20 minutes of slaughter.
The gall bladder was opened and the lumen rinsed with modified Hanks's balanced salt solution (HBSS, Sigma Chemical Co Ltd, St Louis, USA) to remove bile and debris.
The mucosa was stripped from the underlying muscular layer and fat by blunt dissection.
Two circular pieces (21–3 cm diameter) of mucosa were used from the fundus of the gall bladder for harvesting the cells.
The mucosa was left for 15 minutes in preoxygenated HBSS and then rinsed in a series of Petri dishes containing 20 ml HBSS with 5 ml N-acetylcysteine (1 mg/ml)(Sigma Chemical Co Ltd) to dissolve the mucus.
Each piece was then incubated for 20 minutes at 37°C in 20 ml trypsin-EDTA (0.5 g trypsin 1/250 and 0.2 g EDTA.4 Na/1, in Hanks's balanced solution, Ca++ and Mg++ free (Sigma Chemical Co Ltd)) suficient to cover the tissue completely.
The tissue was subsequently transferred to a second beaker with 4 ml bovine calf serum (Sigma Chemical Co Ltd) added to inactivate the trypsin.
The solution was then made up to 20 ml by adding HBSS.
After incubation for 5 minutes at room temperature to allow trypsin inactivation, the gall bladder epithelial cells were detached by gently scrapping the mucosa with the end of a glass microscope slide held at an angle of 45°.
The separated cells were resuspended in HBSS solution and filtered sequentially through a stainless steel sieve of 0.38 mm (size 40) and 0.28 mm (size 50) pore size respectively.
The above procedures were performed in a laminar flow hood using conventional sterile techniques.
The filtered solution was then centrifuged at 3 g for 5 minutes, the supernatant removed, and the cells resuspended in 10 ml of HBSS solution.
The cells were counted with a modified Neubauer haemocytometer.
The percentage cell viability was checked by dye exclusion with 0.4% trypan blue under normal light microscopy.
CELL CULTURE
The final suspension was centrifuged and the cell pellet resuspended in Dulbeco's modification of Eagles' medium containing 10% fetal calf serum and added antibiotics (10000 µ/ml; penicillin, 0.5 mg/ml streptomycin and 25 µg/ml amphotericin B) to a concentration of 1×10 6 cells/ml. the cells were subsequently plated under aspetic conditions in plastic multiwell plates (15 mm diameter well adding 1 ml of the above suspension to each well).
Both uncoated and coated (with collagen type IV or Cytodex 3 microbeads) plates were used and the plates incubated in a standard 95% air/5% CO 2 incubator at 37°C.
Round glass cover slips (15 mm diameter) were also used in some wells.
The medium was routinely changed after 24 hours and thereafter every 48 hours.
Reverse phase microscopy was performed regularly to monitor the progress of the cultures.
MONITORING OF CELL GROWTH AND CHARACTERISATION OF CELLS
The cell cultures were inspected and photographed at daily intervals.
DNA flow cytometry was performed on cells disrupted from the culture monolayer by EDTA treatment using standard techniques, to define the percentage of cells in G 2 /M phase (division), S phase (DNA synthesis), and G o phase (resting).
The cell nuclei were stained with propidium iodide and analysed by an EPICS V Flow Cytometer (Coulter, UK).
The analysis of cell cycle activity was done by EASY 2 computer programme.
Transmission electron microscopy was used to analyse the morphological features of the growing cells.
The cells were fixed in 48% glutaraldehyde for 24 hours, then fixed in osmium tetroxide, and stained with uranyl acetate on nickel grids using standard techniques.
Grids were viewed on a Jeal 2 Electron microscope.
Results
A yield of around 5×10 6 cells/g tissue was obtained from the 5.10 g of gall bladder mucosa used.
The viability of the harvested cells was in excess of 99% as assessed by the trypan blue exclusion method.
With a range of culture media (MCDB-153, Eagles' medium, and Dulbeco modified Eagles' medium) satisfactory plating and growth occurred with most media.
This was assessed by two independent investigators by observing (a) the cell appearance and their ability to attach the plate in the first 24 hours and (b) the length of time the culture required to reach confluency from the same starting number of cells per well.
Dulbeco's modified Eagles' medium containing 10% fetal calf serum had an advantage in both plating efficiency and growth.
Cell attachment was clearly improved in the plates coated with collagen type IV; nevertheless, satisfactory results were obtained with uncoated plastic plates and glass cover slips avoiding the cost of type IV collagen.
Visible clusters of epithelial cells were present by day 2; the attached epithelial cells looked flattened with prominent nuclei (Fig 1A).
Significant growth was present by day 6 (Fig 1B).
In the coated plates (type IV collagen) confluency was reached at 8 to 10 days (Fig 1C); in the uncoated plates at 12 to 14 days.
No problems with contamination of the cultures were encountered and the regimen of penicillin/streptomycin/amphotericin B was considered satisfactory.
Experiments with Cytodex 3 microbeads as coating agent were unsuccessful.
FLOW CYTOMETRY
Flow cytometry was performed at day 6 and day 10 (Fig 2A).
When the cells were in the log phase of development (day 6) there were 21% of the cells in S phase with 9% in G 2 phase compared with 10% in S phase with 1.55% in G 2 phase when the culture was reaching confluency by day 10 (Fig 2B).
These results showed that the cell culture maintained satisfactory growth until confluency had been reached.
CHARACTERISATION OF EPITHELIAL CELLS BY TRANSMISSION ELECTRON MICROSCOPY
Transmission electron microscopy of the cells taken from the monolayer on the subconfluent phase of the culture, showed typical epithelial cells with all the characteristics of the gall bladder epithelium.
Cytoplasmic organelles and microvilli on the epithelial cells were prominent (Fig 3A).
With higher magnification, dilated endoplasmic reticulum and mucin filled vacuoles were seen (Fig 3B).
Focal tight junctions and interdigitating processes between adjacent cells, characteristic of epithelial cells, were also present (Fig 3C).
Discussion
In this study we report a reliable and reproducible method for harvesting and culturing gall bladder epithelial cells from the bovine gall bladder.
Over the past few years there has been increasing interest in the biological characteristics of biliary and gall bladder epithelial cells in an attempt to enhance our understanding of diseases affecting the biliary tree.
Several investigators have attempted to culture biliary cells but the methods described have tended to be complicated and difficult to apply.
A method of gall bladder tissue culture from the guinea pig gall bladder has been developed in the hope of providing a direct tool to study the biological and immunological characteristics of these cells.
The main disadvantage of tissue culture, however, is the simultaneous growth of other types of cells present in the gall bladder wall, particularly fibroblasts, which may suppress the growth of the epithelial cells; for this reason the method has not been applied widely in the study of epithelial cell function.
A few groups from the United States have reported some success in short term cultures of either normal human gall bladder cells or with well differentiated gall bladder adenocarcinoma lines.
More recently, Oda et al reported in detail a technique for the harvesting and longterm culture of dog gall bladder epithelial cells.
The dog gall bladder epithelial cells have similarities to bovine in a number of biological characteristics (time to reach confluency, division rates, etc) but the method we report in this paper is simpler and quicker.
Another significant advantage of our method is the use of bovine tissue, which is easily obtainable and avoids the need for breeding costly experimental animals and the subsequent operation required to retrieve the gall bladder.
The availability of bovine tissue allows the use of frequent short term (up to two weeks) primary cultures rather than longterm cultures avoiding problems of cell differentiation, which are likely to occur in longterm cultures.
We have also found that the method described for bovine tissue can also be applied to human gall bladder epithelial cells and we are currently in the process of culturing and characterising these cells.
The bovine gall bladder model has been studied in our laboratory and we have shown that there are striking similarities in the composition of bovine and human bile apart from cholesterol concentration, which is five times less in cattle compared with human bile (unpublished data).
Bovine bile is lithogenic and the physiology of bovine gall bladder epithelium is similar to the human in terms of electrolyte transport and hydrogen ion secretion.
The development of a simple method of gall bladder cell culture from a readily accessble source will facilitate the study of several aspects of the gall bladder epithelial cell function and in particular the regulation of ion transport and hydrogen ion secretion, identification and cloning of the several antiport systems and channels operating on the cell membrane, regulation of mucin secretion and prostaglandin metabolism, and will enhance the understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms of gall bladder disorders.
In conclusion, we present a simple, reliable, and reproducible method of isolation and culturing bovine gall bladder epithelial cells, which remained viable for at least two weeks.
This method should be useful for the study of the biological properties of gall bladder mucosal cells both in experimental animals and in humans.
Refractory pouchitis: does it reflect underlying Crohn's disease?
Abstract
Typical ‘pouchitis’ is a well recognised complication of ileal pouches in ulcerative colitis.
Infrequently, a refractory pouchitis (RP) presents with certain clinical, endoscopic, and pathological features resembling Crohn's disease and is often ascribed to misdiagnosis of the initial colitis.
To test that hypothesis and to identify risk factors for RP, this study reviewed cases of presumed ulcerative colitis with ileal pouches constructed at The Mount Sinai Hospital between 1973 and 1986.
Twenty four cases with RP (16 Koch pouches and eight pelvic pouches) and 21 controls were compared for eight clinical variables.
The original colectomy slides from 15 RP and 18 control cases were reviewed blindly, classified into five histological categories (corresponding to definite ulcerative colitis, definite Crohn's disease, and three indeterminate groups), and scored for 23 histological features.
There were no significant clinical differences between RP and control cases except for more frequent extraintestinal manifestations (38% v 5%) and male preponderance (79% v 43%) in RP.
There were also no significant differences between the distributions of RP cases and controls among the five histological categories or in the 23 histological features studied.
Refractory pouchitis therefore does not seem to reflect underlying Crohn's disease, but may be linked to immunological mechanisms that are manifested clinically as extraintestinal complications.
Florid active mucosal inflammation with disturbed bowel function, often called ‘pouchitis’, is a comparatively common complication of ileal reservoirs created after colectomy, usually for ulcerative colitis, occurring in roughly 20% of cases (range 7–42%).
Pouchitis usually responds well to treatment with antibiotics, but in a small subset of cases the inflammation is clinically severe, endoscopically atypical, and relatively refractory to conventional treatment.
These cases seem to represent a distinct inflammatory condition, which we have termed ‘refractory pouchitis’(RP).
Because the endoscopical features of RP are not dissimilar to those of Crohn's ileitis, RP has often been attributed to underlying Crohn's disease, presumably ‘misdiagnosed’ as ulcerative colitis pre and perioperatively.
To test the validity of this notion and to identify potential risk factors for RP, we reviewed our cases of RP at The Mount Sinai Hospital and compared the pathological features of their colectomy specimens as well as their clinical features to those of a control group without RP.
Patients
All cases were selected from ileal pouches constructed between 1973 and 1986 at The Mount Sinai Hospital.
Refractory pouchitis — We selected 24 cases that were well known to their gastroenterologists and that fit the clinical, endoscopical, and pathological criteria for RP as adopted at an International Workshop on Pouchitis in London in January 1989, including clinical symptoms (bloody diarrhoea, malaise, or weight loss, or all three); resistance to treatment with antibiotics and steroids; and endoscopical features (serpiginous ulcerations, cobblestone mucosa, or ileitis proximal to the reservoir, or all three).
Table I shows the frequency of each of the defining endoscopic lesions; in some cases, of course, more than one feature was present.
Biopsies of the pouches of all these patients were reported as showing active chronic inflammation.
The mean duration between pouch construction and onset of pouchitis was 22.3 months (range 2–72 months).
Four of the 24 RP patients ultimately required pouch removal and conversion to a standard Brooke ileostomy.
Controls comprised 21 patients with ileal pouches constructed during the same period who had been followed up for a mean duration of 43 months (range 15–119 months) and who had had endoscopies that showed no evidence of active inflammation.
Table II shows the distribution of Kock pouches (continent ileostomies) and pelvic pouches between RP cases and controls.
The medical records of all cases were reviewed for the following eight clinical features: sex, age at onset of colitis, age at colectomy, indications for colectomy, age at time of pouch construction, extraintestinal manifestations before colectomy, use of steroids before colectomy, and immediate postcolectomy complications.
Methods
Microscopic slides of 33 resection specimens were available for review (31 from The Mount Sinai Hospital and two from other hospitals), comprising 15 patients with RP and 18 controls.
The specimens consisted of 21 total colectomies (several performed in two stages), 11 subtotal colectomies, and one second stage proctosigmoidectomy for which the corresponding colectomy specimen was not available.
The original pathological diagnoses were either ulcerative colitis or indeterminate.
The original macroscopic descriptions were reviewed to ensure that the available slides represented an adequate sampling of significant pathology.
All slides were then reviewed by one pathologist (NH), who was aware that the cases comprised both RP and control groups but who had not seen the cases previously and had no knowledge of individual clinical histories or outcomes.
An average of 15 sections (range 7–32) were available for both total and subtotal colectomies and six sections for the single proctosigmoidectomy, not counting sections of lymph nodes and stomas.
Gross photographs of specimens were not examined, as they were not available for all cases.
Based on the microscopic review, each case was assigned to one of five histological categories: cases representing definite ulcerative colitis were assigned to category A, cases representing definite Crohn's disease to category E, and cases containing overlapping features to indefinite categories B, C, or D, depending on the prominence and diagnostic significance of these features (Table III).
Each case was also evaluated and graded for 23 individual histological features (Table IV), mostly those considered useful in the differential diagnosis of ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, but including others that were added in the search for histological features that might distinguish RP from controls.
Differences in the sex distribution and in the frequency of precolectomy extraintestinal manifestations were analysed by the χ 2 test and the remaining clinical variables by the Student t test.
An association of each of the histological features with the presence or absence of pouchitis was sought by the χ 2 test.
Results
Table V shows the comparison of clinical features between RP cases and controls.
There was no statistically significant difference between the two groups except for sex distribution and frequency of precolectomy extraintestinal manifestations.
Refractory pouchitis patients showed a male preponderance of 79% v 43% in the control cases (p).
They also had more prevalent precolectomy extraintestinal manifestations of 38% (9/24)v 5% (1/21) in the controls (p).
These clinical profiles of RP cases did not differ significantly between Kock and pelvic pouches (Table V).
Table VI shows the specific extraintestinal manifestations in the RP and control groups.
In three of the RP cases, but in none of the controls, extraintestinal manifestations had provided the principal indication for colectomy (Table VII); otherwise, the surgical indications were nearly identical between the two groups.
It has been suggested that emergency colectomy and postoperative sepsis may predispose to the development of pouchitis.
Our review of clinical features, however, found no increased incidence of pouchitis in cases that had had emergency colectomy or postoperative sepsis (Table VIII).
As shown in Table VIII, the 13 cases that were judged histological to be definite ulcerative colitis (category A) were distributed almost evenly between the RP and control groups.
By the same token, five cases representing Crohn's disease (category E) by virtue of containing sarcoid like granulomata (evidently overlooked by the original pathologists), as well as 15 cases with varying degrees of overlapping histology (categories B, C, and D), were also distributed almost evenly between the two groups.
Finally, there were no statistically significant associations of RP v control classification with any of the 23 individual histological features listed in Table IV, including the presence of chronic ileitis.
Discussion
Typical pouchitis has been reported in about 20% of ileal reservoirs, although incidences in different series range from 7–42%, with equal frequency in both pelvic and Kock pouches.
By contrast, the syndrome that we have termed refractory pouchitis (RP) is comparatively rare.
It may correspond to what the Lahey Clinic group has called ‘chronic’ pouchitis.
Our cases of RP represent only about 3% of the ileal pouches constructed at The Mount Sinai Hospital during the 13 year period studied.
The mean interval from reservoir surgery to onset of pouchitis in our series was 22 months (range 2–72 months).
This figure conforms closely to the experience of others.
Zuccaro et al reported a mean interval of 25 months (range 3–54 months) and Lohmuller et al reported a mean interval of 17 months (range 2 days–93 months).
There may in fact be some differences in these time intervals and in other pathogenetic factors between Kock pouches and pelvic pouches, but in view of the general clinical similarities between the RP syndromes in these two forms of pouch (Table V), we have felt justified in combining them for the purposes of our analysis.
Because the endoscopical findings in RP often include serpiginous ulcerations, fissures, and ileitis proximal to the pouch, the syndrome has often been attributed to underlying Crohn's disease, the diagnosis of which had presumably been ‘missed’ both clinically and pathologically up to and including the time of colectomy.
There has been no systematic study, however, to discover if this assumption is correct.
We therefore sought clinical and pathological features that might test this concept and help us identify risk factors for the development of RP.
The only distinguishing clinical features we could identify in the RP group were male preponderance and an increased frequency of extraintestinal manifestations.
We are not aware that a male preponderance has been previously seen in association with any form of pouchitis.
Lohmuller et al reported that among 671 patients with chronic ulcerative colitis, if preoperative extraintestinal manifestations had been present, pouchitis occurred in 39% of cases, but in only 26% if no extraintestinal manifestations had been present.
They also showed by lifetable analysis that the risk of pouchitis at 5 years was 44% if preoperative extraintestinal manifestations had been present v 33% if they had been absent.
Similarly Becker et al reported that if their ulcerative colitis patients had preoperative extraintestinal manifestations, 39% developed pouchitis v only 19% among those patients who had not had preoperative extraintestinal manifestations.
Indeed, severe systemic manifestations have been reported in the course of pouch ileitis itself.
Blind pathological review of the colectomy specimens showed no correlation between histological category and the presence or absence of RP.
For example, colectomy specimens were classified as definite ulcerative colitis (Group A) as frequently in RP as in controls (40% and 38%, respectively).
This lack of significant difference between the proportions of RP cases and controls held true for the other histological categories as well, including even patients with definite Crohn's disease (Group E)(RP 13%, control 17%).
Our findings are supported by the Mayo Clinic report of no increased incidence of pouchitis in cases of histological indeterminate colitis compared with cases of more classic ulcerative colitis.
Our review also attempted to discern any correlation between RP and individual histological features, primarily those considered to be indicators of classic Crohn's disease, but we found no such associations.
For example, the same proportions of RP and control patients had histological evidence of ileitis on review of their surgical specimens (20% and 17%, respectively).
This particular finding supports the finding, based on radiological studies, that the presence of backwash ileitis did not predispose to an increased incidence of pouchitis.
It should be emphasised that even the five cases classified pathologically as Group E were not histologically compelling examples of classic Crohn's disease apart from the presence of typical granulomata.
Granulomata themselves were comparatively infrequent, and other histological features characteristic of Crohn's disease were less conspicuous than usual.
Therefore, we are not implying that patients with classic Crohn's disease are necessarily good candidates for reservoir surgery, nor does the recent experience of The Cleveland Clinic support such a view.
We are suggesting, however, that the postoperative development of RP is not prima facie evidence for a ‘missed’ diagnosis of Crohn's disease before and including the time of colectomy.
The cause of RP may be linked to the still unelucidated immunological mechanisms in inflammatory bowel disease that are clinically manifested as extraintestinal complications.
Perhaps an immunologically vulnerable subset of inflammatory bowel disease patients, Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis alike, are prone to develop refractory pouchitis under the influence of certain mechanical, vascular, bacteriological or biochemical factors, or all four that may arise in an ileal reservoir.
This concept may explain why the inflammatory changes manifested in the clinical syndrome of ‘pouchitis’ are seen almost exclusively in patients who have had colectomy for inflammatory bowel disease rather than familial polyposis.
Whatever the pathophysiological basis of RP may be, however, it is worthy of serious study as a ‘human experimental model’ of inflammatory bowel disease, rather than cavalier dismissal as simply a ‘misdiagnosis’of Crohn's disease.
