Management of common bile duct stones with a biliary endoprosthesis.
Report on 40 cases
Abstract
Endoscopic placement of a biliary endoprosthesis has been proposed for the management of choledocholithiasis when stone extraction is difficult or considered hazardous.
Over a two year period this approach was used in 40 such patients.
There were 24 women and 16 men with a median age of 76 years.
In seven patients with severe cholangitis no attempt was made to extract the stones.
Twenty three (57.5%) patients underwent a sphincterotomy and four (10%) needle knofe papillotomy.
The endoprosthesis insertion was considered a temporary measure in 13 (32.5%) patients and definitive treatment in 27 (67.5%).
Bile duct drainage was established in all patients.
Early complications occurred in six patients (15%), but were without sequelae.
Late complications developed in eight (20%) of the patients and included biliary colic (four), cholangitis (three), and cholecystitis (one).
Two patients (one cholangitis and one cholecystitis) died as a consequence of the complication.
Only patients without a sphincterotomy developed cholangitis.
A total of eight patients (20%) underwent surgery (one as an emergency) and nine a repeat endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (two as an emergency) to clear the duct.
The remaining 23 patients are asymptomatic at a median of 13 months (range five to 24 months).
Biliary endoprosthesis insertion for choledocholithiasis is an important alternative means of establishing drainage in selected cases, and is probably the optimum method of management for the elderly and or debilitated patients with previous cholecystectomy.
Caution must be exercised, however, in patients with an in situ gall bladder.
Choledocolithiasis is a relatively frequent problem arising in approximately 15% of patients with stones in the gall bladder.
Before the availability of endoscopic bile duct intervention surgical treatment was the usual approach to management.
The mortality of exploring a common bile duct dramatically increases over the age of 60 particularly if other serious medical conditions are present such as diabetes, malnutrition, cardiorespiratory and renal insufficiency.
In one study the mortality ranged between 2.5 and 33% in patients over 70 years depending on the surgical approach used.
Endoscopic sphincterotomy is now the primary treatment for bile duct stones in most clinical contexts, whether emergency or elective.
Surgical treatment for bile duct stones is now restricted to those patients who are not obstructed and require a cholecystectomy, and in any patient in whom endoscopic treatment fails to achieve bile duct clearance.
Endoscopic sphincterotomy and basket extraction of the stones has been the most widely used technique having an overall success rate of 85% in clearing the ducts.
In patients in whom the procedure is successful 4.4–9.8% will develop bile duct stenosis, new stone formation or both.
The major limitations of therapy have been the presence of large stones (>mm), large and tortuous ducts, non-dilated ducts in which the basket cannot expand, and a stricture distal to the stone(s).
Other techniques have been developed to enhance bile duct clearance including mechanical lithotripsy, electrohydraulic lithotripsy, chemical dissolution using methylterbutylether through a biliary catheter, extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy and laser fragmentation.
The use of a biliary endoprosthesis has been proposed as an alternative approach for patients at high risk for surgery.
A number of small series have been published providing support for the efficacy of this technique.
The role played by an endoprosthesis is believed to be two-fold.
First, prompt biliary drainage is established in the obstructed duct and second, subsequent impactation of stones is prevented by the presence of the endoprosthesis within the duct.
Endoprosthesis occlusion (which is almost inevitable within three to six months) will not influence this function and therefore replacement is not routinely required.
A second group in whom this technique may be valuable is those in whom the number of stones or technical difficulties such as diverticuli, may expose the patient to a protracted procedure which even if successful may be detrimental for the patient — that is, the old and frail.
We report our experience in 40 patients in whom such criteria were fulfilled and in whom this technique was applied.
Methods
PATIENTS
From January 1989 to January 1991 a total of 146 patients underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography for choledocholithiasis.
In 106 of these patients (72.6%) the stones were successfully retrieved by the standard technique of sphincterotomy and basket or balloon extraction.
In the remaining 40 patients (27.3%) clearance of the ducts was not achieved because of the aberrant position of the papilla (seven), large size of the stones (17), distorted common bile douct (four), presence of a biliary stricture distal to the stones (five) or in the presence of serious clinical conditions in which endoprosthesis insertion was considered the most rapid means of establishing drainage (seven).
Patient demographic, clinical and laboratory data are summarised in Table I, II, and III.
There were 24 female and 16 male patients with a median age of 76 (range 24–92).
All patients underwent an abdominal ultrasound examination before endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.
This confirmed intra and extrahepatic duct dilatation in 31 patients (77%), cholecystolithiasis in 19 of the 32 patients (60%) in whom the gall bladder was in place.
Common bile duct stones were only shown in 10 patients (25%).
The endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was carried out in the standard manner using an Olympus or Pentax sideviewing endoscope under antibiotic cover.
An attempt was made to extract the bile duct stones in 33 (82.5%) of the patients.
In seven cases severe cholangitis was considered a specific indication for the rapid establishment of drainage using an endoprosthesis.
After the initial canullation and passage of a guide wire, a 7 F double pigtail polyethylene endoproshesis was placed with the proximal end above the stones and the distal end in the duodenum.
A straight 10 F endoprosthesis was used in the five patients with a bile duct stricture distal to the stones.
Results
The preliminary endoscopy confirmed a periampullary diverticulum present in 14 (35%) patients.
A median of two stones were found (range one to six) within the duct with a median size of 1.5 cm (range 0.5–2.5).
A stone was impacted at the level of the ampulla in five patients.
In five patients a common bile duct stricture was found, four benign (believed to be as a consequence of choledocholithiasis in two and as a complication of cholecystectomy in the other two).
One stricture was subsequently proven to be malignant (metastatic carcinoid).
A sphincterotomy was performed in 23 (57.5%) of the 40 patients although this was only possible in nine (64%) of those with a diverticulum.
In four (10%) patients a precut papillotomy using a needle knife was carried out to gain access to the common bile duct.
In 13 (32.5%) patients the insertion of the endoprosthesis was considered a temporary measure either before planned surgery (10 cases) or a repeat attempt to clear the duct endoscopically (three cases).
Of these patients six underwent surgery at a median of 1.25 months (range 0.5–7) from the procedure, four are awaiting surgery at a median of nine months (range four to 14), and three underwent endoscopic clearance of their ducts at a median of one month (range 0.5–2).
In the remaining 27 patients endoprosthesis insertion was considered definitive treatment.
Bile duct drainage was established in all 40 patients (100%) after endoprosthesis insertion.
Early complications were defined as those occurring during or within the first 72 hours after the procedure and were present in six patients (15%).
One patient developed a transitory respiratory arrest and the procedure was deferred for the next 48 hours.
One patient developed a mild allergic reaction to the contrast medium requiring treatment with H 1 blocking drugs.
Evidence of sphincterotomy related bleeding occurred in three (7.5%) patients, although none required blood transfusion.
The remaining patient developed fever, right upper quadrant pain and deranged liver function tests with negative blood cultures immediately after the procedure requiring intravenous antibiotics for one week with complete resolution of the episode.
This patient had not undergone a sphincterotomy before the insertion of the endoprosthesis.
Late complications were defined as those occurring after 72 hours after the insertion of the endoprosthesis.
These were present in eight (20%) patients.
In three patients cholangitis occurred from two to seven months after the placement of the endoprosthesis.
One patient was managed endoscopically with stone extraction and another by cholecystectomy and duct exploration.
The remaining patient, a 60 year old man with severe respiratory and left ventricular failure died from sepsis.
These three patients were notable for not having undergone a sphincterotomy before the insertion of the endoprosthesis.
Four patients (12.5% of those with a gall bladder in situ ) developed typical biliary colic.
Two of these underwent a cholecystectomy and exploration of the bile duct 0.25 and two months respectively from the procedure.
The other two patients are awaiting surgery seven and 12 months after endoprosthesis insertion.
Finally, an 80 year old man with a history of myocardial infarction, rheumatoid arthritis, and metastatic prostatic carcinoma presented with abdominal pain four months after the procedure.
An abdominal radiograph failed to show the endoprosthesis, its absence confirmed at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography which also showed a 1 cm stone within the duct (presumably migrated from the gall bladder) which was successfully extracted.
Two weeks later the patient became septic with associated jaundice.
An ultrasound scan revealed non-dilated ducts and suggested acute cholecystitis.
He underwent a partial cholecystectomy but died shortly afterwards as a consequence of sepsis.
Early and late complications are summarised in Table IV.
Eight (20%) of the 40 patients underwent surgery, six having a cholecystectomy and exploration of the common bile duct and two a cholecystectomy alone (the endoprosthesis being left in situ ).
This procedure was elective in seven patients and an emergency in one.
The median time from endoprosthesis insertion to surgery was two months (range 0.25–6).
Nine patients (12.5%) underwent a second endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography for duct clearance which was successful in five, seven were done as an elective procedure and two as an emergency, at a median of two months (range 0.25–7).
The remaining patients (23) have remained asymptomatic with respect to the biliary system or have died of unrelated causes at amedian of 13 months (range 5–24).
Of these four have been on a surgical waiting list for a median f 9.5 months (range five to 14).
The total number of deaths was six patients (15%), two with biliary related sepsis, two of a cerebrovascular accident, and two of disseminated malignancy.
Laboratory data in the 23 asymptomatic patients was normal except in 8 (29%) which had a mildly raised alkaline phosphatase (mean 172 IU/l), five of these also had a mildly raised GGT (mean 156 IU/l).
Discussion
Few reports have been published on the use of biliary endoprosthesis for the management of common bile duct stones.
In 1984 Siegel reported 22 cases with long term stenting (>months), two patients ahd the proximal end of the pigtail placed accidentally within the gall bladder, all remained asymptomatic for a mean of 16.3 months.
In the same year Forbes described 22 patients with contraindications for surgery in which an endoprosthesis was placed, of these four (18%) developed cholangitis, three had a repeat endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with clearance of the ducts, and two died of unrelated causes, the remaining patients were followed up for a mean of 14 months with no complications (17).
In 1987 a report from Belgium stated that eight elderly patients were treated in this fashion with no complications arising in a mean follow up of 17 months with one biliary unrelated death.
In an editorial of the same journal van der Heyde mentions 43 patients treated similarly in Holland but gives no further information.
Cotton also presented in 1987 17 patients, two (12%) developed biliary related problems requring surgery, one having a stormy postoperative period but no deaths; two had a second endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with duct clearance and five died of unrelated causes; the remaining eight patients were followed for a mean of 39 months.
In 1988 Cairns reported in abstract form 90 patients treated with an endoprosthesis, in 39 it was a short term measure as they underwent surgery or endoscopic clearance of the duct in a mean of 2.4 months, two (5%) of these patients developed cholangitis.
The other 43 patients underwent long term endoprosthesis placement and were followed up for a mean of 15.9 months; six (15%) developed cholangitis requiring surgery or endoscopic clearance of the ducts, there were no biliary related deaths.
Soomers in 1990 described 26 patients in whom this approach was used, six (23%) patients developed late procedure related complications five requiring surgery and one replacment of the endoprosthesis, thses included duodenal perforation in one, endoprosthesis clogging in two and stent migration in two, the patient that underwent a second endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography also had endoprosthesis clogging.
Ten patients died of unrelated causes and the remaining 10 were followed up for a mean of 26 months with no biliary symptoms.
Dufeck, also in 1990 described his experience with the procedure in 15 patients, five (33%) of whom developed biliary complications, two requiring surgery, and three a repeat endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography to establish drainage; 13 patients were symptom free at a median follow up of 25 months.
Finally, Rao in 1991 reported in abstract for a series of 27 and 19 patients followed for three and two years respectively, 7% of which developed cholestasis.
Literature review findings are summarised in Table V.
In the present series we report our experience with biliary endoprosthesis placing for the management of common bile duct stones over a two year period.
Of the 146 patients referred for endoscopic treatment of choledocholithiasis the overall success rate for clearing the common bile duct stones was 72.6% which is somewhat lower than other reported series but might reflect the selection of patients to a specialised centre.
A preiampullary diverticulum was found in 14 (35%) of the patients.
This contrasts markedly with only four (3.7%) such cases in the 106 patients managed by sphincterotomy and stone extraction.
The presence of a diverticulum frequently adds to the technical difficulties of sphincterotomy and stone extraction with an enhanced risk of duodenal perforation, facts which undoubtedly influenced the greater use of an endoprosthesis in such patients.
The insertion of an endoprosthesis was successful in establishing adequate biliary drainage in all the patients.
Early complications were few and without sequelae.
Late complications were of much greater concern and arose in eight patients (20%) at a median of 3.3 months (range 0.25–12) from the initial insertion.
Four patients (12.5% suffered biliary colic, three developed cholangitis, and one acute cholecystitis.
The development of cholangitis as a late complication occurred only in patients in whom a sphincterotomy was not carried out and this might be considered a prerequisite in all patients in whom an endoprosthesis is inserted as long term therapy.
There were two (5%) biliary related deaths, one patient with cholangitis and one with cholecystitis.
All of the patients in the late complication group has an in situ gall bladder.
Currently, approximately 50% of all patients undergoing a sphincterotomy for bile duct stones have their gall bladder in situ , and of these 6–20% subsequently require a cholecystectomy for biliary pain or cholecystitis during a follow up of one to six years [2.11].
The incidence of biliary related symptoms of 15% in the present series is similar to that reported in patients undergoing a sphincterotomy and stone extraction alone with the gall bladder left in situ.
In patients in whom endoprosthesis was inserted as a short term measure before surgery or a further attempt at endoscopic duct clearance the only complication observed with biliary colic in patients with gall bladders in situ (four cases).
Thus this approach may be considered both safe and effective as a temporary measure to relieve stone related biliary obstruction.
In conclusion biliary endoprosthesis insertion for common bile duct stones offers an important alternative means of establishing duct drainage in selected cases.
In patients without a gall bladder the biliary related complications have been negligible and probably for the elderly and or debilitated patients, this represents the optimum method of management.
In patients with an in situ gall bladder the risks of biliary related problems are higher although they are in keeping with the general incidence in patients who are treated with a sphincterotomy and successful duct clearance.
Some caution must be exercised, however, in these patients and the advent of laparoscopic cholecystectomy may markedly increase the proportion of such patients considered fit for gall bladder removal.
Latrogenic pancreatitis in familial adenomatous polyposis
Abstract
The first case of a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) who developed pancreatitis after routine screening and biopsy of the anpulla of Vater is described.
Upper gastrointestinal tract malignancy is a major cause of death in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).
Regular screening is therefore advocated to determine those at greatest risk and to start treatment early; as well as to study the natural history of duodenal adenomas.
Representative biopsies are taken of abnormal areas with histological examination to discover the degree of dysplasia and type of adenoma (tubular, tubulovillous, or villous).
These two factors, as well as the size and number of polyps, are, as they are in the large bowels, thought to be associated with a greater risk of malignant change.
The papillary area is commonly affected and is therefore the area where biopsies are usually carried out.
We report the first case of a patient with FAP who developed pancreatitis after routine screening and biopsy of the ampulla of Vater.
Case report
A 71 year old asymptomatic woma attended for a routine day case screening duodenoscopy using a side viewing video endoscope (Olympus EVIS JFV10).
She had had a colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis for FAP in 1961 and had required 20 fulgurations for rectal polyps.
She was not taking any drugs.
Her first upper gastrointestinal endoscopy in 1988 had shown more than 20 polyps, between 0.5 mm and 5 mm in size.
Histological examinations at this time showed the papilla to have mild dysplasia and duodenal polyps to be tubular adenomas with mild dysplasia.
Biopsy specimens were taken with 7 mm forceps (Olympus FB-24U).
She returned for her follow up endoscopy in 1992 and once again had more than 20 polyps, the largest being 5 mm in size.
Biopsy specimens were taken of suspicious areas including a 5 mm polyp on the papilla (this was a tubular adenoma with mild dysplasia).
Biopsy specimens were taken with new rat toothed flexible head biopsy forceps (Olympus FB-40Q).
Within eight hours she had developed central abdominal pain, vomiting, and distension.
She was seen to be afebrile with a tender rigid abdomen on admission to her local hospital.
An erect abdominal x ray showed no free gas but a presumptive diagnosis of perforation was made.
Unfortunately plasma amylase activities were not assessed before or after surgery.
At laparotomy, however, she was found to have an area of oedematous, necrotic, haemorrhagic pancreas adjacent to the second part of the duodenum.
There was no perforation seen.
She was treated with fluids and analgesia.
She recovered well and was discharged eight days later.
Discussion
This is the first published case of iatrogenic pancreatitis in FAP.
FAP patients are at 100–300 times greater risk than the general population of dying from upper gastrointestinal malignancies.
When treated with a prophylactic colectomy the colon cancer risj is eliminated and the rectal cancer risk is minimised by regulkar surveillance and fulguration of rectal polyps.
Duodenal malignancy then becomes the greatest cause of death in patients with FAP; therefore identification of patients most at risk of malignant change of the duodenum is of great importance.
At present the best way of monitoring these patients is by endoscopy.
The incidence of pancreatitis after endoscopic retrograde cholangio pancreatographic and sphincterotomy requiring hospital admission is approximately 1%; although the serum amylase activity is almost always raised.
The incidence of pancreatitis after endoscopic biopsy of the papilla is unknown.
Even without endoscopic intervention, patients with FAP are at risk of developing acute pancreatitis.
In a series of 141 patients who had had a prophylactic colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis, five patients had a history of acute pancreatitis.
Histological information was available in two of these patients; both showed coexisting pancreatic abnormalities (an 8 mm adenoma in the mid section of the pancreas with a dilated duct and an adenocarcinoma at the ampulla of Vater).
Indeed, adenomas and dysplastic areas may occur throughout the biliary and pancreatic tree in patients with FAP and these may predispose such patients to pancreatitis.
Like all screening programmes endoscopic surveillance of the duodenum in FAP patients seeks to detect treatable lesions at an asymptomatic stage and this has been achieved.
Despite targeting this relatively small but high risk group, such screening programmes have been the subject of criticism.
The anti-screening argument would be bolstered if the complication rate of examinations was high.
This is the first complication, however, that we have encountered in 150 patients in whom biopsies have been performed.
Perhaps the rat toothed forceps used in the present case contributed to the onset of pancreatitis as they had not been used before.
Numerous further endoscopic biopsies of enlarged papillas in FAP patients have since been performed with standard forceps without complication.
As almost 90% of papillas in FAP patients show visible enlargement or deformity suggestive of dysplasia we consider it ethical and clinically desirable to continue such histological assessment.
Biomechanical wall properties of the human rectum.
A study with impedance planimetry
Abstract
Biomechanical properties of the rectal wall were studied in 17 healthy adult volunteers (nine men and eight women).
With impedance planimetry it is possible to obtain simultaneous measurements of pressure and rectal cross sectional area (CSA) during balloon inflations.
Rectal distensions weredone with an intraluminal balloon using specificed pressures up to 40 cm H 2 O above baseline rectal pressure.
Balloon inflation caused a phase of rapid increase in rectal CSA followed by a phase of slow increase until a steady state was reached.
Steady state occurred within 67 to 140 seconds with the shortest period at the highest distension pressures.
Steady state rectal CSA values had a non-linear relation to increasing distension pressure.
Rectal CSA values in women showed a tendency of being slightly higher than male values at all pressure steps with a significant difference at 3 and 5 cm H 2 O. Biomechanical parameters were calculated from rectal CSA pressure relations.
Circumferential wall tension increased in a linear way.
Rectal compliance decreased in a non-linear way with no further decline between 30 and 40 cm H 2 O. The pressure elastic modulus increased steeply until a distension pressure of 35 cm H 2 O with no further increase to 40 cm H 2 O. This suggests that rectal tone is reduced as the muscle fails to resist further distension at 35 cm H 2 O and higher pressures.
Impedance planimetry offers new possibilities for investigation of anorectal physiology through the study of segmental biomechanical wall properties of the human rectum.
Changed anorectal function and innervation are commonly studied by pressure-volume relations by balloon distension, reflex investigations, characterisation of sphincter function, and registration of rectal sensation.
Balloon distension elucidates the reservoir mechanism from a sensory point of view.
It provides some information on biomechanical properties of the rectal wall.
Commonly, rectal distensibility is determined as rectal compliance and calculated as the changes of volume and intrarectal pressure ().
Radial expansion, however, is not necessarily related to the volume infused because of the multidirectional expansion of the volume.
Longitudinal extension of a compliant balloon is likely to occur during distension.
This happens when tension, which has developed in the rectal wall, impedes further radial expansion.
The value of such compliance measurements is disputed.
To characterise segmental biomechanical properties of the rectal wall and regional thresholds of sensation new methods have to be introduced.
This study concerns a method named impedance planimetry by which it is possible to obtain segmental information on biomechanical properties at one specific circumference of the rectal wall.
The aim was to describe these properties by measuring rectal cross sectional area (CSA) at the site of distension upon graded isobaric distension in healthy volunters.
We have used the technique in human and animal studies of intestinal wall properties.
Methods
SUBJECTS
We studied 17 healthy volunteers without any history of bowel disease.
The volunteers were nine men (age 28 (27–29) years, height 185 (179–187) cm, weight 80 (75–85) kg) and eight women (26 (23–29) years, 169 (166–172) cm, 58 (53–63) kg).
Before the study we obtained informed consent from all subjects.
The study was performed according to the second declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Ethical Committee of Aarhus county.
The study was conducted between 8.00 am and 1.00 pm.
There was a period of at least 12 hours of fasting before the investigations.
No laxative was used and subjects were asked to empty the rectum and bladder.
Before the investigation a digital examination confirmed an empty rectum.
TECHNIQUE AND EXPERIMENTAL PROBE DESIGN
We used a specially constructed four electrode impedance measuring system located inside a balloon on a 20 cm long probe with an 8 mm external diameter (Fig 1).
Two outer ring electrodes for excitation were placed with an interelectrode distance of 6 cm.
A generator delivered a constant alternating current of 100 microamperes at 5 kHz for excitation.
Midway between the excitation electrodes we placed two ring electrodes with an interelectrode distance of 0.2 cm for measurement of impedance.
We used copper electrodes wound around the probe in 0.5 mm wide grooves to ensure a smooth surface.
The distance between the excitation and detection electrodes was chosen on the basis that the CSA can be measured up to a diameter of 4 to 5 times the interelectrode distance.
We measured CSA according to the field gradient principle from the measurement of impedance of the fluid inside the balloon.
Rise time for measurement of CSA was 0.02 (0.02–0.03) seconds.
We calibrated the CSA measuring system in PVC tubes with holes of known CSAs.
Before the measurements we calibrated the measurement system with a two point minimum and maximum calibration.
The latex balloon was 6.9 cm long.
To prevent longitudinal elongation of the balloon during distension we chose a balloon with a well thickness of 0.2 mm.
The balloon could be inflated with 37°C electrically conducting fluid (0.65 mM NaCl solution) through an infusion channel (diameter 4.5 mm) up to a CSA of 6361 mm 2 (diameter=90 mm and a volume of 200 ml) without stretching the balloon wall.
The container was cylindrical with a surface area of 363 cm 2 ensuring a maximum reduction of the water level in the container of 0.55 cm in case of maximum balloon inflation.
With a digitally controlled heating device (microprocessor HT 50, temperature sensor Pt 100, and heating tape BD 1194, Horst, Germany) we secured the temperature stability of the infusion fluid.
A side hole for balloon pressure measurements was placed between the detection electrodes.
The lumen and the side hole had diameters of 0.7 mm.
We measured pressurewith a low compliance perfusion system connected to an external transducer (strain gauge MX860, Medex Inc) with a perfusion rate of 0.16 to 0.20 ml min -1 .
Rise time for measurement of pressure was 0.09 (0.08 to 0.10) seconds.
INVESTIGATIONAL PROCEDURE
The subjects were placed in the left lateral position with hips and knees flexed to 90°.
Calibration of the measuring system was done before the insertion of the probe into the rectum.
We secured the position of the prove by tape attached to the buttocks and measured the rectal CSA between 8.2 and 8.4 cm from the anal verge.
The balloon was inflated to a pressure of 30 cm H 2 O to unfold the balloon before the measurements were recorded.
There was a resting period of 20 minutes before the measurements were taken.
After this period we did a series of rectal pressure distensions.
We assessed the baseline rectal pressure by increasing the pressure column in steps of 1 cm.
We continued until the inflation of the balloon caused an increase in rectal CSA.
Raising a pressure column of consecutively increasing pressures at 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, and 40 cm above the baseline rectal pressure provided the distension stimulus.
Each distension lasted at least 1.5 minutes and until a steady state rectal CSA value.
Five minute rest periods separated each rectal distension.
We tested the in vivo reproducibility of the steady state values with repeated measurements at the pressure steps 10, 20, 30, and 40 cm H 2 O in five subjects.
After each rectal distension, the subjects described their sensation.
Records of rectal CSA and pressure were amplified and analogue to digital converted with a sample frequency of 10 Hz and stored online with software developed in our laboratory (Mingo).
DATA ANALYSIS
Computer analysis was applied to the data.
The calibration curve was non-linear.
Therefore we calibrated the results with an 8 point calibration curve to obtain a final linear calibration (Fig 2).
We determined the steady state rectal CSA values for further analysis of the biomechanical parameters.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data are presented as medians and quartiles.
We used the Mann-Whitney U test to compare the results of different groups.
Results were significant if p.
Furthermore, we used a Wilcoxon signed ranks test to test the in vivo reproducibility of steady state rectal CSA values.
Results
The baseline rectal pressure was 4 (4–5) cm H 2 O. Figure 3 shows recordings at different distension pressures and the resulting increase in rectal CSA from one subject.
An initial rapid rectal CSA increase was followed by a phase of slow increase until steady state was reached.
This was the configuration of the rectal CSA change seen in all the balloon inflations.
Rectal reflex contractions elicited upon distensions were detected as deflections in rectal CSA, but no clearcut relation to the distension pressure could be established.
The time to steady state rectal CSA was 67 to 140 seconds with the shortest period at the highest distension pressures.
As Figure 4 shows, we found a good in vivo reproducibility of the steady state rectal CSA values (p=0.53).
Steady state rectal CSA values had a non-linear relation to the increasing distension pressure (Fig 5).
Rectal CSA values in women showed a tendency to be slightly higher than in men.
The difference, however, was only statistically significant at distension pressures of 3 and 5 cm H 2 O (p=0.037 and p=0.012).
Rectal CSA values related to height, weight, and surface area showed no significant relation.
Among the calculated biomechanical wall parameters only wall tension showed significant differences at the lowest distension pressures between men and women.
Therefore, we considered all subjects as belonging to one group when presenting the data for the these parameters.
Rectal wall tension increased in a linear way with increasing distension pressures (Fig 6), whereas rectal compliance decreased in a non-linear way with increasing distension pressure.
There was no further decline in rectal compliance between 30 cm H 2 O and 40 cm H 2 O (Fig 7).
The pressure elastic modulus increased in an almost sigmoid way until a distension pressure of 35 cm H 2 O. There was a small but insignificant decrease in wall stiffness between the distension pressures of 35 cm H 2 O and 40 cm H 2 O (Fig 8).
RECTAL SENSATIONS
Figure 9 shows data for rectal sensations.
Only three subjects had a feeling of wind before a period of intermittent need for defecation.
This feeling was followed by a feeling of continued need for defecation throughout the distension period.
Only one subject had a feeling of urge at the highest pressure step.
It was possible to classify rectal sensations into a group with no sensation, a group with intermittent need for defecation, and a group with continued need for defecation throughout the distension period.
A comparison of men and women in terms of rectal CSA, wall tension, and pressure at the onset of intermittent need for defecation showed no significant difference (p=0.22, p=0.26, and p= 0.49, respectively).
Furthermore, there was no significant difference at the onset of continued need for defecation throughout the distension period (p=0.26, p=0.22, and p=0.39, respectively).
Discussion
Impedance planimetry is a novel technique offering possibilities to characterise biomechanical properties in vivo of the gut wall.
The principles of measurement and possible sources of error of this technique have been described in detail.
The method provides an accurate segmental measurement of distension of tubular organs.
From measurements of pressure and CSA the technique allowed us to derive several biomechanical parameters.
The thickness of the rectal wall during distension could not be measured.
Therefore, we calculated the circumferential wall tension, compliance, and the pressure elastic modulus rather than wall stress and Youngs elastic modulus.
The validity of rectal distension measurements, usually determined with pressure-volume relations, is disputed.
Volume is a three dimensional variable.
Studies of other tubular organs have shown that the major tensile stress during distension is in the circumferential direction.
Because volume is a three dimensional variable, it does not give exact information about a specific circumference.
The advantage of pressure and volume relations seems more obvious in globular organs such as the bladder and the stomach by use of a barostat.
With the rectal pressure as the zero pressure reference point, the applied distension pressure probably equals the transmural pressure allowing the calculation of circumferential wall tension according to the law of LaPlace.
The calculation is valid for the innermost layer of the wall at a constant transmural pressure and at steady state conditions.
Furthermore, a uniformly cylindrical lumen and wall contact at the site of distension must be assumed during distensions.
We achieved that in a previous study, and before this study we showed these conditions with a vaginal ultrasonic probe during distension series of the rectum (unpublished data).
In this study the rectal CSA curve at each distension pressure could be described by an initial rapid phase followed by a slow phase of filling before reaching steady state.
Previously, we have shown similar patterns in other intestinal segments by use of impedance planimetry.
It is a measure of viscoelastic properties, and not as previously stated a particular rectal phenomenon of accommodation to different volume loadings.
The rectal CSA values of men and women were significantly different at transmural pressures of 3 and 5 cm H 2 O. This shows that the rectal luman is bigger and that the rectum is more compliant at low induced pressures in women.
We need further investigations, however, including larger populations of men and women to confirm the tendency of higher low pressure distensibility in women than in men.
Despite a non-linear increase of luminal rectal radius similar to the rectal CSA increase, the increase of the circumferential wall tension with increasing distension pressures was linear.
This suggests that it is the major influence of the transmural pressure on this parameter calculated according to the Law of LaPlace.
Calculation of stress-strain relations seems more appropriate to estimate the load of distension on a rather thick walled human rectum.
Compliance showed no linear relation to the distension pressure (Fig 7).
The rectum was most compliant at low pressures and declined with increasing distension pressure until no further progress in compliance between the pressures of 30 to 40 cm H 2 O. Because non-linearity it is doubtful if rectal compliance should be characterised by a single value.
The pressure elastic modulus showed a similar non-linear pattern.
This parameter is more appropriate than compliance to describe biomechanics because it measures the changes in rectal CSA and pressure and also considers the actual degree of distension.
Variations in rectal tone as shown by Bell et al might change rectal distensibility upon distension.
The influence of smooth muscle cells within the wall of a tubular organ upon intraluminar distensions is shown in studies of vascular distensibility.
Variations in vascular muscle stiffness change arterial distensibility, for example, when the arterial muscle contracts, the vessel is less distensible.
In this study, the rectal pressure elastic modulus (wall stiffness), increased steeply until a distension pressures of 35 cm H 2 O with no further increase to 40 cm H 2 O. At 35 cm H 2 O and higher pressures muscle tone may be reduced as the muscle fails to resist further distension.
If only passive properties determine the pressure elastic modulus, an exponential increase would have been expected.
We showed this in a previous study of the isolated perfused procine duodenum.
Studies of the human oesophagus and duodenum showed the same influence of intestinal tone upon the pressure elastic modulus during distension.
Sensations elicited by rectal distensions are the subject for research by several investigators.
Volume is commonly the independent variable.
Previously, another group performed isobaric distensions with simultaneous registration of the infused volume.
In this study we classified rectal sensations elicited by isobaric distensions according to the segmental steady state values obtained.
Previous results have shown a higher threshold of rectal sensation in men than in women.
This could not be confirmed by this study.
This may be caused by the use of different techniques, for example, continuous rectal filling with a certain infusion rate up to the maximal tolerable volume.
The method may be a future tool in studies of rectal biomechanical wall properties and anorectal motility elicited by intraluminal distensions.
Furthermore, in combination with new techniques, for example, high resolution ultrasound systems, it permits the measurement of stress-strain relations of the rectal wall and so obtain values of the rectal wall thickness during distensions.
Neoterminal ileal blood flow after ileocolonic resection for Crohn's disease
Abstract
Endoscopic laser Doppler flowmetry was used to measure neoterminal ileal blood flow in 16 patients who had undergone ileocolonic resection for Crohn's disease and had since remained clinically and biochemically free of disease, and eight control patients who had undergone similar surgery for colonic carcinoma.
Four patients with clinically active Crohn's disease of the terminal ileum were also studied.
Noeterminal ileal recurrence in those with inactive Crohn's disease was graded endoscopically.
The median and minimum of five local blood flow measurements performed in each patient were inversely correlated with the endoscopic recurrence grade (r=0.52, p=0.04 and r=0.63, p=0.01 respectively).
Relative to the control group, median blood flow was non-significantly lower in the inactive Crohn's disease group as a whole (p) but was significantly reduced in patients with active disease (p=0.02).
A progressive reduction in tissue perfusion may accompany recurrence of Crohn's disease while at a subclinical stage.
Recent studies of resection specimens from patients with Crohn's disease have shown inflammatory microvascular occlusion, apparently secondary to mesenteric vasculitis.
The same authors have localised most granulomas in Crohn's disease to the wall of intestinal blood vessels.
The identification of focal microvascular injury within and adjacent to grossly normal mucosa led to their proposal that vascular compromise is central to the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease.
It remains possible, however, that these abnormalities are simply a consequence of small vessels becoming involved in the chronic inflammatory process.
Several colonoscopic studies have drawn attention to the development of subclinical lesions within the neoterminal ileum after ileocolonic resection for Crohn's disease.
Aphthoid ulcers and neoterminal ileitis develop in the early postoperative months in about 70% of patients.
Although it was initially considered that these endoscopic signs were features of disease recrudescence, careful perioperative and postoperative surveillance studies have established that the lesions represent true disease recurrence.
If microvascular occlusion plays a primary role in the pathogenesis of the disease, reduced blood flow would be expected in association with these subclinical manifestations of recurrence.
This would be in contrast to the increased blood flow normally associated with an inflammatory response, as has been observed in ulcerative proctitis.
Endoscopic laser Doppler flowmetry was used to perform a controlled study of neoterminal ileal blood flow in patients whose Crohn's disease had remained clinically and biochemically inactive after ileocolonic resection.
The control group consisted of patients who had undergone similar surgery for carcinoma of the right colon.
For secondary comparison, a small group of patients with clinical, biochemical, and endoscopic evidence of active Crohn's ileitis was also investigated.
Patients and methods
CROHN'S DISEASE PATIENTS
Seventeen asymptomatic patients who had previously undergone ileocolonic resection for Crohn's disease agreed to participate in this study.
One was subsequently excluded because it proved impossible to advance the colonoscope as far as the anastomosis in this patient.
There were five men and 11 women with a median age of 40 years (range 21–64 years).
The diagnosis was based on typical clinical and histological features.
The original operation had been performed a median of four years (range 1–14 years) before this study.
Three patients had developed anastomotic disease recurrence and had required a further resection and reanastomosis 8–14 years before this study.
Patients were not included if they had required corticosteroid treatment for active disease after their most recent resection.
None had clinical or biochemical evidence of disease activity at the time of study (Best activity index <and serum C reactive protein <mg/l).
Four patients with clinically active Crohn's ileitis were also studied.
They comprised one man and three women with median age of 25 years (range 18–33 years) and a median Best activity index of 250 (range 220–340).
One of these patients had undergone ileocolonic resection for Crohn's disease five years before this study.
CONTROL PATIENTS
Eight patients with a history of ileocolonic resection for carcinoma of the right colon agreed to undergo blood flow studies during their planned surveillance colonoscopy.
There were five men and three women with a median age of 67 years (range 51–79 years).
The resection had been performed a median of three years previously (range 3–8 years).
METHODS
After standard orthograde bowel preparation, each patient received intravenous diazepam and pethidine, the doses being titrated according to the response.
The colonoscope was advanced to the ileocolonic anastomosis and the endoscopist graded the appearance of the neoterminal ileum in each Crohn's disease patient according to the criteria of Rutgeerts as follows:
A single endoscopist (MCA) performed all grading.
Blood flow measurements were performed using a Periflux PF3 laser Doppler flowmeter (Perimed, Stockholm) with a 12 kHz bandwidth and 3 seconds output time constant settings.
The endoscopic flowmeter probe (model PF309) had optical fibres of 125 µ diameter and 250 µ centre-to-centre spacing.
Constant gain was ensured by regular calibration using a colloidal latex suspension according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
Hyoscine-N-butylbromide (40 mg) was given intravenously immediately before measurements to minimise peristalsis.
The flowmeter probe was passed through the biopsy channel of the endoscope and the tip was placed in gentle contact with the mucosa.
Measurements were obtained at five locations around the circumference of the ileum just proximal to the anastomosis in the inactive Crohn's disease and control groups, and in three to five inflamed areas of the terminal ileum or ileocaecal junction in patients with active disease.
Measurements on ulcers and their immediate margins were avoided.
The flowmeter output, in arbitrary perfusion units, was recorded over a period of 30–60 seconds at each location, and the mean of each such recording, ignoring easily identified artefacts due to peristalsis, was taken as a single measurement.
Interpretation of blood flow recordings and endoscopic grading were performed in a mutually blind fashion.
The reproducibility of blood flow measurements performed in this way was assessed in separate patients by performing successive recordings at a single location.
The mean coefficient of variation of 12 of these series of repeated measurements was 18%.
The coefficient of variation of the measurements for each patient in the present study was calculated as a measure of within patient variability.
The median and minimum of the readings for each patient were used for intergroup comparisons and for assessment of the relationship between blood flow and endoscopic grade.
Statistical analysis was performed using the Mann-Whitney test and Spearman's rank correlation test as appropriate.
Departures from the null hypothesis were assessed at the 5% significance level.
Results
The within patient coefficient of variation for blood flow measurements ranged from 12.5 to 63.0%, and averaged 31.9%.
It did not differ significantly between groups.
Blood flow measurements in the three groups are compared in the Table and in Figure 1.
Median and minimum neoterminal ileal blood flow values in patients with inactive Crohn's disease were lower than in non-Crohn's disease controls but the differences were not statistically significant (p).
In patients with clinically active Crohn's disease, blood flow was lower than in both of the other groups, although only the difference in median values relative to the control group was significant (p=0.02).
There was an inverse correlation between the endoscopic grade of recurrence in patients with inactive Crohn's disease and both median and minimum blood flow values (r=-0.52, p=0.04, and r=-0.63, p=0.01 respectively: Fig 2).
In the subgroup of patients with grade 2 recurrence or higher, the contrast with controls approached statistical significance (p=0.05 and p=0.07 for median and minimum values respectively).
Blood flow was not significantly correlated with age or length of time since surgery in any of the groups.
Discussion
This study has shown that after ileocolonic resection for Crohn's disease, neoterminal ileal blood flow as measured by laser Doppler flowmetry falls as the endoscopic recurrence severity grading increases.
These changes precede clinical and biochemical evidence of disease recurrence.
Patients with higher grades of endoscopic recurrence (at least five aphthous ulcers) and those with active Crohn's ileitis had similar levels of blood flow, which were lower than in controls.
There have been few previous studies of intestinal blood flow in Crohn's disease.
Su et al , using endoscopic reflectance spectrophotometry, suggested that blood flow was increased in affected regions of the colon in patients with active Crohn's disease.
Hulten et al reported that colonic blood flow as measured by intraoperative Kr clearance was increased in severe diffuse Crohn's colitis but reduced in chronic segmental disease.
In Crohn's ileitis, the same authors found flow to be normal in early stage and reduced in late stage disease, and in both the colon and ileum reduced blood flow was associated with submucosal fibrosis and decreased vascularity.
Quantitative fluorescent radiography has confirmed the reduction in the microvascular volume in segmental Crohn's disease.
These observations supported long standing speculation that vascular insufficiency could be a pathogenic factor, but suggested that vascular and haemodynamic changes were variable and dependent on the stage and pattern of disease.
More recent histopathological and microvascular studies suggest that vascular involvement may occur at an earlier stage and play a more important role in the disease process than had previously been supposed.
Wakefield et al have shown a multifocal occlusive vasculitis in resected bowel affected by Crohn's disease, and have shown that a high proportion of granulomas within the bowel wall directly involve damaged blood vessels.
As vascular lesions were observed in macroscopically normal areas of bowel, and adjacent to and in continuity with normal blood vessels, it was proposed that the vasculitis was a primary process and that the macroscopic and histological features of Crohn's disease could be explained by multifocal intestinal infarction.
Although the present study suggests that a reduction in blood flow may precede disease recurrence as defined by clinical and biochemical criteria, it does not support the suggestion that a perfusion defect is an essential precursor to mucosal ulceration.
We analysed minimum blood flow values because of their potential to show the presence of focally ischaemic areas, but found a large overlap between Crohn's disease and control patients.
Since the laser Doppler recordings represent highly localised measurements, it remains possible that the most poorly perfused areas escaped detection in some patients.
Another possibility is that ischaemia progresses to ulceration so rapidly that it is unlikely to be observed in isolation.
We were unable to show a significant difference in blood flow between the control group and the inactive Crohn's disease group as a whole.
It is possible that a greater difference would have emerged if we had been able to age-match the Crohn's disease and control groups, as age has been shown to be inversely correlated with intestinal blood volume.
Another factor masking differences between groups was the wide variation in median blood flow values between individual patients.
This was comparable with the interpatient variation reported by others using laser Doppler, venous outflow collection, and isotope clearance techniques in the gastrointestinal tract.
Variations in laser Doppler readings between different measurement sites within a given patient may be due to heterogeneity of flow or to factors degrading the reproducibility of measurements.
The inter-site coefficient of variation in this study (32%) was substantially higher than was observed when measurements were repeated at the same site (18%), suggesting that much of the apparent heterogeneity was genuine.
Inter-site variation in laser Doppler flow measurements has been shown to be partly related to the small dimensions of the measurement volume, which make the results highly sensitive to local non-uniformity of microvascular perfusion.
An important question in the interpretation of the laser Doppler readings is the depth of the measurement region.
Intraoperative studies by Ahn et al showed a good correlation between laser Doppler flowmetry recordings and measurements of total venous outflow in the feline and human small bowel, and provided direct evidence that the measurements reflected blood flow throughout the full thickness of the bowel wall in both species.
Those studies utilised a probe with 700 µ diameter optical fibres, however, whereas the probe in the present study had narrower, more closely spaced fibres, and this would be expected to reduce the effective measurement depth.
Johansson et al found that interposition of unperfused tissue of 2.4 mm thickness between the bowel and a probe with similar geometry to our own completely abolished the blood flow signal.
This suggests that the depth of measurement in our study did not exceed 2.4 mm, and that the measurements thus primarily represent mucosal perfusion, with a possible submucosal contribution attenuated by depth.
Thickening of all layers of the bowel wall is a feature of Crohn's disease, a factor perhaps further weighting the recordings towards mucosal as opposed to submucosal and muscularis blood flow.
Since the mucosa is normally the most richly perfused tissue layer, this factor is unlikely to have artificially promoted either the observed reduction in flow in patients with active disease, or the negative correlation between flow and disease severity in asymptomatic patients.
However, it could have hidden a greater reduction in flow in the deeper layers of the bowel wall, which may be the main site of vascular compromise.
This study suggests that blood flow disorders are present in recurrent Crohn's disease that is subclinical, and are related to its endoscopic grade of severity.
This is consistent with anatomical evidence of microvascular occlusion and with the hypothesis that reduced tissue perfusion is a contributory factor in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease, although proof of a cause/effect relationship remains a difficult task.
Endoscopic laser Doppler flowmetry provides a suitable means of investigating haemodynamic aspects of the disease process, and further advances may be made by performing longitudinal studies.
Non-invasive detection of gastro-oesophageal reflux using an ambulatory system
Abstract
The aim of this study was the separate measurement of reflux of food and acid into the oesophagus in 37 healthy, ambulant subjects.
This was performed by radiolabelling the food and monitoring its reflux with a small directional gamma detector, which was placed externally over the oesophagus, and connected to an ambulatory data recorder.
The pH was measured with a conventional oesophageal pH electrode.
This method permitted the separate characterisation of acid and neutral (food) components of gastro-oesophageal reflux.
The gastric emptying characteristics of the test meal were also monitored by gamma scintigraphy in a separate experiment.
The oesophageal pH fell below 4 for 3.2% (mean (SD)) of the recording time.
Food reflux alone occurred for 17.8% of the recording time.
Simultaneous food and acid reflux occurred for only 0.95% of the time.
Not every reflux event detected by a fall in pH was seen as an increase in counts as a result of reflux of food, and vice versa.
This poor correlation of food and acid reflux implies incomplete mixing of food and acid in the stomach, and further shows the inadequacy of reflux diagnosis methods that depend on pH detection alone.
Ambulatory pH monitoring is a well established technique for the assessment of gastro-oesophageal reflux.
Various parameters are used to assess the severity of reflux, for example, percentage time for which the oesophagus reaches a pH of less than 4, number of episodes, and average duration of each reflux episode.
Although these data are extremely useful, it cannot assess reflux of potentially harmful materials such as bile, which has a near neutral pH, or even food with a near neutral pH that may contain other damaging agents such as pepsin.
Reflux of radiolabelled food and liquids can be measured using the technique of gamma scintigraph; however, in this procedure the subjects are non-ambulant as they have to be continually monitored by standing in front of, or lying under, a gammacamera to detect the reflux event.
It is therefore not practical to monitor patients for long periods with this technique.
Also reflux provoked by postural changes such as stopping cannot be measured by this method.
Various techniques to promote reflux while imaging have been attempted, such as abdominal cuffing, in which a binder is placed over the abdomen and the pressure is increased by inflating it with air.
It has been argued that compression of the abdomen increases the ‘pinchcock’ effect of the angular incisura and so it is possible that this manoeuvre could actually prevent reflux in some patients.
Gamma scintigraphy has been shown to be more sensitive than either radiography or the standard acid reflux test in the detection of gastro-oesophageal reflux, with a sensitivity of 85.5%, compared with 69.5% with the standard acid reflux test and 27.5% with radiography.
Scintigraphy is also a sensitive test in patients where endoscopy and histological examination cannot confirm the presence or absence of reflux.
The advantages of gamma scintigraphy are offset by the fact that patients are required to be static during imaging, whereas it has been shown that it is more reliable to monitor reflux in ambulant patients than patients restricted within a hospital routine.
At Nottingham we have developed a technique for measuring reflux of radiolabelled food into the oesophagus in ambulant subjects using a highly collimated cadmium telluride gamma detector, which is worn in a harness over the oesophagus.
To compare the new technique with the conventional intraoesophageal pH measurement, a method was developed to locate a pH electrode at the same point in the oesophagus as that monitored by the cadmium telluride detector.
The reflux patterns of both food and acid were then measured in 37 healthy volunteer subjects after a refluxogenic meal.
The gastric residence of the solid and liquid phases of the meal in the stomach was also characterised using gamme scintigraphy in healthy volunteers.
The gastri pH profile produced by the meal was also measured in the same subjects and its total buffering capacity was measured in vitro by titration.
Methods
The test meal consisted of (ingredients per person): two eggs (approximate weight 120 g), 50 g grated cheese, 30 g each of tomato, onion, mushroomm green peppers, and smoked mackerel, 10 g butter, one slice buttered toast, 250 ml lemonade, one small (about 50 g) apple pie, 50 g ice cream, and one cup of coffee (with cream and sugar if desired).
The meal was served as a savoury omelette with the lemonade, followed by apple pie and ice cream with a cup of coffee as a second course.
Identical test meals were used for all the experiments.
This meal was designed to include many reflux provoking foods to maximise postprandial reflux in normal subjects.
IN VITRO STUDIES
Buffering capacity of the test meal
The cooked test meal was cut into small pieces, mixed thoroughly, and placed in a beaker in a water bath at 37°C.
One hundred millilitre samples of simulated gastric juice (USP formulation) were then added to the test meal, the mixture was stirred thoroughly, and the resultant pH measured when it had stabilised after 10 minutes.
Additions were repeated until a pH of 2 was obtained.
Characterisation of the collimation for the gamma detector
The experiments required the gamma detector (Bionuclear Services Ltd, Cornwall) to be well shielded from the activity in the stomach while still being able to detect the potentially small amount of refluxed activity in the oesophagus.
The polar and cartesian responses of the detector were measured with a small source of technetium-99m (9 9 m Tc).
The shielding with the collimator supplied by the manufacturers was insufficient as it caused a high background level, and hence a new lead collimator was designed to provide a more directional response.
IN VIVO STUDIES
Ethical considerations and volunteer selection
Healthy male and non-pregnant female volunteers, age range 19 to 31, were recruited from the University student population.
Subjects were screened by a fully qualified medical practitioner.
Female subjects were tested for pregnancy on the morning of the trial.
The volunteers were given both written and verbal information as to the nature of the trial.
Approval was obtained from the Nottingham University Hospital Ethical Committee.
Permission to give isotopes was obtained from the Department of Health.
Measurement of the gastric emptying of liquid and solid phases of the test meal
The omelette was labelled by the addition of 2 MBq technetium-99m (9 9 m Tc) tin colloid per subject into the eggs before cooking.
The integrity of this method of labelling the meal has been well established by incubation of labelled scrambled egg with simulated gastric juice at 37°C and monitoring the rate of release of the label into the liquid phase.
The release of the label into the liquid phase correlated with the digeston of the egg by the pepsin.
In addition the liquid phase of the meal was labelled by the addition of 2 MBq Indium-113m diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid per subject (1 1 3 m In DTPA) to the lemonade.
Six healthy female subjects were fasted overnight, and on the morning of the trial ingested the radiolabelled test meal.
The gammacamera (GEC Maxicamera II) was fitted with a nigh energy parallel hole collimator (400 keV maximum energy).
Anterior and posterior images of 30 seconds durations were recorded at 15 minute intervals starting immediately after the subjects had ingested the first course of the meal.
Imaging was continued until the meal had left the stomach.
Radioactive anterior and posterior markers were placed on the thorax opposite the stomach to permit accurate alignment of subsequent images.
The 9 9 m Tc and 1 1 3 m In images were recorded simultaneously, but stored separately on the computer for subsequent analysis.
The counts were corrected for background contribution, radioactive decay, and energy overlap.
The geometric mean of the anterior and posterior counts was calculated to correct for tissue attenuation.
Interpolated data from each subject were then used to calculate the mean gastric emptying curves.
Measurement of the pH in the fundus after the test meal
The pH probe (Radiometer, Copenhagen) was sterilised and calibrated immediately before and after use.
The probe was labelled with approximately 0.5 MBq of technetium dried onto a small square of filter paper, sealed under waterproof tape, and placed very close to the electrode tip.
The gastric pH was measured in the same six volunteers who had participated in the gastric emptying study.
The volunteers fasted overnight, or for six hours after a light breakfast if the study was carried out in the afternoon.
The pH probe was passed nasogastrically with a small amount of water.
While standing in front of the gammacamera, the subject sipped a small amount of 9 9 m Tc-DTPA labelled water to outline the stomach.
The pH probe was then positioned in the fundus 5 cm below the cardia.
The pH was recorded at 15 second intervals by a solid state ambulatory recorder (Novo Memolog, Vertec Scientific, Reading).
Baseline values were recorded for approximately 15 minutes.
The meal was then ingested and the pH values were recorded for approximately four hours.
At the end of the study period, the information was transferred from the Memolog recorder into an Apple Macintosh computer for analysis.
The pH values for each subject were converted to H + concentrations.
These were averaged for the six subjects and the SEM was calculated.
These values were then converted back to the pH scale.
This provided an arithmetic mean of the H + concentration, rather than a geometric mean, which is calculated by averaging the pH values directly.
pH Monitoring and food reflux detection study
The study was carried out in 21 male and 16 female volunteers.
The test meal was radiolabelled with 1 MBq 9 9 m Tc tin colloid as described earlier, and in addition 1 MBq 9 9 m Tc-DTPA per subject was added to the lemonade.
One isotope was used to label both phases of the meal because the gamme detector cannot discriminate between isotopes.
The pH probe was prepared and marked as before but the radioactive marker was placed 5 cm from the electrode tip to be out of view of the gamma detector.
The volunteers fasted overnight or for six hours after a light breakfast if the study was carried out in the afternoon.
The pH probe was passed either nasogastrically or orogastrically with a small amount of water.
Fifty ml of 9 9 m Tc-DTPA labelled water (activity of 0.5 MBq) was given to the subject while they were standing in front of the gammacamera to outline the oesophagus and stomach.
The pH probe was then positioned in the oesophagus with the radioactive tag 10 cm from the cardia using the gammacamera, thus positioning the tip 5 cm above the cardia.
The positon of the gamma detector was identified by moving a small sealed 9 9 m Tc source over the chest with the subject standing in front of the gammacamera.
The source was positioned 5 cm above the cardia and 5 cm below the tag on the pH probe.
The exterior source was then removed and replaced with the gamma detector, which was worn in a harness to fix its position.
Both the gamma detector and the pH probe were connected to a dual channel solid state recorder (Novo Memolog 600 system, Vertec Scientific, Reading).
The timebase was set to record at 15 second intervals.
Subjects then ingested the radiolabelled meal.
Recording of data took place for approximately four hours, while the subject was ambulant; at the end of this period, the pH probe and gamma detector were removed and the calibration of the pH probe was checked.
The data from the Memolog recorder were transferred to the computer for analysis.
If a drift in calibration of the pH electrode exceeded 0.2 of a pH unit, a linear correction was made to the pH data.
The refluxed activity was corrected for decay and a baseline rejection was performed, and the area under the pH peaks calculated.
The time for which the oesophageal pH was below 4 and 5 after the meal was consumed was calculated as a percentage of the total postprandial recording time.
Peaks in the refluxed food count data were identified, and backgrounds removed, using a conventional moving average baseline algorithm, and the total amount of refluxed activity present as reflux peaks was calculated.
Results
IN VITRO STUDIES
The angular sensitivity of the gamma detector was characterised by its 3 dB angle.
This is the angle through which a source must be moved at constant detector distance to reduce the count to 50% of that measured with the source on the detector axis.
The uncollimated detector had a 3 dB angle of 75°, and the collimator supplied by the manufacturer with the detector reduced this only to 50°.
The 3 dB angle of the detector was reduced to 20° using the new collimator.
In practice, the main background source that we sought to reject from the refluxed food signal was as a result of the large pool of activity in the stomach.
This material would be approximately 10 cm from the probe and 10 cm off its axis, and at this point the detector signal would be reduced to less than 5% of its value on the detector axis.
The in vitro study showed that the test meal was capable of buffering 0.180 mol of H + ions before the pH was reduced to 2.0, about basal gastric pH.
This required 1 litre of simulated gastric fluid.
IN VIVO STUDIES
Gastric emptying of liquid and solid phases of the test meal
Figure 1 shows the mean gastric emptying of the test meal.
The liquid phase (lemonade) began to empty in a rapid exponential fashion immediately after ingestion.
After 0.7 (0.09) h (mean (SEM)), half of the liquid phase (T50) had emptied from the stomach.
In all subjects, the digestible phase (omelette) of the test meal emptied more slowly than the liquid phase and the mean T50 was 2.4 (0.38) h.
Measurement of the pH in the fundus after the test meal
Figure 2 shows the mean pH profile in the fundus.
The mean baseline fundal pH was 1.75 (0.25), and after ingestion of the test meal rose rapidly to 2.75 (0.75) by 10 minutes.
It remained at this value for a further 20 minutes before rising again to 3.5 (0.5) by 30 minutes and then falling back to baseline by 2.5 hours.
pH Monitoring and gamma detection
The oesophageal pH and refluxed activity from each subject was plotted against time, and a typical trace is shown in Figure 3.
All subjects reported belching after the meal.
Figure 4 shows the indvidual data for the subjects.
This represents the percentage time at background — that is, no food or acid reflux, the percentage of time with food reflux or acid reflux, and the percentage for which both food and acid were refluxed.
Also shown is the total amount of food refluxed (expressed as counts/10 7 of refluxed activity).
These variables were strongly skewed and seemed log normally distributed, so a log transform was used before calculating their means and deviations.
The oesophageal pH fell below 4 for 3.2+8.6/ -2.3% (mean (SD)) of the recording time.
Not every reflux event detected, however, by a fall in pH to less than 4 was seen as an increase in counts because of reflux of food, and vice versa.
Food reflux alone occurred for 17.8+53.2/-13.8% of the recording time.
Simultaneous food and acid reflux occurred for only 0.95+5.2/-1.2% of the time.
A wide variation among subjects was also seen in the total amount of food refluxed into the oesophagus.
This was 0.95+13.0/-0.9×10 7 counts, corresponding to a rather low mean but with a significant number of higher outliers.
Discussion
GASTRIC BEHAVIOUR OF THE TEST MEAL
The mean fundal baseline pH in the subjects was mean (SEM) 1.75 (0.25), which is in agreement with previous studies.
When the peak pH occurred in the fundus, about 90% of the solid meal and 50% of the liquid phase of the meal remained in the stomach.
This rapid rise in fundal pH is due to the buffering effect of the food, largely because of the protein present, and this has been seen in previous experiments with different test meals.
The pH of the test meal when measured in vitro was found to be 4.9, but this was not achieved in vivo because of the presence of an initial amount of gastric juice, and because of the immediate stimulation of acid production by the food.
Two hours after the meal was ingested, fundal pH had returned to baseline, but about 50% of the food solid phase and 20% of the liquid phase remained.
This behaviour is typical of the several meals we have investigated using scintigraphic techniques, and shows that it represents a physiological relevant test meal.
OESOPHAGEAL pH AND FOOD REFLUX
The subjects, all of whom had no previous history of reflux disease or gastric disturbances, showed a wide range of behaviour.
In general, the amounts of refluxed acid were low, the average person having acid in the oesophagus for about 3% of the recording time.
A significant number of subjects (7/37), however, had food reflux that was outside one standard deviation from the mean, whereas only one of these subjects would have had a positive reflux score by measuring acid alone.
The reflux of acid with no corresponding increase in counts suggests that although gastro-oesophageal reflux is stimulated by the presence of a meal, it is not simply acidified food that reaches the oesophagus, but unlabelled gastric acid.
This implies incomplete mixing of gastric acid with the food mass.
A similar finding has been reported using simultaneous gamma scintigraphy, oesophageal pH monitoring, and manometry in which only 23% of reflux events were detected by both methods.
In this study scintigraphy detected more reflux events (61%) than the pH monitoring alone (16%).
Oesophageal contractions not associated with acid reflux have been reported.
It is possible that these correspond to alkaline reflux, which would not be detected using the gold standard test of intraoesophageal pH monitoring.
There can often be a poor correlation between acid reflux and the degree or type of damage to the oesophagus; for example, there is not significant difference between the extent and patterns of reflux in patients with severe oesophagitis and those who have developed Barrett's oesophagus.
The ability to radiolabel the neutral components of reflux such as food or even bile using technetium-99m labelled hepatioiminodiacetic acid (Tc-99m HIDA) offers exciting opportunities towards the basic understanding of gastro-oesophageal reflux, mechanisms of gastro-oesophageal disease, and the effectiveness of its treatment without increasing the discomfort of the patient.
Oesophageal gamma counting for the diagnosis of reflux of neutral materials is a simple, non-invasive technique.
The small gamma probe used in our study has the added advantage that the patient is free to have a normal routine while the detector is worn.
This technique can provide information to assess reflux in terms of frequency and duration of both acid and alkaline reflux and allows the validation of current theories as to the development of complications in this disease.
The technique is also useful in the assessment of the efficacy of anti-reflux treatment because these formulations are of neutral pH and cannot be discriminated from normal oesophageal pH.
Interleukin 2 and interferon-γ augment anticolon antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity in ulcerative colitis
Abstract
In vitro effects of cytokines and therapeutic drugs on antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) mediated by anticolon antibody were investigated in serum samples from patients with ulcerative colitis.
A 5 1 Cr release assay was used to examine ADCC activity with the colon cancer cell line, colo 205, as the target and peripheral blood mononuclear cells as the effector.
High ADCC activity was shown in 13 of 32 (41%) patients with ulcerative colitis.
This ADCC activity was inhibited by protein A treatment of the serum samples.
Interleukin 2 (IL2) activated effector cells could enhance ADCC activity, but interferon-γ (IFN-γ) or tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) had no effect on the cytotoxic activity of effector cells.
Treatment of target cells with IFN-γincreased the vulnerability of these cells to ADCC with a large increase of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression on their surface.
Monoclonal antibodies to ICAM-1 inhibited this IFN-γ enhanced ADCC activity.
Interestingly, prednisolone (PSL) reduced ADCC activity, but sulphasalazine (SASP) or 5-aminosalyclylic acid (5-ASA) did not.
These results suggest that IL2 and IFN-γ could enhance colonic epithelial cell injury mediated by the ADCC mechanism in ulcerative colitis and that ADCC enhanced by cytokines is restored by PSL treatment.
Immunological abnormalities are generally accepted to be involved in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis.
T cell mediated immunity and microcirculatory disturbance may participate in the induction of colonic inflammation.
Circulating anticolon antibodies have been found in serum samples from patients with ulcerative colitis.
Whether or not these autoantibodies are directly related to the pathogenesis of this disease remains controversial.
There are some studies indicating that these autoantibodies may contribute to lysis of colon epithelial cells through antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) mechanisms.
We have previously reported that these autoantibodies are synthesised by mucosal or peripheral blood lymphocytes from patients with ulcerative volitis through the use of the Epstein Barr virus (EBV) transformation method.
There is no doubt that cytokines can contribute to the pathophysiology of the diseases in some chronic inflammatory states and autoimmune conditions.
Reports of in vitro production of cytokines by peripheral or mucosal mononuclear cells in inflammatory bowel disease, however, conflict.
It is postulated that cytokines may affect colonic inflammation, but it still remains unclear how they contribute to the exacerbation of the inflammation.
As cytokines modulate cytotoxic activities of various killer cells, perhaps ADCC mediated by anticolon antibody (anticolon ADCC) is as well modulated in vivo by the cytokines synthesised locally in the colonic mucosa of ulcerative colitis.
It has been considered that therapeutic drugs such as sulphasalazine (SASP), 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA), and prednisolone (PSL) may reduce the accelerated cytotoxicity.
In this study, we first investigated the effects of cytokines on anticolon ADCC activity and then examined the effects of therapeutic drugs on anticolon ADCC activity, natural killer activity, and lymphokine activated killer activity.
Patients and methods
SERUM SAMPLES
Ulcerative colitis was diagnosed on the basis of typical clinical, radiographic, and pathological features.
Serum samples were taken from 32 patients with ulcerative colitis (19 males and 13 females).
The mean age of the patients with ulcerative colitis was 36 (range 16–55) years.
The colitis was active in 17 patients and inactive in 15.
The serum samples from nine patient with Crohn's disease, six patients with colonic diverticulitis, and seven patients with colonic cancer were also tested.
Control serum samples were taken from 31 healthy hospital workers.
The sex and age distribution of the healthy control group was comparable with that of the patient group.
Serum samples were stored at -80°C without preservatives and centrifuged at 105000 g for 90 minutes before use.
The activity of anticolon antibody in the serum samples was detected by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with colon epithelial cells as reported previously.
MONONUCLEAR CELL PREPARATION
Heparinised blood was taken from apparently healthy volunteers for use as effector cells for cytotoxicity.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were purified by Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient through centrifugation.
After being washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), the PBMCs from healthy controls were used for the ADCC assay as effector cells.
To elucidate the characteristics of effector cells, PBMCs were separated into monocytes and lymphocytes by adherence onto Petri dishes.
The resulting population of adherent cells, subsequently designated monocytes, was more than 95% esterase positive and showed the morphological characteristics of monocytes as determined by Giemsa stained preparations.
ADCC ASSAY
A 5 1 Cr release assay was used to determine ADCC activity.
The human cancer cells from the cell line colo 205 that expressed colonic antigens detected by anticolon antibody positive serum was used as the target cells and PBMCs from healthy controls were used as effector cells.
These effector cells were preincubated with or without 1–100 U/ml of recombinant interleukin 2 (IL2)(Shionogi Pharm, Osaka, Japan) or 1–100 U/ml of recombinant interferon-γ (IFN-γ)(Shionogi Pharm, Osaka, Japan) for one day.
The target colo 205 cells were preincubated with or without 100 U/ml of IFN-γ for two days.
Recombinant human tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)(Boehringer Mannheim, Germany)(0.1–100 ng/ml) was added to effector cells and incubated for one day.
Target cells were treated with TNF-α for two days.
After being washed with medium, the target cells were suspended in 1 ml of medium containing 100 mCi Na 2 5 1 CrO 4 (Daiichi Radioisotope, Tokyo, Japan) and incubated for 45 minutes at 37°C.
The labelled cells were washed with medium and resuspended at a concentration of 1×10 5 cells/ml.
A 100 µl suspension of 5 1 Cr labelled target cells were incubated with 50 µl of 1:10 diluted serum from the patients with ulcerative colitis and 50 µl of effector cells (1:50 ratio of effector to target) for four hours at 37°C.
Culture of target cells and effector cells without serum was used as the control (control culture).
All cultures were performed in triplicate.
At the end of the incubation, supernatant was collected from each well and the radioactivity was measured with a γ-counter.
Maximum possible 5 1 Cr release was determined by three freeze thaw cycles.
ADCC activity was calculated according to the following formula, in which spontaneous cytotoxicity was reduced:
Staphylococcus aureus protein A (Sigma, St Louis, MO) was used for the inhibition assay.
This compound is known to bind to the Fc portion of IgG and to block the interaction between Fc of IgG and Fc receptor on effector cells.
The serum samples were incubated with 30 µg/ml of straphylococcus aureus protein A for 10 minutes and then centrifuged.
Monoclonal antibody to intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1)(Immunotech SA, Cedex, France), human lymphocyte antigen (HLA) A, B, C (BB 7.7, ATCC, Rockville, MD), and HLA-DR (L243, ATCC, Rockville, MD) was used at the concentration of 2 µg/ml to inhibit ADCC activity.
NATURAL KILLER ASSAY
K-562 cells (1×10 5 /ml) labelled with 5 1 Cr were used as target cells.
After the target cells were incubated with PBMCs (2×10 6 /ml) for four hours,5 1 Cr activity in the supernatant was measured.
The results were expressed in % cytotoxicity as follows:
LYMPHOKINE ACTIVATED KILLER ASSAY
5 1 Cr labelled Daudi cells (1×10 5 /ml) were used as target cells; PBMCs (2×10 6 /ml) were incubated with 1000 U of IL2 for two days and then cultured with the 5 1 Cr labelled target cells for four hours.
The results were expressed in % cytotoxicity according to the formula given for the natural killer assay.
EFFECTS OF DRUGS ON CYTOTOXICITY ACTIVITIES
To examine the effects of PSL, SASP, and 5-ASA on ADCC activity as well as on natural and lymphokine activated killer activity, those drugs were added at various concentrations to the cultures in all three kinds of assays already described.
IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE STAINING AND FLOW CYTOMETRY ANALYSIS
One million cells were incubated at 4°C for 30 minutes with monoclonal antibody to ICAM-1.
After washing, the cells were stained with fluorescence isothiocyanate conjugated rat anti-mouse Ig monoclonal antibody (Dako, Santa Barbara, CA, USA) at 4°C for 30 minutes.
For the staining of HLA-A, B, C and HLA-DR, FITC conjugated anti-HLA-A, B, C (W6/32, Sera-Labo, Sussex, UK) and anti-HLA-DR (L243, Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA, USA) were used.
After two washes, the stained cells were assayed for fluorescence intensity on a FACScan cell sorter (Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA, USA).
Results
ADCC ACTIVITY IN THE SERUM SAMPLES FROM PATIENTS WITH ULCERATIVE COLITIS
The mean ADCC activity of the serum samples from 32 patients with ulcerative colitis was 9.6 (SD 9.9) % and that from normal controls was 2.8 (2.5) %.
The difference was significant (p; fig 1).
Anticolon activities measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were 0.918 (0.281)(optical densities) in serum samples from patients with ulcerative colitis and 0.466 (0.144) in control samples.
Simple regression showed a significant correlation between the values in ELISA and ADCC activity (r =0.615, p).
In 17 patients with active ulcerative colitis, the mean cytotoxicity was 13.5 (SD 12.0) %, which was significantly higher than that of healthy controls.
By contrast, the cytotoxicity of 15 patients in the inactive stage was 4.8 (3.4) %, which was not significantly different from that of normal controls.
A % cytotoxicity above the normal range (mean (2 SD) in normal controls) was found in serum samples from 13 of 32 (41%) patients with ulcerative colitis.
The % cytotoxicities of nine patients with Crohn's disease and six patients with colonic diverticulitis were 4.44 (1.82) % and 3.94 (2.04) %.
These were not significantly higher than the % cytotoxicity of normal controls.
In serum samples from seven patients with colon cancer, the % cytotoxicity was 2.7 (1.9) %, which was not significantly different from that of serum samples from normal controls.
The serum samples from patients with high cytotoxic activity were used for the subsequent ADCC assay.
To confirm that the increased cytotoxicity was due to the interactions between the Fc portion of IgG and the Fc receptor on the effector cells,Staphylococcus aureus protein A was added to the ADCC assay.
It was found that Staphylococcus aureus protein A had a pronounced inhibition on ADCC (mean of 71% with a range of 51% to 92% inhibition).
EFFECT OF IL2 ON ADCC ACTIVITY
The % cytotoxicity of the six serum samples from patients with ulcerative colitis was 11.2 (4.3) % when untreated effector cells were used (Fig 2(A)).
Preincubation of the effector cells with 1 U/ml, 10 U/ml, or 100 U/ml of IL2 enhanced ADCC activity in the serum samples from patients with ulcerative colitis (19.1 (2.0) %, 37.3 (3.0) %, and 40.2 (2.9) %).
this enhanced cytotoxicity was also inhibited by treatment with Staphylococcus aureus protein A.
EFFECT OF TNF-α ON ADCC ACTIVITY
The effector cells were incubated with or without various concentrations of TNF-α, and their ADCC activity was tested.
The treatment of effector cells with TNF-α did not alter ADCC activity in six serum samples from the patients (Fig 2(B)).
In the following experiments, five or six serum samples were used unless indicated otherwise.
When the target cells were treated with TNF-α at a concentration of 1 to 100 ng/ml, ADCC activity against TNF-α treated cells was not significantly different from that against untreated target cells (data not shown).
EFFECT OF IFN-γ ON ADCC ACTIVITY
The effector cells were preincubated with 1 to 100 U/ml IFN-γ, and the resulting ADCC activities were compared (Fig 2(C)).
Treatment of effector cells with IFN-γ did not enhance ADCC activity.
When the target cells were preincubated with 100 U/ml of IFN-γ for two days, the ADCC activity of the serum samples from six patients with ulcerative colitis was 23.9 (2.0) %.
It was significantly increased in comparison with the % cytotoxicity of the same serum samples against untreated target cells (11.6 (2.6) %)(Fig 3(A)).
The colon antigen expression detected by anticolon antibody positive serum samples was examined in IFN-γ treated and untreated target cells.
The activities of anticolon antibody detected by ELISA expressed as optical density was compared.
The mean reactivity of serum samples from five patients with ulcerative colitis was 0.766 (0.089)(optical density units) when the cells were untreated.
When the cells were treated with IFN-γ, the reactivity was 0.832 (0.067)(NS, Fig 3(B)).
In the next experiment, the expression of ICAM-1, HLA-A, B, C or HLA-DR was examined on the surface of TFN-α (10 ng/ml) or IFN-γ (100 U/ml) treated and untreated target cells.
None of the untreated cells expressed ICAM-1; and TNF-α treatment induced a slight ICAM-1 expression on the cell surface.
By contrast, almost all of the IFN-γ treated cells expressed this molecule (Fig 4).
Furthermore, monoclonal antibody to ICAM-1 significantly inhibited IFN-γ enhanced ADCC activity (cytotoxicity: 23.2 (3.6) % without the monoclonal antibody and 12.4 (0.9) % with it).
The ADCC actvity without IFN-γ was unaltered by monoclonal antibody to ICAM-1 (cytotoxicity: 14.5 (3.1) % without monoclonal antibody, 12.4 (2.2) % with it).
The HLA-DR was not expressed on untreated and TNF-α treated colo 205.
Treatment with IFN-γ profound by induced the expressionof HLA-DR on the surface of colo 205.
The expression of HLA-A, B, C was slightly increased by TNF-α and considerably increased by IFN-γ (Fig 4).
Monoclonal antibody, however, to either HLA-DR or HLA-A, B, C did not inhibit IFN-γ enhanced ADCC activity (cytotoxicity: 22.1 (4.5) % without monoclonan antibody, 20.1 (3.3) % with monoclonan antibody to HLA-DR, 22.8 (6.4) % with monoclonan antibody to HLA-A, B, C).
EFFECTS OF THERAPEUTIC DRUGS ON ADCC, NATURAL AND LYMPHOKINE ACTIVATED KILLER ACTIVITY
The addition of PSL to the ADCC assay culture with the serum samples from patients with ulcerative colitis enhanced % cytotoxicity.
In the presence of PSL, there was significant reduction in lymphokine activated killer activity as well(Fig 5).
Natural killer activity, however, was not greatly influenced by the addition of PSL.
The addition of 0.5 to 50 µg/ml SASP to the three types of cytotoxicity assay did not alter % cytotoxicity.
The 5-ASA did not affect any cytotoxic activity significantly whereas ADCC and lymphokine activated killer activity were slightly decreased at a high 5-ASA concentration.
Discussion
Various kinds of cytokines may be involved in causing the inflammation of colonic mucosa in ulcerative colitis.
The production of IL1, IL2, TNF-α, and IFN-γ is probably increased in patients with inflammatory bowel diseases.
These cytokines may affect the functions of immunocompetent cells to induce colonic injury or induce the lysis of colonic epithelial cells directly.
It is well established that cytokines including IFN-α, IFN-Β, IFN-γ, IL2, TNF-α, and the combination of these can enhance the cytotoxic activity of T cells, natural killer cells, and monocytes in vitro.
Activity of ADCC is also enhanced by various cytokines including IFN-γ, IL2, and the combination of IL2 and TNF.
Previous reports, however, indicate that the effects of cytokines were tested in the monoclonal antibody mediated cellular cytotoxicity (monoclonal ADCC) system.
The effects of cytokines on ADCC mediated by autoantibody in human serum, though, have never been tested.
The synthesis of cytokines such as IL2 and TNF-α is increased in the colonic mucosa of inflammatory bowel disease, whereas some reports postulate against the increased production of IFN-γ.
It is assumed that these increased cytokines can induce ADCC in colonic inflammation such as ulcerative colitis as well as in some malignancies.
In our study, IL2 activated effector cells were found to exert considerable ADCC activity, but IFN-γ treated effector cells did not.
Taken together with the previous study on the IL2 induced ADCC in the murine system, the increase in Fc receptor positive cell populations by treatment with IL2 may have enhanced the anticolon ADCC activity in our study.
Unexpectedly, treatment of effector cells or target cells with TNF-α did not affect ADCC activity.
It has recently been suggested that the synthesis of TNF-α is greatly increased in inflammatory bowel disease and that TNF-α could enhance the functions of natural killer cells, lymphokine activated killer cells, and polymorphonuclear neutrophils.
The results in our study, however, indicate that TNF-α does not participate in anticolon ADCC mechanisms to kill colonic epithelial cells.
Target cells treated with IFN-γ were more vulnerable to anticolon ADCC.
The increased expression of the colon antigen on target cells by IFN-γ treatment might have been expected to enhance anticolon ADCC activity, but there was no significant difference in the colon antigen expression tested by anticolon antibody positive serum samples between the IFN-γ treated and untreated target cells.
One of the explanations for this unexpected result is that the colon specific antigens detected by ELISA and those detected by this ADCC assay may be different, and those detected by ADCC might be increased by treatment with IFN-γ.
Alternatively, some surface antigens relating to ADCC mechanisms may be changed by the treatment.
Recent studies have proposed that the molecules mediating cellular adhesion such as LFA-1 and ICAM-1 are important in the cytotoxic activity of monocytes and T cells.
Thus we examined the role of ICAM-1 int he IFN-γ induced vulnerability of target cells.
We found that anti-ICAM-1 antibody could block the enhancement of anticolon ADCC through IFN-γ treatment of target cells, on which the ICAM-1 expression was remarkably induced.
This result clearly indicates that the enhanced ICAM-1 expression on target cells may induce the vulnerability of the target cells to anticolon ADCC.
We next examined the influence of corticosteroid, SASP or 5-ASA on anticolon ADCC.
It has been reported that spontaneous cell mediated cytotoxicity brought on by mononuclear cells can be inhibited by SASP but not by corticosteroid, and that ADCC is not influenced by SASP or corticosteroid.
Gibson and Jewell have reported that SASP produces an inhibitory effect on natural killer activity.
In our study, corticosteroid was found to result in anticolon ADCC and lymphokine activated killer activity.
These results show a considerable disparity with those reported by MacDermott et al , and the reasons for this are not clear.
The different target cells and the assay systems used might explain the discrepancy.
In conclusion, the in vitro effects of these cytokines on ADCC activity suggest that locally produced cytokines exacerbate the lysis of colonic epithelium through the enhancement of ADCC mechanisms as well as by direct effects of these cytokines.
The treatment with corticosteroid is suggested to be effective through the inhibition of anticolon ADCC in the colonic mucosa.
As anticolon ADCC in patients with ulcerative colitis is one of the various immunological abnormalities that contribute to the colonic inflammation, it is accordingly of considerable value to find drugs capable of inhibiting anticolon ADCC.
Contractile activity of the human colon: lessons from 24 hour studies
Abstract
The motor function of the colon is probably the least understood of the various hollow viscera of the human body.
This is partly because of the marked variability of colonic motor function and the short recording periods usually used, generally not exceeding three hours.
Most of the data available on human colonic motility originate from investigations conducted in the most distal portions of the viscus, because of technical difficulties in reaching its proximal portions.
Although attempts have been made to solve these problems through the ingestion of radiotelemetric pressure sensors, these efforts have been hampered by intermittent signal loss and the inability to control the location of the capsule within the gastrointestinal tract.
To overcome these problems, techniques have recently been developed that permit prolonged recordings (24 hours or more) of myoelectrical and contractile activity of the human colon, with both perfused and solid-state manometric systems.
The present paper reviews the current experience in 24 hour recording from the human colon, with a primary emphasis on the more forceful propulsive contractile activity associated with the so called mass movements.
Non-propulsive motility
Basal and stimulated colonic contractile activity is virtually always of the segmental-type — that is, represented by relatively low amplitude waves, occurring singly or in bursts, in a random sequence.
The functional significance of non-propulsive motility is probably that of mixing intraluminal content and shifting it over short distances, permitting adequate absorbption of water and electrolytes.
Observations by radiological and mixed manometric radionuclide methods support this concept.
Two independent groups of researchers have reported the presence of a rectal motor complex, but no patterns of cyclic motility have been reported from the anal canal.
Additionally, no cyclic or regular pattern has been observed in the colon more than 25 cm from the anal verge.
Diurnal patterns of motility
It has been suggested on the basis of short periods of observation that sleep depresses colonic motility, but this was not confirmed by some authors, and others noted a wide variability of rectosigmoid motor activity during sleep.
Prolonged studies have consistently shown decreased motor activity during the night and during daytime naps, however, providing a more definitive answer to the contradictory data previously available on colonic motility during sleep.
Morning awakening provides a strong stimulus for increased colonic contractile activity.
Moreover, increased motility was observed immediately after occasional afternoon naps.
This observation has also been supported by a recent report on healthy volunteers, showing that sudden awakening is accompanied by a strong increased in segmental motility from the colon.
Contractile activity increases promptly with food ingestion (within one to three minutes after the first mouthful of food) and lasts several hours after ingestion of a meal.
The early component of the meal stimulated increase in contractile activity is thought to be neurally mediated and the late component is thought to be hormonally mediated.
The physiological basis of this response, however, is not well understood.
The colonic motor response to eating, characterised by both low amplitude, frequent, irregularly spaced contractions, and occasional high-amplitude propagated contractions, show that eating is one of the most physiological and powerful stimuli to elicit colonic motility.
One investigation aimed at characterisation of this response showed that it differs in the various colonic segments, with the proximal ones displaying brisk and less sustained contractile activity than the distal ones.
On the basis of this and other studies, it has been suggested that a functional physiological specialisation does exist in the human colon, with the proximal segments representing sites of mixing and storage of contents, whereas the distal ones would act as a conduit to propel faeces to the rectal ampulla.
The above observations are further supported by evaluation of defecatory patterns.
Most individuals experience the urge to defecate on morning awakening and after meals, when colonic motility is known to peak.
High amplitude propagated contractions and their relationship to mass movements
Mass movements were first described by Hertz in 1907 (who also noted their relationship to meals) and later by Holzknecht in 1909, who is frequently credited with their discovery.
As described by radiological methods, mass movements define an infrequent, aborally propagated displacement of colonic contents for long distances along the viscus.
Only a few manometric studies have attempted to characterise the motility patterns associated with mass movements.
These investigations were performed under non-physiological conditions — that is, through colostomies, or after colonic stimulation with laxatives or balloon distension.
Recent studies which used long term recording of colonic motility with a colonoscopically positioned manometric probe, and simultaneous measurement of transit through intraleuminally instilled radiolabelled compounds have provided more detailed information on the relationship of motility to mass movements:(1) high amplitude propagated contractions (pressure waves greater than 50 mmHg which are propagated more than 10 cm) occur infrequently in normal subjects, averaging six per 24 hours.
(2) Because their amplitude, which may exceed 200 mmHg, high amplitude propagated contractions are easily differentiated from other colonic contractions.
Some studies, however, suggest that low amplitude waves (typically 10–30 mmHg) may also propagate over relatively long distances and may move colonic contents.
These low amplitude propagated contractions are reported to be more frequent.
It is unknown whether low amplitude propagated contractions and high amplitude propagated contractions have the same physiological basis and serve the same function — that is, whether they are parts of a continuum of propagated contractions. (3) High amplitude propagated contractions start from the ascending colon (old observations also suggest that the appendix may be involved in such forceful activity), and most are propagated in an aboral direction.
Rarely, they may propagate in an oral direction.
(4) High amplitude propagated contractions are frequently associated with a crampy urge to defecate or actual defecation and sometimes with borborygmi.
Despite their high amplitude, however, they are rarely associated with pain.
(5) High amplitude propagated contractions are associated with specific physiological or behavioural events, being more frequent during the day (80% of occurrences), after meals (50% of occurrences), and upon awakening in the morning (33% of occurrences).
The function of these forceful propulsive waves seems chiefly that of shifting a relatively large quantity of intraluminal content aborally for long distances within the colonic lumen, thereby determining a right-to-left gradient important for the initiation of defecation.
Not all high amplitude propagated contractions result in an immediate defecation, however, and not all defecations are immediately preceded by high amplitude propagated contractions, because subjects normally store stool in the rectum or distal bowel until defecation is socially convenient.
High amplitude propagated contractions are elicited by some types of laxatives (especially bysacodyl), which provides further evidence of their role in defecation.
To date, no data are available about the neurohumoral mechanisms underlying high amplitude propagated contraction onset.
One recent paper showed that cholinergic stimulation does not evokes this kind of propagated activity, although it does increase segmental contractions.
Hardcastle and Mann showed that propagation depends on the integrity of the enteric nervous system, but the role of the extrinsic nerves has not been assessed.
Pathophysiological applications of prolonged colonic recordings
Apart from increasing our understanding of normal colonic motility patterns, prolonged recordings are providing useful information about different pathological conditions.
A recent study showed that chronically constipated subjects displayed significantly fewer high amplitude propagated contractions and a decreased frequency of urge to defecate, suggesting that one important pathophysiological mechanism for constipation may be a decrease in the propulsive ability of the viscus.
Other studies have disclosed that patients complaining of slow transit constipation have impaired cyclic rectal activity, suggesting that these patients have a motor neuropathy.
Although irritable bowel syndrome is commonly believed to be a colonic motility disorder, the evidence supporting this hypothesis is inconsistent.
Most of the motility studies on irritable bowel syndrome patients have been conducted for brief periods of time in the very distal portions of the viscus.
Prolonged recordings have recently confirmed that constipation predominant irritable bowel syndrome patients have significantly fewer high amplitude propagated contractions than controls, implying that they have impaired colonic propulsive activity.
Diarrhoea predominant irritable bowel syndrome patients were found to have normal numbers of high amplitude propagated contractions, although the amplitude of high amplitude propagated contractions was significantly reduced relative to controls.
The physiological significance of the findings in diarrhoea predominant irritable bowel syndrome patients, which were contrary to expectation, is unknown.
Technical limitations and critical evaluation of colonic manometric recordings
Although open tipped tubes and intraluminal strain gauges have been widely used for the measurement of contractile activity in the colon, it has been argued on theoretical grounds that they detect only lumen occluding contractions, and therefore underestimate the incidence of contractile activity.
A direct comparison of serosal strain gauges to open tipped catheters, however, showed that open tipped tubes detected 87% of all tonic contractions and 80% of all phasic contractions recorded by serosal strain gauges.
The contractions recorded were of varying amplitudes, and Cook et al 's tracings show good reproduction by the open tipped tube recordings of both the shape and amplitudeof contractions measured from the serosal strain gauges throughout a wide range of amplitudes.
Thus, open tipped tubes and intraluminal solid state pressure transducers appear to provide a good estimate of the amount and characteristics of contractile activity.
Another concern which has been raised about the validity of intraluminal recordings is that the bowel evacuation which is used to facilitate placing the probe may alter contractile patterns.
Dinoso et al have show that contractile activity is greater after a cleansing enema than in the unprepared colon.
Differences in motility, however, can be recorded after bowel preparation which are consistent with the typical symptoms of the patients studied.
Moreover, as the intraluminal contents may influence motility, it is safer to infer that differences between individuals in motility patterns are causally related to their altered bowel habits if these motility patterns are seen when the intraluminal contants are similar — that is, after bowel evacuation, as opposed to varying from liquid to hard masses.
Comparative physiology
The lack of an appropriate animal model has hampered progress on the investigation of colonic motor activity.
The structure and function of the large intestine varies greatly among mammals, with variability concerning mostly the extent of the sacculation and the size of the caecum.
The simplest large intestines, exhibiting a vestigial caecum and no sacculations, are found in the rat, cat, and dog, which are the animals most frequently used in studies on colonic motor function.
The colon in these animals is a smooth, uniform tube, without sacculations or teniae, and it is approximately C-shaped and devoid of the sharp angulations seen in man.
Furthermore, the electrophysiological properties of the colonic circular muscle of the cat and dog are very different from that of the human colon.
In recent years, however, the canine colon has become a standard model for colonic motility studies and, although it displays some kinds of contractile activity not seen in man, it has been useful for investigating neuropharmacological interactions.
The best animal model for colonic physiology in man appears to be the pig.
This animal has a similar diet, the colon has a caecum similar to man, and the anatomy is similar at the microscopic level.
Like man, the pig shows spontaneous constipation and diarrhoea (perhaps pigs also have irritable bowel syndrome…
).
These two species also have similar patterns of contractile activity.
The pig has rarely been used in physiology laboratories because of its size and temperament, but the development by animal breeders of a minipig with better temperament may change this.
Future directions
Prolonged pancolonic recordings may play an important role in elucidating the physiological mechanisms underlying different patterns of colonic motility and their functional significance.
For example, simultaneous monitoring of the EEG and large bowel motility has shown that sleep has profound inhibitory effects on overall colonic contractions and is the major determinant of the daily variations of motility.
Abnormalities in the inhibition of motility during sleep should be evaluated in patients who report nocturnal faecal incontinence.
Solid state catheters, which produce data closely comparable with those acquired from perfused tubes, will permit more physiological recordings from freely ambulating subjects in their normal work and social environment, once some technical limitations are resolved — that is, fixed position of recording points, difficulty in spacing sensors less than 5 cm from each other , fragility of the probes, few recording points available, expensive price, and maintainance.
Moreover, the application of the barostat to long term recordings of colonic motility, may prove useful to assess other pathopysiological aspects of functional colonic disorders.
Finally, preliminary results from the evaluation of severely constipated patients for whom surgery is being considered suggest a possible diagnostic role for prolonged colonic recordings, especially when coupled with pharmacologic stimulation.
This fact is particularly significant in light of the poor outcomes sometimes reported after surgical procedures for constipation; a thorough in depth functional evaluation, especially coupled to small bowel recordings, in order to exclude a more generalised gastrointestinal motor disorder, might yield more effective results after surgery in patients with chronic constipation.
Pulmonary hypertension associated with primary biliary cirrhosis in the absence of portal hypertension: a case report
Abstract
Pulmonary hypertension is well described in association with portal hypertension of any cause including end stage primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC).
The essential feature of this association is the presence of portosystemic shunting, including surgically created shunts.
A patient with primary pulmonary hypertension and PBC without portal hypertension is reported.
This suggests that primary pulmonary hypertension may be associated with PBC in the absence of portal hypertension.
Decisions regarding appropriate organ transplantation may depend on whether pulmonary hypertension is primary or secondary to portal hypertension.
Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a chronic disorder where inflammation and fibrosis of intrahepatic bile ducts leads to cirrhosis and liver failure.
PBC has been associated with numerous diseases of an autoimmune nature, most notably, thyroiditis and various rheumatological manifestations.
Pulmonary involvement in PBC includes interstitial lung disease and airways obstruction.
Pulmonary hypertension (PHT) has been described only with end-stage PBC as well as portal hypertension of any cause.
We present a patient with PHT and PBC in the absence of demonstrable portal hypertension, suggesting that primary pulmonary hypertension may be independently associated with PBC.
Case history
A 44 year old white woman was initially found to have raised alkaline phosphatase, an anti-mitochondrial antibody titre of 1:160 and hypothyroidism with high anti-microsomal and anti-thyroglobulin titres.
Except for myalgia, which quickly resolved with appropriate thyroid replacement, she was entirely asymptomatic.
Abdominal ultrasonography showed cholelithiasis and she had a cholecystectomy.
The serum aspartate amino transferase was 33 U/l (normal range=10–47 U/l), alkaline phosphatase 217 U/l (11–189 U/l), and total bilirubin 11 µmol/l (7–26 µmol/l).
An intraoperative liver biopsy was consistent with a diagnosis of PBC.
Over the next five years, the patient had gradually progressive exertional dyspnoea and a vague non-pleuritic central chest discomfort.
She was otherwise asymptomatic and did not have any symptoms suggestive of a rheumatological disorder including Raynaud's phenomenon.
There was no recurrence of myalgia.
The past medical history was otherwise unremarkable.
The patient was a non-smoker and did not consume alcohol.
Physical examination showed an obese woman.
There were no abnormalities in the head and neck region; rheumatological, dermatological, and neurological examinations were unremarkable.
Examination of the chest was unremarkable with no evidence of hyperinflation and clear auscultation.
Cardiovascular examination showed mild dependent peripheral oedema.
Jugulovenous distension and a hepatojugular reflux was present.
Auscultation of the precordium detected a loud fixed split second heart sound in the left upper parasternal area and a II/VI diastolic decrescendo murmur.
Splenomegaly, ascites, and extrahepatic symptoms of chronic liver disease were notably absent.
An electrocardiogram showed right heart strain.
Radiographs of the chest showed enlargement of the right heart with prominence of the pulmonary outflow tract.
A ventilation perfusion scan was non-diagnostic, however, pulmonary angiography did not show pulmonary thromboemboli.
The pulmonary artery pressure was raised at 99–108/20–25 mm Hg systolic/diastolic.
Pulmonary hypertension was diagnosed and the patient referred for consideration of a lung transplant.
Laboratory data showed normal haematological parameters, serum electrolytes, and creatinine.
The serum aspartate aminotransferase was 30 U/l, alkaline phosphatase 200 U/l, total bilirubin 29 µmol/l, albumin 36 g/l, international normalised ratio 1.14, PTT 33.1 s, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 2 mm in the first hour.
Assay for antinuclear antibody, extractable nuclear antigens, anticentromere antibodies, and cryoglobulins were negative.
Pulmonary function studies showed a very mild restrictive pattern consistent with obesity and were otherwise normal.
An echocardiogram showed dilatation of the pulmonary artery and tricuspid regurgitation.
Cardiac catheterisation showed moderate mitral regurgitation with a pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 14 mm Hg.
The pulmonary artery pressure was 104/42/ 65 mm Hg (systolic/diastolic/mean), the right ventricular pressure 103/14 mm Hg, and mean right atrial pressure 14 mm Hg.
Repeat abdominal ultrasonography was normal with spleen length 10 cm and no evidence of ascites, collateral vessels, or varices.
Transfemoral liver biopsy showed portal fibrosis consistent with stage III PBC.
Hepatic vein catherterisation showed a hepatic vein wedge pressure of 12–14 mm Hg and inferior vena caval mean pressure of 12–13 mm Hg.
The hepatic vein wedge pressure-inferior vena caval mean pressure gradient was 1–2 mm Hg (normal <mm Hg) suggesting no portal hypertension.
One year after the initial diagnosis of PHT, the patient shows no evidence of portal hypertension.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy did not show any varices.
Upper gastrointestinal radiology was likewise normal.
A technetium sulphur colloid liver spleen scan was normal with no evidence of portal hypertension or cirrhosis.
Repeat abdominal ultrasonography remains normal.
The patient awaits heart and lung transplantation.
Discussion
Pulmonary hypertension is present when the pulmonary artery pressure exceeds 30 mm Hg systolic and a mean of 20 mm Hg.
In the absence of secondary causes including primary lung disease, primary left sided heart and valvular disease or systemic diseases affecting the pulmonary vasculature, PHT is considered primary.
An autoimmune basis has been suggested as PHT can be associated with rheumatological conditions including systemic lupus, scleroderma, and its CREST variant, mixed connective tissue disease, primary Sjogren's disease, and rheumatoid arthritis.
PBC has been associated with the same rheumatological diseases.
The association of primary Raynaud's phenomenon with primary PHT and the finding of cold induced pulmonary vasospasm in healthy subjects with primary Raynaud's syndrome suggest an underlying vasoconstrictive disorder.
Pulmonary endothelial injury affecting endothelial derived medicators of smooth muscle has been suggested as a mechanism of primary PHT.
The association of liver disease and PHT is well recognised.
It seems that portal hypertension is the essential feature of this association.
The underlying liver disease, which results in portal hypertension, may be of any cause as extrahepatic causes of portal hypertension have been associated with PHT.
The prevalence of PHT in portal hypertension has been reported by McDonnell et al as 0.73% in a series of 17901 unselected necropsies (v 0.13% for primary PHT) and 0.61% in a clinical series of 2549 patients with cirrhosis confirmed by biopsy.
Recently Hadengue et al reported a higher prevalence of 2% in 507 patients with portal hypertension.
The histological features of portal hypertension associated pulmonary hypertension (portopulmonary hypertension) are identical to the plexogenic changes of primary PHT medial hypertrophy, concentric intimal fibrosis, and plexiform lesions of small pulmonary arteries.
The most widely accepted hypothesis for portopulmonary hypertension is the shunting of vasoactive substances, usually inactivated in the liver, into the pulmonary vasculature, resulting in pulmonary vasoconstriction and chronic arterial changes.
Organised thrombi have been noted in some patients in association with plexiform lesions suggesting chronic thomboemboli as the cause.
This hypothesis is not widely accepted as the clinical evidence generally is not supportive.
The thrombi are considered to be secondary to local injury, stasis or cor-pulmonale.
Our patient with PBC and PHT had no evidence of a primary pulmonary or cardiac disease.
Clinically there was no evidence of portal hypertension.
Investigations did not show varices or ascites.
Furthermore the hepatic vein wedge pressure-inferior vena caval mean pressure gradient was normal.
Although the inferior vena caval mean pressure and absolute hepatic vein wedge pressure were high this reflected high right sided filling pressures secondary to cor-pulmonale as the right atrial pressure was similar to the inferior vena caval mean pressure.
This gradient reflects sinusoidal pressure and is an indirect measure of portal pressure.
In 21 to 43% of patients with presinusoidal portal hypertension, however, this method may underestimate portal pressure.
In the early stages of PBC there may be a component of presinusoidal portal hypertension.
Our patient, however, was found to have stage III PBC on biopsy examination.
It has been reported that in stages III and IV of PBC, portal hypertension if present reflects sinusoidal pressure.
Our patient thus failed to show evidence of portal hypertension.
Patients described in published works with portopulmonary hypertension have all had clinically obvious portal hypertension.
Although the rheumatological conditions associated with PBC are also associated with PHT, our patient had no clinical or laboratory evidence of a rheumatological disorder.
The only manifestation of PBC associated autoimmune disease was hypothyroidism and there have been no patients described in English language publications with PHT and thyroiditis.
One patient reported in Japanese studies with PHT had coincident chronic thyroiditis and chronic hepatitis; no further details are available.
Our patient thus had no primary systemic disorder, other than PBC, that would have resulted in PHT.
We therefore conclude that our patient with PBC had true primary PHT.
Although the possibility remains that there may have been some undetectable degree of portosystemic shunting, our patient did not have clinically evident portal hypertension.
As mentioned previously, all cases of portopulmonary hypertension reported have had obvious portal hypertension.
Morrison et al did describe a 52 year old woman with a weakly positive antimitochondrial antibody and Raynaud's disease, treated with immunosuppressive agents, who died secondary to PHT.
There was no pathological examination of the liver, however, and no mention of the presence or absence of portal hypertension, and no definitive diagnosis given.
Therefore, there have been no definite cases of PBC associated PHT described in published works without evident portal hypertension.
Our case is thus the first to be described.
Because PBC is felt to reflect immune dysfunction and autoimmunity has been suggested as a possible cause of primary PHT, it is possible that the two conditions are causally associated.
Given that the recognition of the significance of portal hypertension in portopulmonary hypertension is recent, it is possible that other cases of PBC associated primary PHT have been dismissed as merely associated with liver disease.
This has important therapeutic implications.
We have reported that PHT can recur in portopulmonary hypertension if transplanted with a lung only.
Transplantation with either a combined liver and lung (heart) or in certain situations a liver alone, however, offers the possibility of longterm relief of PHT.
Patients with PBC and PHT cannot be assumed to have portal hypertension without investigation as primary PHT may be associated with PBC without portal hypertension.
Expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1, CD54) in colonic epithelial cells
Abstract
The expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1, CD54) was examined in 16 surgically removed colonic tumours and two colonic carcinoma cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry showed a varying percentage of ICAM-1 positive colonic carcinoma cells in 9/16 tissue specimens, while normal colonic tissue (apart from a slight reactivity of endothelial cells) was not stained.
The presence of the ICAM-1 molecule on the cell surface and the expression of ICAM-1 mRNA were investigated for two colonic carcinoma cell lines.
It was possible to enhance the expression of ICAM-1 considerably by incubating the cells in the presence of inflammatory cytokines in HT-29 and CaCo-2 cells.
The responsiveness to either interferon α (IFN-α), tumour necrosis factor α (TNF-α), or interleukin 1β (IL-1β) treatment was different in each cell line.
Interestingly, ICAM-1 is shed by colonic carcinoma cells because soluble sICAM-1 was detected in the cell culture supernatants.
In comparison with normal serum samples, the mean value of sICAM-1 in 63 samples of patients with colonic carcinoma and in 20 cases of active inflammatory bowel disease is raised about twofold.
It remains to be clarified what part both forms of ICAM-1 play in the course of colonic cancer, ulcerative colitis, and Crohn's disease.
ICAM-1, the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 represents a cell surface bound glycoprotein of 70 to 110 kilodaltons (kDa).
It mediates adhesion dependent cell to cell interactions and is expressed on haematopoietic cells such as tissue macrophages, monocytes, B-cells, activated T-cells, germinal centre dendritic cells in tonsils, lymph nodes, and Peyer's patches, as well as on non-haematopoietic cells such as vascular endothelial cells, thymic epithelial cells, certain other epithelial cells, and fibroblasts.
The expression of ICAM-1 and two of its counter receptors, the lymphocyte function associated antigen-1 (LFA-1, CD11a/CD18) and the complement receptor type-3 (CR-3, MAC-1, CD11b/CD18) was shown to be essential for most of the lymphocyte/lymphocyte, lymphocyte/phagocyte, and leucocyte/endothelial cell interactions in the immune response.
Moreover, ICAM-1 participates in the transient adhesion of leucocytes to the vascular endothelium and mediates, in part, granulocyte extravasation.
Previous reports on fibroblasts and monocytic tumour cell lines, for example, have shown that inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 1Β (IL-1Β), tumour necrosis factor α (TNF-α), and interferon γ (INF-γ) induce or enhance the expression of ICAM-1.
In inflammatory bowel disease an increased expression of ICAM-1 on mucosal mononuclear phagocytes on colonic biopsy specimens was shown to be associated with the maintenance of chronic inflammation and the induction of ICAM-1 expression has been seen on bile duct epithelium, endotheoium, and hepatocytes of liver allografts undergoing acute rejection.
In previous reports an expression of ICAM-1 was seen on neoplastic cells of various origins including gastric and pancreaic carcinoma.
A considerable expression of ICAM-1 was also seen on fibrous tissue in the vicinity of carcinoma cells and on tumour infiltrating lymphoid cells.
For melanoma, it has been shown that the de novo expression of ICAM-1 correlates with an increased risk of metastasis.
Most recently, a soluble form of the usually membrane bound ICAM-1 molecule was detected in human serum samples.
The cellular source of soluble ICAM-1 (sICAM-1) in samples of healthy blood donors seemed to be from mononuclear cells, because sICAM-1 was only detectable in cell culture supernatants of lymphoid cell lines and peripteral blood mononuclear cell cultures.
Raised values of sICAM-1 have been reported in samples of patients with melanoma, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, metastatic cancer, and acute urolithiasis.
In this study, we show that de novo expression of ICAM-1 occurs in association with colonic carcinoma and that colonic carcinoma cells express both forms of ICAM-1, the usual membrane bound ICAM-1 on their cell surface and the soluble sICAM-1 as detected in the cell culture supernatants of colonic carcinoma cell lines.
Enhanced sICAM-1 values were found in serum samples of patients with colonic carcinoma and active inflammatory bowel disease.
Material and methods
CELL LINES, MEDIUM, REAGENTS, CYTOKINES, ANTIBODIES, AND sICAM-1 ELISA
The colonic carcinoma cell lines HT-29 and CaCo-2 were donated by Dr L Old, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center New York, USA, and Dr Franke, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum Heidelberg, Germany.
All cell lines were cultured in CMRL medium containing 10% basal medium supplement, Seromed (Berlin, Germany).
Basal medium supplement is a medium supplement that contains defined amounts of salt, aminoacids, D-glucose, vitamins, peptides, and growth factors as described in the company's catalogue.
Recombinant IFN-γ was supplied by Boehringer (Mannheim, Germany); recombinant IL-1Β from Behring (Marburg, Germany), and recombinant TNF-α from Thomae (Biberach, Germany).
All three cytokines were expression products purified from recombinant Escherichia coli (E coli ) strains.
Incubation time and concentration of cytokines were chosen according to optimal responses known for the ICAM-1 upregulation on other tumour cell lines.
Monoclonal anti-ICAM-1 antibody mAB 7F7 was kindly provided by Dr M P Dierich (Innsbruck, Austria); as an additional control we used a different anti-ICAM-1 antibody, mAB 84H10, which was purchased from Dianova (Hamburg, Germany).
The sICAM-1 enzyme linked immunosobent assay (ELISA) used to determine sICAM-1 in the cell culture supernatants, in serum samples of healthy blood donors and patients was supplied by Bender Med Systems (Vienna, Austria).
Diluted samples as well as undiluted and concentrated cell culture supernatants were assayed according to the protocol enclosed.
Monoclonal antibody mAb R-24 recognising the ganglioside GD3 on malignant melanoma cells was used as a negative control.
Monoclonal antibody mAb W6/32 as positive control reactive with human HLA determinants was purchased from Sera Laboratories (Crawley Down, UK).
For immunofluorescence, we used the GAM-FITC antibody 6602159 from Coulter Immunology (Hialeah, USA).
The tests were performed in LAB-TEK slides as described earlier.
IMMUNOSTAINING OF ICAM-1 ON TISSUES AND CELLS
Cryostat sections and cells were tested by indirect immunoperoxidase assays using rabbit anti-mouse antibody P260 Dakopatts (Hamburg, Germany) and the substrate 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazol Sigma (Deisenhofen, Germany) as an indicator system as described elsewhere.
Normal colonic tissue and tissues from inflammatory bowel disease and colorectal tumours were obtained from the department of surgery at our university.
To investigate the cell surface expression of ICAM-1 on colonic cancer cell lines, cells were detached from confluent cultures by 0.05% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid in phosphate buffered saline, washed once with CMRL medium, resuspended in CMRL medium supplemented with 10% basal medium supplement and adjusted to 10 5 cells per ml medium, as described elsewhere.
CMRL medium (200 µl), containing 2×10 4 cells per well, was plated on LAB-TEK no 4808 tissue culture slides from VWR Scientific (Naperville, USA) in the presence or absence of the tested cytokines, and cultured for 24 hours at 37°C/5%CO 2 and high humidity.
Cell surface expression was tested on unfixed cells and was performed according to the method described above.
RIBONUCLEIC ACID EXTRACTION AND NORTHERN BLOT ANALYSIS
Total ribonucleic acid was prepared from exponentially growing cells according to standard methods, assessed by measuring the absorbance at 260 nm, separated on a formaldehyde containing agarose gel, and blotted to nylon filters.
Agarose gel electrophoresis, ribonucleic acid transfer, and hybridisation of blots were performed by standard techniques.
The filters were probed with a 1.2 kb long Xba-1/Pst-1 restriction fragment of cDNA clone pICAM-1, kindly supplied by Dr B Seed (Boston, USA).
The complementary DNA (cDNA) was labelled with P 3 2 -dATP using the random priming method and used at a concentration of 5×10 6 cpm of labelled cDNA per millilitre hybridisation solution.
Hybridisation was performed at 65°C without formamide.
The washing of the northern blots was carried out according to standard methods.
The last washing step was performed in 0.3×SSC/0.1% SDS for 1 hour at 65°C.
As previously described, the northern blot results were normalised by rehybridising the filters with a P 3 2 -labelled oligonucleotide (5'AACGATCAGAGTAGTGGTATTTCACC 3') that corresponds with the 28s ribosomal ribonucleic acid.
This probe had been shown to be better than actin as a control for the amount and quality of total ribonucleic acid loaded.
Kinase labelling, hybridisation, and washing of the blots was performed at 42°C according to standard procedures.
SERUM SAMPLES
Serum samples were obtained from healthy blood donors, patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma without evidence of infection, and from patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
The BEST index was used to evaluate activity and severity of Crohn's disease.
It contains eight indicies such as abdominal pain, number of liquid stools, score of general well being, and others.
This index estimates predominantly patients' complaints (BESTdisease).
Results
DE NOVO EXPRESSION OF ICAM-1 IN COLONIC TISSUES
The expression of ICAM-1 was examined on colonic epithelial tissues, cryostat sections of normal colon (12 specimens), of ulcerative colitis (2) and Crohn's disease (2), and 16 tumour tissues of patients with primary colorectal carcinoma were stained with both antibodies, mAb 7F7 and mAb 84H10.
As shown in Figure 1A, a varying percentage (10–70%) of colonic carcinoma cells showed a strong staining at the basement membrane site of the tumour cells with both antibodies.
In contrast, normal colon tissue (beside a marginal staining of the blood vessel endothelium) did not react with antibodies directed against ICAM-1 (Fig 1C).
In tissue specimens of chronic inflammatory bowel disease ICAM-1 expression (Fig 1B) was only detectable on the inflammatory mononuclear cells, but not close to epithelial cells.
DETECTION OF ICAM-1 mRNA IN COLON CARCINOMA CELL LINES
Total ribonucleic acid preparations from the two colonic tumour cell lines were subjected to northern blot analysis to investigate whether they expressed mRNA for ICAM-1.
Figure 2A shows that ICAM-1 mRNA was abundantly expressed in untreated HT-29 and CaCo-2 colonic cancer cells.
To find out whether cytokine treatment would modulate ICAM-1 expression in HT-29 and CaCo-2 cells, each of the cell lines was incubated for 24 hours in the absence or presence of IFN-γ (100 U/ml), IL-1Β (100 U/ml), or TNF-α (10 ng/ ml).
The highest abundance of mRNA for ICAM-1 was obtained with IFN-γ in HT-29 cells.
Figure 2A, representing one of three northern blot experiments performed, shows that a response to the cytokine treatment could be seen by the enhancement of ICAM-1 mRNA expression.
In all ribonucleic acid preparations of ICAM-1 expressing cells, we always saw two hydridisation signals, a major signal at about 3.3 kb and aminor signal at about 2.4 kb, indicating the expression of the two previously reported ICAM-1 mRNA species.
Whenever the expression of the 3.3 kb mRNA was enhanced, the 2.4 kb mRNA was changed to the same extent.
DETECTION OF ICAM-1 ON THE CELL SURFACE OF COLONIC CARCINOMA CELL LINES
To examine if the expression of mRNA was followed by the expression of the ICAM-1 molecule on the cell surface, cytokine treated and untreated HT-29 and CaCo-2 cells were assayed with two different monoclonal antibodies directed against ICAM-1 (mAb 7F7 and mAb 84H10).
Figure 3 shows the immunostaining of HT-29 cells, after incubation with IFN-γ, with mAb 7F7.
IFN-γ and TNF-α induced enhanced ICAM-1 cell surface expression in HT-29 cells, while IFN-γ and IL-1Β enhanced ICAM-1 expression on CaCo-2 cells.
DETECTION OF sICAM-1 SHEDDED BY COLONIC CARCINOMA CELLS
To investigate whether colonic carcinoma cells also shed the recently described soluble sICAM-1, culture supernatants were collected from confluently growing colonic tumour cell lines after five days of culture and assessed in duplicate in an ICAM-1 specific ‘sandwich’ ELISA.
The comparative amounts of sICAM-1 determined from undiluted cell culture supernatants were 8.5 ng/ml for HT-29 cells and 13.5 for CaCo-2 cells.
The medium control was constantly negative for sICAM-1.
Therefore sICAM-1 is shed from both, HT-29 and Ca-Co-2 cells.
After cytokine treatment of HT-29 and CaCo-2 cells, the values of sICAM-1 in some of the cell culture supernatants were raised for TNF-α twofold, for IFN-γ fourfold in HT-29 cells, for IFN-γ and IL-1Β about twofold in CaCo-2 cells.
sICAM-1 IN SERUM SAMPLES FROM PATIENTS WITH COLIC CARCINOMA AND INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
To see whether patients with colonic carcinoma and inflammatory bowel disease show raised serum concentrations of sICAM-1, we compared the content of sICAM-1 in their serum samples with the sICAM-1 concentrations in samples of 19 healthy blood donors.
Figure 4A shows that sICAM-1 was present in the normal serum samplesat an average of 334 ng/ml, whereas the samples of colonic carcinoma patients contained sICAM-1 at an average of 684 ng/ml.
In a Mann-Whitney-White analysis, these differences were shown to be highly statistically significant with 0.001at confidence intervals of 95%.
Some of the patients samples showed extremely high sICAM-1 concentrations with up to 1.700 ng/ml while only few did not differ from the control group.
We also saw a significantly increased concentration 0.01of sICAM-1 in the serum samples of 15 patients with active Crohn's disease (average 804 ng/ml) compared with 10 patients with inactive disease (average 546 ng/nl)(see Fig 4B).
Five patients with active ulcerative colitis also showed increased serum concentrations of sICAM (640 ng/ml).
Discussion
The data presented show that colonic carcinoma cells express ICAM-1 molecules on their cell surface in contrast with normal colonic epithelium.
In a previous report on a de novo expression of ICAM-1 by mucosal mononuclear phagocytes in inflammatory bowel disease, the percentage of mononuclear phagocytes was increased from 7% in controls to 70% in ulcerative colitis and to 45% in Crohn's disease.
These findings were confirmed in this study.
According to the analysis of Maliza and our data, however, the source of soluble ICAM-1 seems to be different, in inflammatory bowel disease, the mononuclear phagocytes and in colonic cancer, the tumour cells.
The de novo expression of ICAM-1 in phagocytes of the colonic mucosa and the raised soluble ICAM-1 in active Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis shown here are consistent with a condition of immunological activation induced by the local release of proinflammatory cytokines.
Therefore, it may be of value to include the value of soluble ICAM-1 in the index of inflammatory activity in the clinical assessment and progression of inflammatory bowel disease.
A study is underway that includes a large number of patients and their specific clinical and laboratory findings.
For the same reason we feel that it is important to determine ICAM-1 expression in tissues and serum samples of patients with colonic cancer, because ICAM-1 expression on melanoma was shown to be an important pathophysiological parameter.
Patients whose primary tumours express abundant ICAM-1 have an increased risk of metastasis.
It is therefore tempting to speculate whether the expression of ICAM-1 on colonic and pancreatic carcinoma cells may contribute, in an as yet unknown way, to the aggressive potential of colonic cancer cells.
In the two colonic tumour cell lines cytokine treatment resulted in an induction orenhancement of ICAM-1 expression on the cell surface, but also increased the shedding of sICAM-1.
In agreement with the findings in melanoma, the shedding of sICAM-1 could be a mechanism for colonic tumour cells to evade from lymphocyte mediated cytolysis.
Therefore the relation between the ICAM-1 expression and the clinical course seems to be of diagnostic interest for colonic carcinoma.
In conclusion it is justified to examine ICAM-1 expression as a potential prognostic risk factor for colonic carcinoma.
Peptic ulcer, cimetidine, and motor neurone disease — a record linkage study
Abstract
A previous cohort study suggested that there might be an association between use of cimetidine and motor neurone disease.
The Oxford Record Linkage Study was used to explore this hypothesis.
In the analysis the presence of a peptic ulcer in patients after 1876 was taken as a proxy for cimetidine (and ranitidine) use.
The past history of 540 patients with motor neurone disease in this period was compared with that of 1370 patients with multiple sclerosis (neurological controls) and over 240000 control patients with a variety of ther conditions.
Among those with motor neurone disease, five had been previously admitted to hospital with peptic ulcer in comparison with an expected number of 7.4 (morbidity ration 0.68, 95% confidence intervals: 0.2 to 1.6).
The corresponding figures for those with multiple sclerosis were 12 and 9.7 respectively (morbidity ration 1.24, 95% confidence intervals: 0.6 to 2.2).
This study provides some evidence against the possibility that cimetidine (and ranitidine) are related to motor neurone disease.
Research staff based at Glasgow, Nottingham, Oxford, and Portsmouth have, for many years, been following the pattern of mortality in a cohort of 10000 takers of cimetidine.
In the latest report to become available, dealing with mortality at 10 years, eight deaths were certified as being from motor neurone disease while only three such deaths were expected from national rates.
This gave a relative risk of 2.6 (95% confidence intervals: 1.1 to 5.1).
The authors noted that one of the eight deaths had been recorded as being from motor neurone disease even though the patient had died from a myelopathy secondary to severe cervical spondylosis.
It was also noted, however, that in most of the cases of motor neurone disease there was a ‘clear history of longterm use of cimetidine’ and that ‘this observation might warrant further study’.
We judged this to be a potentially important finding in view of the extremely widespread use of cimetidine.
We therefore used the Oxford Record Linkage Study to shed some light on any association.
The Oxford Record Linkage Study does not collect information about prescriptions but data are collected about admissions to hospital for peptic ulcer.
We considered that it would be reasonable to take peptic ulcer in people admitted after 1976 as a proxy for cimetidine use (bearing in mind that cimetidine has only been available since then) and to see if peptic ulcer was commoner in people with motor neurone disease than in others.
Population and method
The Oxford Record Linkage Study abstracts and organises records of hospital inpatient care and death certificates collected in a geographically defined population, such that records of successive events for the same person can be linked together.
Two of the eight districts in the Oxford Region were covered by data collected from 1968–86 and a further four from 1974–86 (total populations covered in the two periods: 850000 and 1.9 million people).
Patients' records with a diagnosis of motor neurone disease at any position on the record were identified.
Records of patients with multiple sclerosis were selected as a neurological comparison group.
A mixed group of controls was also selected, which consisted of people with admissions for a broad range of elective operative procedures (excluding operations for peptic ulcer), appendicectomy, fractures, and other injuries as the main diagnosis on the hospital record.
Records of previous admission for peptic ulcer were sought for people in the case and the comparison groups.
Anyone who had both a case and a control diagnosis was excluded from the analysis.
The data set was subdivided into people whose first recorded case or control event occurred in 1976 or before and those whose first recorded events occurred between 1977–86.
The data set was then stratified in the analysis by 5 year age groups, sex, calendar year of first diagnosis of case or control event, and district of residence at first diagnosis.
The rates of previous admission for peptic ulcer in each stratum in the control group were used to calculate the number of people in each stratum in the motor neurone disease and multiple sclerosis groups who would have been ‘expected’ to have a previous admission for peptic ulcer.
The expected numbers in each stratum were then summed to give an overall expected number; and this was compared with the observed number of subjects with motor neurone disease and multiple sclerosis who had a previous admission for peptic ulcer.
Confidence intervals for the ratio of observed to expected numbers of patients with previous peptic ulcer were calculated from published tables for Poisson distributions.
Results
The Table gives the indings which, for cases and controls after 1976, includes 540 cases of motor neurone disease, 1370 of multiple sclerosis, and 240258 controls.
It can be seen that patients with multiple sclerosis had a slight excess of previous admissions for peptic ulcer (morbidity ratio 1.24) and patients with motor neurone disease had slightly fewer admissions than expected (morbidity ratio 0.68).
The ratio did not differ significantly from one for either disease.
We also examined data for the period before the introduction of cimetidine (1968–76).
The contrast between the two periods was weak because of the small amount of data in the earlier period.
None the less, noting untoward was detectable.
Discussion
The inding which stimulated this study was generated in the context of multiple significance testing across a wide range of diseases in relation to cimetidine.
For this reason it may have been spurious but worth further study.
The findings presented here can provide only indirect evidence about any possible adverse effect of cimetidine on motor neurone disease.
None the less, during the period under review, it became more or less routine to treat peptic ulcers with cimetidine (or ranitidine) and the absence of any relation between peptic ulcer and motor neurone disease offers some reassurance.
The other difficulty, of course, is that the observed and expected numbers are rather small (despite the large number of cases and controls) and the study is therefore somewhat lacking in statistical power.
On the evidence of this study it is unlikely that any relative risk could be as large as twofold, but we cannot discount a 50% increase in risk.
It has been suggested (in the era before cimetidine was introduced) that peptic ulcer, or some factor associated with its treatment, might itself be a risk factor for motor neurone disease.
Our results offer some reassurance on this issue as well.
Toxic megacolon: the knee-elbow position relieves bowel distension
Abstract
Toxic megacolon complicating inflammatory or infective colitis carries a high morbidity and mortality and surgical intervention is necessary in up to 80% of cases.
Perforation complicates toxic megacolon in about 35% of cases.
After perforation, the death rate nears 50%.
Gaseous distension of the bowel causes considerable discomfort to the patient and increases transmural pressure.
The latter is thought to cause a reduction in blood flow and may predispose to perforation.
The use of instruments for colonic aspiration is discouraged, because of the high risk of perforation.
The successful use of the knee-elbow position to relieve bowel distension in two patients with toxic megacolon is described.
Case report 1
A 38 year old white man, presented with a two week history of febrile illness, rigors, and bloody diarrhoea (10–12 bowel actions daily), after returning from a visit to Thailand.
Stool cultures had showed the presence of Shigella flexneri and Salmonella singapore .
He had taken cophenotrope and loperamide in the week before admission.
His temperature was 39.4°C, pulse 120/ min, serum sodium 137 mmol/l, potassium 3.1 mmol/l, urea 4.4 umol/l, albumin 29 g/l, orosomucoid 3.01 g/l (n) haemoglobin 12.6 g/dl, white blood cells 9.4×10, with a normal differential count.
Stool microscopy and culture and blood cultures were negative.
Shortly after admission abdominal distension and tenderness over the transverse colon was noted.
A plain supine abdominal radiograph showed gaseous dilatation of the transverse colon and small bowel.
The diameter of the distal transverse colon was 10 cm and a diagnosis of toxic megacolon was made.
After 24 hours treatment with intravenous fluids, potassium supplements, cotrimoxazole and hydrocortisone, the patient's condition improved.
His temperature was 37°C, pulse 84/ min, and serum potassium 3.8 mmol/l.
Although the number of bowel actions had decreased to 5/day, he complained of increasing abdominal discomfort.
Abdominal girth measured 97 cm and the radiographic diameter of the distal transverse colon had increased to 11.5 cm.
Surgery was considered.
A few hours later, while trying to find a comfortable posture, the patient adopted a kneeling position with his head lowermost (Fig 1).
This resulted in passage of flatus, which continued for some minutes.
He reported improvement of the abdominal discomfort and the manoeuvre was repeated a number of times with similar results.
Twelve hours later, abdominal girth and the radiographic diameter of the distal transverse colon had decreased to 95 and 10 cm respectively, and there was a reduction in dilatation of small bowel loops.
By 48 hours, the abdominal girth had decreased to 92 cm.
Over the next two weeks he made a slow clinical improvement and required blood transfusion and intravenous nutrition.
He was discharged three weeks after admission, having recovered fully.
Case report 2
A 51 year old white man with a 28 year history of ulcerative colitis and ankylosing spondylitis had been receiving longterm treatment with sulphasalazine, until two years previously.
He had a 10 day history of diarrhoea (10 bowel actions daily) without blood.
He had received loperamide and ciprofloxacin without benefit.
Two days before admission he noted abdominal distension and began to hiccup.
His temperature was 38.8°C, with a tachycardia of 120/min.
Arterial blood pressure was 140/90 mm Hg with no postural drop.
The abdomen was distended and the outline of the transverse colon clearly visible.
Abdominal girth measured 116 cm.
Stool microscopy and culture, and blood cultures were negative.
Serum sodium was 136 mmol/l, potassium 3.7 mmol/l, urea 2.5 umol/l, albumin 22 g/l, orosomucoid 1.91 g/l, haemoglobin 14.6 g/dl, white blood cell count 17.4×10 and platelets 313×10.
A plain abdominal radiograph showed gaseous distension of the transverse colon (distal transverse colon diameter 10 cm) with mucosal oedema.
A diagnosis of toxic megacolon was made and the patient was given intravenous fluids, potassium supplements, intravenous metronidazole, cefuroxime, and hydrocortisone.
After 24 hours, his temperature was 37°C and the pulse rate 90/ min.
He complained of increasing abdominal discomfort.
Abdominal girth had not changed but a repeat plain abdominal film showed the radiographic diameter of the distal transverse colon had increased to 11.5 cm.
In addition, there was distension of the caecum (9.5 cm) and descending colon (7 cm).
On the basis of our findings from case 1, the patient was advised to adopt the knee-elbow position for five minutes every half hour.
Assumption of the position, almost invariably resulted in spontaneous passage of wind, often started by a gentle cough.
Abdominal discomfort lessened and abdominal girth decreased steadily to 108 cm within 12 hours.
Improvement was reflected in the radiological findings.
At 12 hours, the diameter of the distal transverse colon was 7 cm, caecum 4 cm, and descending colon 2.5 cm.
At 48 hours the diameter of the distal transverse colon was 2.0 cm.
He made steady improvement and was discharged 12 days after admission.
Discussion
In both cases established criteria for the diagnosis of toxic megacolon were fulfilled.
Deflation of the colon (recorded by girth and radiological measurements) with relief of symptoms was achieved by a simple, safe postural manoeuvre.
We propose that in the knee-elbow position, mobile bowel loops shift to a dependent position, while the rectum remains uppermost.
Fluid shifts to dependent bowel loops and allows gas to rise to the rectum.
We obtained supportive evidence for this explanation from a double contrast barium enema investigation of a patient complaining of changed bowel habit.
A lateral ‘through-view’ abdominal radiograph, taken with the patient in the knee-elbow position, confirmed fluid accumulation in dependent bowel loops and shift of gas to the sigmoid colon and rectum (Fig 2).
Although the knee-elbow position has been recommended to facilitate digital examination of the rectum and sigmoidoscopic decompression of sigmoid volvulus, we are not aware of any previous reports of its use for decompression of the bowel in toxic megacolon.
We advocate the use of the knee-elbow position in all cases of toxic megacolon to deflate the bowel and achieve relief of symptoms.
In addition, it is possible that colonic decompression may reduce the chance of perforation and improve blood flow to the bowel wall.
Persistent colonic dilatation may constitute an indication for surgical intervention.
Therefore, it is possible that relief of gaseous distension may have some influence on a surgical decision.
A prospective assessment of the possible influence of bowel decompression on outcome, may be appropriate.
Extraintestinal lymphoma in association with Whipple's disease
Abstract
A 45 year old man is reported on with Whipple's disease who presented with weight loss, lethargy, and ascites.
He subsequently developed fever and a mass in the neck, but died despite antibiotic treatment and nutritional support.
Necropsy showed extraintestinal lymphoma.
Whipple's disease, or intestinal lipodystrophy, is a rare chronic systemic illness.
Less than 1000 cases have been reported in world publications.
The cause is thought to be infective and while ‘Whipple's bacillus’ has never been cultured, it has recently been identified by a molecular genetic approach.
Before antibiotic treatment was used, the condition was universally fatal.
Death due to treated Whipple's disease is now rate.
There is evidence of both an associated humoral and cellular immune defect in Whipple's disease, but no uniform abnormality has been shown.
This is the first reported example of extraintestinal lymphoma in association with Whipple's disease.
Case report
A 45 year old white man presented in October 1991 with a one year history of weight loss, lethargy, and fluid retention.
He was educationally subnormal from birth with an IQ of 60.
He had previously had a cholecystectomy and appendicectomy.
He had a nine year history of a seronegative arthritis affecting his hands, knees, and feet.
On examination he was hyperpigmented and malnourished, with wasting of the face and trunk (Fig 2).
INVESTIGATIONS
There was severe hypoalbuminaemia (serum albumin 14 g/l) and iron deficiency anaemia (total iron 1.4 umol/l, Hb 69 g/l).
Jejunal biopsy showed the typical features of Whipple's disease, with PAS positive macrophages (Fig 3).
The patient responded well to nutritional support and treatment with benzyl penicillin and cotrimoxazole for more than a year.
He made good progress until February 1992 when he was readmitted with a febrile illness and a tender mass in the right side of his neck, which was thought to be infective, but had not resolved despite treatment with flucloxacillin.
His general condition deteriorated steadily, despite additional broad spectrum drugs and intensive nutritional support.
Aspiration cytology of the neck mass showed only amorphous, necrotic material.
Excision biopsy was carried out and before the result was available the patient deteriorated rapidly and died.
Postmortem examination showed a right sided parapharyngeal tumour, with the lower border just above the carotid bifurcation and had ulcerated into the pharynx.
It had ensheathed, but not invaded the carotid artery.
The cut surface was firm and pale, but with no areas of necrosis.
Histological examination showed polymorphic lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma (Fig 4).
The oesophagus, stomach, small and large intestines were macroscopically normal.
The small bowel mesentery was thickened and contained multiple enlarged lymph nodes (Fig 5).
The liver was large and congested, but the spleen seemed normal.
There was a terminal bronchopneumonia.
Discussion
The nature of the infecting organism in the aetiopathogenesis of Whipple's disease has recently been clarified, with the identification by Relman and his co-workers of the uncultured ‘Whipple's bacillus’ as a gram positive actinomycete,Tropheryma whippelii .
It is widely accepted that infection is the primary cause of Whipple's disease, but the importance of an associated immune deficiency in starting or promoting persistence of the infection is less clear.
Several abnormalities of humoral and cell mediated immunity have been reported, but no consistent defect has emerged.
There is no real evidence to support autoantibody production.
Early reports showed reduced concentrations of IgM, but later studies showed normal or even raised immunoglobulin concentrations.
Reduced numbers of intestinal mucosal plasma cells have been reported, with a return to normal values after antibiotic treatment.
Evidence to support a defect in cell mediated immunity is more compelling.
Reduced peripheral blood T lymphocyte counts, impaired macrophage function, and diminished cutaneous responses to a variety of antigenic stimuli have been reported, all of which have tended to return to normal after antibiotic treatment.
HLA B27 positivity in some patients and a gramulomatous infiltration on histological examination in others would also support impaired cell mediated immunity.
It has been suggested by Dobbins that the defective T cell responses may be a secondary phenomenon, resulting perhaps from the combination of anergy triggered by infection, incomplete intestinal lymphatic obstruction, and severe malnutrition.
Before the introduction of antibiotic treatment Whipple's disease was universally fatal.
The gravity of central nervous system recurrence and hence the importance of appropriate antibiotic treatment in preventing relapse has been emphasised.
The outcome in this patient suggests that the delay in diagnosis and hence starting effective antibiotic treatment may have given rise to the abnormality in both the humoral response and T cell function, which on this occasion may have contributed to the development of an associated extraintestinal lymphoma.
Pleural lymphoma in a patient presenting with malabsorption: an illustration of the clinicopathological behaviour in a case of enteropathy associated T cell lymphoma
Abstract
A case of enteropathy associated T cell lymphoma (EATCL) is described, which was diagnosed by biopsy of a lymphomatous pleural mass.
Retrospective radiological review showed that this lesion had been present when an initial diagnosis of coeliac disease had been made 12 months previously and a detailed description of the natural history of the lymphoma during this period was thus available.
The findings show that EATCL may behave in an indolent fashion and masquerade as coeliac disease, delaying the correct diagnosis.
The relation of this disorder with coeliac disease and lymphocytic gastritis is discussed with reference to recent published works.
The cause and definition of enteropathy associated T cell lymphoma (EATCL) and its relation to coeliac disease has been the subject of much debate recently.
This is centred around the question of whether or not T cell lymphoma may be a cause or an effect of coeliac disease.
The traditional view that EATCL is a complication of coeliac disease is supported by new immunohistochemical evidence that both diseases have similar subsets of intestinal mucosal T cells.
It has been argued, however, that in some cases of adult onset ‘coeliac’ disease the histological findings of villous atrophy, crypt hyperplasia, and intra-epithelial lymphocytosis may be a response to low grade lymphomatous infiltration.
Because coeliac disease may be asymptomatic it is difficult to prove that a monoclonal lymphocytic intestinal infiltrate can develop in previously normal bowel.
Lymphocytic gastritis is a recently described entity characterised by a dense epithelial lymphocytic infiltration the pathogenesis of which is incompletely understood.
It has been associated with coeliac disease, small bowel lymphoma, and Menetrier's disease.
In one report the subset of T cells present differed from those found in coeliac disease in having low percentage of γ/; ta; T cells.
Some take the view that it may be a common morphological manifestation of more than one disease.
This report describes the case of a patient who was initially diagnosed and treated as having coeliac disease and lymphocytic gastritis but who responded poorly to a gluten free diet.
A diagnosis of T cell lymphoma was made by pleural biopsy one year later.
Case report
A 74 year old man presented in October 1990 with a two year history of intermittent diarrhoea and weight loss.
Investigations showed a raised mean corpuscular volume (MCV -114 fl), low serum B12 (150 ng/l), normal 200–1000), and folate (1.2 µg/l, normal 2–14).
Haematological parameters were otherwise normal.
Liver function was normal.
Chest x ray showed evidence of previous tuberculosis and some pleural thickening at the left base, which was thought likely to be long standing (Fig 1).
Barium enema was normal.
Gastroscopy showed a nodular gastric mucosa with apthous ulceration and superficially normal duodenal mucosa.
Gastric biopsy showed a lymphocytic gastritis and duodenal biopsy showed partial villous atrophy with a mixed severe mononuclear cell infiltrate consistent with a clinical diagnosis of coeliac disease (Fig 2).
A gluten free diet was started and over the next two months there was 2.3 kg weight gain and symptomatic improvement.
In the year after diagnosis the improvement in bowel symptoms was maintained but three further gastric and duodenal biopsies at four monthly intervals showed no improvement.
Further weight loss, fever, and upper abdominal pain precipitated re-admission in September 1991.
Liver function tests now showed raised alanine transaminase (101 IU, normal 0–35) and alkaline phosphatase (227 IU, normal 25–95).
Upper abdominal ultrasound and abdominal computed tomography were normal.
Repeat chest x ray showed no change.
Liver biopsy showed a predominantly T cell mononuclear cell infiltrate and although the possibility of lymphoma was raised it was considered that this may also have been caused by an inflammatory process.
Barium follow through was normal.
Infection screen was negative.
A trephine bone marrow biopsy specimen showed a slight increase in small lymphocytes but no definite evidence of lymphoma.
Finally, computed tomography of the chest showed pleural thickening at the left lung base in an area corresponding to that previously noted on a chest x ray (Fig 3).
A biopsy specimen of this lesion showed infiltration of the chest wall by malignant mononuclear cells of T cell phenotype consistent with a high grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (Fig 4).
Because of the poor response to gluten free diet and the presence of lymphoma it seemed reasonable to consider that the malabsorption was as a result of an enteropathy associated with the lymphoma (EATCL) rather than simple coeliac disease.
The patient then received on ‘B-CHOP’ chemotherapy.
Each course of ‘B-CHOP’ consists of intravenous bleomycin, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and adriamycin on day 1 with oral prednisolone on days 1–5.
There is a course option at four weeks depending on the response of the lymphoma and the extent of bone marrow suppression that is induced.
Computed tomography after three courses of chemotherapy showed that the pleural mass had reduced in size.
This reduction in pleural thickening could also be seen on the chest x ray (Fig 5) making it very likely that the pleural thickening noted initially in October 1990 and thought then to be unimportant was neoplastic from the outset.
Unfortunately the chemotherapy was poorly tolerated, the patient went into a gradual decline, and died in a hospice three months later.
Postmortem examination was refused.
Discussion
This patient presented with malabsorption and small bowel biopsy specimens were consistent with a diagnosis of coeliac disease.
The subsequent biopsy of a lymphomatous pleural plaque, visible on previous radiographs, permitted the retrospective deduction of lymphoma at initial presentaton.
This case is similar to that of Wright et al in that none of the intestinal tissue provided morphological evidence of lymphoma but differs in the unusual finding of a high grade lymphoma in the pleural lesion.
Further similarities can be drawn with two cases described by Wolber, which had lymphocytic gastritis, small bowel intraepithelial lymphocytosis, and morphologically detectable T cell lymphoma of the small bowel.
A valuable feature of our case is that it provides a detailed profile of the natural history of EATCL over a period of 12 months from initial presentation to the introduction of chemotherapy.
This suggests that EATCL may behave in an apparently indolent fashion with a very slow change in pathological state over many months as measured by clinical state, serial upper gastrointestinal biopsy, radiography, haematology, and biochemistry results.
It is also of interest that the pleural lesion, morphologically a high grade lymphoma when biopsied, showed no significant increase in size during the year after presentation.
There was some progression of the disease, however, over this period as shown by the slow deteioration in general condition and liver function.
Although we have not investigated the clonality of the T cells infiltrating the gut one possibility is that these represented epitheliotropic ‘transitional’ or ‘end’cell phases of the same cell line present in the pleural lesion.
This may partly explain the lack of change in the appearance of the duodenal mucosa on serial biopsy in this condition.
We consider it to be most unlikely that the pleural lesion is the site of origin of this lymphoma because of the extensive lymphocytic infiltration elsewhere, the long history of bowel symptoms, and the similarity with other described cases.
Primary pleural lymphoma has been described, particularly in Japan but is said to arise most frequently from old inflammatory pleural disease, is usually of B cell type and is usually localised to the pleura.
The conventional view would be that our patient had asymptomatic coeliac disease and developed a lymphoma, which precipitated the initial presentation.
The alternative view that the intestinal lymphoma developed as a primary event two years before presentation seems possible in view of the indolent nature of the disease and subsequent findings.
Clearly the combination of malabsorption with small bowel villous atrophy and lymphocytic inflation is not specific for coeliac disease because EATCL may present in similar fashion.
It is probable that the lymphocytic gastritis present in this case wasalso a manifestation of lymphoma.
These findings reaffirm the maxim that patients with adult onset ‘coeliac’ disease who show a poor response to treatment or who deteriorate when receiving treatment should be viewed with a high degree of suspicion.
Small bowel biopsy and abdominal computed tomography are essential but often unhelpful in early diagnosis.
In such cases a careful search for secondary extra-abdominal disease may be worthwhile.
Unless there is macroscopic, radiologically detectable disease it may be necessary to perform cytogenetic and immunohistochemical studies on biopsy specimens, possibly even obtained from laparotomy, to exclude lymphona.
Intramural haematoma of the oesophagus complicating sclerotherapy for varices
Abstract
A patients is described who developed an intramural haematoma of the oesophagus shortly after variceal endoscopic sclerotherapy.
This unusual complication is best imaged by computed tomography or nuclear magnetic resonance and needs conservative treatment.
Resolution usually occurs spontaneously and may result in eradication of the varices.
Endoscopic sclerotherapy is the cornerstone for both acute and elective management of bleeding oesophageal varices.
Complications occur, however, in up to 46% of patients and the procedure related mortality is about 1–2%.
This report describes an intramural haematoma of the oesophagus, a rare but potentially dangerous complication of variceal injection.
Case report
A 52 year old man suffered a variceal bleed secondary to posthepatitis C cirrhosis.
This was treated by emergency sclerotherapy, using a technique of both intra and paravariceal injections of 1% polidocanol.
The patient was then enrolled into a programme of elective longterm prophylactic sclerotherapy.
Four months later, 24 hours after his fifth outpatient endoscopy session, he complained of retrosternal pain.
Within a few hours, he also developed total dysphagia.
A Gastrografin swallow showed an occlusion of the distal oesophagus (Fig 1).
Computed tomography showed an intramural soft tissue mass compressing the lumen of the lower third (Fig 2A) resulting in occlusion (2B; 2 cm below Fig 2A).
An oesophageal tube was placed just above the obstacle under fluoroscopic guidance to drain the saliva.
Total parenteral nutrition and drugs were given.
One week later, another contrast swallow showed the reopening of the lumen and oral intake was therefore gradually resumed.
At endoscopy five weeks later, the varices were eradicated and the patient had no further oesophageal complaints.
Liver transplantation was performed successfully one year later.
Discussion
Intramural haematoma of the oesophagus is rare.
It may be spontaneous or can be induced by a Mallory-Weiss tear, instrument trauma, anti-coagulant treatment, and haematologic malignancies.
After endoscopic sclerotherapy, an incidence of 0.3 to 1.6% has been reported and our case is the only one of a series of 259 consecutive patients who received a total of 1867 injections between 1981 and 1992.
Tissue necrosis extending into the submucosa and muscularis is probably the initial pathogenic event.
An abnormal coagulation profile and raised portal pressure then tend to enhance longitudinal and circumferential expansion, resulting in submucosal dissection.
Although pain and dysphagia suggest the diagnosis of intramural haematoma, symptoms may be mistaken for an oesophageal perforation, a myocardial infarct, or a dissecting aortic aneurysm.
We feel therefore that imaging techniques are required in this situation.
A water soluble contrast swallow seems an excellent screening tool to rule out an oesophageal perforation.
The nature of the obstructive lesion is, however, better defined by computed tomography or nuclear magnetic resonance, showing a hyperdense mass without enhancement after intravenous contrast injection.
We do not agree with others, who recommend endoscopy, as it carries a risk of life threatening iatrogenic perforation.
Because spontaneous rupture of the haematoma is rare, treatment should be conservative, resulting in complete recovery in two to three weeks.
Submucosal healing and scarring may even contribute to the eradication of the varices, as in our patient.
Duodenal juice total protein and pancreatic enzyme synthesis, turnover, and secretion in patients after acute pancreatitis
Abstract
It is controversial whether acute pancreatitis has longterm effects on pancreatic function.
Pancreatic enzyme synthesis, turnover, and secretion were measured in 10 patients in clinical remission who had had one or more (one to six) attacks of acute alcoholic pancreatitis.
The studies were done between two and 29 months after the most recent attack.
A control group included five patients with no evidence of pancreatic disease.
A four hour primed/continuous intravenous infusion of [C]L-leucine tracer was given with secretin (2 U/kg/h) and cholecystokinin (0.5 U/kg/h) and secreted duodenal juice aspirated.
Amylase and trypsin were extracted from duodenal juice by affinity chromatography, permitting measurement of the rate of isotope incorporation into total protein, amylase, and trypsin.
The results showed non-parallel changes in enzyme synthesis and turnover with decreases in total enzyme protein and amylase synthesis and turnover but preservation of trypsin synthesis and turnover.
The low turnover rates may be ascribed to continuing pancreatic cell malfunction after recovery from acute alcoholic pancreatitis and suggest that the decreased amylase secretion rates are partly a consequence of impaired amylase synthesis and not simply because of loss of pancreatic tissue.
The effect of acute pancreatitis on pancreatic function is unclear with some but not all studies showing complete recovery as judged by secretory testing.
Secretory tests may not be suitable, however, for assessing pancreatic function as preliminary studies have suggested that enzyme synthesis may be changed before changes in secretion are identified.
In a previous study, we used a primed/4 hour continuous intravenous infusion of C labelled leucine to compare synthesis rates in patients with chronic calcific pancreatitis with those in patients with no pancreatic disease.
The results showed that protein secreted during the first hour of stimulation was derived from pancreatic stores and that the turnover rate of stores was approximately 37%/h in normal human subjects.
Calculation of these results assumed, however, that pancreatic juice protein was equivalent to enzyme protein.
While this is a reasonable assumption in normal subjects, it can lead to significant error in patients with inflammatory disease, such as pancreatitis, where juice may be contaminated with exudative proteins.
To exclude such possible error a method was developed for the extraction of pure enzyme protein from aspirated duodenal juice, based on affinity chromatography for both amylase and trypsin.
These developments have now allowed us to perform measurements of total protein, amylase, and trypsin turnover in 10 patients who have experienced acute attacks of alcohol induced pancreatitis.
In this study we have used this technique to assess whether there are any longterm changes in pancreatic function after recovery from acute alcoholic pancreatitis.
Patients
Ten male patients in clinical remission after between one and six attacks of clinically acute alcoholic pancreatitis were studied between two and 29 months after the most recent attack.
Table I gives the clinical details of the patients.
None of the patients, however, were overtly diabetic, had clinical steatorrhoea, or were taking pancreatic enzyme supplements.
Five normal healthy men were selected as controls for the study.
The controls had no history or symptoms suggestive of pancreatitis.
There was no significant difference between the control and patient group with regard to age and body weight.
The procedure was reviewed and accepted by the Hospital Medical Ethics and Radiation Safety Committees and informed signed consent was obtained from each patient.
Methods
We have shown that it would be possible to measure pancreatic enzyme secretion and synthesis rates simultaneously if approximately 50 µCi of a C labelled amino acid tracer was infused intravenously for four hours together with secretin and cholecystokinin.
PROCEDURE
The procedure has been previously described in detail.
After an overnight fast, subjects had an endoscopy and insertion of two Rüsch tubes, one into the duodenum and the other into the stomach.
Constant suction was then applied to both tubes.
The position of the tubes was fluoroscopically checked frequently during infusion.
After intravenous administration of a pulse dose of 10 µCi [1-C]L-leucine, a four hour intravenous infusion consisting of 500 ml 0.45% sodium chloride, 50 µCi [1-C]L-leucine tracer, secretin (2.0 Crick-Harper-Raper U/kg/ h), and cholecystokinin (0.5 CHR U/kg/h) was started.
Gastric juice was discarded.
Duodenal contents were separated into 30 minute collections.
Samples were collected on ice, the volume measured, and samples immediately assayed for amylase, trypsin, lipase, and bicarbonate.
Five ml samples of duodenal juice were mixed with an equal volume of 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and trasylol (10% vol/vol) added to the remainder.
Samples were stored frozen (-20°C).
Venous blood samples were taken at 1, 2.5, and 4 hours for measurement of plasma total amino acid concentrations, plasma leucine specific activity, and plasma protein synthesis rates.
THEORY AND CALCULATIONS
Previous studies have shown that during a primed/continuous four hour infusion of C labelled leucine hormonally stimulated pancreatic enzyme secretion only becomes labelled after a delay period of approximately 100 minutes.
As the time taken for secreted enzyme to pass into the duodenum is relatively small (three to four minutes), the delay period may be used as a measure of the time taken for the synthesis of new enzymes by the acinar cell.
After the delay period there is a linear increase in the labelling of secreted enzymes curving off to a plateau value after four hours at which time pancreatic enzyme stores (zymogen) will be fully labelled at a specific activity equivalent to that of the precursor amino acid pool.
Measurement of the rate of increase in the linear part of the curve will permit calculation of the fractional turnover rate of the zymogen pool from the equation: where,D S A protein is the rate of increase of specific activity of bound leucine in protein and S A plasma max is the plateau specific activity of plasma leucine during the four hour infusion.
This assumes that the plasma free amino acid pool is representative of the precursor for pancreatic enzyme synthesis.
Support for this assumption was obtained from a similar study in pigs that showed that amino acids derived from the extracellular space were used directly for pancreatic enzyme synthesis.
Finally pancreatic enzyme pool size can be calculated from the equation:
SAMPLE ANALYSIS
Methods for the measurement of duodenal juice total protein specific radioactivities, pancreatic amylase and trypsin specific radioactivities, and plasma leucine specific radioactivities have been described.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Means of the control and post-acute pancreatitis groups were compared using the Student's t test for unpaired data.
Correlation studies were performed using linear regression and Spearman's correlation coefficients were calculated.
Results
Results were analysed with and without values obtained for the two patients studied 15 and 29 months after their most recent acute attack of pancreatitis.
Excluding these two patients made no difference, however, as they do not represent the outlying points.
Mean and standard deviation figures therefore include these two patients.
TOTAL PROTEIN, ENZYME, AND BICARBONATE SECRETION
Figure 1 shows that individual secretory volumes were reasonably constant in patients and controls during the four hour infusion study, showing effective continual hormonal stimulation and satisfactory recovery.
Data for enzyme secretion parallelled changes in secretory volume.
There was no significant difference in mean total protein and trypsin secretion between the control and post-acute pancreatitis groups (Fig 2).
Amylase secretion was significantly (p) lower, however, in the post-acute pancreatitis patients (Fig 2).
Mean lipase secretion was not significantly different in the two groups — that is, mean (SD) 94.1 (46.0) IU×10/h in the control group and 56.4 (33.0) IU×10/h in the post-acute pancreatitis group.
Similarly, there was no significant difference in bicarbonate secretion between the two groups — that is, mean (SD) 27.0 (15.5) mmol/h in the control group and 15.4 (7.7) mmol/h in the post-acute pancreatitis group.
There was a positive correlation between the number of months elapsed since a patient's most recent attack and amylase secretion.
Spearman's correlation coefficient was found to be 0.75 (p).
There was only one patient, however, who had a mean amylase secretion rate above the control mean value.
This was the patient who was studied 29 months after his most recent acute attack.
Only three other patients had amylase secretion rates that fell within the control range.
These patients were studied 15, 6, and 4 months after their most recent acute attack.
Other patients studied at 5, 6, and 7 months after their most recent acute attack had mean amylase secretion rates below the control range.
If the patients studied at 15 and 29 months were excluded, there was no correlation between the number of months elapsed since a patient's most recent attack and amylase secretion.
APPEARANCE OF LABELLED PROTEIN, AMYLASE, AND TRYPSIN IN DUODENAL JUICE
Comparing the post-acute pancreatitis patients with the controls, the time taken for labelled total protein to appear in the duodenal juice was significantly (p) longer in the post-acute pancreatitis patients (Table II, Fig 3).
Similarly, the time taken for labelled amylase to appear in duodenal juice was significantly (p) longer in the post-acute pancreatitis patients.
There was no significant difference, however, in the time taken for labelled trypsin to appear in the duodenal juice of the post-acute pancreatitis patients.
DUODENAL JUICE TOTAL PROTEIN, AMYLASE, AND TRYPSIN TURNOVER RATE
The turnover rate of duodenal juice protein was 33% lower in the post-acute pancreatitis patients compared with controls (p)(Fig 4).
Similarly the amylase turnover rate was 37% lower (p).
The trypsin turnover rate, however, was not significantly changed.
TOTAL PROTEIN, AMYLASE, AND TRYPSIN POOL SIZES
There was no significant difference in total protein, amylase, and trypsin pool sizes between the post-acute pancreatitis patients and the controls.
Mean (SD) values were as follows: total protein (mg): 301 (61) in the control group and 380 (394) in the post-acute pancreatitis group; amylase (phadebas U): 92 (44) in the control group and 82 (72) in the post-acute pancreatitis group; and trypsin 999 (484) and 803 (553) in the post-acute pancreatitis group.
THE EFFECTS OF ONE v MULTIPLE ACUTE ATTACKS
The pancreatitis patients were divided into two groups — that is, those who had one acute attack and those who had had multiple attacks.
When comparing the group of patients who had had a single attack with the control group, there was no significant difference in amylase secretion (Table III).
By contrast, the time taken for labelled amylase to appear in the duodenal juice was longer in the patients (p).
There was a significant difference in both secretion (p) and synthesis (p) between the multiple attack group and controls.
Discussion
We have shown that after acute pancreatitis, amylase secretion was decreased whereas trypsin, lipase, and bicarbonate secretion were not.
Patients after acute pancreatitis had slower duodenal juice protein and amylase turnover rates but trypsin turnover was not different with controls.
The decreased total protein and amylase turnover rates are probably a result of a reduction in synthetic rates as the time taken for labelled total protein and amylase to appear in the duodenal juice was significantly longer in the the post-acute pancreatitis patients.
There was no correlation between duodenal juice protein, enzyme turnover rates, and enzyme secretion.
There was a positive correlation, however, between the number of months elapsed from the most recent acute attack and amylase secretion.
It is possible that if a large group of post-acute pancreatitis patients was studied, trypsin, lipase, and bicarbonate secretion may also be found to be significantly decreased.
When mean enzyme and bicarbonate secretion in the post-acute pancreatitis patients, however, were expressed as a percentage of those in the control group, amylase secretion was the lowest followed by bicarbonate, lipase, and the trypsin.
Our results are in agreement with those of Marks and Thompsett who found that the earliest and most frequent finding in patients with pancreatic disease was a decrease in amylase secretion.
This finding was confirmed by Burton et al and Amman et al .
The secretion of amylase, however, was normal or less severely impaired than the secretion of lipase or of proteolytic enzymes in pancreatic disease in a number of other studies.
The discrepancies among published reports are partly a result of the very considerable scatter of ratios between the different enzymes in normal subjects.
Non-parallel enzyme secretion has been shown in patients with normal pancreatic function under certain stimulatory conditions.
Non-parallel enzyme synthesis has been reported in rats fed protein rich or carbohydrate rich diets.
A protein rich diet has been shown to augment proteolytic proenzyme synthesis and decrease amylase and lipase synthesis, whereas a carbohydrate rich diet only decreased the synthesis rate of anodic chymotrypsinogen.
Infusion of caerulein has also been reported to cause divergent changes in pancreatic enzyme synthesis under certain conditions, as has intraduodenal administration of oleic acid.
This study is the first to suggest non-parallel enzyme synthesis in man.
Various animal studies have shown inhibition of pancreatic enzyme secretion by pancreatic proteases in the duodenum.
In the rat, this negative feedback control is mediated by cholecystokinin, which is probably released by protease sensitive proteins from either duodenal mucosa or pancreatic juice.
There are conflicting reports as to whether negative feedback inhibition exists in humans and whether it is mediated by cholecystokinin.
Should negative feedback inhibition exist in man, however, amylase and lipase would not be affected and would therefore not be affected by compensatory mechanisms in the way that proteases are.
Negative feedback inhibition would therefore explain the greater sensitivity of amylase secretion for the detection of pancreatic disease.
One would then expect, however, lipase secretion to be an equally sensitive measurement.
Although lipase secretion was not significantly lower in the post-acute pancreatitis patients, when mean enzyme secretion was expressed as a percentage of the control mean lipase secretion was lower than trypsin.
The lack of correlation between turnover of enzyme pools and secretion is perhaps due to interindividual variation in enzyme pool sizes.
A large enzyme pool turning over at the same rate as a small one would produce more new enzyme, which would result in a greater amount of enzyme being available for secretion.
Enzyme turnover would correlate with enzyme secretion only if pool sizes were similar.
The correlation between amylase secretion and the time elapsed since a patient's most recent attack, shows that amylase secretion is low after an acute attack, but improves with time.
Individual results, however, show that the rate of recovery varies.
Comparison of amylase secretion and synthesis results of patients who had had only one acute attack and those who had had two or more, shows that synthetic studies may be more sensitive than the standard pancreatic function test, which only measures secretion in detecting pancreatitis.
Further study, using larger numbers is required to compare the relative sensitivity of secretion and synthesis measurements.
Control amylase synthesis times obtained in this study are shorter than those obtained previously.
This may be because of the different types and doses of cholecystokinin used.
The most important finding of this study is the reduction in amylase synthesis and turnover in patients studied between 2 and 29 months after an attack of acute pancreatitis.
This suggests that the decreased amylase secretion seen in the post-acute pancreatitis patients is as a result of not only possible loss of pancreatic tissue with chronic change but also because of prolonged pancreatic cell malfunction after an acute attack.
Neutrophil mucosal involvement is accompanied by enhanced local production of interleukin-8 in ulcerative colitis
Abstract
The concentration of myeloperoxidase, a neutrophil granule constituent, was measured in the perfusion fluid from sigmoid and rectal segments in patients with ulcerative colitis.
The concentrations of myeloperoxidase were increased severalfold in the patients with ulcerative colitis compared with healthy controls pointing to an enhanced neutrophil activity.
The release of myeloperoxidase correlated to an enhanced local release of the neutrophil activating peptide interleukin 8 (IL-8).
Increased values of tumour necrosis factor (TNF-α) were also found during intestinal perfusionof the patients and correlated with those of IL-8.
The results obtained are compatible with the hypothesis that local mucosal recruitment/activation of neutrophils in ulcerative colitis is mediated by an enhanced IL-8 synthesis.
TNF-α may be one relevant factor as a stimulus to IL-8 synthesis.
Neutrophil accumulation in the inflamed intestinal mucosa is a prominent feature in ulcerative colitis.
The granules of neutrophil granulocytes contain a number of enzymes, for example, myeloperoxidase, which are important in the combat against bacteria.
These granule enzymes, some of which are proteolytic, can be released upon stimulation, together with cytotoxic oxygen metabolites.
Therefore, activated neutrophils may contribute to tissue damage at sites of inflammation.
The factor(s) responsible for the mucosal recruitment of neutrophils in ulcerative colitis are not certain.
Human neutrophil activating peptide/interleukin 8 (NAP-1/ IL-8) is a single, non-glycosylated peptide chain; its main activities include activation and chemotactic attraction of neutrophils.
It was originally isolated from endotoxin treated monocytes but can also be produced by a variety of other cells upon stimulation with a number of cytokines including IL-1 and tumour necrosis factor (TNF-α).
This study was performed in an attempt to estimate the mucosal activity of neutrophils in ulcerative colitis and elucidate the possible neutrophil activating role certain cytokines may exert.
For this purpose we have measured myeloperoxidase, IL-8, and some cytokines known to induce IL-8 synthesis.
The measurements were performed in the perfusion fluid obtained during regional perfusion of inflamed sigmoid and rectal segments.
Patients and methods
We studied 16 patients with proved ulcerative colitis; eight had a disease extension to or beyond the sigmoid colon and eight had an isolated proctitis (eight women and eight men, with a mean age of 35 years, range 20 to 75).
The diagnosis was based on established criteria including a typical endoscopic appearance supported by histological findings.
All patients had endoscopically active disease of various degrees.
The clinical symptoms varied from mild disease with little blood in stools to more active disease with frequent diarrhoea with blood and mucus in all stools.
The four degree score of Binder was used to classify clinical and endoscopic findings.
Histological scoring of biopsy specimens was performed on formaldehyde fixed sections.
Six patients were not receiving any treatment.
Six patients were receiving treatment with oral or enema steroids, or both and two had recently finished treatment with steroids.
One patient was treated with sulphasalazine and one with lidocaine enema.
The patients were compared with 18 healthy volunteers (11 women and seven men, with a mean age of 33 years, range 21 to 64).
The study was approved by the ethics committee of the medical faculty of Uppsala University.
We used a perfusion system where segments of the sigmoid colon and rectum were isolated.
Before colorectal perfusion studies, the patients and controls had a bowel preparation as for flexible rectosigmoidoscopy, that is — diet restriction and oral purgative the day before and a non-irritative enema two hours before perfusion.
The perfusion instrument was a plastic tube (16 mm in external diameter), which was 60 cm long and contained smaller channels in the tube wall and one large central channel; five latex balloons were attached to the tube (Fig 1).
The investigation started with an endoscopic examination up to the junction of the sigmoid descending colon.
Before insertion of the tube, it was threaded onto the endoscopic.
The tube was then introduced up to the sigmoid colon with the endoscope acting as a guide When the balloons were inflated with air, two 8 cm long segments were established (Fig 1); one in the rectum (rectal segment) and another in the sigmoid colon (sigmoid segment).
After withdrawal of the endoscope, the position of the tube was checked fluoroscopically.
To stabilise the position of the tube, two balloons surrounding the anal canal were inflated (Fig 1).
Using the inflow channels, the rectal and sigmoid segments were continuously perfused at a rate of 3 ml/min with a perfusion solution containing 120 M NaCl, 5.4 mM KCl, 2 mM Na2HPO4, 10 mM glucose, 35 mM mannitol, and 1 g/l polyethylene glycol (Mw 4000).
The pH of the solution was 7.2 and the osmolarity 290 mmol/l.
Aprotinin (10000 IU/ml; Bayer, Leverkusen, Germany) was added to the perfusion solution (10 ml aprotinin/l) to inhibit possible proteolytic activity in the effluent.
The perfusate fluid was collected by the outflow channels from the isolated segments.
After 50 minutes of continuous perfusion to obtain steady state conditions, samples of the effluent were collected on ice.
The total recovery of perfusion fluid was almost equal to that infused.
After centrifugation of the samples, the supernatants were immediately frozen at -70°C until they were analysed.
As the assays might even be affected by the presence of small amounts of proteases, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride to a final concentration of 2 mM (Sigma Chemical, St Louis) was added to all samples before they were thawed on ice and analysed.
Further details of the perfusion system is presented elsewhere.
The granulocyte granule component myeloperoxidase was measured by a radioimmunoassay from Pharmacia Diagnostics, Uppsala, Sweden.
IL-8 was determined by a solid phase double ligand ELISA.
TNF-α was measured by an enzymatic immunoassay obtained from Medgenix, Brussels Belgium.
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) was determined by a radioimmunoassay (Medgenix).
Granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and interleukin-1 (IL-1Β) were measured by immunometric assays (Medgenix).
The perfusion fluid samples were analysed in duplicate and in sequence to avoid inter day variation.
The variability was less than 10% for all methods.
The specificity of the assays applied to perfusion fluid was assured by dilution and by recovery experiments showing correlation to the standard curves.
STATISTICS
To obtain normally distributed values, all values were logarithmically transformed before calculations and statistical analyses.
Means and 95% confidence intervals are presented in text and figures.
Differences between groups were calculated with the two tailed Student's t test; pwas considered significant.
Clinical findings related to perfusion data were tested by one way anylsts of variance.
Results
The patients were grouped into those who had a disease extension to or beyond the sigmoid colon (colitis) and those who suffered from an isolated proctitis.
In patients with colitis the concentrations of myeloperoxidase were increased by an average of 14 and 18 times in the perfusion fluids from the sigmoid and rectal segments compared with controls (p).
In patients with isolated proctitis, there was an eightfold increase of the mean myeloperoxidase concentration in the rectal segment (<) and a twofold increase in the sigmoid segment (Table).
The perfusion fluid concentrations of IL-8 were also significantly increased in both segments in colitis and proctitis (Fig 2 and Table).
The myeloperoxidase and IL-8 concentrations in sigmoid/ rectal segments were correlated in patients with colitis (r=0.76, p; Fig 3) and in proctitis (r=0.46, p).
Significantly increased values of TNF-α were found in perfusates from both segments in colitis but only from the rectal segment in proctitis (Table).
The recovered sigmoid-rectal amounts of TNF-α correlated with the recovered amounts of IL-8 in patients with colitis (r=0.75, p; Fig 3) and proctitis (r=0.62, p).
To compensate for differences in flow rates during perfusion, the appearance rates of myeloperoxidase and cytokines were calculated.
The differences between the perfusion fluid concentrations of the components in the patients and those in the controls were similar to the differences in the appearance rates (Table).
The values of IL-2, GM-CSF, and IL-1Β were below the detection limits.
Most of the patients had clinically mild disease.
On a four degree scale, the median clinical score was 2 (range 1–3) and the median endoscopic and histologic scores of the affected sigmoid and rectal segments were 2 (range 2–3) and 3 (range 2–3), respectively.
We found no significant relation between these scores and the measured substances in perfusion fluid.
Discussion
During regional perfusion of defined sigmoid and rectal segments from healthy controls and patients with ulcerative colitis we were able to detect measurable amounts of myeloperoxidase.
The severalfold increase of the local release of myeloperoxidase in patients should reflect the increased neutrophil accumulation/activity in the inflamed colonic-rectal mucosa.
Previous investigators have also shown, by tissue extraction, an increased release of neutrophil granule constituents in the inflamed mucosa in ulcerative colitis.
The potential hazard of persistent local neutrophil activation relates to the ability of the neutrophil to generate toxic oxygen radicals and release myeloperoxidase and other preformed azurophilic enzymes including collagenase, elastase, and cathepsin G with the capacity to destroy the connective tissue matrix.
The very toxic hypohalide anion catalysed by the enzyme myeloperoxidase may also cause tissue damage.
The mechanism recruiting and activating the neutrophils in the intestinal mucosa in ulcerative colitis is probably multifactorial.
This finding that increased intestinal release of IL-8 was accompanied by increased release of myeloperoxidase, however, makes IL-8 a possible factor for local activation of polymorphonuclear granulocytes in this disease.
IL-8 presumably plays an important part in neutrophil diapedesis through vascular endothelium and focal recruitment at inflamed sites.
Thus, intradermal injection in animals results in plasma exudation and massive neutrophil infiltration.
Besides being chemotactic for neutrophils, IL-8 also activates these cells to degranulate and show respiratory burst.
The cellular source of enhanced IL-8 synthesis in the inflamed mucosa has not been identified in this study but bacterial lipopolysaccharides, immune complexes, and several cytokines including IL-2, IL-3, TNF-α, GM-CSF, and IL-1 are strong inducers to IL-8 production in mononuclear phagocytes.
Endothelial cells and fibroblasts also produce IL-8 in response to IL-1 and TNF-α.
The finding that TNF-α, by contrast with IL-1Β, IL-2, and GM-CSF, was seen in increased concentrations in colonic-rectal perfusion fluid from patients with ulcerative colitis and also correlated with the increased IL-8 release supports the idea that TNF-α is one possible mediator of enhanced IL-8 synthesis in the inflamed mucosa.
The lack of correlation between differences in myeloperoxidase and cytokine values and disease activity should be interpreted with caution because of the narrow ranges of endoscopic and histological scores in our patients and the treatment they were receiving; steroids definitely affect the inflammatory response and probably also IL-8 generation.
The finding that some of the patients with isolated proctitis also had increased release of myeloperoxidase and IL-8 in the seemingly unaffected sigmoid segment might reflect a patchy, low degree sigmoid inflammation missed by endoscopy.
Altered glycosylation of integrin adhesion molecules in colorectal cancer cells and decreased adhesion to the extracellular matrix
Abstract
The integrin mediated interactions between tumour cells and the surrounding extracellular matrix are thought to play crucial parts in the complex process of invasion and metastasis.
It has been previously shown that the expression of integrins is differently diminished in a chain-specific manner in human colorectal cancer.
To further characterise the integrins still expressed in colorectal carcinomas, immunoblots with monoclonal antibodies against the β 1 integrin subunit have been performed.
In isolated cell membranes of colorectal cancers a second smaller β 1 chain (105 kD non-reduced) was found as well as the mature β 1 (116 kD non-reduced) present in normal mucosa of the colon.
This smaller β 1 chain comigrates with the diminished glycosylated precursor form of the β 1 chain.
The role of N-glycosylation for the function and expression of integrins in vitro was therefore investigated, with deoxymannojirimycin (DMJ) and deoxynojirimycin (DNJ) as specific inhibitors of N-glycan processing.
Pretreatment of human colon adenocarcinoma derived HT-29 cells with DMJ resulted in an expression of the 105 kD β 1 precursor chain and of smaller forms of the α 1 , α 3 , α 6 , and α v integrin subunits in a time and dose dependent manner.
HT-29 cells treated with DMJ adhered poorly to laminin (8% of untreated controls), collagen type IV (40%), and fibronectin (35%).
Pretreatment of the cells with DNJ did not alter the molecular weight of the integrin chains expressed and reduced HT-29 adhesion to laminin and fibronectin only to 68% and 49% respectively.
Adhesion to collagen type IV was increased to 124% by DNJ.
This results show that N-glycan processing is essential for the function and expression of integrins in human colorectal cancer cells.
An altered glycosylation phenotype in colorectal cancer.
Invasion and metastasis largely determine the clinical course of colorectal carcinomas.
Despite multiple clinical trials survival from colorectal carcinomas after optimal surgical removal of the primary tumour has not significantly improved in the past 40 years.
There is general agreement that a better understanding of the mechanisms of invasion and metastasis will lead to the development of new and more successful treatment strategies.
During infiltrative growth and metastasis the transformed epithelial cells have to penetrate the basement membrane of the organ and metastasising tumour cells have to traverse vasculart basement membranes on the way to tissue invasion from the circulation.
The initial step of this migration through basement membranes is thought to be the adhesion of tumour cells, which is mainly mediated through binding of extracellular matrix components to tumour cell surface receptors.
In this context the family of integrins is of interest.
Integrins are non-covalently associated dimers of one α and one Β subunit.
As originally described, integrins were divided into three sub-families, each with a common Β subunit capable of associating with a specific group of α subunits.
More recent work has shown that there are at least 13 different α subunits and eight Β subunits, and that certain α subunits can combine with more than one Β subunit (for reviews see).
The classical receptors for extracellular matrix components are found in the Β 1 subfamily (synonymous with the very late activation antigens (VLAS)).
The Β 1 subfamily comprises at least eight related complexes, each consisting of a Β 1 chain with a distinct α chain companion.
Members of the Β 1 subfamily include receptors for fibronectin (VLA-3, VLA-4, VLA-5, and the α v Β 1 complex), laminin (VLA-1, VLA-2, VLA-3, VLA-6, and VLA-7) and collagen types I and IV (VLA-1, VLA-2, and VLA-3).
Most of these receptors are promiscuous in their ligand recognition, but VLA-5 and VLA-6 seem to be specific for fibronectin and laminin respectively.
It was previously shown that during the process of malignant transformation in the large intestine the expression of integrins was changed in a typical pattern.
Compared with normal colonic epithelial cells, the expression of the α 3 and α 5 chains was already greatly reduced in adenomas, and completely lost in most colon carcinomas.
By contrast, the α 6 , Β 1 and Β 4 expression was maintained in adenomas, whereas the transformation from benign to malignant neoplasms associated with infiltrative growth was characterised by diminished expression of α 6 and Β 4 chains.
An altered expression of such adhesion molecules may influence the aggressiveness of local infiltrative growth and metastasis in human cancers.
As well as a changed pattern of integrins in carcinomas, differences in their functional state may cause pathological cell matrix interactions.
In this context it is noteworthy that if maturation of glycans on VLA-5 was blocked, the receptor subunits remained non-functional despite apparently correct assembly and insertion into the plasma membranbe.
Because the pattern of glycosylation of cell surface components is altered in colorectal cancer, we have analysed expression of integrins in cell membranes of colorectal carcinomas and the adjacent normal colonic mucosa with regard to the state of glycosylation.
Also, the role of N-linked oligosaccharide processing on the cell surface expression and the function of Β 1 integrins in human colon adenocarcinoma derived HT-29 cells were studied.
Materials and methods
REAGENTS
Fibronectin, isolated from human plasma, was obtained from Boehringer Mannheim (Mannheim, Germany).
Murine Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm tumour derived laminin and type IV collagen were purchased from Collaborative Research Inc (Bedford, MA, USA).
Cell culture reagents were purchased from Gibco BRL (Berlin, Germany).
The glycosylation inhibitors desoxynojirimycin and other reagents, if not otherwise mentioned, were obtained from Sigma (Deisenhofen, Germany).
Carrier free Na1 was from Amersham (Buckinghamshire, UK).
Protein-A-sepharose was purchased from Pharmacia (Uppsala, Sweden).
ANTIBODIES
The monoclonal antibodies against integrin chains used were anti-α 1 mAB TS2/7 (T-Cell-Science), anti-α 2 mAB Gi9 (Immunotech, Luminy, France), anti-α 3 mAB VM2 (gift of VB Morhenn, Menlo Park, CA), anti-α 4 mAB P4G9, anti-α 5 mAB P1D6, and anti-α v mAB AMF7 (Telios Inc, San Diego, CA), anti-α 6 mAB GOH3 (donated by A Sonnenberg, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), anti-Β 1 mAB 4B4 (Coulter Clone, Krefeld, Germany), anti-Β 2 mAB MHM23 (Dako, Hamburg, Germany), anti-α 3 mAB SZ.21 (Immunotech SA, Luminy, France), and anti-Β 4 mAB 3E1 (Telios Inc, San Diego, CA).
FITC-conjugated goat antimouse lgG or goat antirat lgG antibodies were purchased from Dako (Hamburg, Germany).
Alkaline-phosphatase-conjugated antimouse or antirat lgG antibodies were from Sigma (Deisenhofen, Germany).
TISSUES
Intestinal tissues were obtained from eight patients (five men and three women, age range 52 to 82 years) with colorectal adenocarcinomas.
In all cases, macroscopically and histologically normal adjacent mucosa (10 cm from the primary tumour) as well as tumour tissues were examined.
Surgical resection specimens were obtained from the Department of Surgery at the Steglitz Medical Center immediately after their removal.
After extensive washing in phosphate buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.2), normal mucosa scrapings and tumour tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use.
ISOLATION OF CELL MEMBRANES
Cell membranes of human colorectal carcinomas and normal mucosa were prepared as described by Maeda et al with minor modifications.
Briefly, tumours or mucosal scrapings were homogenised in TEA buffer (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM triethanolamine (pH 7.6) containing 1 mM phenylmethylsuphonylfluoride (PMSF) and 1 mM N-ethylmaleimide as protease inhibitors) on ice and centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 minutes.
The supernatant liquid was centrifuged for 20 minutes at 19500 g .
The fluffy white upper layer of the double pellet was resuspended in 15 ml of TEA buffer and loaded on 10 ml 41% sucrose.
After centrifugation for 60 minutes at 96000 g , cell membranes were collected as a white interfacial band and pelleted by centrifugation at 48000 g for 30 minutes.
The pellet was analysed for ouabain sensitive Na/K-ATPase as a marker for basolateral cell membranes according to Evans.
CHARACTERISATION OF INTEGRINS BY IMMUNOBLOTTING
Equal amounts of cell membrane protein from normal and carcinoma tissue were boiled for five minutes in SDS sample buffer and analysed by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis acording to Laemmli with 7% resolving gels.
To identify Β 1 integrins, resolved cell membrane proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose as described by Towbin et al .
Nitrocellulose strips were blocked with blocking buffer (PBS containing 0.1% sodium azide, 0.3% tween, and 2% powdered non-fat milk) at 4°C overnight and incubated with monoclonal antibodies against the integrin Β 1 chain diluted 1:100 in blocking buffer for 60 minutes at room temperature.
At the end of the incubation period, strips were washed three times for 30 minutes with blocking buffer.
Bound antibodies were detected with antimouse-lgG antibodies coupled to alkaline phosphatase by the APAAP technique.
CELL CULTURES
The human colinic adenocarcinoma cell line HT-29 was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, USA).
HT-29 cells were routinely cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (4.5 g/l glucose) supplemented with 10% heat inactivated fetal calf serum in 8% CO 2 in air at 36.5°C.
Media routinely changed three times a week.
Inhibitors of glucosidase I (deocynojirimycin (DNJ)) and mannosidase I (1-deoxymannojirimycin (DMJ)) were used at optimum concentrations, as specified for HT-29 cells.
Stock solutions of inhibitors were made and serially diluted in the culture media.
Cells were preincubated in the presence of inhibitors of different concentrations for four to 48 hours before radiolabelling, cytofluorometry, or cell adhesion experiments, depending on the nature of the experiment as described in the text and figure legends.
No significant loss of cell viability resulted from pretreatment as judged by trypan blue exclusion tests.
CELL-SURFACE LABELLING
Cell surface proteins were iodinated by the lactoperoxidase method as described by Hynes and Wyke.
Briefly, confluent cell layers in 25 cm culture bottles were washed twice with Ca + + /Mg + + free PBS.
Cells were harvested by incubation with 1 mM EDTA in tris buffered saline for 20 minutes and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 10 minutes.
A pellet of 10 cells was resuspended in 360 µl HEPES-buffered saline (HBS) containing 150 µg lactoperoxidase and 1 mCi of carrier free Na1.
The iodination reaction was initiated by adding 19 µl 0.1% H 2 O 2 .
After incubation on ice for five minutes with intermittent swirling, another 19 µl aliquot of 0.1% H 2 O 2 was added, and the reaction was continued for another 10 minutes.
Unbound1 was removed by washing the cells three times with HBS.
Labelled cells were extracted in 500 µl of 200 mM O-octyl-Β-D-glucopyranoside in HBS containing 1 mM PMSF with swirling of 20 minutes at 4°C.
Extracts were clarified by centrifugation.
IMMUNOPRECIPITATION
Immunoprecipitation with mABs was carried out as described by Sonnenberg et al with the modification: cell extracts were first incubated overnight at 4°C with 10 µl of the specific antibody and 10 µl of a species specific polyclonal rabbit lgG (Dako, Hamburg, Germany) antibody and then for an incubation period of one hour with 9 mg protein A sepharose at 4°C.
After centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 minutes, the pelleted sepharose was washed twice with 10 mM Tris/HCI (pH 8.0), 0.5% sodiumdeoxycholate, 1% nonidet P 40, and 0.1% SDS.
The absorbed protein was eluted by boiling the pellet for five minutes in double concentrated SDS sample buffer with or without dithiotreitol as reducing agent.
After polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (see earlier) with 7% resolving gels, radioactive peptides were visualised after drying the gel at 60°C by exposure to Kodak X-Omat film at -80°C for three to five days depending on the experiment.
QUANTIFICATION OF INTEGRINS BY FLOW CYTOMETRY
Flow cytometric analysis of expression of integrins on inhibitor treated and untreated HT-29 cells was conducted essentially as described.
Briefly, after trypsination, HT-29 cells (2×10) were incubated with monoclonal antibodies against different integrin subunits (see earlier) diluted 1:5 to 1:50 with FACS buffer (PBS containing 10% FCS and 0.1% sodiumazide) in a total volume of 50 µl for one hour at 4°C.
After two washes with 1 ml FACS buffer, cells were incubated with FITC conjugated goat antimouse lgG or goat antirat lgG antibodies diluted 1:10 for one hour at 4°C, followed by another two washes.
Non-specific staining was assessed by omission of the primary antibody.
Cells were then analysed on a FACSCAN (Becton Dickinson) flow cytometer.
ADHESION ASSAYS
Cell adhesion assays were described recently in detail.
Briefly, microwells were coated with intact mouse laminin, type IV collagen, human serum fibronectin, or bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 90 minutes at 36°C and washed once with PBS.
HT-29 cells were washed with PBS and harvested by a 10 minute incubation with 0.05% trypsin/0.02% EDTA 24 hours after reaching confluency.
The reaction was stopped by addition of 10% fetal calf serum in DMEM, cells were pelleted by centrifugation (300 g/ 10 min) and resuspended in serum free medium.
Cells (50000) in serum free medium were added to each coated well and incubated for various times at 36°C.
At the end of the incubation period, plates were gently washed twice with 100 µl of PBS to remove unattached cells.
After staining, dishes were photographed (Yashica, Ilford HP 5 films), and adherent cells were counted from the photographs.
To test the inhibition of HT-29 cell adhesion to these extracellular matrix components, cells were preincubated with varying concentrations of monoclonal antibodies against integrin subunits for one hour at 4°C before seeding on coated microwells.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical significance was determined by the Wilcoxin rank test at p.
Results
EXPRESSION OF 1 INTEGRINS IN CELL MEMBRANES OF COLORECTAL CARCINOMAS AND NORMAL COLONIC MUCOSA
Expression of Β 1 integrins by normal colonic epithelial cells and malignant epithelial cells from colorectal carcinomas was examined with the immunoblot technique.
With a Β 1 chain specific antibody, expression of a characteristic Β 1 chain (130 kD under reducing and 116 kD under non-reducing conditions) could be shown in isolated basolateral cell membranes of normal colonic mucosa.
By contrast, in cell membranes of colorectal carcinomas, two bands representing the mature Β 1 and the Β 1 precusor form (105 kD under non-reducing conditions) were detected in five of eight carcinomas (Fig 1).
In three carcinomas a broad Β chain (100–115 kD) was stained, indicating that a putative pre Β and Β chain were not completely separated under these experimental conditions.
EXPRESSION OF INTEGRINS ON HT-29 CELLS
In an attempt to further identify cell adhesion receptors, flow cytometry was performed with antibodies against various α and Β subunits of integrins.
Flow cytometric analysis showed that HT-29 cells expressed α 1 , α 2 , α 3 , α 6 , α v , Β 1 , and Β 4 chains of integrin cell adhesion receptors.
No positive cell staining was seen with monoclonal antibodies against the α 4 , α 5 , Β 2 , and Β 3 chains.
The specificity of the antibodies was further confirmed by immunoprecipitation of integrin chains from cell lysates after l-lactoperoxidase cell surface labelling with the indicated antibodies.
In accordance with flow cytometry, we identified the α 1 , α 2 , α 3 , α 6 , α v , Β 1 and α 4 integrin subunits in HT-29 cell membranes.
Also, no α 4 , α 5 , Β 2 , and aΒ 3 chains of integrins were detected (data not shown).
EFFECT OF DNJ AND DMJ ON THE CELL SURFACE EXPRESSION OF β 1 INTEGRINS ON HT-29 CELLS
The amount of integrins expressed on the surface of inhibitor treated and untreated cells was analysed by indirect immunofluorescent staining with monoclonal antibodies against integrin subunits followed by flow cytometric analysis on a FACSCAN (Becton-Dickinson) flow cytometer.
This analysis showed that HT-29 cells express the α 1 , α 2 , α 3 , α 6 , and Β 1 chain of the integrin cell adhesion receptor family.
Also, significant expression of the α v chain was found (see Table).
No positive cell staining was seen if monoclonal antibodies against the α 4 , the α 5 , the Β 2 , and the Β 3 chains were used.
Figure 2 shows that treatment of HT-29 cells with DNJ and DMJ for 48 hours reduced the expression of α 3 , α 6 , and Β 1 to 55% to 70% of that of untreated controls.
Reduction of α 2 staining was less intense (70%-80%) and staining intensity of the α 1 chain was not significantly altered.
The staining intensity of all these integrin chains was similar in DNJ and DMJ treated HT-29 cells.
By contrast, the expression of the α v containing fibronectin binding integrin was reduced to 53% by treatment with DNJ but was not altered by DMJ.
STRUCTURE OF β 1 INTEGRINS ON HT-29 CELLS TREATED WITH DMJ OR DNJ
The effect of N-linked oligosaccharode trimming and processing on the molecular weight of Β 1 integrins on HT-29 cells was investigated with specific inhibitors of glucosidase I (DNJ) and mannosidase I (DMJ).
Equivalent numbers of HT-29 cells were incubated for 48 hours with 3 mM DNJ or DMJ or left untreated.
Cell surface molecules were then labelled with I, and the aΒ heterodimers containing Β 1 were immunoprecipitated with mAb 4B4 and resolved by SDS-PAGE.
As described previously, Β 1 integrins on the cell surface of untreated cells migrate under non-reducing conditions as three major bands: a strong signal averaging at 115 KD representing the mature Β 1 subunit, a broad signal between 140–160 KD at postions of the α 2 , α 6 , and α v chains, and a weak signal at 200 KD of the α 1 chain (Fig 3).
Inhibition of the mannosidase I for 48 hours by DMJ results in the cell surface expression of the minor pre-Β 1 chain of about 105 KD and a minor α 1 chain of about 190 kD.
As well as the α chain band at 140–160 kD a further signal was seen at 130 kD.
Immunoprecipitation experiments with monoclonal antibodies against α subunits showed that this pre-α band mainly contains the smaller forms of α 3 and α v chains, whereas the molecular weight of the α 2 chain is not altered by DMJ treatment (data not shown).
After inhibtion of the glucosidase I by DNJ no change in the molecular weight of the integrin subunits was found.
KINETICS OF TURNOVER OF Β 1 -INTEGRINS ON HT-29 CELLS IN THE PRESENCE OF DMJ
HT-29 cells were incubated with the mannosidase I inhibitor DMJ for various times and Β 1 integrins were immunoprecipitated from I-surface labelled cells and analysed by SDS-PAGE followed by autoradiography.
After four hours of incubation with DMJ, no pre-Β chains were found and after a 12 hour incubation period, most of the Β 1 integrin complexes on the cel surface still contained the mature Β 1 chain but some the smaller pre-Β 1 chain (Fig 4).
After a 24 hour incubation with DMJ, 50% of Β 1 integrins were replaced by pre-Β 1 containing integrins.
After a 48 hour incubation period, most Β 1 integrins contained the pre-Β chain.
These data indicate a half life of Β 1 integrins on HT-29 cells of about 20–24 hours under these experimental conditions, but we cannot rule out the probablity that in the presence of DMJ the turnover rate of these adhesion receptors differs from that of untreated cells.
ADHESION OF HT-29 CELLS TO VARIOUS EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX COMPONENTS
We first investigated the adhesion of HT-29 cells to various extracellular matrix components.
Figure 5 shows that the time course of HT-29 cell adhesion to these substrates was remarkably different.
After six hours of incubation, HT-29 cells showed maximal adhesion to type IV collagen.
An increase in the incubation time did not change plating efficiencies (data not shown) and plateau values for adhesion to type IV collagen varied between 80% and 85% of total cells seeded.
With this rate of adhesion set as 100%, only 2.5 (1) % (mean (1 SD)) of the cells adhered to BSA in serum free medium after six hours.
Within 30 minutes, only 0.5 (0.2) % of cells adhered to BSA v to 81 (9) % to type IV collagen.
A significant adhesion after six hours was also found for laminin (76 (10%)) and fibronectin (66 (7) % (p)(Fig 2).
Under all experimental conditions, HT-29 cells showed a greater adhesion to type IV collagen than to laminin or ibronectin.
INTEGRIN MEDIATED CELL ADHESION OF HT-29 CELLS
To define more precisely the interaction between HT-29 cells and extracellular matrix components, we tested the effect of added antibodies against different integrin chains.
Adhesion of HT-29 to laminin is mediated by the α 6 Β 1 integrin complex, as the monoclonal antibody 4B4 directed against the integrin Β 1 chain and the monoclonal antibody GOH3 against the α 6 chain abolished cell adhesion to laminin (Fig 6).
Pretreatment of HT-29 cells with monoclonal antibodies against α 1 or Β 1 significantly inhibited cell adhesion to type IV collagen, indicating that HT-29 adhesion to the basement membrane component type IV collagen as well as to laminin is mediated by Β 1 containing integrins.
With fibronectin substrates on the other hand, only the monoclonal antibody against the α v chain was inhibitory.
These results indicated that α v containing integrins are essential for adhesion of these tumour cells to fibronectin.
EFFECT OF DNJ AND DMJ ON CELL ADHESION TO LAMININ, TYPE IV COLLAGEN, AND FIBRONECTIN
To examine the function of Β 1 integrins on DMJ or DNJ treated HT-29 cells, we assayed the direct adhesion of treated and untreated cells to extracellular matrix components.
Figure 7 shows that treatment of HT-29 cells for 48 hours with DMJ (3 mM), an inhibitor of golgi mannosidase I, resulted in a decreased adhesion (p≤0.001) of the pretreated cells to laminin (8 (2) %) of adhesion of untreated controls), fibronectin (35 (6) %), and collagen type IV (39 (10) %).
This was not a toxic effect of treatment with DMJ, as cell viability and even proliferation were not altered by DMJ or DNJ as judged by trypan blue exclusion and by counting cells from treated and untreated cultures.
Also the inhibition of the glucosidase I with DNJ significantly (p) reduced adhesion of HT-29 cells to laminin (68 (19) %) and fibronectin (48 (13) %) although to a lesser extent than DMJ treatment did.
Interestingly, adhesion of HT-29 cells to collagen type IV was increased by DNJ (124 (28) %)(p).
Discussion
There is growing evidence that Β 1 integrin mediated interactions between the extracellular matrix and cancer cells can regulate the process of infiltrative growth and metastasis.
Our data show that malignant transformed epithelial cells of colorectal carcinomas expressed a 105 kD (non-reduced) precursor form of the Β 1 chain not found in epithelial cells of the normal mucosa.
The differences in electrophoretic mobility between the pre-Β 1 and mature Β 1 chain were probably due to structural differences in the glycan portion, as it was abolished after enzymatic deglycosylation of the receptors in normal epithelial cell membranes (data not shown).
Differences in the glycosylation of cell surface components of colorectal cancer cells have been previously shown.
That the detection of pre-Β chains in isolated cell membranes of colorectal carcinomas with the immunoblot technique reflects contaminations from an intracellular pool of pre-Β polypetides cannot, however, be excluded.
Akiyama et al showed that in transformed cells the turnover of Β 1 integrins is increased, leading to a decrease in the intracellular pool of pre-Β polypeptides compared with normal cells.
Contamination of isolated cell membranes with intracellular components would therefore probably result in the detection of pre-Β chains in the normal colonic mucosa.
To further characterise the relevance of N-linked oligosaccharides for Β 1 integrin receptor expression and function in malignant colonic epithelial cells, cell culture experiments were performed with HT-29 cells, cell line derived from a human adenocarcinoma.
In a first attempt to characterise Β 1 integrin cell membrane expression, flow cytometry analysis was performed with antibodies against various α chains of the Β 1 family of integrins after pretreatment with DMJ or DNJ.
We found that expression of various α subunits was modified by DNJ or DMJ treatment in different patterns.
Pretreatment with DMJ and DNJ, for example, reduced expression of the α 6 and Β 1 chains to 60%-70% of untreated control values, whereas expression of the α 1 chain remained unchanged.
Expression of the α v chain mediating adhesion of fibronectin was not altered by DMJ treatment but was reduced to 53% by DNJ.
A diminished receptor expression may be due to reduced membrane insertion or increased degradation of the receptor in inhibitor treated cells.
In agreement with our results, Spiro et al recently reported that inhibition of the glucosidase I by DNJ delayed maturation and membrane insertion of the α v Β 3 vitronectin receptor in human melanoma cells and resulted in a 50% reduced cell surface expression, whereas pretreatment with DMJ did not alter the vitronectin receptor expression.
Immunoprecipitation experiments from I labelled cells were performed to further characterise the molecular mechanisms by which inhibitors of glycosylation modify Β 1 integrin receptor expression.
We have shown that pretreatment with DNJ had no apparent effect on the molecular weight of Β 1 integrins in HT-29 cells.
By contrast, inhibition of mannosidase I with DMJ reduced the molecular weight of several α chains and led to the expression of the smaller 105 kD pre-Β 1 chain on the cell surface.
Similar results were reported for DMJ treatment of fibroblasts, which blocked maturation of the pre-Β 1 to the mature Β 1 chain.
Because the N-linked oligosaccharides synthesised in the presence of DNJ contain maximally four sugar residues more than those synthesised in the presence of DMJ, most of the 13 potential N-glycosylation sites on the Β 1 protein have to be glycosylated to account for the difference in molecular weight between the β 1 chains in DMJ and DNJ treated cells.
The effect of DMJ was dose and time dependent, indicating a 20–24 hour half life of the Β 1 chain of in HT-29 cells under these experimental conditions.
Besides an altered expression of integrin adhesion molecules in colorectal cancer, an altered function may also result in pathological cell matrix interactions.
Evidence has been found for the involvement of integrin glycosylation in the modulation of cell matrix interaction.
Reduction in erythroleukaemia cell adhesion after phorbol ester treatment caused by reduced glycosylation of α 5 Β 1 was recently reported.
To further characterise the relevance of glycosylation of integrins for their function as cell adhesion receptors we performed initial experiments to analyse the integrin mediated cell matrix interation in HT-29 cells, and were able to show that inhibition of golgi mannosidase I by DMJ resulted in a significantly decreased adhesion of DMJ treated HT-29 cells to laminin, type IV collagen, and fibronectin.
Also inhibition of the glucosidase I by DNJ significantly reduced HT-29 adhesion to laminin and fibronectin although less effectively than DMJ treatment.
Attachment of HT-29 cells to type IV collagen was increased by treatment with DMJ.
The reduced adhesion of DMJ treated HT-29 cells towards the extracellular matrix components tsted cannot be simply explained by a diminished expression of integrin receptors, because the effect of DNJ on the expression of integrins was similar or greater than that of DMJ, but inhibition of cell adhesion was less efficient or absent.
This suggests that the processing of N-linked oligosaccharides is required for the function of the integrin receptors.
This conclusion is further corroborated by the finding that DNJ increases the adhesion of HT-29 cells to type IV collagen despite unchanged or diminished expression of α 1 and Β 1 chains mediating this binding.
A similar effect of DNJ on integrin mediated cell adhesion to collagens has been described for several myoblast cell lines.
The role of glycans on integrin receptors differs from that on some higher affinity receptors examined.
For example, the insulin or epidermal growth factor receptors retain surface expression of oligosaccharides are present but incompletely processed.
In the case of the insulin receptor, the deglycosylated receptor retains its ability to bind to insulin.
Studies on the role of glycosylation in malignancy are complicated by identification of the relevant target molecule.
Recent studies have shown that inhibitors of the N-glycan processing reduce metastatic growth of tumour cells of different histological types and origins.
A change in a single enzyme will generally influence a multitude of substrate proteins and lipids.
It is not easy to find out which substrate molecule is implicated in a particular phenotypic or functional change, if any.
Thus it seems clear that malignant transformation can affect the expression, distribution, and function of glycosylated cell surface components such as integrins, but the pattern of changes may be complex.
Our data may, however, serve as a basis for further studies aiming at the identification of regulatory factors (for example, hormones, lymphokines, cytokines) that modulate the expression and function of integrins of colorectal cancer cells.
This might open up new concepts for influencing local tumour growth and metastasis of colonic malignancies.
Transplantation of cultured small bowel enteroxytes
Development of successful primary culture techniques for mammalian cells, have permitted the study of basic molecular mechanisms governing physiological and pathological cellular processes.
In a therapeutic context, appropriate cells have been successfully isolated, maintained or cultured in vitro and subsequently transplanted to restore bone marrow function in haemopoetic disorders, to provide skin cover in major burns and insulin independence after pancreatic islet transplantation.
The use of cultured osteoblasts to enhance bone graft function and hepatocyte transplantation in acute hepatic failure are currently being evaluated.
Central to the application of these techniques in renewal tissues has been the isolation and maintenance ex vivo of progenitor or pluripotent stem cells, which by definition have the capacity for both self maintenance and for production of distinct functional cell lineages.
Comprehension of stem cell biology of specific tissues has aided development of the above methods and may be approporiate for development of similar techniques, for the small bowel.
Stem cells of the small intestine
The small bowel mucosa has distinct proliferative and functional epithelial cell subpopulations.
Stem cells, which are few in number and intermediate transit cells, which have limited proliferative capacity, occupy the lower two thirds of each crypt.
Stem cells divide, giving rise to both new stem cells and to daughter cells that generate the distinct epithelial lineages of the small intestine — namely functional Paneth, absorptive, goblet, and enteroendocrine cells.
These processes are regulated by gene expression and in health, asymmetric stem cell division provides a steady state, in which the stem cell compartment is maintained and the differentiated lineages are produced at rate equal to their losses.
Regulation of enterocyte stem cells in vivo 
Gastrointestinal stem cells respond to environmental influences and the dyanmic equilibrium of the steady state may change.
After bowel resection, crypt cell proliferative activity increases, resulting in increased functional enterocyte numbers, which are accommodated by an increase of villus height.
The converse occurs during prolonged starvation or bowel defunction.
Furthermore, the balance between stem cell self maintenance and provision of functional progeny may change, when mucosal losses are caused by stem cell injury or death.
For example, stem cells are particularly sensitive to irradiation and most are killed after high sublethal doses.
Sterilised crypts continue to empty of functional cells for a few days, then crypts disappear and bare ulcerated areas develop.
The surviving fraction of stem cells, which may be as low as 1/100000 mount a proliferative response.
Microcolonies, which consist of clumps of 10 or more cells, develop and assume a crypt outline, from the third and fourth day.
From the seventh day after radiation, the process of crypt budding or branching provides new crypts, each with its own stem cells.
With continued cell proliferation and development of new crypts, colonies enlarge, become visible to the naked eye, then ultimately coalesce to restore the mucosal layer.
This neomucisa contains all normal intestinal cell lineages and persists for the life of the animal.
Similar responses are seen after cytotoxic agents are used.
Hence, extensive mucosal losses may be restored in vivo, from very small stem cell numbers.
The proliferation/ differentiation balance of the steady state shifts towards stem cell renewal, resulting in increased stem cell number, genesis of new crypts, new cell lineages and mucosal replacement.
This phenomenon may be important in any application of enterocyte stem cell transplantation.
Influence of mesenchyme
Data concerning cellular or molecular stimuli that influence postnatal stem cell function in vitro, are scant.
Proliferation and survival in culture of fetal endodermal cells, which have the pluripotent characteristics of stem cells, however, are enhanced by mesenchymal support.
Endodermal cells, which have been cultured alone, generally fail to proliferate and only survive short intervals of up to four to five days.
Those cocultured on a mesenchyme fibroblastic feeder layer, however, proliferate more readily, and can be maintained for longer intervals in vitro.
During development, intestinal endodermal cells are responsive to mesenchymal stimuli by cell to cell and cell to matrix interactions.
Epithelial maturation starts after development of close cell to cell contact, between surface epithelial cells and underlying mesenchymal cells.
Grafting experiments using avian embryonic intestinal endoderm, lead to well organised intestinal structures including crypt/ villus architecture, only when combined with mesenchyme.
Endoderm grafted alone fails to develop.
Recent work has shown that even a very small amount of mesenchyme grafted in combination with endoderm, will allow morphogenesis to proceed in adult recipients.
In these circumstances, however, additional mesenchyme support may be recruited from the tissue of the recipient animal.
Hence, it seems that epithelial/mesenchymal interaction supports proliferation of fetal endodermal cells in vitro and organotypic development after grafting in vivo.
Enterocyte culture and transplantation
Successful stem cell transplantation or autotransplantation requires the isolation and maintenance of stem cells ex vivo.
In addition, the stem cells' capacity for organotypic development — that is , for restoration of cell lineages and tissue architecture, should be unaffected by the isolation, culture or transplantation procedures.
Most studies entailing isolation of intestinal epithelial cells in vitro and subsequent grafting in vivo have used intact undifferentiated fetal endoderm.
Early endodermal cells are pluripotent, proliferate readily in culture, and in combination with mesenchyme, are capable of morphogenesis after transplantation.
Endoderm is not, however, representative of small intestine of later developmental stages.
When the crypt/villus pattern becomes established in late fetal or neonatal intestine, proliferative stem cells are sparse and confined to crypt regions.
Hence, their isolation and culture is difficult and functional villus cells, which are incapable of division, may predominate in cell isolations.
Data relating to morphogenesis by small bowel isolates of later development, are limited.
Montgomery et al isolated cells from 18 day fetal rat intestine by trypsin dissociation.
Cells failed to proliferate in culture, which limits any potential for increasing cell number in vitro, but surviving cell clumps impregnated in gelatin squares showed development in vivo .
Haffen et al showed morphogenesis by neonatal intestinal cells and embryonic mesenchyme, when placed as an interspecies recombinant graft into an embryonic environment.
This group also showed limited morhogenesis in 10% grafts of an immortalised postnatal epithelioid cell line [IEC-17], when combined with fetal mesenchyme.
Successful isolation of normal intestinal proliferative cells, however, at late development stages, with proliferation and increase of cell number in vitro, then successful morphogenesis after transplantation into an adult environment, has not been reported.
An enzymatic method for isolation of small bowel epithelium and successful establishment of primary cell culture from the normal postnatal small intestine has recently been described.
This method has relied on disaggregation of intact crypt/villus units, which contain proliferative stem cells, functional epithelial cells, and mesenchymal tissue within the villus core.
Hence, this method preserves the important epithelial/mesenchymal interactions during isolation and during the early stages of cell attachment and proliferation in vitro.
When this method is used, cells attach readily and proliferate rapidly in vitro, to form coalescing colonies, with a ‘cobblstone’ appearance.
Most cells develop brush border enzyme activity, express cytokeratins, and exhibit morphological features including epithelial tight junction, desmosomes, and microvillus brush borders, which are characteristic of small bowel enterocytes.
Grafting models were then developed to assess the capacity of cells isolated and cultured by this method, for organotypic development.
In these studies, isolates were obtained from 20 day fetal rat intestine, in which the crypt/villus pattern is established.
Isolates were maintained in vitro for four days then grafted in combination with fetal mesenchyme, to the renal subcapsular space of adult nude mice.
On retrieval, grafts had showed progressive morphological development.
At seven days after operation, a rudimentary lumen lined by a simple columnar epithelium was found, while by 14 days crypts, villi, and at least two small bowel epithelial cell lineages were present.
Hence, small intestinal epithelial stem cells may be isolated in mixed cell populations and successfully maintained ex vivo.
Their capacity for organotypic development is retained after isolation and shortterm primary culture.
Small bowel neomucosa may be generated, in ectopic sites of adult recipients, from grafts of these cell cultures.
Successful clinical application of a treatment entailing transplantation of small intestinal enterocyte stem cells would require a suitable recipient site in which peristalsis is maintained.
We have shown that the colon provides a suitable site for small bowel mucosal autografts.
In that environment, small bowel morphology and function is maintained, after mucosal autotransplantation.
Hence, the colon is a potentia recipient site for small bowel stem cell autotransplantation.
Further experimental work, concerning cell lineage development, mesenchymal support, and motility is required, however, before the application of any of these methods to human tissues.
Morphometric analysis of intestinal mucosa.
Abstract
To study changes in rectal mucosa that might be attribtable to the effects of gluten, rectal biopsy specimens from untreated and treated gluten sensitised subjects were analysed morphometrically and by immunohistochemical techniques and were compared with a series of disease control mucosae.
Although morphometry showed increased populations of plasma cells, lymphocytes, and mast cells in the mucosae of untreated patients, which were reduced (except for mast cells) by dietary gluten restriction, immunohistochemical techniques were far more sensitive in defining these changes.
There were highly significant increases in CD3 + and gd + lymphocytes within both the lamina propria and the epithelium while neitrophils (CD15 + cells) were not at all prominent.
Activated (CD25 + ) lymphoctyes expressing interleukin (IL) -2 receptors were increased in lamina propria, usually subjacent to basal lamina, although a few IL-2R + intrapithelial lymhocytes found, other IL-2R + cells were deemed to be macrophages (CD68 + ).
These results clearly indicate that in untreated, gluten sensitised subjects the rectal mucosa shows a lymphoplasmacytoid reaction that is responsive to gluten restriction.
The absence of neutrophilia suggests that this lesion is not a conventional inflammatory type proctitis, but rather one presumed to be induced by gluten antigen(s) present in the faecal stream — that is, a cell mediated form of response.
In previous studies from this laboratory, the use of computerised image analysis in the numerical quantitation and comparison of jejunal mucosae from patients with gluten sensitivity have been described.
Mucosal pathology in gluten sensitivity seems to be dependent on T cel lmediated reactivity in genetically predisposed subjects.
In those with severe, flat-destructive (type 3) mucosal lesions and evident malabsorption, however, it would not be surprising if changes in rectal mucosa, caused, perhaps by the passage of residual antigenic fragments of gliadin through the colon, were seen.
Indeed, in two of the earliest reports on this subject, many gluten sensitised subjects were considered subjectively to have an abnormal rectal mucosa and were thus presumed to be showing a local immune response to dietary gluten proteins.
This subject has also been addressed in two other studies.
In one, a retrospective review of 438 patients with coeliac disease and diarrhoea, 14 of a total of 42 rectal biopsies performed (30%) were deemed to be abnormal.
Eleven showed severe inflammatory changes (proctitis) and the remainder features reminiscent of ulcerative colitis.
In another study of 135 gluten sensitive patients, seven rectal biopsy specimens from a total of 21 biopsies performed were, on subsequent review, considered to be abnormal — two were compatible with ‘colitis’, four with microscopic lymphocytic colitis, and the seventh a mixed picture.
There is a well known, although rare, association between gluten sensitivity and ulcerative colitis, as well as a five to 15 fold increased risk for ulcerative colitis in first degree relatives of patients with coeliac disease, which raises the possibility of an aetiological environmental link between both conditions.
In view of these reports indicating some kind of distal colonic abnormality, it was decided to evaluate the rectal mucosa in gluten sensitive patients on a prospective basis:(i) to determine whether there is a coeliac disease associated inflammatory proctitis,(ii) to define its characteristics, and (iii) to analyse the effects of gluten withdrawal.
Methods
PATIENTS
Patients were drawn from the outpatient service of the University Department of Medicine, Hope Hospital, Salford and comprised 38 disease control subjects and 65 patients with proved gluten sensitivity, of whom 32 were untreated at the time of study.
Eighteen of the disease control subjects had irritable bowel syndrome, five had bacterial overgrowth of small intestine from pseudo-obstruction (three) or advanced scleroderma (two), and three had Crohn's disease of the terminal ileum.
The remainder comprised three patients with iron deficiency, one with carcinomatosis, two with oral amphthous ulceration, two normal subjects considered to have been incorrectly diagnosed with gluten sensitivity as children, one patient with mild microscopic colitis, one patient with giardiasis, and two seemingly normal relatives of patients with coeliac disease.
PROCESSING OF MUCOSAL BIOPSIES SPECIMENS
Specimens were obtained with grab forceps via a rigid, illuminated sigmoidoscope.
Specimens were gently spread out on a flat surface, flooded with 2.5% glutaraldehyde buffered in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate solution, and fixed for four to six hours.
The specimens were then progressively dehydrated in an ascending ethanol series, infiltrated with epon, sectioned at 1 µm in an OMU-3 ultramicrotome, and stained with toluidine blue for morphometric analysis in the computer.
For immunocytochemical analysis, mucosae were oriented on dental wax, embedded in OCT compound, snap frozen in melting isopentane (-160°C), and stored in a liquid nitrogen Dewar.
Blocks were subsequently sectioned at 6–7 µm with a Bright cryostat and stored at -20°C.
A series of monoclonal antibodies (Dako, High Wycombe, Bucks; T Cell Sciences, Cambridge, MA, USA) was used to quantitate CD3 + and gd + (TCS1) lymphocytes, neutrophils (CD15), macrophages (CD68), and the expression of MHC class 2 alloantigen and interleukin (IL) 2-R (CD25).
Monoclonal antibodies were variously employed at dilutions of 1/15–1/50 in a two step indirect peroxidase method, where DAB was used as substrate and NiCl as enhancing agent: nuclei were stained with Mayer's haematoxylin.
Sections were mounted in Apathy's medium (BDH, Poole, UK).
The APAAP technique was used for CD25 and CD15 with fast red as substrate, and then counterstained and mounted as described above.
Double immunostaining was performed with CD3 and CD25, HLA-DR and CD25, CD68 and CD25 using indirect peroxidase and APAAP, as described elsewhere.
ANALYSIS
Measurements were confined to the mucous membrane.
The volumes of surface and crypt epithelium, and of the lamina propria, were determined with reference to a standard reference square of muscularis mucosae (10µ m): measurements were successively accumulated per specimen until a coefficient of variation <was secured.
The cellularity of each specimen was determined in absolute terms for (a) total (crypt+ surface) epithelial lymphocytes and (b) lamina propria plasma cells, lymphocytes, mast cells and neutrophils which, from earlier work, were all assumed to have a mean nuclear diameter of 5 µm.
Thus, the total number of sectioned profiles of each cell type observed within the tissue volume overlying 10 µm muscularis mucosae was divided by effective section thickness (mean diameter of nuclei plus actual section thickness, or 5+1=6 µm) to obtain the absolute number of cells present within each tissue volume-compartment.
Similarly, for immunostained cells, absolute populations were determined with reference to a similar standard reference area of muscularis mucosae (10 µm): however, these counts were performed at the microscope with a calibrated ocular graticule aligned parallel to the muscularis mucosae.
STATISTICS
Group means for structural components of mucosae were compared by unpaired t tests.
For cell populations, data were all long transformed and expressed as geometric means (SD) and analysed parametrically. p Values ≥0.05 were taken as significant.
Results
COMPUTER ASSISTED MORPHOMETRIC ANALYSIS
There were no statistically significant differences in volume compartments (volumes of surface epithelium, crypt epithelium, lamina propria) between disease control and gluten sensitive (treated or untreated) patients (Fig 1).
Total intraepithelial lymphocytes (surface and crypt epithelium combined) as assessed in 1 µm toluidine blue stained epon sections differed insignificantly from treated patients or disease controls in the untreated gluten sensitivity groups (Fig 2).
Populations of plasma cells, increased 10 fold above those of lymphocytes, were responsive to gluten restriction (p=0.02) but mast cell populations remained unchanged (Fig 3).
Neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils were too few to count and could not be analysed further.
With regard to intraepithelial lymphocytes, it should not be noted that in absolute numbers there were fewer surface than crypt intraepithelial lymphocytes, but their densities — that is, intraepithelial lymphocytes per 100 epithelial cells — were higher in surface than in crypt epithelium.
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
In contrast to the histological analysis, as described above, populations of CD3 + lymphocytes (per 10 µm muscularis mucosae) were all significantly increased in untreated gluten sensitive patients within the epithelium (p), the lamina propria (p), and when both compartments were combined (p)(Fig 4A): similar findings also held for treated patients too when compared with disease control subjects (Fig 4A).
The gd + lymphocytes (per 10 µm) muscularis mucosae) were all significantly increased in untreated gluten sensitive patients in the epithelium (p), lamina propria (p), and when both compartments were combined (p).
In treated gluten sensitive patients epithelial gd + lymphocytes but not those in the lamina propria (Fig 4B) were significantly raised (p) when compared with the disease control group.
The percentage of intraepithelial gd + to CD3 + lymphocytes was increased only in treated gluten sensitive patients (p), while that for lamina propria was increased only in the untreated group (p)(Fig 5).
Nevertheless, there was a significantly increased percentage of gd + /CD3 + lymphocytes, when combined, for both untreated (p) and treated (p) gluten sensitive patients (Fig 5).
Only a few CD15 + cells (neutrophils) were observed in lamina propria throughout and populations did not differ significantly between either group.
CD25 + (IL-2R expressing) cells were mainly located subjacent to basal lamina, with occasional cells distributed singly throughout the deeper parts of the lamina.
Intraepithelial lymphocytes rarely expressd CD25, although when found this was more common in the crypt than surface epithelium.
Double staining with CD25 and CD3 showed that many of the T lymphocytes were activated, though it was not technically possible to count these.
MHC class 2 positivity was largely confined to subepithelial clsuters of macrophage-like cells (CD68 + ) with foamy cytoplasm: double labelling of these clusters with anti-IL2R (CD25) confirmed with prescence of activated macrophages.
These appearances, while making enumeration of individual cell types impossible, allowed some estimate of the strength and extent of expression.
Discussion
This study reaffirms our previous work indicating that the rectal mucosa is abnormal in gluten sensitivity and, in particular, displays features of a lymphocytic proctitis that is responsive to gluten restriction.
This proctitis is a gluten driven phenomenon, therefore, and not the result of idiopathic inflammation or, in other words, distal inflammatory bowel disease.
The data also show that immunohistochemical techniques were much better than histological analysis, despite measurements performed on 1 µm epon sections observed under oil-immersion opics.
No statistically significant differences in lymphoctye populations were apparent histologically.
This discrepancy arises from the ever present difficulty of deciding whether a particular cell could be either a lymphocyte or part of a macrophage, neutrophil, or fibroblast.
In our laboratory the rule adopted is ‘ignore if uncertain’.
This always results in numerical underestimating, a factor that is clearly not a problem when a specific cell type is identified by a specific marker: then, morphological distinctions become irrelevant.
Contrary to the finding in other types of inflammatory colitis or proctitis, the rectal mucosa in gluten sensitivity lacks any predominance of neutrophils when assessed by either histological staining or monoclonal antibody recognition (CD15), indicating that the epitheliotropic T cell responses are probably caused by residues of specific antigen present within luminal colonic contents, and hence dependent on the circulatory presence in and recruitment of gluten sensitive T cells to the rectal mucosa.
This viewpoint is also corroborated by the brisk response of rectal mucosa to local gluten infusion.
Clearly the coeliac type lymphocytic proctitis, as defined in this study, is an entity entirely unrelated to those (as yet undetermined) mechanisms operative in ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease, except in the rare concurrence of either condition in the same patient.
Diarrhoea continues to be one of the most common presenting symptoms of untreated gluten sensitivity.
The loose stools are invariably considered to be osmotic in type, due to the passage of unabsorbed solute delivered to the large bowel.
It would be difficult to distinguish osmotic effect (jejunal malabsorption) from diarrhoea generated entirely from within the colon, as implied by other workers.
Thus, despite the striking familial association between gluten sensitivity and ulcerative colitis, it is clear from this study that the gluten driven proctitis is not part of a continuum of inflammatory change which culminates in some individuals in full blown ulcerative colitis.
The computerised image analysis showed that there is no architectural difference between gluten sensitivity and disease control rectal mucosae.
This is important since it has been shown that in inflammatory bowel disease, architectural disturbances in the mucosa, manifest especially in crypt distortion, are well established by the time of the first clinical episode.
Our failure to show architectural deformity, lamina propria swelling, or neutrophilic infiltrates cautions against too ready an acceptance of the gluten induced proctitis as a major contributor to diarrhoea.
It is not uncommon, however, for these patients to present initially with watery diarrhoea and lower abdominal pain which together may suggest a colonic based pathology, especially if other clues like iron deficiency, folate deficiency, or features of splenic atrophy are either not immediately evident, or overlooked.
Our observations also indicate that in the presence of a lymphocytic colitis despite its continuing uncertain nosology, gluten sensitivity should always be excluded.
Conversely, it is also important to realise that if diarrhoea starts again or even occurs for the first time in a patient treated by gluten restriction, the patient should be investigated for colonic disorders, since the answer may not simply or necessarily rest with dietary lapses, an unresponsiveness phase, or lymphoma.
Finally, in this regard it should be recalled that although gluten sensitivity never presents with rectal bleeding, patients were seen to develop an acute erythematous/haemorrhagic proctitis after massive rectal challenge with gluten or its derivatives.
Apart from our own prospective studies there seems to have been only one other approach to rectal mucosa in gluten sensitivity based on a retrospective analysis of intraepithelial lymphocytes material obtained 25 years previously.
These data, as presented, are difficult to interpret because (i) fewer crypt intraepithelial lymphocytes than surface intraepithelial lymphocytes (per 100 enterocyte nuclei) were found;(ii) no detectable response to gluten/gliadin challenge, contrary to other findings, was observed; and (iii) data were analysed and presented in terms of total specimens counted rather than numbers of patients from whom all such specimens derived.
Thus, all this study seems to tell us is that it is rather dangerous to evaluate rectal intraepithelial lymphocytes in terms of enterocyte nuclei (Fig 4).
In line with various studies of jejunal tissue, our data have shown a predominance of gd + TCR intraepithelial lymphocytes within the expanded population of CD3 + T lymphoctyes distributed throughout surface and crypt epithelium of rectal mucosa.
It was not easy, however, to show whether, and to what extent, these cells were activated.
Certainly some gd + intraepithelial lymphocytes in rectal crypts were IL2R + but within the lamina propria the MHC class 2 + collections of cells, most probably (CD68 + ) macrophages, made identification difficult.
Since surface enterocytes were positive for MHC class 2 display, it is possible to infer that T cells in gluten sensitive mucosae were activated in order to bring about this effect, possibly via IFN-γ, and because surface cells in normal colon, are generally negative for these alloantigens.
However, these aspects of the immune response to gluten will be addressed in depth in a subsequent paper in which the immunopathological responses in rectal mucosa to local antigenic challenge will be further detailed.
Role of intragastric and intraoesophageal alkalinisation in the genesis of complications in Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus
Abstract
Patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus have severe acid gastrooesophageal reflux and may develop complications, including ulceration, stricture, and carcinoma.
The aim of this study was to establish if a relationship exists between the pH profile in the oesophagus and stomach and the development of complications in patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus.
Twenty four hour ambulatory oesophageal pH monitoring was performed in 26 patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus and combined with 24 hour ambulatory gastric pH monitoring in 16.
Ten of the 26 with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus had complications including stricture (eight), deep ulceration (one), and carcinoma (one).
Oesophageal acid exposure (% time <4) was similar in patients with or without complications (19.2% v 19.3% p).
Oesophageal alkaline exposure (% time7) was greater in patients with complications (24.2% v 8.4% p).
Of the 16 patients who underwent gastric pH monitoring there was a clear relationship between gastric and oesophageal alkalinisation in 13.
These results support the hypothesis that complications in Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus develop in association with increased exposure of the oesophagus to an alkaline environment which appears to be secondary to duodenogastric reflux.
The routine use of 24 hour ambulatory gastric pH monitoring in comjunction with oesophageal pH monitoring can help identify those patients at risk.
Since the original description of a columnarised lower esophagus by Barrett in 1950 and Allison and Johnson in 1953 it has been recognised that this abnormal lining has a marked propensity to develop serious complications.
These include stricture, ulceration, haemorrhage, perforation, and malignant degeneration.
Such complications occur in approximately 50% of patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus.
It is well recognised that patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus represent the worst end of the reflux spectrum with the most severe forms of lower oesophageal sphincter and pump failure and consequently greater degrees of acid exposure.
It is unclear, however, why the columnarisation is prone to complications in some patients while remaining quiescent in others.
Bremner has proposed that the columnar lining in Barrett's oesophagus, being gastric in character, is acid resistant, but not bile resistant.
DuPlessis and Lawson have both shown damage to gastric columnar epithelium by exposure to duodenal contents.
Van der Veen et al have shown that previous gastric surgery represents an increased risk factor for the development of adenocarcinoma in Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus and Gillen et al have demonstrated increased bile acid concentrations in the stomach of patients who develop complications.
Increased oesophageal alkaline exposure has been previously demonstrated in patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus and it has been suggested that this might be secondary to increased duodenogastric reflux using discriminant analysis in a small number of patients.
The aim of this study was, first, to measure the pH profile in the lower oesophagus of patients with Barrett's oesophagus and by simultaneous ambulatory oesophageal and gastric pH monitoring, to correlate any alterations with changes in gastric pH.
The second aim was to relate the effects of acid and alkaline exposure to the development of complications in Barrett's oesophagus.
Methods
PATIENTS
Patients were entered into the study after their first upper gastro-intestinal endoscopy showed Barrett's oesophagus.
Oesophageal manometry and ambulatory gastric and oesophageal pH monitoring were performed within seven to 14 days of the first endoscopy.
The results of pH monitoring (presence of abnormal acid and alkaline exposure in the oesophagus and stomach) and manometric findings (presence of defective lower oesophageal sphincter and defective oesophageal peristaltic pressure) were compared in patients with and without complicated Barrett's oesophagus (ulcer, stricture, or carcinoma).
Twenty six patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus were diagnosed by endoscopic documentation of the squamocolumnar junction being circumferentially more than 3 cm above the endoscopically determined anatomical oesophagogastric junction.
The demonstration of glandular epithelium (fundic, junctional, or intestinal metaplastic) in biopsy specimens from the lower oesophagus confirmed the diagnosis in all cases.
Patients with previous oesophageal or gastric surgery were excluded from the study.
The presence of complications was defined by the endoscopic demonstration of ulceration within the columnar lined segment (one), oesophageal adenocarcinoma (one), or oesophageal stricture (eight), the latter defined by a narrowing which prevented the smooth passage of a standard (11 mm) endoscope.
The age and sex distribution of patients with and without complications in their Barrett's oesophagus is shown in Table I.
NORMAL VALUES
The range of normal values for the oesophageal pH environment has been derived from previous study of 30 asymptomatic control subjects in this laboratory.
Similarly the range of normal values for gastric pH monitoring has been derived from studies in 10 asymptomatic control subjects who had simultaneous ambulatory oesophageal and gastric pH monitoring.
MANOMETRY
Oesophageal manometry was performed using a catheter containing five solid state transducers located at 5 cm intervals along its length and oriented radially around the circumference of the catheter (Gaeltec Ltd, UK).
This was attached to a multichannel pen recorder (Lectromed, UK).
All procedures were performed in fasted patients.
With the patient in the supine position the manometry catheter was passed transnasally into the stomach.
The lower oesophageal sphincter was assessed by the station pull through method of Winans and Harris, measuring the lower border of the high pressure zone (defined by a rise in the end-expiratory pressure of 2 mm Hg or more above gastric baseline) and the upper border (return of the end expiratory pressure to within 2 mm Hg of the thoracic baseline) as well as the respiratory inversion point and the end expiratory pressure at each station.
Oesophageal body peristalsis was measured by placing the catheter in the oesophageal body at representative levels and asking the patient to swallow a 5 ml water bolus, or dry swallow alternately for 10 swallows.
Oesophageal peristaltic amplitude was measued at each of six representative levels along the length of the oesophageal.
The mean amplitude at each level was then plotted on charts where the 90th and 10th percentiles of pressure at these levels in our previously defined normal volunteers were represented by horizontal boxes (Fig 1).
Impaired peristalsis was defined as a mean pressure outside the lower limite of normal for that level.
These lower limits of normality correspond well with the pressures of ineffective peristalsis as defined by Kahrilas and Dodds.
pH MONITORING
All 26 patients underwent 24 hour ambulatory oesophageal pH monitoring.
Sixteen patients underwent simultaneous ambulatory oesophageal and gastric pH monitoring.
All strictures were dilated at the time of diagnosis (and before pH monitoring when found at presentation).
Patients were asked to withhold acid reducing medication for 48 hours before the study.
H 2 receptor blockers and Gaviscon were the only acid suppressing agents taken by this group of patients and no patients were taking proton pump blockers.
Two antimony pH probes (Monocrystant Mod 0011, Synectics Medical, Sweden) were calibrated at Ph 1 and 7 at 35°C before the study and then passed transnasally so that the upper probe lay 5 cm proximal to the upper border of the manometrically determined lower oesophageal sphincter and the lower probe 10 cm distal to its lower border.
A silver-silver chloride reference electrode was attached to the skin on the chest wall.
The probes were connected to a portable recorder (Digitrapper — Synectics Medical, Sweden) capable of holding data from two channels over a period of 24 hours.
Sampling frequency was once every four seconds.
During the study the patients were asked to consume a standard diet and to record their meal and sleep periods and any symptoms in a diary.
The data were off loaded to a computer (Amstrad PC1640, IBM-compatible) and processed using the Esophagram software (Gastrosoft Ltd, USA).
For the purposes of this study the percentage of the time that the intraoesophageal pH was below 4 and above 7 was calculated, as was the percentage of time that the intragastric pH was above 4 as well as documentation of individual alkalinisation episodes.
The normal upper limits of oesophageal acid and alkaline exposure as defined by the 90 percentile in our normal volunteers was 5.1% and 8.4% respectively.
The corresponding values for percentage of the time the gastric pH was above 4 was 12.2%.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The percentage time spent in each pH category for each group was expressed as the median-interquartile range.
For intergroup comparison the data were assumed to be non-parametric and the Wilcoxon's rank-sum comparison was used.
To compare the number of patients with normal and abnormal gastric pH profiles the Fisher's exact test was applied.
In each case the probability of a pwas regarded as statistically significant.
Results
The duration of exposure of the lower oesophagus to acid in patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus is illustrated in Figure 2, and shows that both groups had markedly increased acid exposure (% total time pH <19.2 (5.1) % v 19.3 (4.9) %), in comparison with asymptomatic controls.
There was, however, no significant difference between the uncomplicated Barrett's patients and those with complications.
In contrast, patients with complications of Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus had a significantly greater oesophageal alkaline exposure than those without complications (% total time pH >(6.0) % v 8.4% (3.4), Wilcoxon's rank-test p, Figure 3).
Alkaline exposure in uncomplicated patients was similar to that in our control subjects.
Oesophageal motility studies showed that 16 of the 26 patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus had a defective lower oesophageal sphincter as defined by Zaninotto et al and a similar proportion of each group had weak or ineffective lower oesophageal peristaltic amplitude.
The mean peristaltic amplitude in each group is illustrated by the box diagram in Figure 1.
In addition 28% of swallows in the complicated group and 32% in the uncomplicated group showed non-propagated simultaneous contraction in the distal levels of the oesophageal body.
Sixteen patients underwent simultaneous gastric and oesophageal pH monitoring.
Table II shows that of the seven patients with increased gastric alkaline exposure, five had increased oesophageal alkaline exposure, illustrating a temporal relationship between gastric and oesophageal alkalinisation.
In the nine patients with normal gastric pH patterns eight had a normal oesophageal pH profile.
This relationship was statistically significant using the Fisher's exact test (p).
Discussion
This study confirms that patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus have a marked degree of acid gastrooesophageal reflux, considerably exceeding that seen in the majority of patients with erosive oesophagitis without columnarisation.
The finding of a greater degree of alkaline exposure in the lower oesophagus of patients with complications of their Barrett's oesophagus distinguishes them from those without complications and poses the question as to the origin of this distinction.
The data from patients who had undergone simultaneous ambulatory oesophageal and gastric pH monitoring show a correlation between normal and abnormal gastric and oesophageal alkalinisation.
In only three of the 16 patients did the gastric and oesophageal findings disagree.
This supports the findings of a previous study which described increased oesophageal alkaline exposure in patients with Barrett's oesophagus.
In order to obviate the criticism of increasing intraoesophageal pH being related to salivation, however, the present study has extended the application of simultaneous ambulatory oesophageal and gastric pH monitoring and enabled a valid correlation to be made between oesophageal and gastric alkalinisation.
The data from pH monitoring do not give direct information on the constituents or origin of the body fluids being measured.
The relationship between the gastric and oesophageal pH profiles, however, suggests the probability of duodenogastrooesophageal reflux.
Several authors have shown a relationship between the degree of gastric alkalinity and the concentration of bile salts in gastric juice over prolonged periods.
Robles et al found a correlation of high gastric pH and bile concentrations in controls and in patients who had undergone vagotomy and pyloroplasty.
Lendrum et al took samples from the oseophagus of both normal volunteers and patients with Barrett's oesophagus and found a significant correlation between rising pH and increasing concentrations of bile salts.
Because of the low resting pH of the stomach, episodes of duodenogastric reflux show relative alkalinity.
The per cent time that gastric pH is >has been widely used in estimating abnormal increases in gastric pH.
Brown et al used this threshold in normal subjects and in patients after cholecystectomy.
It is interesting to note that their normal values were similar to ours, which shows a degree of reproducibility in the normal range.
An alternative method of assessing the possibility of duodenogastric reflux is the Fuchs discriminative score.
pH >was used to define abnormal alkalinity in the oesophagus because in normal volunteers the pH of the oesophagus is between 4 and 7 for 96% of the time.
Time spent outside this range for longer than the 90th percentile in normal subjects implies an abnormal pH exposure.
This does not imply that when the pH is between 4 and 7 — that is, within the normal range — that there is no reflux.
Indeed it is quite possible that at this pH range there is a mixture of gastric acid and duodenal alkaline juices which may be damaging (with toxic synergism) to the oesophageal mucosa, but this cannot be assessed using the parameter of pH.
Qualitative and quantitative assessment of the refluxate during these times of normal pH awaits developments in new biotechnology.
The association of complications in Barrett's oesophagus with the presence of increased duodenogastric reflux is supported by the presence of increased concentrations of bile salts in gastric aspirates of such patients.
In view of the fact that there is virtually no resistance to gastrooesophageal reflux in patients with Barrett's oesophagus, this increased duodenogastric reflux is likely to result in significant exposure of the oesophageal mucosa to duodenal juices.
Other possible explanations for increased oesophageal alkaline exposure in patients with complicated Barrett's oesophagus include bacterial alkalinisation of saliva either because of pooling in the oesophagus or because of dental infection.
The pooling of saliva in this study was minimised by dilatation of the oesophagus before the pH monitoring period and motility studies showed that a similar proportion of patients in both groups had ineffective peristalsis.
The temporal relationship between oesophageal alkalinisation and abnormal gastric pH patterns lends support to the belief that the difference in pH profiles in Barrett's patients is not the result of salivary pooling or excessive salivation.
A conclusive argument will only become available, however, when prolonged in vivo measurements of oesophageal bile concentrations or duodenal enzymes can be achieved.
Attempts to measure bile salts directly by continuous aspiration have produced conflicting results.
Indeed, despite their arguments that bile had little role in the pathogenesis of oesophagitis the data of Gotley et al show that 75% of patients with gastrooesophageal reflux disease do have bile in their reflux aspirates at concentrations >µmol/l and that higher concentrations of bile were more common at night, at which time our gastric pH profiles show greatest alkalinity.
Further support for this concept has recently come from the work of Iftikhar et al who showed higher concentrations of bile in oesophageal aspirates from patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus.
In considering this, Stoker and Williams conclude that when gastric and duodenal secretions mix there may be a toxic synergism between the two that leads to mucosal disruption and intracellular damage to oesophageal cells.
The contribution of duodenogastrooesophageal reflux may be just one of a number of damaging influences in the lower oseophagus of patients with Barrett's oesophagus.
From Table I it can be seen that the patients with complications of their Barrett's oesophagus are older (albeit not statistically significant) than patients without complications.
It is possible, and indeed would be logical, that increased duration of exposure to gastrooesophageal reflux, independent of the nature of the refluxate, may be a factor in the development of complications in Barrett's oesophagus.
This study has clearly shown, however, a correlation between increased alkaline exposure of the stomach and the oesophagus with the development of complications.
These results suggest, first, that simultaneous 24 hour ambulatory oesophageal and gastric pH monitoring is helpful in patients with Barrett's columnar lined lower oesophagus to help identify those patients at greater risk of developing complications.
Patients with increased oesophageal alkalinisation require careful surveillance because of their increased likelihood of developing complications.
Second, such findings may have therapeutic implications, as optimal therapy for paritns with oesophageal alkaline exposure as well as acid exposure may need to be different from that from those with acid exposure alone.
The role of the individual constituents of duodenal juice in the genesis of complications and of surgical procedures such as antireflux surgery and duodenal diversion in their prevention merits further investigation.
Vitamin D and its metabolites inhibit cell proliferation in human rectal mucosa and a colon cancer cell line
Abstract
Like calcium, vitamin D may protect against colorectal neoplasia as it reduces epithelial cell proliferation and induces differentiation.
Although its therapeutic use is limited by its effects on calcium metabolism, analogues such as calcipotriol produce little hypercalcaemia.
Stathmokinetic and immunohistochemical techniques were used to study the effect of 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 and its analogues on cell proliferation in human rectal mucosa and a colon cancer cell line.
Paired sigmoidoscopic biopsy specimens were obtained from 17 control patients and five patients with familial adenomatous polyposis.
Explants were established in organ culture, with or without the addition of vitamin D. Proliferation was assessed using (1) metaphase arrest to determine the crypt cell production rate (CCPR) and (2) Ki-67 monoclonal antibody directed against an antigen present in proliferating cells.
1,25 (OH)2 D 3 in concentrations of 1 µM-100 pM () reduced the CCPR (cells/ crypt/hour) from 4.74–2.15–2.67 (p), and the Ki-67 labelling index from 7.28–3.74 (p).
Likewise, vitamin D 2 , 10 nM () reduced the CCPR from 4.74–2.74 (p) and calcipotriol from 4.86–2.38 (p).
In familial adenomatous polyposis patients 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 100 pM () halved the CCPR from 8.75–4.22.
Calcipotriol () produced a clearcut dose response inhibition of HT-29 cell growth.
Thus, vitamin D and its metabolites inhibit proliferation in normal and premalignant rectal epithelium and suppress growth in a colorectal cancer cell line.
There is a clear link between the intensity of cell proliferation and susceptibility to neoplasia.
In the large intestine, surgical or dietary manipulations that stimulate cell growth generally promote experimental colorectal carcinogenesis, whereas mucosal hypoplasia (for example, by defunctioning colostomy) has a protective effect.
Patients with colonic adenoma or carcinoma show increased labelling indices in ‘normal’ biopsy specimens taken from multiple sites, and those with ulcerative proctocolitis have increased crypt cell proliferation even in quiescent disease.
Thus, the cytokinetic status of the epithelium could reflect a subject's susceptibility to colorectal neoplasia.
Calcium may protect against colorectal cancer by reducing epithelial cell turnover.
Vitamin D could be another chemopreventative agent because of its ability to switch cellular activity (in various cancer cell lines) from proliferation to differentiation.
In particular, the human colon cancer cell lines HT-29 and LOVO possess high affinity receptors for the active metabolite of vitamin D 3 (1,25 (OH)2 D 3 ), which suppresses cell growth and induces changes indicative of differentiation.
Receptors for 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 have also been found in normal human colon.
Although the therapeutic use of 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 and 1-alpha hydroxycholecalcioferol is limited by their profound effects on calcium metabolism, analogues such as calcipotriol (MC-903, a secosterol) are now available which have limited hypercalcaemic and hyperalciuric effects.
We have used stathmokinetic and immunohistochemical techniques to study the effect of three agents — 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 , vitamin D 2 , and calcipotriol — on cell proliferation in human rectal epithelium.
We have studied both macroscopically normal rectal tissue in control patients and those with familial adenomatous polyposis (at increased risk of neoplasia) and HT-29 cells in culture.
Methods
RECTAL BIOPSY SPECIMENS
Paired rectal biopsy specimens were taken from 17 patients (mean age 60 years, range 37–80 years) with macroscopically normal rectal mucosa who were attending the outpatient clinic with incidental anal conditions.
Biopsy specimens were also obtained from five patients (mean age 38 years, range 35–40 years) with familial adenomatous polyposis who had previously undergone total abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis and were attending regularly for follow up.
One specimen from each patient was examined histologically to exclude mucosal disease, notably microadenoma in familial adenomatous polyposis.
The other biopsy specimen was maintained in organ culture with or without the addition of vitamin D metabolites.
In four control patients, tissue was frozen to -80°C (after organ culture) for subsequent immunohistochemistry.
Local ethical committee approval was obtained, and all patients had given fully informed consent to the procedures.
VITAMIN D PREPARATIONS
1,25 (OH)2 D 3 and ergocalciferol (vitamin D 2 ) were donated by Roche Products Ltd (Welwyn Garden City, UK).
The secosterol calcipotriol (MC-903) was supplied by Leo Pharmaceutical Products Ltd (Ballerup, Denmark).
Stock solutions of test compounds were prepared in absolute alcohol and stored at -20°C until use.
Control medium was prepared with a similar dilution of alcohol and in a pilot study had no obvious effect on proliferation.
ORGAN CULTURE
Rectal biopsy specimens were divided into tiny explants and orientated mucosal surface uppermost on a metal grid within an organ culture dish (Lux Laboratories).
Explants were cultured as paired samples in standard culture medium (CMRL 1066, Gibco, Paisley, UK) or in standard culture medium to which vitamin D metabolites had been added: 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 at concentrations of 1 µM (10 -6 M), 10 nM (10 -8 M), or 100 pM (10 -10 M); ergocalciferol (vitamin D 2 ) at 10 nM (10 -8 M); and calcipotriol (MC-903) at 100 mM (10 -7 M).
Thus each biopsy specimen acted as its own control.
The concentrations of vitamin D chosen were in a similar range to previous studies, and the lowest dose of 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 is probably within the human physiological range.
In total, 34 biopsy specimens were obtained from controls and 10 from familial adenomatous polyposis patients, and each biopsy was divided into several explants (between six and 15).
The concentration of 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 in the standard culture medium was 6 pM (6×10 -1 2 M), as determined by batch testing the fetal calf serum.
The organ culture dishes were sealed in an atmosphere of 95% O 2 and 5% CO 2 at a temperature of 37°C and were then gently rocked at 5 cycles per minute.
After 15 hours, vincristine 0.6 µg/ml (Oncovin, Eli Lilly, Basingstoke, UK) was added to the culture medium to induce metaphase arrest within the colonic crypts.
Explants were removed one, two, and three hours later, fixed in Carnoy's fluid, and stored in 70°C alcohol.
Biopsy tissues were rehydrated later in successive solutions of 50%, 25%, and 10% alcohol.
After acid hydrolysis in 1 M HCl at 60°C for 6 minutes, explants were stained with Schiff's reagent.
At least 20 crypts were microdissected from each specimen, and the number of arrested metaphases per crypt was plotted against time from vincristine administration.
The slope of this line (determined by least squares linear regression analysis) gave a value for the crypt cell production rate in cells/crypt/hour.
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
After 18 hours' organ culture in medium with or without the addition of 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 (100 pM), paired mucosal explants were mounted and then 3 µm cryostat sections were cut and air dried before blocking in H 2 O 2 (0.22%) and methanol for 5 minutes.
After washing in tap water and then Tris buffer (pH 7.3) for 5 minutes (×3), sections were stained using a three stage peroxidase procedure in which Ki-67 monoclonal antibody (1:50 in Tris buffer), biotinylated rabbit anti-mouse (1:300 in Tris buffer), and avidin-biotin complex (Dakopatts) were applied.
The Ki-67 antibody is directed agaisnt an antigen expressed in proliferating cells.
Slides were developed in diamino benzadine-hydrogen peroxide (DAB) in Tris buffer for 5 minutes, then washed in tap water.
Haematoxylin was used as a counterstain.
To assess rectal epithelial proliferation, the labelling index was determined in at least 15 crypts per section.
The labelling index was calculated as the ratio of Ki-67 positive to negative cells per crypt.
The mean values of these counts were compared using a paired Student's t test (each case acting as its own control).
CELL CULTURE
HT-29 cells were maintained as a monolayer of cells in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, Flow Laboratories, High Wycombe, UK) with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 µg/ml streptomycin (Serolabs, Crawley, UK).
Cells were incubated at 37°C in 95% O 2 and 5% CO 2 and the medium was changed every 2 days.
At 80–90% visual confluence, the cells were trypsinised with 0.25% trypsin and EDTA (Flow Laboratories).
After washing in phosphate buffer saline (PBS), aliquots of 1×10 4 cells were added to a six well tissue culture plate (Gibco).
The cells were cultured in DMEM, with or without the addition of calcipotriol (MC-903) at a final concentration of 10 -5 to 10 -9 M. All plates were set up in quadruplicate.
After viability assessment using trypan blue exclusion, the total cell number was determined at 7, 14, and 21 days by counting at least three samples from each concentration using a haemocytometer.
Results were analysed using one way analysis of variance and the Mann-Whitney U test.
Results
ORGAN CULTURE
The overall mean (SEM) crypt cell production rate (CCPR) in 17 normal patients (Figure) was 4.74 (0.25) cells/crypt/hour, with a range of 2.85–7.07.
This value is similar to but slightly lower than our previously reported results.
Explants showed excellent preservation of crypt architecture, with an infection rate and crypt necrosis rate of less than 1%.
The active form of vitamin D 3 (1,25 (OH)2 D 3 ) consistently halved the overall CCPR in normal tissue irrespective of the dose used (analysis of variance).
Thus, at 1 µm the CCPR was reduced from 4.96–2.15 cells/crypt/hour, at 10 mM it was reduced from 4.71–2.10 cells/crypt/hour, and at 100 pM it was reduced from 4.86–2.67 cells/crypt/hour.
The data showed a dose-response trend when individual results were compared with their own paired controls (as opposed to the overall control values), percentage reductions being 57%, 55%, and 45% with diminishing doses of 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 (57% v 45%: p).
Ergocalciferol (vitamin D 2 ) at a dose of 10 nM reduced CCPR in the normal rectal tissue from 5.27–2.74 cells/ crypt/hour.
Calcipotriol (10 -7 M) also reduced the CCPR in seven patients from 4.86–2.38 cells/ crypt/hour.
In patients with familial adenomatous polyposis, the baseline CCPR seemed to be higher than the overall control value (8.75 v 4.74 cells/ crypt/hour) but the difference did not reach statistical significance.
Again, 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 halved the CCPR from 8.75–4.22 cells/crypt/ hour (Figure).
IMMUNOHISTOCHEMISTRY
The active metabolite, 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 reduced the crypt labelling index (measured using K-67) from a control value of 7.28 (0.68)(mean (SEM)) to 3.74 (0.64)(n=4, p, paired Student's t test)
CELL CULTURE
HT-29 cells in control media showed a rapid log phase growth in the first 14 days of culture (Figure).
Thereafter cells continued to proliferate but at a diminished rate (possibly because of cell to cell contact).
After 21 days' culture there were 8.29 (0.74) ×10 6 cells in control cultures (mean (SEM)).
Calcipotriol produced a clearcut dose dependent inhibition of proliferation.
After 21 days' culture calcipotriol reduced the number of cells to 0.06% of the control value at 10 -5 M (p), to 0.11% at 10 -6 M (p), to 8.45% at 10 -7 M (p), and to 94.10% at 10 -8 M (see Table).
Discussion
We have shown for the first time an inhibition of in vitro CCPR in normal and premalignant human rectal epithelium by vitamin D and its metabolites.
The data have been verified immunohistochemically using the monoclonal antibody Ki-67 to show a reduction in the labelling index.
The presence of vitamin D 3 receptors in normala nd malignant colorectal tissue, together with the increased colonic absorption of calcium after small bowel resection, had previously suggested that the colon could be a target organ for 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 .
We have now shown an in vitro physiological response in colorectal tissue to the active metabolite of vitamin D 3 and related compounds.
The dose dependent inhibition of HT-29 cell growth by calcipotriol (MC-903) correlates well with reports of the responsiveness of this cell line to 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 .
Calcipotriol has limited effects on calcium metabolism, while it retains potent cell regulatory properties.
Clinical trials using calcipotriol suggest that it is a safe and effective topical treatment for psoriasis vulgaris.
Our data suggest that it also has an effect on colorectal tissue.
There is now substantial evidence to show that 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 acts as a differentiating agent and that some of these actions are associated with a modulation of receptor concentrations.
Differentiating cells have in some cases shown a reduction in vitamin D receptor expression (for example HT-29 cells), and the modulation of receptor expression may be dependent on the state of differentiation.
Although our observations could reflect a receptor associated genomic effect, to establish the fact would require correlation with changes in a measurable gene product.
The almost equal inhibition of CCPR by ergocalciferol compared with the active metabolite (1,25 (OH)2 D 3 ) argues against a receptor mediated effect, since non-hydroxylated vitamin D 2 binds poorly to the vitamin D receptor.
An alternative hypothesis is that our observed effect on proliferation may be a non-genomic effect, possibly related to calcium ion transport (as suggested by the presence of cytosolic calcium binding proteins in the colonic mucosa of short bowel syndrome) or to a post-receptor binding effect.
In support of this, both verapamil and glucocorticoids (which influence calcium transport) affect the morphological changes induced by 1,25 (OH)2 D 3 in LOVO cells.
Irrespective of the mode of action, vitamin D, its metabolites and analogues inhibit colonic epithelial proliferation, at least in votro.
In premalignant conditions associated with an accelerated epithelial cell proliferation, a reduction in CCPR might be beneficial.
Further studies to evaluate the mode of action and possible therapueitic use of vitamin D metabolites and analogues are obviously required.
CLINICAL TRIAL
Double blind trial of oral fluticasone propionate v prednisolone in the treatment of active ulcerative colitis
Abstract
Fluticasone propionate is a corticosteroid with the potential for topical treatment of ulcerative colitis because of low systemic bioavailability.
The drug was compared with prednisolone in the management of active left sided or total ulcerative colitis.
Two hundred and five patients were studied in the multicentre four week double blind study.
Prednisolone was given in a dose of 40 mg daily orally, reducing over four weeks to 10 or 20 mg.
Fluticasone propionate was given in an oral daily dose of 20 mg.
The primary end point was the investigator's overall assessment of response.
Patient's assessment, sigmoidoscopic appearance, and histology were also studied.
Patients improved more rapidly with prednisolone.
Differences between the two groups were significant at two weeks.
At four weeks differences were not significant, but there was a trend in favour of prednisolone.
Corticosteroid side effects were minimal in the fluticasone propionate group, and there was minimal suppression of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis.
Fluticasone proprionate 20 mg daily is not as effective in the treatment of active ulcerative colitis as prednisolone tapering from 40 mg daily to 10 or 20 mg.
The complete absence of suppression of the corticoadrenal axis by fluticasone propionate was encouraging, however, and a higher dosage schedule should be assessed.
Corticosteroid drugs are the most effective and widely used treatment for acute relapse of ulcerative colitis.
High dosage or prolonged treatment is associated with a range of side effects.
Topically active corticosteroids, with reduced systemic bioavailability, should have fewer side effects, and there is evidence that enema preparations of corticosteroid drugs with metabolism in gut wall or liver are effective in distal colitis.
Fluticasone propionate is a potent topically active fluorinated corticosteroid with low systemic bioavailability after oral administration, partly because of malabsorption, and partly because of extensive first pass metabolism.
A significant proportion of the drug reaches the colon.
This study was designed to compare the efficacy and safety of oral fluticasone propionate with prednisolone over a four week period in the treatment of active colitis.
Methods
The study was a multicentre randomised double blind parallel group trial of oral fluticasone propionate (5 mg four times daily)v prednisolone in reducing dosage.
Ethical committee approval was obtained from 24 participating centres in the United Kingdom and Eire, and informed written consent was obtained from patients.
PATIENTS
The patients studied had active ulcerative colitis affecting at least the left side of the colon.
Outpatients, with three or more bowel actions daily, passing liquid or semiformed stool were considered for trial entry.
Patients who had taken corticosteroids in a daily dosage equivalent to 10 mg or more of prednisolone orally, or 20 mg rectally in the previous 14 days were not included.
The other major exclusion criteria were Crohn's disease, pregnancy, or concomitant serious medical conditions.
TREATMENT
All patients received two tablets four times a day.
Patients randomised to prednisolone received 40 mg daily for week one and 30 mg daily for week two.
At 14 days all patients were reassessed, and if improving were assigned to treatment option A: prednisolone 20 mg daily for week three and 10 mg daily for week four.
If there was no improvement they were given treatment B: 30 mg daily for week three and 20 mg daily for week four.
Patients in the fluticasone propionate group received 5 mg four times daily throughout the trial, regardless of whether they were allocated to group A or group B at 14 days.
TRIAL ASSESSMENTS
Patients were seen weekly and kept a daily symptom diary.
Sigmoidoscopy and rectal biopsy was performed at entry, day 14, and day 28.
Mucosal appearance was graded from zero to three according to Baron et al , and histological appearance and vascularity scored as described by Powell-Tuck et al .
Blood pressure, blood count, biochemical profile, and urine tests were checked at entry, day 7, 14, and 28, and plasma cortisol, measured by high performance liquid chromatography, at entry, day 14, and 28.
Blood tests were also performed two weeks after trial completion.
END POINTS
The primary end points were ascertained at day 28 as (a ) the investigator's overall assessment of the patient's condition compared with pretreatment, ‘investigator's assessment’,(b ) the patient's assessment of remission as recorded in the diary card, ‘patient's assessment’, and (c ) the sigmoidoscopy score.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The main analysis was on an intention to treat basis and included all patients randomised.
A subsidiary analysis evaluated those patients adhering fully to the protocol.
The trial was designed to have an 80% power, with significance set at the 5% level.
Using the end point of investigator's assessment of remission, it was calculated that 226 patients were required to show that fluticasone propionate was at worst 15% inferior to prednisolone.
Two hundred and six patients in all were enrolled, and 159 patients were included in the analysis, according to protocol, sufficient to show that fluticasone propionate was no more than 18% inferior to prednisolone.
Overall results, with the exclusion of a patient with Campylobacter jejuni infection, were analysed for safety.
Assessments were made at two and four weeks for each treatment group and compared after adjusting for pretreatment values, using the Mantel-Haenzel unadjusted χ 2 test, with modified ridit scores.
The investigator's overall assessments were also compared for the two treatments after adjusting for sex, initial disease severity, hospital centre, and treatment option at day 14.
Results
Two hundred and six patients entered the study; 101 received fluticasone propionate and 105 prednisolone.
One patient was found to have Campylobacter jejuni infection, and was excluded from all analyses.
Forty six patients were excluded from the analysis according to protocol, 42 because of incorrect entry requirements (15 taking steroids at too high a dose at entry, 21 because symptoms were too mild, and six because disease extent was not established).
Four of the withdrawals (see below) were excluded.
A further 10 patients were partially excluded because of non-compliance, use of disallowed drugs, or late or early clinic visits.
This left 73 patients receiving fluticasone propionate and 86 prednisolone in the analysis according to protocol.
Thirty one patients withdrew during the trial: four because of adverse events (one receiving fluticasone propionate, three receiving prednisolone), 24 because of lack of improvement (12 in each group), one receiving fluticasone propionate because of poor compliance, one who did not complete the trial, and another because of a positive pregnancy test (both receiving prednisolone).
Patients' baseline characteristics were similar in both groups, as shown in Table I.
EFFICACY
Data presented are from the intention to treat analysis.
Data from patients adhering fully to the protocol were also analysed, and where results differ, these are also presented.
The investigator's assessment is shown in Table II.
At two weeks there was a significant difference in favour of prednisolone, but at four weeks the difference was no longer significant.
Specific symptoms were significantly better on prednisolone at two and four weeks, compared with fluticasone propionate.
Fifty two per cent of patients receiving prednisolone had formed stools after four weeks, compared with 29% receiving fluticasone propionate (p=0.007); 60% had no bleeding, compared with 45% for the fluticasone propionate group (p=0.021); and 73% had fewer than three bowel motions a day compared with 41% of those receiving fluticasone propionate (p=0.001).
Overall, at the end of the trial, 20% of the fluticasone propionate group considered themselves in complete remission, compared with 39% of the prednisolone group (p=0.003).
Results were similar in the analysis according to protocol, with 14% considering themselves in remission in the fluticasone propionate group, compared with 39% in the prednisolone group (p=0.001).
Sigmoidoscopy scores showed significant differences in favour of prednisolone at weeks two and four (Table II) in the intention to treat analysis.
In the analysis according to protocol, however, the difference in favour of prednisolone was significant at week two (p=0.021), but not at week four (p=0.12).
At week four the histological appearance of the biopsy specimens of 39% of patients receiving prednisolone had improved, compated with 19% in the fluticasone propionate group (p=0.004).
Differences in biopsy vascularity did not differ significantly between the two groups at week four.
SAFETY
More corticosteroid associated effects were seen in the prednisolone group: of the 100 patients, seven patients had facial swelling, four had facial flushing, one had confusion, and one increased hair growth.
There were no such effects in the fluticasone group.
At entry, blood pressure was similar in both groups.
At four weeks, systolic pressure was 129 (18) mm Hg (mean (SD)), diastolic pressure 80 (12) mm Hg for the prednisolone group;v 120 (19) mm Hg and 77 (12) mm Hg respectively for the fluticasone propionate group.
The difference between the two treatments was significant when adjusted for pretreatment values (psystolic, and p=0.048 diastolic).
Random plasma glucose rose in 13 of 77 (17%) patients receiving fluticasone propionate, and in 23 of 81 (28%) of those receiving prednisolone.
Plasma cortisol levels (measured by high performance liquid chromatography) did not fall significantly in the fluticasone propionate group, although there was marked suppression in the prednisolone group (Table III).
There were no deaths during the study, but two patients died shortly afterwards.
A 72 year old woman died of a perforated colon 11 days after completing the trial, despite continuing prednisolone treatment.
A 55 year old woman was withdrawn from the study at day 22, and treated with oral prednisolone.
Ten days later she was admitted and given intravenous steroids, and died of presumed septicaemia shortly after a laparotomy (day 38).
Both had been taking fluticasone propionate during the trial, but the investigators considered the deaths were caused by disease activity rather than the treatment received.
Discussion
There was improvement in both patient groups during the trial, with 63% and 77% of patients (fluticasone propionate and prednisolone respectively) improved or in remission, as assessed by the investigator at week four.
Improvement occurred earlier in the prednisolone group, and at two weeks there was a significant difference in the investigator's assessment in favour of prednisolone.
At four weeks the difference was no longer significant.
It is possible that the closure of the efficacy gap at four weeks was because of the reduction in dosage in the prednisolone group, but also because fluticasone propionate acted more slowly.
Overall, however, there was a trend for prednisolone to be more effective than fluticasone propionate.
Sigmoidoscopic appearance and patients' symptoms were significantly better in the prednisolone group at two and four weeks.
Biopsy inflammation score was significantly better, but vascularity score did not differ between the two treatments.
Data from the 159 patients adhering fully to the protocol gave similar conclusions.
The majority of side effects were minor, but there was a marked absence of corticosteroid effects and hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis suppression in the fluticasone propionate group.
The two deaths after the trial were related to severe ulcerative colitis, and unlikely to have been drug related.
There are virtually no placebo controlled trials of acute relapse of extensive ulcerative colitis with which to compare these results, and such a trial would be unethical.
There is little doubt that a response rate of 63% for the fluticasone group does represent a therapeutic effect.
A placebo controlled study has, however, been carried out in active distal ulcerative colitis by Angus et al , and showed that the drug was not significantly better than placebo.
The trial was, however, relatively small (59 patients) raising the possibility of a type two error, and it is possible that fluticasone propionate was not present in sigmoid colon and rectum and this could not have a therapeutic effect (two thirds of patients had rectosigmoid disease only).
It is likely that the drug would be more effective in the proximal colon.
It is possible that the relative lack of efficacy of fluticasone propionate compared with a standard regimen of prednisolone is because the dose chosen was too low to produce therapeutic concentrations in the colon.
The daily dose of 20 mg was chosen on the basis of volunteer studies, where doses of 10 mg and 20 mg four times daily suppressed the hypothalamicpituitary axis, whereas 5 mg four times a day did not (Glaxo Group Research Ltd, unpublished data).
The degree of colonic bioavailability might have been insufficient for other reasons.
Plasma concentrations after oral dosage vary widely from individual to individual, and after a single 16 mg dose, recovery in the stool varies from 14 to 49% in volunteers (Glaxo Group Research Ltd, unpublished data).
Thirdly, more prolonged treatment might have shown a late effect.
Although it may not be possible to achieve therapeutic effects in the colon with this formulation, small bowel luminal concentrationmay be higher, and might account for the reports of possible benefit in small numbers of patients with coeliac and Crohn's disease.
A larger trial in Crohn's disease is being evaluated.
Although side effects in our study were minimal, oral fluticasone propionate 5 mg four times daily was not as effective as prednisolone in standard doses in the treatment of ulcerative colitis.
Further studies to find a more effective topically active oral preparation are needed.
Measurement of bicarbonate output from the intact human oesophagus
Abstract
Injury of the oesophageal mucosa can result from exposure to refluxed gastric acid and pepsin.
Competence of the lower oesophageal sphincter and peristaltic activity serve to reduce contract time between luminal acid and oesophageal mucosa, but intraluminal neutralisation of residual acid by bicarbonate may also be important in preventing oesophageal mucosal injury.
Whereas swallowed saliva contains bicarbonate, recent experiments have also demonstrated alkali secretion from the mammalian oesophagus.
Bicarbonate secretion from the human oesophagus was therefore examined with an intubation technique and perfusion of the oesophagus with a non-absorbable marker.
Saliva, gastric, and oesophageal aspirates were collected and bicarbonate concentrations determined by measurements of pH and pCO 2 or by back titration.
In 32 normal subjects (17 women, 15 men) median basal oesophageal bicarbonate secretion determined by a pH/pCO 2 method was 416 (range 139–1050) µmol/hour/10 cm.
In a subgroup of 15 experiments median oesophageal bicarbonate output was 489 (range 157–1033) µmol/hour/10 cm (pH/pCO 2 method) compared with a median alkali output of 563 (range 135–799) µmol/hour/10 cm as determined by back titration.
The difference was not significant.
Salivary contamination of the oesophagus accounted for 25% of all bicarbonate measured within the oesophagus and refluxed gastric bicarbonate accounted for 2.5%.
Bicarbonate secretion from the normal human oesophagus may, in combination with swallowed salivary bicarbonate, play a part in preventing oesophageal mucosal damage due to refluxed gastric acid and pepsin.
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease affects over 10% of the population in the United Kingdom, and symptoms are caused by the presence of excess acid entering the lower oesophagus from the stomach and damaging the surface epithelium.
Gastro-esophageal reflux disease is influenced by the magnitude and duration of acid reflux episodes, and a number of mechanical factors serve to prevent acid reflux in health.
The lower oesophageal sphincter acts as a value allowing passage of swallowed liquid and food into the stomach, while preventing regurgitation of gastric contents into the oesophagus.
Intra-abdominal pressure upon the abdominal portion of the oesophagus also minimises reflux after meals and with changes in posture, and the diaphragm may also contribute a little to oesophageal continence.
Absence of lower oesophageal sphincter pressure facilities acid reflux into the oesophagus either by transient relaxations of the sphincter in 82% of reflux episodes or else by more prolonged absence of sphincter pressure in 13% of reflux episodes.
Once acid has entered the lower esophagus peristaltic waves initiated within the body of the oesophagus sweep the bolus away into the stomach, but may still leave a juxtamucosal acidic environment in the lower oesophagus.
Intraluminal neutralisation of acid occurs in part by swallowed saliva and previous studies have shown enhancement of salivary flow in response to dyspeptic symptoms caused by acid entering the lower esophagus.
Intrinsic bicarbonate secretion from the oesophageal mucosa may also contribute to intraluminal acid neutralisation, and such secretion has been shown in vivo in the opossum oesophagus, which is known to contain submucous glands.
Rabbit oesophagus is devoid of these glands and does not secrete significant quantities of alkali, which suggests the importance of these glands for oesophageal bicarbonate secretion.
Similar glands are present throughout the length of the oesophagus in humans and bicarbonate secretion has previously been found in human stomach and duodenum in vivo.
Experiments were therefore designed to try to show the existence of bicarbonate secretion by the normal human oesophagus.
Such alkaline secretion may be important in preventing mucosal injury in some patients with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease.
Methods
The experimental technique involved continuous perfusion of an open segment of oesophagus and the stomach with saline containing non-absorbable markers.
This was by means of a multilumen catheter.
Samples were continually aspirated from the oesophagus and stomach, pooled at 15 minute intervals, and analysed for bicarbonate and alkali content.
Refluxed gastric alkali was determined by appearance of gastric marker in oesophageal aspirates.
Saliva was continually aspirated from the month and salivary bicarbonate contamination of the oesophagus determined by appearance of amylase in oesophageal aspirates.
The oesophageal output of bicarbonate and alkali would then be determined.
SUBJECTS
Experiments were performed on 32 healthy volunteers with no evidence of current or past gastrointestinal disease.
Seventeen subjects were women and 15 were men.
The median age was 22 (range 18–32) years.
Informed written consent was obtained and the experimental techniques were approved by the Salford Health Authority Ethics Committee.
MULTILUMEN CATHETER
A multilumen polyvinly chloride tube was constructed from a French size 16 nasogastric tube (internal diameter 3.5 mm, external diameter 5 mm) with an infusion port cemented 10 cm above the aspiration holes of the nasogastric tube by means of tetrahydrofuran (Fisons, Loughborough).
The infusion lines were 1 mm internal diameter and 1.6 mm external diameter (Portex, Hythe).
A size 8 nasogastric tube (2 mm internal diameter, 2.5 mm external diameter) was cemented on to the assembly with the aspiration holes 10 cm above the lower infusion port.
A second infusion port was cemented on to the assembly 10 cm above the aspiration holes of the size 8 nasogastric tube, and for in vivo validation studies a third infusion port was cemented on to the assembly at the same point to allow introduction of known amounts of socium bicarbonate into the upper oesophagus.
The intact catheter was 7.5 mm×5 mm in cross sectional external diameter.
After the first eight experiments, a second size 8 nasogastric tube was cemented into the assembly with aspiration holes at the same position as the other size 8 nasogastric tube, and both were connected externally by a Y connector.
This was to facilitate more efficient aspiration of fluid from the lower oesophagus.
Cross sectional diameters of this ovoid tube were 10 mm×6 mm.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Subjects were studied after a nine hour fast and the multilumen tube was passed orally and positioned with the oesophageal aspiration ports (size 8 nasogastric tubes) 35 cm from the incisors.
Positioning was validated fluoroscopically in six subjects, with no adjustment of tube required, and fluoroscopy was therefore not considered essential in subsequent subjects.
Experiments were performed with subjects in a semireclined position and the oesophagus was perfused with [3 H]polyethylene glycol ([3 H]PEG; 12.5 µCi/litre in 0.9% sodium chloride adjusted to pH 7.0 with 0.2 M sodium hydroxide) at a rate of 5 ml/minute.
The stomach was similarly perfused with [1 4 C]PEG (12.5 µCi/ litre in 0.9% sodium chloride at pH 7.0).
Oesophageal and gastric contents were continuously aspirated (-10 mm Hg), collected, and pooled at 15 minute intervals for analysis while fresh 1 ml samples of oesophageal and gastric fluid were collected from the aspiration tubes midway through each 15 minute collection for immediate measurement of pH and pCO 2 .
Collections were commenced after an initial 45 minute equilibration period during which the oesophagus and stomach were perfused and aspirates discarded.
Throughout each experiment subjects were instructed to avoid swallowing saliva, which was collected in 15 minute aliquots by continuous buccal aspiration.
Samples (1 ml) were taken for measurement of salivary pH and pCO 2 and the remainder was retinaed for further analysis.
One hour before intubation subjects were given an oral dose of ranitidine (300 mg), and acid suppression was maintained throughout the experiment by intravenous ranitidine (50 mg/ hour) administered by a cannula (Venflon size 17G) sited in a forearm veing (Fig 1).
ANALYSIS AND CALCULATIONS
Bicarbonate concentrations
The pH and pCO 2 of fresh aspirates were immediately measured with a Corning 170 pH/ blood gas analyser (Ciba Corning, Essex).
When pH was outside the calibrated range (6.838 to 7.382) it was recorded manually by a glass electrode attached to a standard pH meter (PHM 82, Radiometer, Copenhagen) and calibrated by standard buffer solutions at pH 4, 7, and 10.
With these values the oesophageal and gastric HC0 3 -concentrations (mmol/litre) were calculated from the equations:
Oesophageal volume and volume of gastric refluxate
The oesophageal volume represents that volume avaialble within which bicarbonate of oesophageal origin can be distributed.
It includes volume of oesophageal perfusate (75 ml/15 minutes), volume of oesophageal secretion, volume of swallowed saliva, and volume of gastric refluxate.
In a steady state perfusion system:
Hence the oesophageal volume V 2 can be determined:
The volume of gastric refluxate can be determined by appearance of the gastric non-absorbable marker,[1 4 C]PEG, in oesophageal spirates:
The [3 H]and [1 4 C]PEG concentrations in oesophageal and gastric samples were determined by dual isotope counting with an LKB Β scintillation counter (LKB Wallac 81000, Sweden).
Determinations of oesophageal volume and volume of gastric refluxate were by adaptations of previously described methods.
The oesophageal HCO 3 -content and HCO 3 -refluxed from the stomach could then be calculated:
Hence net oesophageal bicarbonate secretion can be determined:
VALIDATION STUDIES
In vivo infusion of sodium bicarbonate
Experiments were performed on seven subjects to determine the accuracy of the method for measuring oesophageal bicarbonate content.
After a 45 minute equilibration period, salivary oesophageal and gastric aspirates were collected and pooled at 15 minute intervalsfor one hour, and pH and pCO 2 were measured in fresh samples to determine basal oesophageal bicarbonate secretion as already described.
During the next 15 minute period a 5 ml bolus containing a known amount of sodium bicarbonate (100, 200, 500, or 1000 µmol) was infused slowly and the total amount of bicarbonate determined by dilution of [3 H]PEG and pH and pCO 2 of oesophageal aspirates.
In most subjects a second bolus containing a different quantity of bicarbonate to the first was infused 30 minutes after the first bolus.
The 15 minute basal rate of oesophageal bicarbonate secretion was subtracted from the calculated bicarbonate outputs during periods when exogenous bicarbonate was infused, to calculate the quantity of infused bicarbonate.
Measurements of amylase in oesophageal fluid
Because saliva contains high concentrations of bicarbonate, even small voumes of swallowed saliva may significantly contaminate the oesophageal segment.
Confidence in the amylase measurements in oesophageal fluid as a marker of salivary contamination is therefore essential.
the major potential confounder is this analysis is pH, because pH values of oesophageal fluid are about 1.0 log point lower than pH values of saliva.
Studies were therefore required to exclude a major effect of pH on measurements of amylase.
Saliva and esophageal fluid were taken from two subjects and pooled.
pH of the saliva pool was 8.20 whereas pH of the oesophageal pool was 7.20.
Each pool was divided into two subgroups and one saliva subpool was titrated down to pH 7.20 with 0.1 N HCl and one oesophageal fluid subpool was titrated up to pH 8.20 with 0.2 N NaOH.
In each of the four subpools, 20 or 21 estimations of amylase activity were performed.
Oesophageal fluid was undiluted but salivary samples were diluted to 1 in 30 to bring amylase values into the known linear range for the assay.
Amylase concentrations in saliva and oesophageal fluid were compared at both pH 7.20 and 8.20.
Bicarbonate and alkali output: comparison of the pH/pCO 2 method and the back-titration method
In 15 subjects oesophageal bicarbonate secretion was determined by the pH/pCO 2 technique described earlier.
Also, alkali concentrations were determined in salivary, oesophageal, and gastric samples by a previously described sensitive back titration technique.
Briefly, a known excess of H + ions (250 µl of 0.1 M H 2 SO 4 =50 µEq H + ) was added to 2 ml of sample and 5 ml of deionised H 2 O. This was gassed with CO 2 free nitrogen (washed through saturated barium hydroxide solution) for five minutes to remove dissolved CO 2 from the sample, which was then titrated up to the reaction endpoint at pH 8.4 (pH meter PHM 82 linked to an autoburette ABU 80 and controlled by an autotitrator TTT 80 all units Radiometer, Copenhagen) with 15 mM NaOH.
The alkali content of each sample was determined from the volume of titrant required to reach the reaction endpoint.
Net oesophageal alkali output was calculated from the previously described volume measurements.
In vitro alkali studies
To determine the accuracy of back titration in determining alkali concentrations, triplicate measurements of alkali concentrations were performed on standard bicarbonate solutions (1, 2, 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 mM sodium bicarbonate), deionised water, and standard oesophageal perfusate containing [3 H]PEG and titrated to pH 7.0 with 0.2 M NaOH.
ACID PERFUSION STUDIES
After a 45 minute equilibration period and a further 60 minutes during which time basal salivary bicarbonate secretion was determined, the oesophageal perfusion solution was changed from saline (containing 12.5 µCi/litre [3 H]PEG) to 0.1 N hydrochloric acid (containing 12.5 µCi/ litre [3 H]PEG).
Acid was perfused at a rate of 5 ml/minute for five minutes in eight subjects and for 30 minutes in 12 subjects.
During this time it was not possible to determine oesophageal bicarbonate outputs by the pH/pCO 2 method as the pH was below 6.1.
The salivary secretory response to oesophageal acidication was, however, examined.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF DATA
The data was analysed on the computer with Minitab 7.1.
As most were not normally distributed, results are expressed as median values with 95% conidence intervals (95% CIs).
Significance levels for comparative data were determined by the Wilcoxon signed rank test.
Independent data populations such as the percentage marker recovery from single and twin lumen oesophageal aspiration assemblies were examined for significant differences with the Mann-Whitney test.
Results
OESOPHAGEAL MARKER RECOVERY
Percentage recovery of the oesophageal marker was determined from the volume of the 15 minute oesophageal aspirates and their [3 H]PEG concentrations.
In the first eight subjects median recovery of the oesophageal marker from the single oesophageal lumen aspiration assembly was 26.4% (95% CI 15.5–37.0).
Efficiency of recovery increased in the subsequent 24 subjects with the twin lumen oesophageal aspiration assembly, with a median marker recovery of 48.2% (95% CI 42.7–56.9).
BASAL BICARBONATE SECRETION IN HUMAN OESOPHAGUS
After a 45 minute equilibration period, bicarbonate content of the oesophagus and contamination by swallowed salivary bicarbonate and refluxed gastric bicarbonate were measured over 60 minutes.
Intragastric pH was maintained between pH 6 and 7 with ranitidine.
Oesophageal fluid pH was consistent with median pH values of 6.71 to 6.66 over 60 minutes.
More variability in corresponding pCO 2 values were found with medians of 10.3 to 10.0 mm Hg over 60 minutes (Fig 2).
Net oesophageal bicarbonate secretion in 32 subjects, after deductions for contaminating salivary and gastric bicarbonate, ranged from 139.2 µmol/hour/10 cm to 1050 µmol/hour/10 cm with a median of 416.3 µmol/ hour/10 cm (95% CI 290.4–521.8)(Fig 3).
SALIVARY CONTAMINATION OF OESOPHAGEAL CONTENTS
All oesophageal samples in all subjects contained varying amylase concentrations indicative of swallowed saliva, and the amount of bicarbonate in the oesophagus derived from saliva was calculated.
Continuous buccal aspiration was efficient, collecting a median 97% of saliva, although 3% of saliva was swallowed (95% CI 1.0–4.7).
A median of 118.6 µmol/hour of salivary bicarbonate was swalloed (95% CI 63.5–206.2), accounting for about 25% of all bicarbonate within the oesophageal segment (Fig 3).
GASTRIC REFLUX OF BICARBONATE INTO THE OESOPHAGUS
Reflux of gastric biocarbonate into the oesophagus was determined from the appearance of gastric marker [1 4 C]PEG in osophageal aspirates and bicarbonate concentration of gastric fluid.
A median of 13.6 µmol/hour of gastric bicarbonate refluxed into the oesophageal segment (95% CI 9.1–28.0) accounted for about 2.5% of total bicarbonate within the oesophagus (Fig 3).
Table I presents data for individual subjects.
VALIDATION STUDIES
In vivo infusion of sodium bicarbonate
The results show an excellent correlation between the quantity of bicarbonate infused into the oesophagus and that measured and calculated from the aspirates (correlation coefficient r=0.965, p=0.0001, Fig 4).
These results reflect accuracy, not only of bicarbonate concentration determination, but also of volume measurements including contaminating saliva and gastric fluid.
Measurement of amylase in oesophageal fluid
Because saliva contains relatively high concentrations of alkali, accounting for about 3% of bicarbonate within the oesophagus, it is important that amylase concentrations measured in oesophageal fluid accurately reflect salivary contamination.
Median amylase concentration in saliva at pH 7.20 was 4229 U/l (n=20), coeficient of variation 2%), and at pH 8.20 median amylase concentration was 4321 U/l (n=20, coeficient of variation =2%).
Thus reduction in pH of saliva from pH 8.2 to 7.2 accounted for a 2.2% reduction in amylase detection (p=0.004).
Median amylase activity in oesophageal fluid at pH 7.20 was 2825 U/l (n=21, coeficient of variation=2.5%) whereas at pH 8.20 median amylase activity was 2859 U/l (n=21, coefficient of variation=2.7%); the difference was not significant (p=0.55).
In vivo human oesophageal bicarbonate and alkali outputs: comparison of pH/pCO 2 and back titration methods
In 15 experiments median oesophageal bicarbonate concentration was 2.06 mmol/l (95% CI 1.57–2.64) derived from pH and pCO 2 where as median oesophageal alkali concentration was 1.65 mmol/l (95% CI 1.32–2.08), determined by back titration.
This difference achieved significance (p=0.04).
Although the pH/pCO 2 method overcalculates the alkali content of oesophageal fluid by about 25%, there is a greater error in salivary alkali determination by the pH/pCO 2 method probably attributable to the higher pH.
Median bicarbonate concentration in saliva determined by the former method was 28.1 mm/l (95% CI 19.79–38.74) compared with 14.74 mmol/l alkali in saliva determined by back titration (95% CI, 12.95–16.69)— that is, a 90% overestimation (p= 0.003).
Overall when bicarbonate or alkali outputs from the oesophagus were determined after deductions for contaminating saliva and gastric fluid, there was a good correlation between the two methods.
Median oesophageal bicarbonate secretion was 489.5 µmol/hour/10 cm (95% CI 271–767), compared with median alkali output of 563.4 µmol/hour/10 cm (95% CI 306–613).
There was a significant correlation between the two methods (r=0.69; p), with no significant bias (p=0.38)(Fig 5).
Due to the differences in salivary bicarbonate and salivary alkali concentrations determined by the pH/pCO 2 or back titration method, there are pronounced differences in total salivary outputs in 15 experiments (13 subjects).
Median basal salivary bicarbonate output (pH/pCO 2 method) was 4473 µmol/hour (95% CI 2595–7999), whereas median basal salivary alkali output was 2777 µmol/hour (95% CI, 2098–3540).
The difference is significant (p=0.003).
Table II shows individual data comparing the two methods of bicarbonate and alkali determination.
In vitro alkali studies
There is an excellent correlation between actual and measured concentration of alkali in standard bicarbonate solutions (0, 1, 2, 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 mM of NaHCO 3 (Fig 6).
This validates the accuracy of the back titration technique in determining the alkali content of solutions (r= 1.0, p=0.0001).
The average percentage difference between actual and measured alkali content was 0.2%.
Oesophageal perfusing solutions (0.9% sodium chloride containing 12.5 µCi/l of [3 H]PEG), were titrated to pH 7.0 with 0.2 M NaOH and were found to contain no titratable alkali.
INTRASUBJECT VARIATION
Six subjects were examined on two separate occasions and mean basal oesophageal bicarbonate outputs, and salivary, and gastric bicarbonate contamination of the oesophagus were quantified by the pH/pCO 2 method (Table III).
Oesophageal alkali outputs were also determined in two subjects on separate occasions by back titration (Table III).
There are reasonable approximations of bicarbonate and alkali secretion for each subject on separate occasions.
Subjects were more tolerant of the procedure on the second occasion with a tendency towards reduced salivary and gastric contamination within the oesophagus.
ACID PERFUSION STUDIES: EFFECT ON SALIVARY SECRETION
During the period in which the oesophagus was perfused with 25 ml of 0.1 M HCl over five minutes in eight subjects, no symptoms were reported and mean salivary bicarbonate secretion was unaltered (basal 5665 µmol/hour, after acid bolus 5337 µmol/hour, p=0.94).
In 12 subjects the oesophagus was perfused continuously with 0.1 M HCl for 30 minutes.
Two subjects did not experience cymptoms due to acid perfusion and no increase in salivary bicarbonate output occurred.
Ten other subjects experienced nausea and heartburn in association with acid perfusion of the oesophagus and median salivary bicarbonate secretion increased from a basal 401 µmol/15 minutes to 497 µmol (p=0.02) and 1100 µmol during the two 15 minute periods of acid perfusion (Fig 7).
Salivary bicarbonate concentrations did not increase significantly and the increased bicarbonate secretion was largely due to an increase in salivary volume from median 34 ml/15 minutes basal to 46.5 ml/15 minutes (p=0.006) and 55.0 ml/15 minutes during the two periods of acid perfusion.
The difference in baselines between these two groups results from the large degree of individual variation in salivary secretion.
Discussion
In the oesophagus, mucosal integrity depends on a balance between aggressive factors such as refluxed acid and pepsin, and protective mechanisms that include salivary and oesophageal bicarbonate secretion, salivary and oesophageal mucus, mucosal resistance and permselectivity, proliferative activity of the epithelium, mucosal blood flow, and motor activity that enhances clearance and maintains competence of the gastro-oesophageal junction.
After an episode of acid reflux, secondary oesophageal peristalsis can reduce the remaining bolus to less than 1 ml.
Studies have shown that exogenous radiolabelled acid instilled in the oesophagus can be cleared after two swallows.
Despite these clearance mechanisms, a small volume of acid remains, reducing oesophageal intraluminal pH and creating an environment for mucosal injury.
Swallowed saliva is now regarded as an important mechanism for neutralising acid within the oesophageal lumen and esophageal pH exhibits an incremental increase with repeated swallows.
The major source of the neutralising capacity of saliva is its bicarbonate content, but there is now evidence that gland bearing oesophageal mucosa can also secrete alkali, a phenomenon first documented in the opossum esophagus in vivo.
This alkali can contribute to acid neutralisation and the intraoesophageal pH increases with time in response to acid even in the absence of salivary secretion.
Similar experiments on rabbit oesophagus, which is devoid of submucosal glands, failed to show alkali secretion suggesting that these glands are the source of oesophageal alkalinisation.
These experimental findings may be relevant to humans, as similar submucosal glands have been described in the oesophagus for more than 80 years.
Several lobules of small tubuloacinar glands drain into a common duct that leads to the surface of the squamous epithelium, and with histological techniques, use of acid toluidine blue has identified irregular longitudinal rows of ductal ostia in the human oesophagus.
Perfusion techniques have been used to investigate secretion and absorption in the human gut in vivo.
The ideal system involves isolating a segment of gut, thus preventing contamination from above or below and allowing 100% recovery of perfused solution.
The technique that most closely approaches these ideals, is that used by Isenberg's group to investigate duodenal secretion of mucosal bicarbonate.
The oesophagus is a muscular segment, the main function of which is the passage of ingested food and fluid from the pharynx into the stomach.
The response to bolus distension within the oesophagus is proximal contraction and distal relaxation and the generation of an aboral contraction wave.
Inflation of an intraoesophageal balloon to between 2 and 2.5 cm diameter (8 to 9 ml), causes pain in normal subjects and is associated with peristaltic activity.
These findings are consistent with our early experience, when attempts were made to isolate a 10 cm segment of oesophagus between two occluding balloons in six subjects.
This system was not tolerated in pilot experiments, and we decided to perfuse an open segment of oesophagus and make appropriate corrections for contaminating saliva and refluxed gastric fluid.
Another group has published preliminary findings on alkaline secretion in a balloon occluded segment of human oesophagus.
The potential advantages of balloon occlusion were not realised, however, with appreciable contamination by saliva (20%) and incomplete oesophageal fluid recovery.
In our study an open segment of oesophagus was perfused and recovered fluid analysed for bicarbonate contents, with deductions made for salivary contamination and refluxed gastric fluid.
In 32 healthy subjects without symptoms median net oesophageal bicarbonate outpur was 416 µmol/hour/10 cm with contaminating saliva and refluxed gastric fluid contributing 25% and 2.5% of total bicarbonate measured in the oesophageal segment by the pH/pCO 2 method.
About 50% of the infused solution was recovered.
There was also an excellent correlation between the quantity of exogenous bicarbonate infused into the oesophagus and that measured and calculated from oesophageal aspirates.
Evidence is also presented which suggests that amylase determination in oesophageal fluid is an accurate reflection of salivary contamination.
In vitro studies show only a 2% reduction in amylase activity when salivary pH is reduced from 8.2 to 7.2.
One potential criticism of the pH/pCO 2 method is that investigators may be measuring dissolved CO 2 in perfusing solution that has diffused as CO 2 gas down a mucosa to lumen concentration gradient, rather than occurring due to secreted bicarbonate ions.
A sensitive back titration technique was therefore used in 15 experiments to determine salivary and oesophageal alkali outputs, and to compare these with bicarbonate outputs as determined by the pH/ pCO 2 method.
In vitro experiments show back titration to be very accurate and precise in determining the alkali content of standard bicarbonate solutions.
Median oesophageal alkali output was 563 µmol/hour/10 cm (back titration) compared with a median bicarbonate output of 489 µmol/hour/10 cm (pH/pCO 2 method).
The two methods correlated (r=0.69) and did not give significantly different overall outputs (p=0.38).
With back titration, swallowed saliva accounted for a median 17% of alkali within the oesophagus whereas refluxed gastric alkali contributed 1.0%.
The pH/pCO 2 method slightly overestimated oesophageal fluid alkali concentration but the error was much greater for salivary analysis due to its higher pH.
Less variable results were obtained with back titration and for these reasons, we suggest that back titration is the analytical technique of choice for determining alkali concentrations in saliva and oesophageal fluid.
Our findings have important implications for oesophageal defence against acid and pepsin injury.
The human oesophagus secretes bicarbonate at about 400 µmol/hour/10 cm, which is a similar order of magnitude to gastric bicarbonate secretion.
The finding that oesophageal acidification increases salivary bicarbonate is of particular interest and is in agreement with previously published results by Helm and coworkers.
These studies imply the existence of an oesophagosalivary reflex that may be responsible for the symptom of ‘waterbrash.’
Whether this response occurs only in symptomatic subjects remains controversial as one group of investigators have reported acid stimulated salivary bicarbonate secretion in the absence of symptoms.
Role of ammonia in the pathogenesis of the gastritis, hypergastrinaemia, and hyperpepsinogenaemia I caused by Helicobacter pylori infection
Abstract
Studies were performed in patients with and without renal failure to investigate the role of bacterial ammonia production in the pathogenesis of the mucosal abnormalities caused by Helicobacter pylori .
The high rate of H pylori ammonia production in uraemic patients should accentuate any ammonia induced effects.
The median (range) gastric juice ammonium concentration in the H pylori positive patients with renal failure was 19 mmol/l (11–43) compared with 5 mmol/l (1–11) in the H pylori positive patients without renal failure (p).
In the H pylori negative patients the values were 3 mmol/l (0.5–11) and 0.7 mmol/l (0.1–1.4) respectively in the patients with and without renal failure (p).
Despite the much higher ammonia production in the H pylori positive uraemic patients, the nature and severity of their gastritis was the same as that in the H pylori positive non-uraemic patients.
The median (range) fasting serum gastrin concentration was raised in the uraemic patients compared with the non-uraemic patients but was similar in the uraemic patients with (95 pmol/l (52–333)) or without (114 pmol/l (47–533))H pylori infection.
The median (range) serum pepsinogen I concentration was also high in the uraemic compared with the non-uraemic patients and was significantly higher in uraemic patients with H pylori (352 ng/ml, range 280–653) than in those without H pyulori infection (165 ng/ml, range 86–337)(p).
These findings indicate that the gastritis and hypergastrinaemia associated with H pylori infection are not the result of mucosal damage induced by the organism's ammonia production.
It is now generally acknowledged that Helicobacter pylori infection is the major cause of antral gastritis.
The bacterium, however, does not penetrate the gastric epithelium and the mechanism by which it induces inflammation of the underlying mucosa is unknown.
The organism has very high urease activity and it has been suggested that the production of high concentrations of ammonia at the epithelial surface could cause mucosal damage.
Though the acidic gastric juice will rapidly convert ammonia to less toxic ammonium ions, the high pH at the site of ammonia production underneath the mucus layer could allow it to remain in its unionised noxious state.
It has also been postulated that ammonia produced by H pylori predisposes to mucosal damage by denaturing the structure of the protective mucus layer.
H pylori infection has also been shown to increase the serum concentrations of gastrin and pepsinogen I. Levi et al proposed that the hypergastrinaemia was related to bacterial ammonia production which raised the antral surface pH, but studies from our own group do not support this.
To investigate the role of ammonia in the histological and biochemical changes that accompany H pylori infection, we have examined patients with chronic renal failure.
The high intragastric urea concentrations in these patients greatly increas H pylori ammonia production which should accentuate any ammonia related effects.
Patients and methods
Gastric juice ammonium concentration, antral histology, and serum concentrations of gastrin and pepsinogen I were examined in nine H pylori positive and nine H pylori negative uraemic patients.
These results were compared with those from age and sex matched control patients with normal renal function with (n=9) and without (n=9)H pylori infection.
Each of the patients examined had been referred for upper gastrointestinal endoscopy to investigate dyspeptic symptoms.
None was receiving antibiotics or had taken acid inhibitory agents within the previous week.
In addition, none of the patients had been treated with bismuth preparations or with immunosuppressive therapy.
The median ages of the uraemic patients were 51 years (range 34–73) in those who were H pylori positive and 49 years (range 27–67) in those who were H pylori negative.
Three of the H pylori positive patients were on maintenance haemodialysis, four on continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis, and two had not yet begun dialysis.
One of the H pylori negative patients was on maintenance haemodialysis and eight were on continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis.
The median duration of dialysis was similar in the H pylori positive (15 months, range 0–100) and negative (20.5 months, range 0–142) patients.
All patients were examined between 0900 hours and 1100 hours after an overnight fast.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed after a venous blood sample had been taken for determination of serum concentrations of urea, gastrin, and pepsinogen I. Immediately after passing the instrument, 10 ml of gastric juice were collected by means of a trap in the suction line.
After inspection of the upper gastrointestinal tract, two biopsy specimens were taken from the greater curvature of the antrum, 2 cm from the pylorus.
The H pylori status of patients and controls was determined by microscopy of antral biopsy for Helicobacter like organisms, rapid urease slide test (CLO test) of antral biopsy, and C-urea breath test.
These tests have been shown to be reliable in detecting H pylori infection in patients with and without renal failure.
ANALYSES
In the patients with chronic renal failure the pH of the gastric juice was determined using a combined glass electrode (Radiometer ETS 822) before storage at -20°C.
Gastric juice urea and ammonium concentrations were determined in all subjects.
For this the samples were thawed and centrifuged at 3000 g for 10 minutes to remove the mucus.
The concentration of ammonium was measured in the supernatant after dilution in 0.2 M phosphate buffer pH 7.4, using an enzymatic method (Sigma, Dorset, UK) adapted for the Cobas Bio (Roche, Welwyn Garden City, UK) as previously described.
The antral biopsy specimens were fixed in formalin and processed routinely.
Paraffin sections were cut at three levels and stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
An extra section from level two was stained with Cresyl fast violet for detection of H pylori .
They were examined by a single pathologist (SD) who was unaware of the patients' clinical details.
The severity of antral gastritis was scored using the method of Rauws et al , which we have found to be a sensitive method for assessing the severity of H pylori -induced gastritis.
Chronic inflammatory infiltrate in the lamina proporia was scored as 0, 1, or 2; lamina propria polymorph infiltrate as 0, 1, 2, or 3; intraepithelial polymorph infiltrate as 0, 1, 2, or 3; and mucosal erosions as 0, 1, or 2.
The scores for these individual components of H pylori related gastritis are then added to give a cumulative gastritis score ranging from 0–10.
The intraobserver variation in the scoring of the severity of the gastritis was assessed.
This was performed by randomly selecting 15 slides scored by the pathologist (SD) at least one year earlier and having him rescore them unaware that he had previously examined them.
The mean cumulative gastritis score for the group of 15 slides was 3.2 (range 0–6) when first scored compared with 3.3 (range 0–8) when rescored.
The mean absolute difference in the cumulative gastritis score between the two assessments was 0.66 (range 0–2) and the coefficient of variation was 21%.
This indicates that our pathologist would have a greater than 95% chance of detecting a difference in mean cululative gastritis score of 1 when comparing two groups of nine subjects.
The serum gastrin concentration was determined by radioimmunoassay using antibody R98.
This detects both G17 and G34 and uses G17 as standard.
Serum pepsinogen I was measured using commercial radioimmunassay kits obtained from Incstar Ltd (Berkshire).
The statistical significance of differences between groups was assessed by the Mann-Whitney U test.
The study was approved by the Western Infirmary Ethical Committee and all patients gave written, informed consent.
Results
The serum urea concentration was raised to a similar extent in the renal failure patients with (median 20 mmol/l, range 12–31) or without (23, 11–32)H pylori infection (normal range 2.5–7.5 mmol/l).
The median (range) gastric juice ammonium concentration in the H pylori positive uraemic patients was 19 mmol/l (11–43) which was approximately four times greater than that in the H pylori positive non-uraemic patients (5, range 1–11)(p)(Fig 1).
Gastric juice ammonium concentrations were similar in the H pylori negative uraemic patients (median 3, range 0.5–11 mmol/l) and H pylori positive non-uraemic patients (5, range 1–11)(p=0.2), and both were significantly higher than the values for the H pylori negative non-uraemic patients (0.7, range 0.1–1.4)(pfor each).
Intragastric pH was similar in the H pylori positive and negative uraemic patients, with a median value of 3.0 (range 1.0–7.1) in the former and 2.1 (1.2–6.6) in the latter.
In spite of the marked difference in intragastric ammonium concentration, the severity of histological gastritis was similar in the H pylori positive patients with (median cumulative gastritis score=5, range 3–6) or without (5, range 3–7) renal failure (Fig 2).
Combining the H pylori positive patients with and without renal failure provided a wide range of gastric juice ammonium concentrations (1–43 mmol/l) but there was no correlation between this and the severity of the H pylori related antral gastritis (Table).
In spite of the H pylori negative uraemic patients having intragastric ammonium concentrations similar to the H pylori positive non-uraemic patients, the former had cumulative gastritis scores of 1 or less which were equivalent to those in the H pylori negative patients with normal renal function.
There was no difference in the endoscopic appearance of the upper gastrointestinal tract in the renal failure patients with and without H pylori infection.
Of the nine H pylori positive uraemic patients, two had oesophagitis, two had scattered petechiae in the stomach and duodenum, and one had erosive duodenitis.
Of the nine H pylori negative uraemic patients, two had oesophagitis and one had scattered petechiae in stomach and duodenum.
Endoscopy in the nine H pylori positive non-uraemic patients showed oesophagitis in one patient and active duodenal ulcer in another.
In the nine H pylori negative non-uraemic patients, one had erosive duodenitis and another a deformed duodenum.
The median serum pepsinogen I concentration (ng/ml) was higher in the H pylori positive uraemic patients (352, range 280–653) than in the H pylori negative uraemic patients (165, range 86–337)(p) and both these groups had higher values than the non-uraemic patients of corresponding H pylori status (pfor each)(Fig 3).
Serum pepsinogen I values were similar in the non-uraemic patients with (median =103, range 40–170) or without (92, 35–127)H pylori infection (p=0.3).
There was no relationship between the serum pepsinogen I concentration and type of renal replacement treatment.
The median serum gastrin concentration (pmol/l) in the non-uraemic patients was higher in those with H pylori (17, range 7–24) than in those without the infection (10, range 7–14)(p)(Fig 4).
Compared with these non-uraemic patients, the gastrin concentrations were noticeably high in the uraemic patients and there was no difference between the latter patients with (median=95, range 52–333) or without (114, range 47–533)H pylori infection.
There was no relationship between the serum gastrin concentration and type of renal replacement treatment.
Discussion
This study shows that the gastric juice ammonium concentration is noticeably affected by both uraemia and H pylori infection.
The extremely high intragastric ammonium concentration in the renal failure patients with H pylori infection can be explained by the combination of their high gastric juice urea concentration and the high urease activity of the organism.
We have previously shown that the intragastric production of ammonia by H pylori is controlled by the availability of urea in gastric juice.
The reason for the higher gastric juice ammonium concentration in the H pylori negative uraemic patients than in the H pylori negative non-ureamic patients is not clear.
However, a variety of urease producing bacteria are present in the mouth and swallowed in the saliva.
Though such bacteria have lower urease activity than H pylori , they may produce significant amounts of ammonia in the presence of high gastric juice concentrations of urea.
In addition, it is possible that the high gastric juice urea concentration encourages the colonisation of the upper gastrointestinal tract by urease positive organisms.
We have previously observed that H pylori negative uraemic patients have higher urease activity assessed by the C-urea breath test than H pylori negative non-uraemic patients.
Some in vitro and experimental animal studies have suggested that the antral gastritis induced by H pylori may be caused by the ammonia produced by the organism's high urease activity.
Murakami et al showed that ammonia produced by the administration of urea plus urease to rats can cause microscopic injury to their gastric mucosa.
In vitro studies by Smoot et al showed that ammonia produced by H pylori is cytotoxic to cultures of human gastric epithelial cells and similar studies by Xu et al found that H pylori ammonia production causes vacuolisation of Vero cell lines.
In addition to a direct toxic effect of ammonia, it has been proposed that ammonium ions may interact with neutrophil produced hypochlorous acid to produce the highly toxic mono-N-chloramine, NH 2 Cl.
It has also been proposed that H pylori ammonia production will lead to mucosal damage by denaturing the protective mucus layer.
In spite of the findings with animal models and in vitro experiments, the present study does not support a causal role for ammonia production in antral gastritis in man.
This was demonstrated by the absence of any correlation between the severity of the gastritis or epithelial surface damage and the bacterial ammonia production.
Examining patients with and without uraemia enabled us to look at the gastric mucosal damage over a very wide range (43 fold) of in vivo ammonia production making it unlikely that any association was missed.
The abnormalities related to ammonia administration noted in the earlier in vitro studies and animal models may be explained by the high pH employed which would have increased the proportion of unionised ammonia.
Triebling et al have recently claimed that ammonia production does play a pathogenic role in the development of H pylori related gastritis in man.
However, this conclusion is not supported by their own data.
They measured gastric juice ammonium and the severity of gastritis in five patients with chronic renal failure and H pylori , before and after treatment with amplicillin, and in five uninfected patients with renal failure.
A positive correlation was observed between the gastric juice ammonium and severity of gastritis.
This correlation, however, can be explained simply by the presence of absence of H pylori in their patient group and does not provide evidence of a causal association between H pylori ammonia production and gastritis.
Within their small group of five patients with H pylori , there was no correlation between gastric juice ammonium and severity of gastritis, which is consistent with the findings of our present study in which we examined 18 such patients.
Our conclusion that ammonia does not play a pathogenic role in the development of H pylori related gastritis in man is also consistent with the recent ultrastructural studies by Thomsen et al .
They noted that there was no correlation between the location of the organism and the morphological damage to adjacent epithelial cells or the degree of subjacent inflammatory cell infiltrate.
The noticeably high serum pepsinogen I concentration in the patients with chronic renal failure is consistent with previous reports and can be explained by its impaired renal clearance.
The increase in serum pepsinogen I was particularly marked in the renal failure patients with H pylori , with its concentration being double that in the renal patients without the infection.
It has previously been reported that H pylori infection raises serum pepsinogen I in non-uraemic patients but only by about 25%.
The fact that H pylori infection raises serum pepsinogen I to a greater extent in uraemic than non-uraemic subjects would be consistent with bacterial ammonia production raising the serum concentration of the zymogen.
However, little is known about the mechanism by which pepsinogen I reaches the serum or about the mechanism of its renal excretion.
If it is excreted by a saturable process then in patients with renal failure the same degree of increased delivery of pepsinogen I into the serum could produce a more marked increase in its serum concentration.
As previously reported, the serum gastrin concentration was found to be high in the renal failure patients compared with those with normal renal function.
Serum gastrin concentration is also known to be raised in patients with H pylori infection, and this is seen in the non-uraemic patients in the present study.
It has been suggested that the hypergastrinaemia induced by H pylori is caused by the ammonia produced by its urease raising antral surface pH and thereby blocking the suppression of gastrin release by luminal acid.
However, we have previously found that neither increasing, inhibiting, nor completely abolishing H pylori urease activity in man alters serum gastrin.
We have also found that H pylori related hypergastrinaemia cannot be explained by ammonia altering mucosal surface pH.
The finding that the gastrin concentration is similar in the H pylori positive and negative uraemic patients, despite the much higher rate of ammonia production in the former, is further evidence against the hypergastrinaemia being due to bacterial ammonia production.
Ala-Kaila et al recently observed that patients with chronic renal failure could be divided into two statistically distinct groups according to their degree of hypergastrinaemia.
The differences in gastrin could not be explained by differences in acid secretion or severity of renal failure and they postulated an unknown mechanism causing enhanced synthesis of gastrin.
The present study indicates that H pylori infection is not the unknown factor.
In conclusion, this study shows that the very high rate of H pylori ammonia production in uraemic patients is not associated with more marked gastritis or hypergastrinaemia.
These findings support our previous work showing that H pylori release of ammonia is unlikely to be responsible for either the hypergastrinaemia or the gastritis caused by this bacterium.
Comparison of 5-aminosalicylic acid and N-acetylaminosalicylic acid uptake by the isolated human colonic epithelial cell
Abstract
Isolated human colonic epithelial cell suspensions were incubated with either 0.1 mM 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) or 0.1 mM acetylaminosalicylic acid (Ac-ASA) for up to two hours.
Intra- and extracellular 5-ASA and Ac-ASA were measured by high performance liquid chromatography.
Mean 5-ASA uptake in one hour was 160.5 nmol/g dry weight, compared with an Ac-ASA uptake of only 5.75 nmol/g dry weight.
No unchanged 5-ASA was detected inside the cell.
Repeated washing had no effect on the intracellular Ac-ASA concentration.
This discrepancy in drug uptake may explain why Ac-ASA seems to be ineffective when given to patients with ulcerative colitis.
5-Aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) is the active ingredient of sulphasalazine in ulcerative colitis, and is thought to work by a local mechanism.
The absorption of 5-ASA by the colon is poor, resulting in very low serum and urine concentrations and high faecal concentrations.
The main metabolite of 5-ASA is N-acetyl ASA (Ac-ASA), and the drug is found predominantly in this form in the body.
The site of acetylation of 5-ASA was widely assumed to be the liver, but it has recently been shown that the human colonic epithelial cell is capable of acetylating 5-ASA, and that N-acetyltransferase activity is present in the cytosol.
In addition, it has been shown that Ac-ASA is the form of the drug predominantly found in the rectal mucosa of patients taking oral sulphasalazine.
It has been suggested that this acetylation process may inactivate the drug, and the results of clinical treatment trials of Ac-ASA have been conflicting, with the drug being ineffective in two out of three trials.
One possible explanation for this discrepancy might be that Ac-ASA is less well taken up by the colonic mucosa, and there is indirect evidence to suggest that this so.
The aim of this study was to compare the uptake of 5-ASA with that of Ac-ASA into the isolated human colonic epithelial cell.
Methods
Fresh colonocyte suspensions were prepared according to the method of Roediger and Truelove.
Briefly, fresh surgical resection specimens were obtained from normal areas of colon at least 5 cm distant from a carcinoma.
Mucosal strips were incubated in Ca + + /Mg + + free Krebs-Henseleit saline, pH 7.4, with 10 mM EDTA and 20 mM dithiothreitol, for 30 minutes at 37°C.
Mechanical agitation released the epithelial cells into a suspension, which was then washed several times before use.
This cell suspension was the basis for all the experiments.
Cell viability was checked by both Trypan blue exclusion and parallel estimation of lactate production from 5 mM glucose.
Lactate was measured in the incubation medium by a spectrophotometric assay in which lactate dehydrogenase (Boehringer — EC 1.1.1.27) catalysed the reduction of NAD to NADH, which was subsequently measured at 340 nm.
Both 5-ASA and Ac-ASA were kindly supplied by Pharmacia AB, Uppsala, Sweden, and were prepared as neutral solutions.
INCUBATION WITH 5-ASA
Aliquots (2 ml) of cell suspension were incubated, in duplicate or triplicate, with 0.1 mM 5-ASA and 5 mM glucose for one hour at 37°C in a shaking water bath (at 70–80 oscillations/ minute).
The incubation was terminated by rapid centrifugation, following which the supernatant was analysed for the presence of Ac-ASA by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).
Intracellular 5-ASA and Ac-ASA were measured by resuspending the cell pellet in 1 ml 0.05 M phosphate buffer, and disrupting it ultrasonically by six, 5 second bursts using an ultrasonicator (MSE).
Control experiments were performed to assess the ability of the Krebs-Henseleit saline, and also the supernatant of a cell suspension, to acetylate 5-ASA.
It has previously been shown that there is no acetyltransferase enzyme activity in the epithelial cell membrane.
The intracellular and extracellular production of Ac-ASA was therefore deemed to be the result of 5-ASA uptake and subsequent metabolism — that is, equivalent to 5-ASA uptake.
INCUBATION WITH AC-ASA
Aliquots (2 ml) of cell suspension were incubated, in duplicate or triplicate, with either 0.1 mM or 1.0 mM Ac-ASA and 5 mM glucose for one or two hours at 37°C in the shaking water bath.
After incubation, the suspension was rapidly centrifuged and the supernatant removed.
The cell pellets were washed three times in phosphate buffered saline (PBS)(2 ml) to remove any adherent drug before being resuspended in 1 ml 0.05 M phosphate buffer.
This suspension was disrupted ultrasonically by six, 5 second bursts using an ultrasonicator (MSE), then centrifuged at high speed for five minutes, thus allowing the intracellular drug content to be measured.
The supernatants were filtered and analysed for the presence of Ac-ASa and 5-ASA by an HPLC method.
In additon, the washings were stored and analysed for drug content by the same method.
The dry weight was calculated by passing a known volume of cell suspension through a glass fibre filter paper (Whatman) over suction (Buchner flask) and comparing this with the weight of filter paper plus the same volume of buffer after overnight drying at 120°C.
TIME COURSE OF AC-ASA UPTAKE
The time course of Ac-ASA uptake was investigated to try to differentiate between true uptake and simple entrainment of drug in the glycocalyx.
Identical flasks containing cell suspension, 5 mM glucose, and 0.1 mM 5-ASA were therefore prepared and the reactions stopped by centrifugation at time intervals ranging from 0 to 120 minutes.
The samples were treated as above.
WASHING EXPERIMENTS
Washing experiments were performed to try to determine whether the drug was being removed from the outside of the cell or being leeched out from the inside.
Initially, the third wash was analysed for the presence of Ac-ASA.
This yielded amounts of Ac-ASA up to 30% of the level subsequently found inside the cells.
The number of routine washes was therefore increased.
After incubation of 2 ml cell suspensions as above in identical flasks, up to six serial washes were undertaken, using 2 ml PBS, with HPLC analysis of all the washings.
In addition, apparent intracellular drug concentrations were estimated after each of the washes by ultrasonic disruption of the pellet in 0.05 M phosphate buffer, as above.
Results
UPTAKE OF AC-ASA
Figure 1 shows the production of lactate from 5 mM glucose over a three hour period (mean of four experiments).
Production remains linear over this time suggesting good viability, and all experiments were completed within a two hour incubation period.
Trypan blue exclusion was consistently >.
There was no relationship between lactate production and 5-ASA/Ac-ASA uptake.
The average uptake of Ac-ASA by the intact cells in one hour was 34.3 (17.5–48.3) nmol/g dry weight (n=6, mean (range)) for 0.1 mM, and 481.2 (419.2–543.1) nmol/g dry weight (n=2) for 1 mM.
In those experiments in which Ac-ASA uptake was measured at both one hourand two hours (n=3, mean (range)), the results were 30.7 (17.5–38.3) nmol/g and 36.4 (20.7–47.1) nmol/g respectively, both at an incubation concentration of 0.1 mM Ac-ASA.
Figures 2 and 3 show the time course of Ac-ASA uptake over two hours for both concentrations of drug (0.1 mM and 1.0 mM) in two single experiments.
As can be seen, uptake is linear after an initial high value.
This may represent an initial rapid drug adherence to the cell surface followed by linear true drug uptake, and this is confirmed in Figure 4 which shows a further time-course experiment with analysis of intracellular Ac-ASA at earlier time periods, including time 0 (immediately on addition of Ac-ASA).
Uptake is again linear, but even at time 0 there are significant quanities of apparent intracellular Ac-ASA.
This seems unlikely to represent true uptake into the cell.
When serial washings were analysed for the presence of Ac-ASA, there was an exponential fall in concentration, compatible with removal of drug from the cell surface (Fig 5).
In a pair of experiments designed to determine the amount of Ac-ASA remaining intracellularly after up to six washings, the amount of Ac-ASA present intracellularly stayed remarkably constant, following an initial drop which probably represents the removal of major surface contamination (Fig 6).
In order to compare the uptake of Ac-ASA with that of 5-ASA, the rate of uptake of Ac-ASA over one hour has to be derived.
This is because the apparent uptake at one hour cannot be taken to be the true uptake in view of the high level at time 0, which must represent adherence to the cell wall (Fig 4).
If the mean levels for one hour and two hours are plotted, then a line intersecting the two points can be taken back to the y-axis (Fig 7) and the hourly uptake calculated from the slope, thus:
UPTAKE OF 5-ASA
The uptake of 5-ASA by the intact cells has to be assumed to be equal to the amount of Ac-ASA produced and detected both extracellularly and intracellularly.
This is because acetylation takes place rapidly on the entry of 5-ASA into the cell and no unchanged 5-ASA can be detected intracellularly.
As it has previously been shown that there is no enzyme activity in either the supernatant or the brush border, the drug must be absorbed before it is acetylated.
The Table shows the amount of Ac-ASA detected, both intracellularly and extracellularly, after incubation of intact cells with 0.1 mM 5-ASA (n=4).
There is a marked discrepancy between the total production of Ac-ASA, representing 5-ASA uptake (160.5 nmol/g dry weight) and uptake of Ac-ASA itself (5.75 nmol/g dry weight).
Even if one assumed the uptake of Ac-ASA to be the total measured drug, including the adherent component (30.7 nmol/g dry weight), it would still be significantly inferior to the uptake of 5-ASA.
Discussion
There seems little doubt now that 5-ASA is the active moiety of sulphasalazine in ulcerative colitis.
After nearly 50 years of use, however, its mechanism of action remains obscure.
In view of its poor absorption and high local concentration, its site of action seems likely to be within the bowel wall.
It has been shown that 5-ASA can be detected in the colonic mucosa, but only in its acetylated form.
The colonic epithelial cell is probably the major site of metabolism of 5-ASA and because the N-acetyltransferase enzyme is cytosolic, 5-ASA must be taken up into the cell before acetylation.
It has been suggested that acetylation probably inactivates the drug, as is often the case with hepatic metabolism of drugs.
However, if the drug exerts its action intramucosally after absorption, as seems likely, it is doubtful whether sufficient unchanged 5-ASA would be present within the mucosa to have any effect.
Ac-ASA certainly has some pharmacological effects which may be important as a proposed mechanism of action for the drug.
Willoughby et al found Ac-ASA to be significantly better than placebo when given rectally to patients with active proctitis.
Since then, however, two further studies have shown it to be no better than placebo and inferior to 5-ASA.
Methodological differences may partly account for the discrepancy between these studies.
In contrast to the two European studies, the Oxford study included 23 out of the 40 patients with sigmoidoscopic activity only.
They were otherwise in clinical remission.
Another possible reason for this discrepancy may be that Ac-ASA is less well taken up by the colonic mucosa than 5-ASA, resulting in subtherapeutic mucosal concentrations.
Indirect evidence for this hypothesis comes from a recent study where urinary and faecal concentrations of 5-ASA and Ac-ASA were measured after taking both 5-ASA and Ac-ASA by either the oral or rectal route in human volunteers.
Urinary recovery of drug was significantly greater for 5-ASA than Ac-ASA with both routes of administration and significantly more Ac-ASA was discharged in the faeces.
This suggests a discrepancy in absorption in both the large and small bowel.
In the rat small intestine, many drugs are acetylated and excreted into the lumen.
A dose dependent excretion of the N-acetyl forms suggests the potential saturation of N-acetyltransferase activity.
It has also been found in the rat that intestinal absorption rates of N-acetyl derivatives are much slower than those of the parent drug.
There is certainly no suggestion that 5-ASA is formed from the administered Ac-ASA, as no 5-ASA is detected in the urine or faeces after administrationof Ac-ASA, and in two volunteers, when deuterated Ac-ASA was administered rectally, there was no de-acetylation and re-acetylation noted.
In this study, we have used the isolated human colonic epithelial cell as a means of comparing the uptake of Ac-ASA with that of 5-ASA.
The colonic epithelial cell is probably the major site of acetylation of 5-ASA when the drug is delivered in an appropriate way to the colon, and as the N-acetyltransferase enzyme is cytosolic, 5-ASA must be taken up by the epithelial cell before acetylation can take place.
Acetylation takes place so rapidly the completely that no unchanged 5-ASA can be detected inside the cell.
The uptake of 5-ASA must therefore be assumed to be equivalent to the production of Ac-ASA over time.
This study shows that the uptake of Ac-ASA is significantly less than that of 5-ASA.
There is an initial high adherence of Ac-ASA to the cell matrix followed by a linear rise which represents true uptake by the cell.
Even if one included this initial adherence, however, there would still be a significant difference in uptake, but the derived uptake is a mere fraction of that of 5-ASA.
The use of this experimental design cannot exclude the possibility that Ac-ASA is pushed back out of the cell after its uptake, as a small excretion rate could not be detected in the presence of such large extracellular quantities.
It seems unlikely that significant excretion would occur against such a large concentration gradient unless the drug is actively transported out of the cell.
No information is available on this.
This direct comparison confirms the results of Van Hogezand's indirect study which suggested that Ac-ASA was less well absorbed by the intestinal mucosa, and shows that the colonic epithelial cell handles these compounds in a similar way to the rat small intestine.
This study therefore provides a plausible reason why Ac-ASA is probably ineffective clinically when given in that form.
This is unfortunate as Ac-ASA is a much more stable compound that 5-ASA and could therefore be much more easily prepared for widespread commercial use.
There is, as yet, no evidence that Ac-ASA inside the mucosa is inactive, and indeed there are good theoretical reasons for assuming that the drug present in the highest local concentration is the active one.
It is therefore still important to examine the role of Ac-ASA in any in vitro experiment desiend to test the mechanism of action of 5-ASA and to bear in mind the differential absorption of these drugs when an intact cell system is used.
Location of the lower oesophageal sphincter and the squamous columnar mucosal junction in 109 healthy controls and 778 patients with different degrees of endoscopic oesophagitis
Abstract
In this study the location of the lower oesophageal sphincter measured by manometry and the location of the squamous columnar junction measured by endoscopy were determined in 109 healthy controls and 778 patients with different degrees of endoscopic oesophagitis.
No significant differences in the prevalence and severity of the heartburn and regurgitation were observed when different degrees of oesophagitis were compared but dysphagia was more common and severe in patients with complicated Barrett's oesophagus (p).
This group also showed a male predominance and older age compared with other groups.
The total length of the oesophagus, measured by the location of the distal end of the lower oesophageal sphincter was similar in all patients; however, the location of the squamous columnar junction extended more proximally and was related to the increasing severity of endoscopic oesophagitis.
The manometric defects at the cardia were more frequent in severe oesophagitis (p).
These results suggest that, during the course of oesophagitis, the squamous columnar junction is displaced proximally.
This displacement is limited to the mucosa, however, and does not involve the muscular layer, because the lower oesophageal sphincter undergoes no dislocation.
There is controversy over the precise location of the true oesophagogastric junction or ‘cardia’ in patients with reflux oesophagitis.
For many endoscopists, the squamous columnar junction is considered as the representative of the oesophagogastric junction and the segment distal to it is frequently thought of as a ‘hiatal hernia’, because of the presence of gastric mucosa.
For radiologists, it is difficult to be precise because when contrast medium is passing through the distal oesophagus, the lower oesophageal sphincter is relaxed and it is impossible to define.
For gastroenterologists and surgeons who perform manometric studies, the distal end of the lowr oesophageal sphincter, which has an abdominal portion of 1 to 2 cm long, is the true oesophagogastric junction.
These different criteria have led to confusion in the diagnosis of the tubular or dilated segment distal to the mucosal junction.
Is it a hiatal hernia or a portion of oesophagus lined by columnar epithelium?
This discrepancy is in part, caused by the many reports in which patients with reflux oesophagitis are taken as a single group, without separating them according to the degree or severity of the injury to the oesophageal mucosa, and in part by the lack of manometric studies in the same patients.
The purpose of the present prospective study was to analyse 109 controls and 778 patients with reflux oesophagitis, who were divided into five categories according to the endoscopic findings, evaluating the following parameters:(a) symptoms of gastrooesophageal reflux;(b) determination of the location of the squamous columnar junction by endoscopy, and the location of the distal and proximal end of the lower oesophageal sphincter by manometry, and (c) to determine the characteristics of the mechanical defects of the lower oesophageal sphincter in all groups.
Methods
SUBJECTS STUDIED
This prospective study was carried out between January 1985 and December 1990.
Two groups were analysed:
(a) Control subjects
One hundred and nine adult asymptomatic cases without any abdominal complaints (68 women, with a mean age of 45.6 years), who agreed to participate in this study, were selected from an original group of 120 controls; 11 subjects refused to participate in the investigation.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was normal in all patients, and a manometric test was performed in all of them.
(b) Reflux oesophagitis patients
Seven hundred and seventy eight patients with a clear long standing history (at least three years) of gastrooesophageal reflux symptoms.
This period enabled us to be sure that a single patient had a chronic and persistent history of symptoms of gastrooesophageal reflux.
There were 433 women, with a mean age of 47.2 years (range 17 to 84).
Eight patients with adenocarcinoma in Barrett's oesophagus were excluded as well as 22 patients with a large, fixed intrathoracic hiatal hernia and three cases with paraoesophageal hernia.
CLINICAL ANALYSIS
A careful clinical questionnaire was defined at the beginning of this study, each patient being asked about the presence of heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia.
The severity of these symptoms was graded into four categories: absent, mild, moderate, or severe, according to De Meester et al 's criteria.
These symptoms were assessed by three authors who had no previous knowledge of the endoscopic or manometric results.
UPPER ENDOSCOPY
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed with the Olympus fibrescopes by two of the authors who did not know the manometric findings.
The severity of oesophagitis was classified into five categories according to Savary's criteria:(a) Grade 0: absence of oesophageal injury;(b) Grade I: presence of few isolated erosions;(c) Grade II: presence of multiple longitudinal or confluent erosions;(d) Grade III: presence of Barrett's oesophagus or columnar lined distal oesophagus, diagnosed by endoscopy when the squamous columnar mucosal function was seen 3 cm or more proximal to the endoscopic location of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
This finding was considered as an ‘uncomplicated’ Barrett's oesophagus. (e) Grade IV: presence of a peptic ulcer or stricture of the oesophagus, located at the level or distal to the mucosal junction, always in the presence of a Barrett's oesophagus.
This latter group was considered as ‘complicated’ Barrett's oesophagus.
The precise location of the squamous columnar mucosal junction, measured in centimetres from the incisors, was carefully defined both at the beginning and at the end of the endoscopy.
In all patients with Barrett's oesophagus (Grade III and IV) serial biopsies distal to the mucosal junction (3 or 4) and proximal (1 or 2) were taken to confirm the type of epithelium lining of the distal oesophagus and to exclude adenocarcinoma.
The endoscopic findings of ‘erythema’, ‘oedema’, ‘friability’, ‘hyperaemia’, ‘dilated cardia’, ‘endoscopic reflux’, which agree with Savary and Tytgat, were not considered as evidence of oesophagitis, because they are too subjective to be evaluated and were not reproducible from one observer to another.
In order to avoid any confusion, patients with small or long finger like projections of gastric mucosa or ‘creeping substitution’ were completely excluded from the present study and only the circumferential extension of gastric mucosa, which may be regular or irregular, was considered as Barrett's oesophagus.
OESOPHAGEAL MANOMETRY
This test was carried out after 12 hours fasting with patients in the supine position.
The manometric assembly consisted of three polyvinyl tubes bounded together in such a way that the 0.8 mm side hole was 5 cm apart from each other(Arndorfer Medical Specialties, Milwaukee, USA).
The tubes had an internal diameter of 1.1 mm and were constantly perfused with distilled water from a pneumohydraulic pump (Arndorfer Medical Specialities) at a rate of 0.5 ml/min.
Each catheter was connected to a pressure transducer (Statham p23Dd, Hato Rey, Puerto Rico) and to a direct writer Gilson Polygraph (M4PM).
Before each test, the pressure transducers and the polygraph were calibrated and the sudden occlusion of the side hole produced an increase of 200 mm Hg at one second.
The recording catheter was introduced by the mouth (in order to compare results with endoscopy) after slight pharyngeal anaesthesia, into the stomach.
This way, the distances from the incisors were comparable with endoscopic findings.
The end expiratory fundic pressure was taken as zero reference, and all values were expressed in mm Hg.
Three manometric characteristics of the lower oesophageal sphincter were determined: resting pressure, total length and abdominal length.
This latter measurement was taken from the distal end of the sphincter up to the respiratory inversion point, which is the level at which the end expiratory pressure changes from a positive to a negative deflection.
In each case, two rapid and two slow pull throughs were obtained.
The resting pressure was taken as the mean pressure of all measurements in each of the three catheters — that is, six determinations in each patient.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
For statistical significance the variance analysis and the Student's t test were used and p values less than 0.05 were considered as significant.
All values are expressed in mean standard deviation (SD).
Results
The main epidemiological features of patients with reflux oesophagitis are shown in Table I. From the 778 patients, 43% showed no macroscopic evidences of endoscopic oesophagitis, while 28.6% had a Barrett's oesophagus of different degrees.
The mean age increased together with the severity of the oesophageal injury.
Patients with oesophagitis Grade 0, I, and II were significantly younger than patients with Barrett's oesophagus (p).
Patients with uncomplicated Barrett's syndrome were also significantly younger than patients Grade IV (p) with complicated Barrett's oesophagus.
The sex relationship was also different.
Parients with oesophagitis Grade 0, I, and II showed a female predominance, while patients with a complicated Barrett's oesophagus (Grade IV) revealed a male predominance (p).
The duration of symptoms did not show any significant differences among the different groups, although a tendency to a shorter duration of symptoms was noted in patients with oesophagitis Grade 0, I, and II.
The prevalence of symptoms of gastrooesophageal reflux is shown in Figure 1.
There were no significant differences in the prevalence of heartburn and regurgitation among the different degrees of endoscopic oesophagitis.
Only dysphagia was significantly more frequent in patients with complicated Barrett's oesophagus with ulcer or stricture (Grade IV) compared with the rest (p).
Moderate and severe dysphagia, however, were significantly more frequent in patients Grade IV (p).
The manometric features of the lower oesophageal sphincter are shown in Table II.
Control subjects showed significantly higher resting lower oesophageal sphincter pressure compared with all degrees of oesophagitis (p).
Patients with oesophagitis Grade 0, I, and II had significantly higher sphincter pressure than patients with oesophagitis Grade III and IV (p).
On the contrary, patients with oesophagitis Grade 0, I, and II showed no differences as well as patients Grade III or IV.
The total length of the lower oesophageal sphincter was similar in controls and in patients with oesophagitis 0, I, and II, but significantly longer than in patients with oesophagitis Grade III and IV (p).
The abdominal portion of the lower oesophageal sphincter was significantly longer in controls compared with all patients (p).
In patients with oesophagitis Grade 0 and I, it was significantly longer than in the other groups (p).
On the other hand, patients with oesophagitis Grade II, III, and IV had similar lengths of the abdominal portion of the distal sphincter.
The percentage of cases with resting pressure below 12 mm Hg (lower limit of our normal values) is also shown in this Table.
In controls, this value was 6.4% which increased to more than 50% in patients with oesophagitis Grade 0, I, and II, and to more than 70% in patients Grade III and IV.
The individual values for resting sphincter pressure are shown in Figure 2.
A considerable overlap of values can be seen in controls and patients with oesophagitis Grade 0 and I, as well as among all oesophagitis groups.
The location of the lower oesophageal sphincter detected by manometry and the location of the squamous columnar mucosal junction seen by endoscopy are shown in Table III.
No significant differences in the location of the distal limit of the lower oesophageal sphincter were shown in any group.
The location of the mucosal junction, however, was significantly different in controls compared with all degrees of endoscopic oesophagitis (p).
Patients with oesophagitis Grade 0 were also significantly different from all others (p) as well as oesophagitis Grade I and II compared with Grades III and IV (p).
These latter groups had similar location of mucosal junction.
The distances between the idstal or proximal end of the lower oesophageal sphincter and the mucosal junction are observed in Table IV.
In controls the mucosal junction is located in the midportion of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
In patients with oesophagitis Grade 0, I, and II, this mucosal junction is very close or located at the proximal limit of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
Patients with Barrett's oesophagus with oesophagitis Grade III or IV had the mucosal junction several centimetres proximal to the distal or proximal end of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
The mean values for lower oesophageal sphincter pressure in patients with limited Barrett's oesophagus (mucosal junction located distal to 32 cm from the incisors) or extended Barrett's oesophagus (mucosal junction located proximal to 32 cm from the incisors) are shown in Figure 3.
These values were taken from to the criteria proposed by Iascone et al .
There is a significant difference among both groups (p).
The prevalence of mechanically defective cardia, defined as lower oesophageal sphincter pressure equal or below 6 mm Hg, an abdominal portion of the lower oesophageal sphincter with a length equal or shorter than 9 mm, and a total length of the distal sphincter equal or shorter than 20 mm, or a combination of these three parameters are shown in Table V. We also calculated the percentage of cases with absence of lower oesophageal sphincter pressure and the percentage of cases with absence of the abdominal portion of lower oesophageal sphincter.
There is a progressive increase in the percentage of cases with defective cardia in all parameters evaluated according to the severity of endoscopic oesophagitis, which is significantly more pronounced in patients with oesophagitis Grade III and IV (p).
The combination of the three parameters (sphincter pressure equal or less than 6 mm Hg, total length of lower oesophageal sphincter equal or less than 20 mm and abdominal portion of the lower oesophageal sphincter with a length equal or less than 9 mm) demonstrated in controls that this situation was not observed.
In patients with oesophagitis Grade 0, I, and II, the percentage varies between 7 and 11%, which increased to 28% or 29% in patients with severe oesophagitis (p).
The summary of endoscopic and manometrical findings in controls and patients with reflux oesophagitis is shown in Figure 4 where the mucosal junction seen at endoscopy is located more proximal according to the increasing severity of reflux oesophagitis.
The lower oesophageal sphincter, however, remains in a similar location independent of the oesophageal damage.
The abdominal portion of the lower oesophageal sphincter is shorter in patients with more severe oesophagitis.
Discussion
The present prospective study was designed to evaluate all patients with symptoms of gastrooesophageal reflux, who were submitted to a clinical assessment over a period of time.
Few studies have tried to answer the question of whether clinical and demographic criteria can help to distinguish patients with gastrooesophageal symptoms from patients complicated with Barrett's oesophagus.
Two reports found no differences in the mean frequency of heartburn and regurgitation, and a higher prevalence of dysphagia in the Barrett's group compared with reflux oesophagitis patients.
The number of cases, however, was too small (22 v 31 cases respectively).
Thus, in our opinion reflux symptoms are of no value in distinguishing Barrett's oesophagus patients from patients with reflux oesophagitis, and only the presence of a severe dysphagia may indicate Barrett's metaplasia.
The age and sex distribution was also a significant finding in our study.
Patients without endoscopic oesophagitis or with the presence of erosions at the distal oesophagus are younger, usually in the fourth decade and mainly women, while patients with Barrett's oesophagus (uncomplicated and complicated with ulcer and/ or stricture) are significantly older (usually in the fifth decade) and mainly men.
This latter finding has been point out by some authors, noting that the mean age at the time of the diagnosis of Barrett's oesophagus was about 55 years, which is the same as the value found in our study.
Also male predominance was particularly significant in these cases.
What makes the difference between these reports and our study, however, is the fact that we clearly divided patients with gastrooesophageal reflux from those with endoscopic oesophagitis into different degrees or categories and in the number of patients evaluated, which is less than 50 in all these studies.
The definition of a Barrett's oesophagus, although it seems very simple (distal oesophagus lined by metaplastic gastric or columnar epithelium), is subject to much controversy.
Should it be an endoscopic, radiological, pathological or manometric definition?
The point is to define the precise junction between the oesophagus and the stomach, which unfortunately is quite difficult.
Anatomical landmarks are not clinically applicable.
As it has been shown in the present study, the normal squamous columnar junction does not correspond to the distal end of the lower oesophageal sphincter, and it is located in the midportion of this sphincter, at a mean distance of 17 mm from its distal end measured by manometry.
Radiological studies are not able to precisely define the muscular end of the oesophagus and when a Barrett's oesophagus is present with gastric mucosa lining the distal oesophagus, it can easily be mistaken for a hiatal hernia.
Endoscopy in the diagnosis of a Barrett's oesophagus is more precise, but when the distal oesophagus is dilated, which is a usual finding in these cases and a hypotensive lower oesophageal sphincter is present, it is more difficult to detect the true oesophagogastric junction or cardia.
In the light of our results, we believe that the best clinical approach for an acute diagnosis of a Barrett's oesophagus is the combination of endoscopic and manometric studies; but how accurate is it to compare distances measured by manometry from distances measured by endoscopy?
The tubes have a different stiffness and it is important to be able to measure distances within several milimetres.
This may be a difficult question to answer, and indeed these techniques may not be comparable, unless one could simultaneously measure function and visualise the squamous columnar junction, which is very difficult.
In a previous study, however, were determined the efficacy of the manometric measurements, comparing preoperative and intraoperative determinations.
Under direct vision of the oesophagogastric junction and simultaneous manometric measurements, it is possible to observe a very similar correlation among the location of the lower oesophageal sphincter measured before operation with the values measured during surgery and under a direct observation.
Besides, in six patients simultaneous endoscopy during surgery was performed in order to localise the squamous columnar junction.
A very good correlation was observed with preoperative studies.
The distal end of the lower oesophageal sphincter represents the true oesophagogastric junction or cardia and if the squamous columnar junction is located 3 cm or more proximal to the proximal limit of this sphincter, a true Barrett's oesophagus is present, which has been our criteria.
This concept has two main difficulties: manometric studies should be performed in these patients, which is not frequently done and secondly, initial or developing Barrett's oesophagus is not considered in this group.
We agree with Bremner et al and with Spechler and Goyal et al , who stated that the established Barrett's oesophagus represents the true cases and that ‘creeping substitute’ or developing Barrett's oesophagus should be carefully followed up in order to determine the progression or not of these lesions.
Manometric studies in patients with Barrett's oesophagus are few and the comparison with patients with gastrooesophageal reflux are less frequent.
Sarr et al compared objective tests of oesophageal function in 318 patients with symptoms of gastrooesophageal reflux with 44 patients with Barrett's oesophagus undergoing endoscopy.
From the reflux group, manometry was performed in only 60 cases showing a low distal oesophageal sphincter pressure in 53% of them (below 10 mm Hg), while in 11 patients with Barrett's oesophagus, this sphincter was below 10 mm Hg in all.
Mann et al compared reflux oesophagitis patients as a single group against Barrett's patients.
In their study, mean lower oesophageal sphincter pressure was 19 mm Hg v 11 mm in Barrett's patients.
No mention of the control group was made.
Gillen et al compared 25 patients with oesophagitis in a single group with 24 Barrett's oesophagus patients.
No significant differences in sphincter pressure were noted.
The best studies have been carried out by De Meester et al .
They compared controls, patients with oesophagitis Grade I or II and patients with Barrett's oesophagus, finding very similar results to those found in our study.
Patients with Barrett's oesophagus had much lower oesophageal sphincter pressure, but a similar length of the sphincter exposed to the abdomen than patients with oesophagitis.
Both groups had significantly lower oesophageal sphincter pressure and shorter abdominal length than controls, and cases with extended Barrett's oesophagus had lower sphincter pressure than cases with limited Barrett's oesophagus.
In a further analysis, they determined the prevalence of the mechanically defective cardia, defined by manometric parameters.
They noted an increase in these alterations according to the progression of oesophageal injury.
We have found similar results in our group of reflux oesophagitis patients and Barrett's oesophagus cases.
It is interesting to point out that we found in 50% of patients with gastrooesophageal reflux without oesophagitis (Grade 0), a hypotensive lower oesophageal sphincter which suggests that the decrease in sphincter pressure comes before the inflammatory or tissue damage.
Therefore, in the present study we have shown that the total length of the oesophagus, measured by the location of the distal end of the lower oesophageal sphincter is similar in all patients, but the squamous columnar junction extends more proximally parallel to the increasing severity of the endoscopic oesophagitis.
This finding is closely related to the frequent problem caused by the radiological and endoscopical diagnosis of a ‘small hiatal hernia’.
As it can be noted in the present study, we avoided the use of this terminology.
It must be clear that the squamous columnar junction does not represent the true oesophagogastric junction or cardia, as it has been previously demonstrated by simultaneous determination of potential difference change and manometric studies.
This is why the distal ring noted by some authors is only a mucosal stricture, which marks only the mucosal junction and not the true muscular oesophagogastric junction as observed by Reinaldo and Gahagan. and Harris.
Therefore, it may not represent a hiatal hernia as reported by Lauren and Cauthorne, who showed that these mucosal rings occur near the upper margin of the lower oesophageal sphincter.
We believe that the diagnosis of hiatal hernia has been over exagerated and only manometric studies combined with precise endoscopic evaluation can say whether we are dealing with a true hiatal hernia or a small initial Barrett's oesophagus.
Results of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy of gall bladder stones in 693 patients: a plea for restriction to solitary radiolucent stones
Abstract
During a period of 24 months 693 consecutive patients with symptomatic gall bladder stones (526 men; mean age 50 years, range 18–89) were treated by extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy with a Piezolith 2300.
The procedure was carried out on an outpatient basis without analgesics or sedatives.
Concomitant chemolitholytic treatment (ursodeoxycholic and chenodeoxycholic acid 7.5 mg/kg/day each) was administered until three months after total fragment clearance for a maximum therapy period of 1.5 years.
In 601 patients with radiolucent stones complete clearance of all fragments was obtained after three, six, 12, and 18 months in respectively 20, 41, 64, and 78%.
Actuarial analysis of the subgroups according to the stone mass (size and number) selected an ideal patient population with solitary stones less than 20 mm diameter (84% stone free after one year).
The results are significantly less good when the greater the number of stones or their maximal diameter increases.
Treatment was interrupted in 3.6% of the patients.
In 90 sludge or fragments remain present.
Twenty five patients were lost to follow up for non-biliary reasons.
Stone recurrence was 5.7% at one year and was observed both in patients with solitary and multiple stones.
A cost effectiveness analysis suggests that laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the most effective and economic solution, although extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for solitary radiolucent stones less than 2 cm is cheaper than conventional cholecystectomy.
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for multiple stones is the most expensive and least effective option.
Since the initial report of the Munich group of treatment of gall bladder stones by extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL), this treatment has widely captured the attention of the medical literature.
Because of the advances in science and technology of lithotripter techniques, it was presented as a simpler alternative to surgery, and the piezoceramic device proved very effective.
In the mean time laparoscopic cholecystectomy has rapidly become a popular method.
The aim of this study is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy in the treatment of gall bladder stones and to compare in a cost effectiveness analysis these results with the conventional and new surgical techniques.
Methods
PATIENT SELECTION
The criteria for selection to this study were those previously described by the Munich Study Group (Table I) with the exception of the stone characteristics.
Gall bladder function was demonstrated by oral cholecystography.
Pretreatment investigations included a history and full physical examination, blood chemistry evaluation (clotting parameters, amylase, alkaline phosphatase and aminotransferase concentrations, and a complete blood cell count), abdominal ultrasonography (Ultramark 8, ATL), and oral cholecystography.
From December 1988 to January 1990, 693 patients (601 with radiolucent stones and 92 with a calcified nucleus and/or rim) were treated.
The characteristics of both groups are listed in Table II.
Stone number and diameter were assessed by radiography.
Above three stones the number was not specified because this had no proven value.
The mean (SD) diameter of the largest stone was 17.4 (7.5) mm in the case of solitary calculus and 12.6 (7.7) mm in the case of multiple stones (p).
The influence of possible bias on the success of lithotripsy was assessed by relating body weight to body length expressed by the body mass index.
LITHOTRIPSY AND ADJUVANT THERAPY WITH BILIARY ACIDS
All patients were treated with the Piezolith 2300, Wolf, which has a bowl shaped configuration and bears a mosaic of 3000 ceramic elements on its concave surface.
The underlying physical principle and the shock wave machine have been described elsewhere.
The focal area has a width of 3 mm and a length of 10 mm.
The maximal peak pressure in the area was 1200 bar before June 1989 and 1400 bar thereafter, when the upgraded dish array was installed.
Ultrasound was used for localisation of the stones, constant monitoring of fragmentation and refocusing of the larger fragments during lithotripsy.
The pulse frequency was set at 1.5 Hz.
The number of shock wave discharges administered per session was limited to 3000, based on experimental studies and because a higher number of discharges leads to clouding of the gall bladder with resultant suboptimal ultrasonographic visualisation caused by cavitation and fragmentation effects (cloud of dust phenomenon).
A maximum of five retreatments were scheduled when fragments larger than 5 mm were visible by ultrasonography four weeks after the previous lithotripsy session.
All the patients were treated in the prone position, with the shock waves entering from the ventral side.
The procedure was on an outpatient basis without administration of analgesic or sedative medication.
The interval between two consecutive sessions varied between four and six weeks.
Adjuvant chemolitholytic medication was given to obtain complete dissolution of the fragments.
Chenodeoxycholic acid and ursodeoxycholic acid, 7.5 mg/kg body weight, administered daily as a single dose at bedtime, were started 10 days before the first lithotripsy session and continued until the gall bladder was stone free for three months.
Compliance with the oral treatment was assessed by questioning at the control or at follow up.
FOLLOW UP
The predefined outcome for the evaluation of efficacy was the complete disappearance of gall stones, assessed with two consecutive ultrasound examinations (Ultramark 8, annular array, probe 5 Mhz, ATL) within three months both in the supine and upright positions.
The start of the follow up period was the date of the first lithotripsy session.
The stone free date corresponds to the first time the gall bladder was considered to be free of fragments and sludge.
The patients were evaluated one month after the first lithotripsy session.
If the fragments were larger than 5 mm a second session was immediately undertaken.
If the fragments were smaller than 5 mm chemolitholytic therapy was continued and the patients were evaluated at three months interval until stone free.
This evaluation consisted of a medical history and an ultrasonography of the gall bladder and the common bile duct.
Once stone free the patients were evaluated at six months interval.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are expressed as means (SD) or medians.
The statistical significance of differences was assessed with the Student's t test, Wilcoxon's test, the χ 2 test or the log-rank test.
p Values less than 0.05 were regarded as significant.
An actuarial analysis of the probability of disappearance of all fragments was performed according to the life table method of Kaplan and Meier.
Results
STONE FRAGMENTATION
In the group of 601 patients with radiolucent lithiasis 1801 lithotripsy sessions were applied.
Fragmentation of stones to particles of 5 mm or less was obtained after 3.0 (1.5) sessions: 2.8 (1.5) sessions for solitary stones and 3.3 (1.4) sessions for multiple stones (p).
For solitary stones the number of sessions for complete fragmentation was significantly different for stones less than 20 mm versus stones of 20 to 30 mm (p) or stones >mm (p).
Only one session was necessary to disintegrate 34% of solitary stones smaller than 20 mm, 11% of the solitary stones between 21 and 30 mm, and 14% of the multiple stones.
In contrast, none of the single stones larger than 30 mm was fragmented after the first session.
The number of sessions necessary to obtain a complete fragmentation is significantly dependent of the number and size of the stones and the presence of calcifications (pversus radiolucent stones)(Table III).
Body mass index, sex, and age revealed no statistical significant difference.
STONE CLEARANCE
Complete stone disappearance calculated by actuarial analysis is shown in Table III and the Figure.
The rate of complete clearance increased with time in all groups of patients.
Pairwise comparison of the stone free rate revealed significance between single and multiple stones, lucent versus calcified stones, and solitary stones less than 20 mm versus solitary stones of 20 to 30 mm or <mm.
Sex, body mass index, and age had no significant influence.
Forty seven per cent of the patients with stones with a calcified rim and 33% of those with a calcified nucleus were stone free after one year.
The stone free patients with radiolucent stones had a median duration of therapy of 124 days (95 days for patients with solitary stones less than 20 mm) and 216 days for patients with calcified stones.
SIDE EFFECTS
Lithotripsy caused one or more adverse effects in 50% of the patients.
Minor side effects during the procedure were right upper quadrant discomfort (7%) responding to a slight reduction of the intensity, vagal reaction (1%), and skin petechiae (5%).
In one patient an acute abdominal pain syndrome caused by a haematoma in the gall bladder wall necessitated the interruption of the treatment.
In the days or weeks after the lithotripsy 36% of the patients had attacks of biliary pain.
In the majority, pain responded well to minor analgesics.
Laboratory and clinical signs of mild pancreatitis occurred in two patients (0.3%).
Five per cent complained of diarrhoea that resolved after a slight reduction of the bile acid medication.
Major side effects resulting in interruption of the treatment were uncontrolled biliary colics in 13 patients, cholecystitis in seven patients and acute pancreatitis in two patients.
Twenty five patients were lost to follow up.
FAILURES
Ninety patients were considered as failures after five sessions and chemolytic therapy for 18 months.
In one third of these patients the gall bladder became afunctional.
The variables indicating a favourable outcome are a diameter of less than 20 mm, a solitary stone, and the absence of calcifications.
The mean age, sex, body mass index, and skin distance were not significantly different.
RECURRENCES
Three hundred and thirty one stone free patients were evaluated after 12 months: stone recurrence was observed in 19 patients (5.7%).
No statistically significant influence of sex, body mass index, or age was seen at the early recurrence rate.
The initial stone mass did not influence the recurrence rate, however, when the patients with recurrence were analysed with regard to the initial number of stones, the rate of recurrence was 4.8% (eight of 166) in patients with solitary stones, 4.2% (two of 48) in patients with two stones, and 6.4% (seven of 110) in patients with more than three stones.
Discussion
Our results show that extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy with a piezo electric lithotripter, in combination with chemolitholytic medication for the dissolution of radiolucent gall stones in a functioning gall bladder, is an effective and safe treatment in selected groups of patients.
When the number of stones is limited, especially the group of solitary stones with a maximal diameter below 20 mm, the results are excellent with 84% of patients stone free after one year.
Number and diameter as indicators of the total stone mass seem to be important determinants with regard to complete stone disappearance.
Our results are comparable with those of the spark gap generator as reported by the Munich group.
In the majority of our patients, however, repeat lithotripsy sessions were necessary to obtain an acceptable fragmentation.
With the spark gap system a smaller number of shock waves seems necessary, most patients needing only one session.
This difference is probably because of the lower energy per pulse transmitted with the piezo electric system compared with the electrohydraulic one.
We extended the range of indications of the Munich group, and performed extracorporeal lithotripsy combined with oral bile acid dissolution in a group of patients with four or more than 25 radiolucent stones.
As expected, because of the larger stone mass, these patients needed more sessions and complete stone disappearance was slower: the success rate was 57% at one year.
In patients with partially calcified stones the success rate was lower.
Forty seven per cent of those with a calcified rim and 33% of those with a calcified nucleus were, however, stone free after one year.
Lithotripsy with the piezo electric generator Wolf 2300 is well tolerated, only 7% experienced local pain of moderate intensity during or immediately after the procedure.
Indeed, the piezo electric generator has a high pressure gain which implies that the peak pressure at the skin, where the beam enters the patient, is rather low.
This is why it can be performed on an outpatient basis, without administration of analgesic or sedative medication and this represents an important clinical advantage over the electrohydraulic technique of shock wave generation.
Good visualisation of the stones during lithotripsy is essential to optimise fragmentation, especially with the Wolf 2300 lithotriptor, the focusing area being small.
A suboptimal ultrasonographic localisation could explain less satisfactory results obtained in some other centres.
Therefore, previous ultrasound experience is recommended before starting with the Piezolith 2300.
The incidence of recurrent biliary colic is rather high.
In the majority of patients, however, the pain is of short duration and responds well to spasmolytic medication or minor analgesics.
Because only symptomatic patients were treated, it is difficult to distinguish biliary pain which occurs as part of the natural course of the disease from that caused by lithotripsy.
Other significant side effects were uncommon.
One third of the failures are caused by the development of an afunctional gall bladder which precludes the dissolution of the remaining small fragments.
The long term success of management of gall stones disease not involving the removal of the gall bladder is, however, confronted with the risk of gall stone recurrence as the defects leading to primary gall stone formation often persist.
In our patients stone recurrence was 5.7% at one year which is somewhat lower than the recurrence rate observed by the Munich group: 11% at one year and 15% at two years.
These percentages are lower than those reported in postdissolution trials.
To our surprise, we did not observe any influence of age, sex, and body mass index upon the success rate and the recurrence rate; even the initial number of stones apparently did not influence the recurrence rate, which is in contradiction with the postdissolution experience where the recurrence was higher in patients with multiple stones than with solitary stones.
Lasting success of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for biliary stones will depend on advances in secondary prevention.
Success of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy was mitigated by the increasing importance of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, and in comparing new techniques projected costs must be analysed.
In our country each lithotripsy session costs US$315 (£185); a medical treatment with 500 mg ursodeoxycholic acid and 500 mg chenodeoxycholic acid daily during one year costs US$886 (£517).
In estimating the cost of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, the failures and recurrences that eventually need surgery must be taken into consideration.
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for solitary stones with its 85% effectiveness at one year, two sessions of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, 15% failures and an estimated 30% recurrences in the long term (assuming that only half of them become symptomatic and therefore need treatment) will cost US$1970 (£1150).
For multiple stones, however, with at least three sessions, and 40% failures, the expected cost is US$2695 (£1570).
In our country the cost of a conventional cholecystectomy is estimated at US$2400 (£1400), the inability to work not taken into consideration.
Because of its shorter hospital stay, the cost to the community of laparoscopic cholecystectomy (with a 5% morbidity) can be estimated at US$1570 (£920).
Early resumption of normal activities is expected with this technique.
The cost of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy is strongly influenced by the stone number, volume, and characteristics.
Optimal results with least expenditure are obtained in patients with radiolucent solitary stones, less than 2 cm diameter, with a total cost comparing favourably with the conventional cholecystectomy.
Indiscriminate patient selection is in our opinion unwanted and extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy should be largely restricted to patients with solitary stones, as careful patient selection is the key to obtaining optimal results with the least expenditure.
This cost effectiveness analysis, however, suggests that overall laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the most economic therapeutic approach to the patient with symptomatic gall bladder stones.
Dietary calcium does not reduce experimental colorectal carcinogenesis after small bowel resection despite reducing cellular proliferation
Abstract
It has been proposed that colorectal carcinogenesis is accompanied by increased mucosal cell proliferation and that the converse may also apply.
To examine this thesis, the crypt cell production rate (CCPR) was measured in eight groups of rats (n=187) that had received 1,2 dimethylhydrazine, 70% small bowel resection, supplemental dietary calcium, or a combination of these.
Analysis of variance showed the following:(1) the CCPR decreased between the ileum and distal colon;(2) the CCPR decreased between 16 and 32 weeks;(3) dimethylhydrazine and small bowel resection increased the CCPR and calcium decreased the CCPR independently of one another;(4) the CCPR interacted with dimethylhydrazine x small bowel resection, calcium x dimethylhydrazine and interacted between the site of bowel and calcium, dimethylhydrazine, small bowel resection, and dimethylhydrazine x small bowel resection (p=0.014 to p).
The tumour yield was reduced by calcium in dimethylhydrazine treated animals () but was unaffected by calcium in dimethylhydrazine and small bowel resection treated animals despite significant differences in the CCPR.
An increase of the CCPR both preceded and accompanied colorectal carcinogenesis but reduction of the CCPR was not invariably accompanied by reduced carcinogenes.
Against a background of inherited susceptibility, diet, particularly one that is high in animal fat, seems to have a major influence on the development of colorectal cancer.
Yet a population with a high dietary intake of fat, protein, and meat can also be at very low risk of colorectal cancer.
One of the factors that may be protective is calcium, but the epidemiological data are contentious.
Therefore, some investigators have examined the role of dietary calcium in influencing colonic crypt cell kinetics, since the latter may be a marker of neoplastic predisposition.
Williamson and Rainey (among others) have proposed that conditions which increase intestinal cell proliferation also protentiate intestinal carcinogenesis.
Under experimental conditions, hyperplasia follows 20–80% of small bowel resection, jejunoileal bypass, subtotal colectomy, colostomy closure, pancreaticobiliary diversion, and topical instillation of bile acids.
These manoeuvres are all associated with increased colonic tumourigenesis.
In man, there seems to be an expanded colonic crypt cell proliferative compartment in a number of situations associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer, including in subjects with a family history of colorectal cancer and in patients with ulcerative colitis, as well as those with sporadic adenoma or cancer and those with familial adenomatous polyposis.
It is of interest that supplementary calcium is able to abolish the increased tumoyr yield after enterectomy and will also reduce crypt cell production.
While the evidence linking increased cell proliferation and colorectal cancer is good, the converse is less clear cut.
Moreover, one experimental study showed increased tumour formation with dietary calcium.
To help clarify some of these issues, a single experimental study was undertaken to compare the effects of dietary calcium and 70% small bowel resection on experimental colonic tumourigenesis and crypt cell proliferation in the terminal ileum, caecum, and distal colon, thereby permitting multivariate statistical analysis to determine independently significant and interacting factors influencing mucosal proliferation.
Methods
STUDY DESIGN (FIG 1)
(a)
Effect of dietary calcium on normal small and large bowel mucosa proliferation Forty animals were randomly divided into two equal groups of which one group received calcium supplementation.
Eight animals from each group were killed at 16 weeks and the remainder at 32 weeks.
(b)
Effect of dietary calcium and 1,2-dimethylhydrazine on small and large bowel mucosa proliferation Sixty animals received dimethylhydrazine and were divided into two equal groups, of which one group received calcium supplementation.
Eight animals from each group were killed at 16 weeks and the remainder (22 per group) were sacrified at 32 weeks.
(c)
Effect of dietary calcium, dimethylhydrazine, and 70% small bowel resection on small and large bowel mucosa proliferation Eighty seven animals underwent 70% small bowel resection and were divided into two groups.
In the first group (n=40), half received calcium supplementation (n=20); 16 animals (eight receiving calcium) were sacrified at 16 weeks; the remainder were sacrified at 32 weeks.
The second group (n=47) received dimethylhydrazine, and 24 randomly chosen animals were given calcium supplementation.
Four of these animals were lost for technical reasons and four because of intestinal obstruction; the remainder (n=39) were killed at 32 weeks.
The crypt cell production rates (CCPR) were determined at each point of sacrifice.
For 24 hours before sacrifice at 32 weeks, animals were placed in metabolism cages and a 24 hour stool collection was performed for faecal fat measurement.
At the time of sacrifice, blood was obtained for measurement of serum calcium, phosphate, and albumin.
Finally, the intestinal tract was excised, fixed in formalin, stained with haematoxylin and eosin, then coded.
ANIMALS, CALCIUM INTAKE, AND CALCIUM SUPPLEMENTATION
Female Wister rats (Charles Rivers, UK, Ltd) weighing 100–150 g were housed in the Biomedical Services Unit (University of Birmingham) with a 12 hour regular light-dark cycle.
The animals were weighed weekly and given food (diet 86A, Pilsbury Ltd, UK, containing 19% protein, 3.4% fibre, and 0.8% calcium) and water (6 mg calcium carbonate/l, Severn Trent Water Authority) ad libitum, which was recorded daily.
The normal average dietary calcium intake was 140 mg/24 hours which was doubled to 280 mg/24 hours in the above specified groups by the addition of calcium lactate to the drinking water.
Calcium supplementation was begun in all the relevant groups at six weeks.
CARCINOGENESIS
This was induced with subcutaneous dimethylhydrazine (Aldrich Chemical Co Ltd) 40 mg/kg body weight, weekly for five weeks.
Controls received carrier solution (saline/EDTA).
SMALL BOWEL RESECTION
A 70% small bowel resection was performed under general anaesthesia after measuring the small bowel and preserving the distal 10 cm of ileum.
An end to end anastomosis was formed using a single layer of interrupted 6/0 silk.
CCPR
A previously in vivo stathmokinetic method was employed.
Under halothane anaesthesia, six to eight animals were killed serially at 15–30 minute intervals for 135–180 minutes, after intraperitoneal administration of vincristine (Oncovin, Eli-Lilly, Basingstoke, UK) 1 mg/kg body weight.
Mucosa was obtained from the caecum, distal colon 2 cm from the anus, and the terminal ileum 5 cm from the ileocaecal valve.
The number of metaphase arrest figures were counted from 30 crypts at each site in the large bowel and from 10 crypts in the small bowel.
The CCPR (cells/crypt/hour) was determined by the slope of the regression line comparing the number of mitotic figures with time.
SERUM CALCIUM, PHOSPHATE, AND ALBUMIN
This was determined by automated analysis in the Department of Chemical Pathology using a SMAC machine.
FAECAL FAT ANALYSIS
The fats were saponified with 5% alcoholic potassium hydroxide, extracted with HCl and ether, then measured calorimetrically.
HISTOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
The slides were examined by a consultant pathologist (HT) who was unaware of the group origin of the tissue.
Tumours were assessed as benign or malignant and were graded by degree of dysplasia (benign) or differentiation (malignant).
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The studies were undertaken under Home Office and University of Birmingham regulations ensuring the humane treatment of animals at all times.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Categorical data were analysed by the χ 2 test, and non-parametric continuous data by the Kruskall-Wallis and Mann-Whitney U (two tailed) tests.
The data relating to CCPR were analysed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS).
Independently significant effects were investigated using a repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA).
The within subjects repeated measures on crypt cell production were the three different sites (ileum, caecum, and distal colon) and the between subject factors were calcium, dimethylhydrazine, and small bowel resection.
All possible interactions were also tested for independent significance.
For descriptive purposes the CCPR is given as the slope (SEM) of each regression line; the R-sq% is also given, which represents the extent to which each data set is described by a straight line.
Unless stated otherwise, significance was set a p.
Results
ANIMAL WEIGHTS
There were no significant differences between any of the animal groups with respect to weight (Table I).
TUMOUR YIELD
There was a significant reduction of tumours in the group receiving calcium supplementation and dimethylhydrazine compared with the group receiving dimethylhydrazine alone (Fig 2).
There were no significant differences with regard to the proportions of benign or malignant tumours or their distribution (Table II).
There were no significant differences in respect of the degree of dysplasia or the histological grades or stages (data not shown).
CCPR AT 16 WEEKS
The results are shown in Table III and the statistical analysis in Table IV.
The bowel site had the greatest effect on crypt cell production (ileumcolon).
Calcium, dimethylhydrazine, and small bowel resection all had independently significant effects on crypt cell production at this time and there was a significant interaction between the site of the gut and small bowel resection.
Both dimethylhydrazine and small bowel resection individually increased CCPR while calcium generally reduced this, in a simple arithmetic manner (that is, there was no interaction).
CCPR
The results are shown in Table V, and the statistical analysis in Table VI.
The independently significant effects found at 16 weeks were maintained at 32 weeks.
Moreover, the additional groups at 32 weeks allowed testing of interactions between calcium, dimethylhydrazine, and small bowel resection, revealing two way but not three way interactions.
There was also a highly significant reduction in CCPRs at all sites from 16 weeks to 32 weeks (p) upon which the above changes were superimposed.
SERUM CALCIUM, PHOSPHATE, AND ALBUMIN
None of the results were significantly different between the groups (Table VII; p set at <because of multiple testing).
FAECAL FAT EXCRETION
Calcium increased faecal fat excretion in two of the three pairs of groups in which this was measured (Table VIII; p set at <because of multiple testing).
Discussion
Our results are consistent with observations in man that mucosal proliferation decreases with distance from the ileocaecal valve to the rectum.
Two previous experimental studies have shown an opposite effect, which may be due to the different species or sex of animals used and the methods of assessing cellular proliferation (stathmokinetic technique v labelling index using tritiated thymidine).
In agreement with earlier studies, both carcinogen administration and 80% small bowel resection increased the colonic CCPR, whereas supplementary calcium had the opposite effect.
Between 16 and 32 weeks, the CCPR became significantly decreased at all three intestinal sites.
Time had a greater effect on reducing the CCPR than did dietary calcium.
Two other experimental studies have shown an increase in the CCPR with age, but studies in man are variable.
Our data are also consistent with observations in man that mucosal proliferation is increased in patients with large adenomas or cancer.
Since colorectal cancer is distributed predominantly in the distal large bowel and rectum where the CCPR is least, additional factors to those which cause cell proliferation may be important for tumourigenesis.
The latter notion is further supported by the tumour yields in the different groups, which did not always correlate with the mucosal proliferation rates (compare Fig 2 and Table V).
For example, the tumour yields in the dimethylhydrazine group and the dimethylhydrazine plus small bowel resection plus calcium group were very similar but the distal colonic CCPR differed by a factor of ×2.
Of three previous studies involving 30–85% enterectomy, two showed an increase in tumour yield and one, no difference.
Hart et al administered dimethylhydrazine (20 mg/kg) weekly for a total of 16 weeks (12 weeks after enterectomy) and at sacrifice at 50 weeks, the increase in tumours was at the anastomosis and not in the colon.
Suing Fischer rats given a total dose of 90 mg/kg azoxymethane, Williamson et al found no increase in tumours in the group that had 85% enterectomy and attributed this to poor weight gain, since body mass influences carcinogenesis.
In the present study there were no significant differences in body weight at the time of sacrifice so this is not the explanation for the discrepancy in tumour yield between this and the two other studies.
Williamson and Rainey have made the important observation that ileal resection reduces the latent period for tumour formation but not the overall tumour yield.
Appleton et al have indicated that the mucosal proliferative changes brought about in experimental carcinogenesis by small bowel resection or calcium supplementation, or both, are closely linked to tumour yield.
This conclusion was based on sophisticated but completely separate experiments.
In the first study, CCPR was measured in 58 male Sprague-Dawley rats (mean (SD) starting weight 358 (25) g) sacrified seven weeks after an 80% small bowel resection or transection and with or without calcium supplementation; no carcinogen was given.
In the second study, tumour yield (but not CCPR) was determined in 53 similar animals (mean (SD) starting weight 150 (14) g) given azoxymethane for six weeks before using an identical protocol, but delaying sacrifice until 25–27 weeks later.
In contrast, we have used a single experiment.
At 16 weeks, there was an increase in CCPR by dimethylhydrazine or 70% small bowel resection and a decrease in CCPR by cacium; there were no interactions between these factors (Tables III &IV).
The results at 32 weeks (Tables V and VI) confirmed the former findings but also showed significant interactions by calcium or small bowel resection with the carcinogen.
Unlike Appleton et al , we did not find complete linkage between CCPR and tumour yield.
This discrepancy might be explained by differences in the species or sex of the animals used, the extent of small bowel resection (70% v 80%), or the type of carcinogen used, although it should be noted that 1,2 dimethylhydrazine is the natural precursor of azoxymethane.
Alternatively, the discrepancy may be explained by the experimental protocols since the studies of Appleton et al could not take into account the interactions between carcinogen and calcium or enterectomy.
The effects of calcium on tumour promotion may be the result of direct or indirect action.
In vitro, high extracellular calcium concentrations inhibit the proliferation of human colonic epithelial cells and several colonic cancer cell lines.
A systemic mode of action has been suggested for calcium but this seems unlikely from the present study since the serum values of calcium and phosphate were similar in the different groups.
Supplementary dietary calcium has been shown in some studies to reduce colonic cell proliferation in man.
The indirect mechanism of action proposed to explain such an effect implicates the sequestration of bile acids or other acidic lipids, such as fatty acids.
It seems likely that the proposed mechanisms of action of calcium, incolving either the precipitation of calcium bound bile salts or fatty acids as soaps, and the negation of such actions by phosphate is an over simplification.
For example, bile acids are probably precipitated from the water fraction of faeces as calcium-phosphate-bile salt complexes.
While increased dietary calcium may increase faecal calcium and the concentration of the bile acid deoxycholate in man, colonic mucosal proliferation may remain unaffected.
In the present study, we have shown an increase in faecal fat excretion (albeit not significant) in the dimethylhydrazine treated small bowel resection group given calcium while the CCPR was significantly reduced, yet the tumour incidence was similar.
A similar paradox pertains in the relationship between dietary fibre, colonic cell proliferation, and experimental carcinogenesis.
Although most studies show a protective effect by 20–40% dietary wheat bran, this also causes appreciable epithelial cell proliferation and mucosal hyperplasia.
Oat bran has been shown to increase tumourigenesis yet it does not effect colonic cell proliferation.
Indeed Galloway et al reported the highest proliferation activity in a dietary experimental group with the lowest incidence of tumours and the converse was also found.
A number of interactions were shown between crypt cell production, dimethylhydrazine administration, small bowel resection, and different sites of the intestine.
Small bowel resection results in significant changes in the delivery of a variety of luminal factors to the colon including fibre, bile salts, other fats, ions, and water.
The precise mechanisms of action and interaction of these factors on carcinogenesis require elucidation in order to understand fully their relationship to colonic cell proliferation.
It seems that while an increase in colonic cell proliferation usually precedes and accompanies colorectal carcinogenesis, a reduction of cellular proliferation is not of itself always sufficient to reverse the process.
We and others have previously shown increased mucosal cell proliferation in patients with adenomatous polyps or cancer and a reduction of mucosal cell proliferation after calcium supplementation.
Moreover, sulindac has been shown to cause regression of rectal polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis without there being an alteration in the Ki 67 index, an alternative marker of cellular proliferation.
Until long term studies are available, caution should be exercised in the use of colonic cell proliferation indices as markers of neoplastic potential in human dietary intervention studies.
Tests of renal function in patients with quiescent colitis: effects of drug treatment
Abstract
Mesalazine has structural similarities to aspirin and phenacetin and is nephrotoxic when given intravenously in high doses to rats.
A number of cases of nephrotoxicity has been reported recently in patients taking oral mesalazine.
Sensitive indicators of renal function in a group of patients maintained on long term, delayed release mesalazine and a comparable group on sulphasalazine have been studied.
Sixty two patients (32 men, aged 28–82 years) with quiescent colitis were studied.
Thirty four had been maintained on delayed release mesalazine 1.6 (0.8–2.4) g/day for 2.9 (0.5–6.9) years and 28 on sulphasalazine 2 (2–3) g/day.
Groups were comparable for age, sex, disease duration, and disease extent.
Renal function was assessed by: urine microscopy; creatinine clearance; the urinary excretion of two markers of glomerular toxicity, albumin and transferrin; and the urinary excretion for two markers of tubular toxicity, N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) and α 1 -microglobulin.
There were no significant differences in renal function between the two treatment groups.
Furthermore, no correlations were found between measures of renal function and either cumulative mesalazine dose or mesalazine treatment duration.
In this study, long term maintenance treatment with delayed release mesalazine was no more nephrotoxic than continued treatment with sulphasalazine.
Recent insights into the pharmacology and component properties of sulphasalazine have led to the development of a new generation of drugs based on mesalazine (5-aminosalicylic acid, 5-ASA).
These agents seem as effective as sulphasalazine in the treatment of patients with ulcerative colitis, and in the short term are less toxic.
However, considerations of long term safety are also important as lifelong maintenance treatment is usually recommended.
The effect of mesalazine treatment on renal function has been a particular concern as mesalazine has structural similarities to aspirin and phenacetin, both of which have been implicated in analgesic nephropathy.
Chronic sulphasalazine treatment does not seem to be nephrotoxic but the systemic absorption of 5-ASA from sulphasalazine is relatively low.
Delayed release mesalazine formulations release their contents rapidly in the distal small intestine and proximal colon.
Plasma concentrations of 5-ASA may therefore be higher in patients taking delayed release mesalazine than in patients taking equivalent doses of sulphasalazine.
In addition, freedom from sulphapyridine related side effects allows high dose treatment, further increasing the potential for dose related nephrotoxicity.
We have therefore studied sensitive indicators of renal function in a group of patients maintained on long term, delayed release mesalazine and a comparable group maintained on sulphasalazine.
Methods
PATIENT SELECTION AND ASSESSMENT
Patients were selected from a computerised database of 222 patients with chronic ulcerative colitis attending Leigh Infirmary.
Of these, 44 had been taking delayed release mesalazine as the sole maintenance treatment for at least six months.
For each patient taking mesalazine a computer matched patient taking sulphasalazine was also selected.
All pairs were matched for age (within five years), sex, disease duration (within five years), and disease extent.
Patients were invited to participate by letter and those who consented attended for outpatient review.
Patients with symptoms of active colitis in the four weeks before attendance and those with a history of diabetes, hypertension, renal disease, or chronic analgesic ingestion were excluded.
A detailed drug history was taken to confirm the type, dose, and duration of maintenance medication.
At the time of clinic attendance patients were asked to provide a freshly voided sample of urine for microscopy and to return with a timed urine collection for measurement of:(i) creatinine clearance;(ii) two markers of glomerular toxicity, albumin and transferrin excretion; and (iii) two markers of tubular toxicity, α 1 microglobulin and N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) excretion.
To overcome the problems of collecting a 24 hour urine specimen, an overnight collection was made.
This had the added advantage of controlling for circadian variations in creatinine clearance and minimised the effects of postural fluctuations in urinary protein excretion.
Patients were asked to empty their bladder before going to bed, noting the precise time and discarding the urine.
Urine passed throught the night was saved and on rising the bladder was again emptied, the urine saved, and the exact time noted.
Patients were asked to return the collection at 9 am the same morning, at which time a 10 ml blood sample was taken.
Aliquots of urine and plasma were stored at -20°C before analysis.
In order to establish appropriate normal values for overnight creatinine clearance and marker excretion, 50 age matched healthy volunteers were studied using an identical protocol.
ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES
Plasma and urinary creatinine concentrations were measured using the Jaffe reaction.
Urinary albumin concentrations were measured by immunoturbidimetry.
In brief, a 25 µl urine sample was added to 250 µl of rabbit antiserum to human albumin (Dakopatts, DK-2600) in buffer.
The change in absorbance at 340 nm was measured between 0.5 and 100 seconds and results were derived from absorbance changes produced by eight standard solutions (American Hospital Supply, UK).
The range of the assay was 3 to 180 mg/l and between and within batch coefficients of variation were 5.0 and 2.7% respectively.
Transferrin concentrations were determined by enzyme immunoassay.
Microtitre plate wells were coated with 100 nl of anti-human transferrin (Dakopatts) in 0.05 M carbonate bicarbonate buffer (pH 9.6) at a concentration of 10 µg/ml.
Plates were incubated for one hour at room temperature and then overnight at 4°C.
After emptying and washing each well, 100 µl of sample or standard (diluted 1 in 80 in phosphate buffered saline, pH 7.2, and containing 0.1% Tween and 0.5% bovine serum albumin to prevent non-specific protein binding to the plate) were added and incubated for one hour.
After washing, 100 µl of anti-transferrin horseradish peroxidase conjugate in buffer was added at a dilution of 1 in 2000 and incubated for a further 60 minutes.
The conjugate buffer contained 0.1% Tween, 0.5% bovine serum albumin, and 1.0% normal rabbit serum to prevent non-specific binding of conjugate to the plate.
After washing, 100 µl of substrate (tetramethylbenzidine in DMSO (10 mg/ml) dilutes 1 in 100 in 0.15 M citrate buffer and containing H 2 O 2 to a final concentration of 1.3 M/l) were added and incubated for a further 15 minutes.
Finally, 100 µl of 1.0 M sulphuric acid were added to stop the reaction and the absorbance was read at 450 nm.
Concentrations were derived by reference to a standard curve (Behring Diagnostics).
The range of the assay was 20 to 4000 µg/l and within and between batch coefficients of variation were 3.4% and 6.1% respectively.
α 1 -microglobulin concentrations were measured by enzyme immunoassay using an identical methodology to that described for transferrin.
The range of the assay was 0.1 to 10.0 mg/l and within and between batch coefficients of variation were 2.4% and 4.9% respectively.
NAG concentrations were determined colorimetrically using a commercially available kit (Boehringer Mannheim).
Briefly, a 15 µl urine sample was added to 250 µl of 3-Cresol ulfonphthaleinyl-N-acetyl-β-D-glucosamide and incubated at 37°C for 11 minutes.
The reaction was stopped by the addition of 75 µl of saturated sodium carbonate and the optical density was read at 580 nm (Cobas Bioanalyser, Roche).
Results were calculated by reference to a standard curve.
The between batch coefficient of variation was less than 3.0%.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All results are expressed as median and range unless otherwise stated.
Between treatment comparisons were made using signed rank tests and correlations were sought using Spearman's rank correlation test.
Results
Of the 88 patients invited to participate, 62 fulfilled the inclusion criteria and agreed to the study.
Thirty four patients had been maintained on delayed release mesalazine for a minimum of six months and 28 had been maintained on long term sulphasalazine.
The two groups were comparable for age, sex, disease duration, and disease extent (Table).
Patients treated with mesalazine had taken the drug for 2.9 (0.5–6.9) years at a daily dose of 1.6 (0.8–2.4) g daily; the total cumulative mesalazine dose was 1.46 (0.58–3.50) kg.
Nine of the group had never received sulphasalazine, the other 25 had been maintained on sulphasalazine 2 (2–3) g daily for 4.3 (0.2–24) years before mesalazine treatment.
Patients in the sulphasalazine group had been maintained on the drug at a daily dose of 2 (2–3) g for 8.0 (1.7–2.1) years and had never received mesalazine.
The total duration of maintenance drug treatment was comparable in the two groups.
Urine microscopy was unremarkable in all cases.
Creatinine clearance values varied widely but did not differ significantly between the two treatment groups (mesalazine=90 (47–172) ml/ min, sulphasalazine=85 (48–153) ml/min) or between the treatment groups and the healthy colunteers (healthy volunteers=79 (34–180 ml/ min)(Fig 1).
A negative correlation between creatinine clearance and age was apparent in all three groups (mesalazine: r=-0.44, p; sulphasalazine: r=-0.36, p; healthy volunteers: r=-9.47, p).
No significant correlations were apparent between creatinine clearance and either duration of mesalazine treatment or cumulative mesalazine dose.
The results of urinary albumin and transferrin excretion are shown in Figure 2.
All results are expressed as marker/creatinine concentration ratios in order to standardise for differences in timing of the urine collection.
In the healthy volunteers the albumin/creatinine ratio was 0.60 (0–3.3) mg/mmol and the transferrin/creatinine ratio was 17.2 (2.0–161) µg/mmol.
(The upper limit of normal for each measure was set at the 95th centile).
There were no significant differences between the two treatment groups (albumin/creatinine ratio: mesalazine=0.91 (0.23–4.55) mg/mmol, sulphasalazine=0.84 (0.24–7.95) mg/mmol; transferrin/creatinine ratio: mesalazine=7.4 (1.1–94) µg/mmol, sulphasalazine=17.6 (1–229) µg/mmol) or between the treatment groups and healthy volunteers.
Four patients had albumin/ creatinine ratios above the 95th centile (two mesalazine, two sulphasalazine) and four patients had mildly raised transferrin/creatinine ratios (one mesalazine, three sulphasalasine).
Albumin/creatinine ratios were positively correlated with transferrin/creatinine ratios in both treatment groups (mesalazine r=0.44, p; sulphasalazine r=0.38, p) but neither correlated with the duration of mesalazine treatment or cumulative mesalazine dose.
Figure 3 shows the results of α 1 -microglobulin/ creatinine and NAG/creatinine concentration ratios.
In healthy volunteers the α 1 -microglobulin/creatinine and NAG/creatine ratios were 277 (12–1237) µg/mmol and 240 (1–755) mU/mmol respectively.
No significant differences were found between the two treatment groups (α 1 -microglobulin/creatinine ratio: mesalazine=132 (3–1070) µg/mmol, sulphasalazine=193 (6–2237) µg/mmol; NAG/creatinine ratio: mesalazine=187 (49–1360) mU/mmol, sulphasalazine=202 (64–650) mU/mmol) or between the treatment groups and healthy volunteers.
Five patients had raised α 1 -microglobulin ratios (one mesalazine, four sulphasalazine) and four patients had high NAG ratios (two mesalazine, two sulphasalazine).
α 1 -microglobulin/creatinine ratios correlated with NAG/ creatinine ratios in both treatment groups (mesalazine r=0.56, p; sulphasalazine r=0.64, p) but neither correlated with the duration of mesalazine treatment or cumulative mesalazine dose.
Discussion
Salicylate nephrotoxicity has been recognised for many years.
Acute renal failure is not uncommon after aspirin overdose and large therapeutic doses of acetyl salicylic acid, choline salicylate, and sodium salicylate may cause acute tubular dysfunction.
Pathological studies in the rat, however, suggest that tubular necrosis is transient despite continued dosing.
Although aspirin has been implicated in chronic analgesic nephropathy recent studies have case doubt on this association.
Moreover, high dose para-aminosalicylic acid (4-ASA) was, for many years, used in the treatment of tuberculosis yet nephrotoxic reactions were uncommon.
In massive dose, however, 4-ASA may cause haematuria and reduce creatinine clearance, particularly in patients with pre-existing renal disease.
Similarly, despite widespread clinical use, evidence for sulphasalazine renal toxicity is scanty.
Acute interstitial nephritis and nephrotic syndrome have been reported but evidence of chronic nephropathy is lacking.
Studies of the effect of mesalazine on renal function are relatively few.
In the rat, very high single doses of intravenous mesalazine cause acute tubular and papillary necrosis.
High dose oral mesalazine does not seem to be nephrotoxic in rats when given for four weeks but both rats and dogs develop renal papillary necrosis when fed high dose mesalazine for 6 to 12 months.
After oral administration, mesalazine is extensively acetylated such that N-acetyl-5-ASA is the predominant form found in both plasma and urine.
The nephrotoxicity of N-acetyl-5-ASA is therefore of interest, particularly as minor structural changes to the aspirin and phenacetin molecules are known to influence nephrotoxicity.
Furthermore, the plasma ratio of 5-ASA to N-acetyl-5-ASA varies somewhat in patients maintained on the different mesalazine formulations and this has led some to suggest differences in nephrotoxic potential.
However, there are no data to support this view and studies of the relative nephrotoxicity of 5-ASA and N-acetyl-5-ASA are awaited with interest.
Recently, a number of cases of nephrotoxicity have been reported in patients taking delayed release mesalazine.
Clinical presentation has been with acute nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, or renal failure.
When undertaken, renal biopsy has usually shown interstitial nephritis, although minimal change nephropathy has been reported.
These reactions seem to be independent of dose and a number have occurred in patients previously exhibiting allergic reactions to sulphasalazine.
In the only documented case in which rechallenge has been undertaken, low dose rechallenge with both mesalazine and sulphasalazine caused microscopic haematuria suggesting dose independent hypersensitivity to 5-ASA.
Clinical trials with mesalazine formulations have been more reassuring.
In one early study of colitis relapse, two patients treated with mesalazine 2.4 g daily for four weeks developed minor rises in plasma creatinine concentrations.
More recent studies, however, have not confirmed this finding and in a number of studies, patients in relapse have been treated with doses up to 4.8 g daily without untoward effect.
Furthermore, a number of maintenance studies have shown no significant change in renal function on standard biochemical screening.
In the only detailed study of tubular function in man, Diene et al found no evidence of continuing renal dysfunction in a group of nine patients with Crohn's disease maintained on mesalazine 1.5 g daily for up to 12 weeks.
In this study we have assessed renal function in a group of patients who have been maintained on delayed release mesalazine from six months to over six years.
We have measured the urinary excretion of albumin and transferrin as these are sensitive indicators of early glomerular damage, and the excretion of NAG and α 1 -microglobulin as these are sensitive markers of tubular toxicity.
NAG has been used extensively to identify and monitor potentially nephrotoxic drugs, its excretion increases in a dose dependent manner following the ingestion of aspirin and sodium salicylate and high concentrations are found in patients with established analgesic nephropathy.
Using this battery of sensitive tests we were unable to find evidence that maintenance treatment with mesalazine was any more nephrotoxic than continued treatment with sulphasalazine.
This was despite the fact that patients maintained on mesalazine were receiving twice the equivalent dose of 5-ASA as those maintained on sulphasalazine.
Although toxicity marker excretion ratios were unrelated to the type of maintenance drug treatment, a number of patients had marker excretion values above the 95th centile for healthy volunteers raising the possibility of mild glomerular and tubular dysfunction.
Whether these values represent the upper extreme of normality or are related to the underlying colonic disease, long term medication, or other factors is not clear.
Clinical evidence of renal dysfunction is unusual in patients with ulcerative colitis.
Renal stones occur more commonly than in the general population and, rarely, amyloidosis may occur.
Detailed pathological studies to detect subclinical renal disease have not been undertaken.
In conclusion, there is little doubt that mesalazine may cause nephrotoxic reactions.
The available evidence suggests that in humans these are allergic in nature and independent of dose.
They may therefore occur after the ingestion of all 5-ASA containing formulations.
Within the current therapeutic dose range there is no evidence to suggest dose dependent nephrotoxicity and in the present study long term maintenance treatment with delayed release mesalazine was no more nephrotoxic than continued treatment with sulphasalazine.
Effects of ethanol, acetaldehyde and cholesteryl esters on pancreatic lysosomes
Abstract
Recent studies indicate that altered lysosomal function may be involved in the early stages of pancreatic injury.
Chronic consumption of ethanol increases rat pancreatic lysosomal fragility.
The aim of this study was to determine whether the lysosomal fragility observed after chronic ethanol consumption is mediated by ethanol per se , its oxidative metabolite acetaldehyde or cholesteryl esters (substances which accumulate in the pancreas after ethanol consumption).
Pancreatic lysosomes from chow fed rats were incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C with ethanol, acetaldehyde or phosphatidylcholine vesicles containing cholesteryl oleate.
Lysosomal stability was then assessed by determination of:(a) Latency — that is, the per cent increase in lysosomal enzyme activity after addition of Triton X-100 and (b) Supernatant activity — that is , the proportion of lysosomal enzyme remaining in the supernatant after resedimentation of lysosomes.
Acid phosphatase, N-acetyl glycosaminidase, β-glucuronidase and cathepsin B were assayed as lysosomal marker enzymes.
Lysosomes incubated with homogenising medium alone or equivalent volumes of phosphatidylchloine vesicles without cholesteryl oleate were used as controls.
Cholesteryl oleate at concentrations of 15 and 20 mM increased pancreatic lysosomal fragility as shown by decreased latency and increased supernatant enzyme.
In contrast, ethanol (150 mM) and acetaldehyde (5 mM) had no effect on lysosomal stability in vitro.
These results suggest that increased pancreatic lysosomal fragility observed with ethanol may be mediated by cholesteryl ester accumulation rather than by ethanol or acetaldehyde.
Abuse of ethanol is a known association of pancreatitis.
The mechanisms whereby ethanol exerts its pancreatotoxic effects, however, are unknown.
Over the past decade, digestive enzyme activation by lysosomal hydrolases (particularly cathepsin B) has been implicated as the initial event in three forms of experimental pancreatitis.
Furthermore, recent studies from this laboratory have shown that experimental ethanol administration increases the fragility of rat pancreatic lysosomes.
The increase in pancreatic lysosomal fragility could result from a direct effect of ethanol on lysosomal membranes.
In vivo and in vitro animal studies have shown that ethanol alters the morphology and/or function of membranes of hepatocytes, erythrocytes, intestinal microvilli, and brain microsomes.
Alternatively, the increased lysosomal fragility may be mediated by acetaldehyde.
This highly reactive metabolite of ethanol has been shown to form adducts with liver plasma membranes which result in activation of the complement sequence.
In addition, Tillotson et al have shown that acetaldehyde increases membrane permeability and fluidity as well as inhibiting Na + -stimulated glucose transport in rat intestinal microvillus membranes.
An additional possibility is that cholesteryl esters alter lysosomal stability.
Fat droplet accumulation in acinar cells has been observed as the earliest morphologic alteration in the pancreas of alcoholics.
This phenomenon has been reproduced in a rat model of ethanol feeding and subsequent lipid analyses indicated that accumulated cholesteryl esters were responsible for the morphologic changes observed.
These compounds (Fig 1) are known to disrupt biologic membranes in vitro and therefore have the potential to mediate the increased pancreatic lysosomal fragility observed in ethanol fed rats.
The aim of this study was to determine whether ethanol induced fragility of pancreatic lysosomes is mediated by ethanol, its oxidative metabolite acetaldehyde or cholesteryl esters.
To study this question, the stability of pancreatic lysosomes was assessed after exposure in vitro to ethanol, acetaldehyde and the cholesteryl ester, cholesteryl oleate.
Methods
EXPERIMENTAL ANIMALS
Chow fed male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 300–350 g were used in all experiments.
Each animal was killed in the fed state by decapitation.
A portion of the tail of the pancreas was then quickly excised, trimmed of adipose and connective tissue and used immediately.
ISOLATION OF PANCREATIC LYSOSOMES
Pancreatic lysosomes were isolated by a modification of the method of Ignarro et al as previously described.
Briefly, approximately 100 mg pancreatic tissue from each animal was homogenized in a medium containing 0.25 M sucrose, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetra acetic acid (EDTA) and 25 mg% soybean trypsin inhibitor in a Dounce homogeniser (using five up and down strokes of the ‘B’ pestle).
The resulting crude homogenate was then centrifuged at 600 g for 10 minutes to remove unbroken cells and nuclear debris.
The resulting pellet was resuspended, rehomogenised and centrifuged as above.
Supernatants were combined and centrifuged at 16500 g for 25 minutes to obtain a lysosome enriched pellet.
Electron microscopic analysis of the pellet revealed the presence of zymogen granules as well as lysosomes.
The pellet was then gentle resuspended in 10 ml homogenising medium and used for incubation with ethanol, acetaldehyde, or cholesteryl oleate.
A lysosome enriched fraction rather than a pure lysosomal preparation was used because preliminary experiments indicated a loss of lysosomal stability with prolonged preparative procedures.
PREPARATION OF PHOSOPHOLIPID VESICLES
Experiments examining the effect of cholesteryl esters on the stability of isolated pancreatic lysosomes were carried out using cholesteryl oleate incorporated into phosphatidylcholine vesicles.
This was done in order to avoid phase separations during the incubation process.
Vesicles were prepared by the method of Chobanian.
Tall, and Brecher.
Egg yolk lecithin (phosophatidylcholine) and cholesteryl oleate were dissolved in chloroform:methanol (2:1) and mixed together in a molar ratio of 25:1 as Forrest and Cushley have reported that a maximum of 5 mol% of cholesteryl ester can be incorporated into phosphatidylcholine vesicles.
The lipid mixture was evaporated under N 2 , lyophilised overnight and resuspended in 250 µM NaCl — 25 µM Tris buffer (pH 7.4).
Unilamellar vesicles were prepared by sonication as described by Barrow and Lentz in a nitrogen atmosphere using a Heat Systems Cup Horn Sonicator (Heat Systems Ultrasonics Inc, NY, USA) at an output setting of 4, for 55 minutes at 25–35°C.
Care was taken to place the vial in the centre of the ‘cavitation umbrella’ of the Cup Horn.
After sonication, the sample was centrifuged at 150000 g for one hour to yield a faintly opalescent supernatant consisting of a homogeneous population of cholesteryl oleate vesicles.
CHARACTERISATION OF VESICLES
(a) Sizing
Lipid vesicles were sized by photon correlation spectroscopy as described by Barenholz et al using a Malvern Autosizer II C. The mean diameter of the vesicles was 605 (15).
The polydispersity index of the preparation was 0.33.
(b) Electron microscopy
The vesicle preparation was diluted 1:4 with NaCl-Tris buffer and examined by electron microscopy using:(i) Negative staining with sodium phosphotungstate as described by Tall et al , and (ii) Platinum coating of vesicles on a carbon free hydrophilic grid as described by Huang.
(c) Cholesteryl oleate concentration
Recovery of added labelled cholesteryl oleate (cholesteryl [1- 1 4 C]oleate, specific activity 52 mCi/mmol), was used to estimate the concentration of cholesteryl oleate in the liposome preparation.
(d) Free fatty acid concentration
The concentration of free fatty acids in the vesicle preparation was determined by thin layer chromatography followed by gas chromatography mass spectroscopy.
The vesicle preparation was freeze dried overnight and resuspended in chloroform:methanol (2:1) at a concentration of 20 mg lipid/ml solvent.
This preparation was then applied to standard silica gel thin layer chromatography plates together with phosphatidylcholine, cholesteryl oleate, and oleic acid standards.
Plates were developed in chloroform: methanol:water (65:25:4 v/v/v) and the bands visualised by iodine staining.
The free fatty acid band was identified and scraped off the plate.
Free fatty acids were then eluted three times with methanol acidified to pH 3 by the addition of a few drops of acetic acid.
Free fatty acids were methylated by the method of Howard-Black using excess etherial diazomethane and then identified and quantified using gas chromatography mass spectroscopy.
The vesicle preparation was thus found to contain 13.9 µg palmitic acid and 11.5 µg oleic acid/ml.
The maximum concentration of free fatty acid in the incubation mixture was calculated to be 50 µM.
INCUBATION OF LYSOSOMES WITH ETHANOL AND ACETALDEHYDE
Isolated pancreatic lysosomes were incubated with ethanol or acetaldehyde in tightly sealed tubes for 30 minutes at 37°C.
The concentrations of ethanol and acetaldehyde in the incubation medium were 150 mM and 5 mM respectively.
Lysosomes incubated with the homogenising medium alone were used as controls.
INCUBATION OF LYSOSOMES WITH CHOLESTERYL OLEATE
Isolated pancreatic lysosomes were incubated with phosphatidylcholine vesicles containing cholesteryl oleate for 30 minutes at 37°C.
The concentration of cholesteryl oleate in the incubation medium ranged from 10 to 20 mM.
Control incubations used equivalent amounts of phosphatidylcholine vesicles without cholesteryl oleate.
INCUBATION OF LYSOSOMES WITH FREE FATTY ACID
In some experiments, lysosomes were incubated with oleic acid which had been emulsified in 250 µM NaCl — 25 µM Tris buffer (pH 7.4) by sonication under nitrogen as described by Nagai et al using a Heat Systems Cup Horn Sonicator at an output setting of four for 10 minutes at 25°C.
Lysosomes were then incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes with 50 µM oleic acid; this concentration of oleic acid corresponded to the maximum amount of free fatty acid present in the liposome preparation.
Lysosomes incubated in the presence of buffer alone were used as controls.
ASSESSMENT OF LYSOSOMAL STABILITY
Lysosomal stability was assessed in two ways:(i) Determination of latency — that is, the percentage increase in lysosomal enzyme activity of the incubation sample after the addition of Triton X-100 (0.1% final concentration).
Latency was calculated as follows: Increased lysosomal fragility is indicated by a decrease in latency. (ii) Determination of the proportion of total enzyme released into the supernatant after resedimentation of lysosomes from the incubated samples by centrifugation at 16500 g fr 25 minutes.
Increased lysosomal fragility is indicated by an increase in supernatant enzyme.
There was no increase in lysosomal enzyme activity after the addition of Triton X-100 to the supernatant suggesting that supernatant enzymes were in the free form — that is, not membrane bound.
The presence of zymogen granules in the lysosome enriched fraction did not interfere with the assessment of lysosomal stability as this was measured using enzyme markers specific for lysosomes (vide infra ).
LYSOSOMAL MARKER ENZYMES
The lysosomal enzymes N-acetyl glucosaminidase, acid phosphatase and Β-glucuronidase were assayed fluorimetrically using 4-methylumbelliferone substrates.
Activity was determined by measuring the amount of 4-methylumbelliferone released after incubation with the enzyme source.
Cathepsin B was assayed fluorimetrically by the method of McDonald and Ellis, as modified by Saluja et al , using CBZ-Arg-Arg-Β-naphthylamide as the substrate.
Activity was determined from the rate of change of fluorescence as a result of the release of Β-naphthylamide after incubation with the enzyme source.
All lysosomal enzyme assays were linear with respect to time and protein concentration.
Triton X-100 (0.1% final concentration) was added to the reaction mixture in order to determine the total amount of lysosomal enzyme present in each lysosomal fraction studied.
Tissue protein concentrations were determined by the method of Lowry et al .
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data were expressed as means (SEM).
Differences between samples incubated with ethanol, acetaldehye or cholesteryl oleate and control samples were analysed by Student's t test for paired comparisons.
MATERIALS
All chemicals were of analytical reagent grade.
Cholesteryl oleate and phosphatidylcholine (99.9% pure) were purchased from the Sigma Chemical Company, St Louis, MO, USA, and eluted as single bands when chromatographed on thin layer chromatography plates.
Methylumbelliferone substrates were also purchased from Sigma Chemical Company, St Louis, MO, USA.
CBZ-Arg-Arge-Β-naphthylamide was purchased from BACHEM, California, USA.
Ethanol (96%) was obtained from Ajax Chemicals, Australia and acetaldehyde (99% pure) was purchased from BDH Ltd, Poole, England.
Cholesteryl [1- 1 4 C]oleate was obtained from Amersham, Bucks, England.
Results
EFFECT OF ETHANOL AND ACETALDEHYDE ON LYSOSOMAL STABILITY
Lysosomal latency
The Table indicates the latency results obtained with control, ethanol and acetaldehyde incubated lysosomes.
For all four lysosomal marker enzymes studies, there was no significant difference between the latency of lysosomes incubated with ethanol or acetaldehyde when compared with control values.
Proportion of lysosomal enzymes in supernatant
The Table also indicates the proportion of lysosomal enzymes released into the supernatant after sedimentation of uncubated pancreatic lysosomes.
Again for all four marker enzymes studied, lysosomes incubated with ethanol or acetaldehyde showed no difference in the proportion of lysosomal enzyme released into the supernatant when compared with control values.
EFFECT OF CHOLESTERYL ESTER ON LYSOSOMAL STABILITY
Lysosomal latency
Figure 2 (a-d) depicts the effect of increasing concentrations of cholesteryl oleate on lysosomal latency.
With all lysosomal enzymes studied, there was a progressive decrease in latency with increasing concentrations of cholesteryl oleate when compared with phosophatidylcholine controls.
This decrease in latency was statistically significantly with cholesteryl oleate concentrations of 15 and 20 mM.
Per cent of lysosomal enzymes in supernatant
Figure 3 (a-d) indicates the percentages of lysosomal enzymes released into the supernatant after incubation of isolated pancreatic lysosomes with phosphatidylcholine vesicles (with and without cholesteryl oleate) and subsequent resedimentation of lysosomes.
Paralleling the findings observed with lysosomal latency (Fig 2), cholesteryl oleate (15 and 20 mM) resulted in significant increases in per cent of supernatant enzyme.
EFFECT OF FREE FATTY ACID ON LYSOSOMAL STABILITY
Free oleic acid (50 µM) did not alter rat pancreatic lysosomal stability in vitro.
Using acid phosphatase as a lysosomal marker enzyme, values for latency and supernatant enzyme (calculated as a per cent of control values and expressed as means (SEM)) were as follows: latency — 143.6 (38.7) %; supernatant enzyme — 96.4 (2.8) % (four experiments).
Discussion
Experimental ethanol administration results in increased fragility of pancreatic lysosomes and the simultaneous accumulation of cholesteryl esters in the pancrease.
Ethanol induced fragility of pancreatic lysosomes has been observed in the absence of any morphologic evidence of pancreatic damage making it unlikely that it is a secondary phenomenon.
This study shows that cholesteryl oleate can disrupt pancreatic lysosomes in vitro suggesting that cholesteryl esters may be responsible for the lysosomal fragility observed in vivo.
In contrast, ethanol and acetaldehyde did not have any apparent deleterious effect on lysosomal stability.
The concentrations of cholesteryl ester seen to increase lysosomal fragility in vitro(15 and 20 mM) were greater than those observed in the rat pancreas in vivo (5 mM).
The requirement for higher concentrations to disrupt pancreatic lysosomes may reflect the fact that, in an in vitro system, the period of incubation of isolated lysosomes with cholesteryl ester is necessarily limited (30 minutes in our study) whereas in the previous in vivo study, lysosomes were exposed to increased levels of cholesteryl esters for a much longer period (up to four weeks).
The effect of cholesteryl ester on pancreatic lysosomal latency appeared more pronounced than the effect on supernatant enzyme (Figs 2, 3) although significant changes in the proportion of supernatant enzyme were also seen.
A somewhat similar result was observed in vivo where chronic ethanol administration was associated with decreased lysosomal latency but unaltered values for proportion of supernatant enzyme.
This differential effect on the two parameters of lysosomal stability may indicate that the predominant effect of chronic ethanol administration and of cholesteryl ester is to increase the permeability of pancreatic lysosomal membranes rather than to completely disrupt the organelles.
Thus, enzyme substrates may have greater access to enzymes within the lysosomes resulting in increased pre Triton enzyme activities and decreased latency (methods).
Complete disruption of lysosomes also occurs, but to a lesser extent resulting in less marked release of enzyme into the supernatant.
It is unlikely that the effect of cholesteryl esters on pancreatic lysosomes is an artefact related to release of free fatty acids during preparation or incubation of phosphatidylcholine vesicles.
The maximum concentration of free fatty acids to which the lysosomes were exposed (50 µM) did not disrupt pancreatic lysosomes after in vitro incubation.
The mechanism whereby cholesteryl esters decrease the stability of pancreatic lysosomes is not known.
There have been only limited studies which directly address the effect of cholesteryl esters on the stability of biologic membranes.
Forrest and Cushley have reported that incorporation of cholesteryl esters increases the permeability of model membranes to ions 10 fold.
Chronic ethanol administration to rodents has been shown to increase the cholesteryl ester content and to decrease the microviscosity of hepatic plasma membranes.
In addition, there is evidence from the work of Hamilton and Small that cholesteryl oleate molecules incorporated into model membranes are aligned with the carbonyl group close to the aqueous interface and the sterol ring and fatty acyl chain parallel to the acyl chains of phospholipid, thereby exerting a disordering effect.
It is conceivable that the observed destabilising effect of cholesteryl esters on lysosomes could be an indirect one, possibly mediated by disruption of zymogen granules in the lysosome enriched fraction and release of their contents.
This is an unlikely explanation, however, for two reasons.
First, pancreatic zymogen granules contain inactive precursors of the digestive enzymes (proteases, phospholipases) likely to be injurious to lysosomal membranes.
Second, a protease inhibitor was used to counter any autoactivation which may have occurred during isolation.
The concentration of ethanol used (150 mM) was much higher than that usually found in the blood of ethanol fed animals or alcoholic individuals.
Despite such a relatively high concentration there was no demonstrable alteration in pancreatic lysosomal stability.
Similarly, the acetaldehyde concentration used (5 mM), although much higher than that detected in vivo(0–25 µM), failed to produce any evidence of lysosomal damage.
The lack of an acute effect of ethanol or acetaldehyde on pancreatic lysosomes in vitro, however, does not exclude the potential pancreatotoxicity of these compounds in vivo .
For example, acetaldehyde has been shown to form circulating cytotoxic adducts with serum albumin.
Furthermore, chronic ethanol consumption has recently been shown to increase the synthesis of pancreatic digestive enzymes and ethanol and acetaldehyde have been shown to inhibit pancreatic exocrine secretion.
These latter changes could contribute to the increased glandular content of digestive enzymes observed after ethanol feeding and may predispose the gland to autodigestion.
The pathogenesis of alcoholic pancreatitis can be approached in two ways:(i) by studying factors influencing the individual susceptibility to the disease or (ii) by studying constant effects of ethanol on the pancreas.
It is well known that only a minority of alcoholics are afflicted with clinical pancreatitis and the issue of individual susceptibility to alcoholic pancreatitis has recently been reviewed.
In essence, however, the predisposing factors remain unknown.
The study reported in this paper has adopted the latter approach and has explored one of the constant metabolic effects of ethanol on the pancreas — namely, increased lysosomal fragility, which may render the organ susceptible to autodigestion by facilitating contact between pancreatic digestive enzymes and lysosomal hydrolases.
This study has shown that cholesteryl esters can disrupt pancreatic lysosomes in vitro and thus supports the notion that cholesteryl esters may mediate the increased pancreatic lysosomal fragility observed after experimental ethanol administration.
Ethanol induced lysosomal fragility may permit release of lysosomal proteases and their subsequent contact with digestive enzymes, thereby predisposing the pancreas to autodigestion.
The implication is that cholesteryl esters may play an important role in the pathogenesis of alcohol induced pancreatic injury.
Role of smoking and alcohol in metaplasia and risk of cancer in Barrett's columnar lined oesophagus
Abstract
Smoking and alcohol consumption predispose to oesophageal mucosal damage and exacerbates gastro oesophageal reflux.
The alcohol and smoking habits of patients with severe oesophagitis (n=24), Barrett's columnar lined oesophagus (CLO)(n=58), and adenocarcinoma arising in CLO (n=23) were studied.
There was no significant difference between the age (median 67, 64, and 65 years respectively) or duration of symptoms (median 10 years) in each group.
Patients with benigh CLO were significantly more likely to be non-smokers and non-drinkers, or both than patients with both severe oesophagitis and adenocarcinoma (p).
Of those who smoked or drank, patients with CLO had a smoking history of a median 15 pack years (range 2–60 pack years), which was less than both the severe oesophagitis (median 45.5, range 5–150 pack years)(p), and adenocarcinoma groups (median 55.25, range 4–200 pack years)(p).
Patients with adenocarcinoma had smoked for more years in total (median 38.5, range 4–54 years) than patients with CLO (median 29.5, range 6–55 years)(p).
Patients with severe oesophagitis (median 38.5, range 27–55 years) and adenocarcinoma patients had a similar long history of smoking both of which were greater than CLO patients (p).
Half of the severe oesophagitis group drank more than 40 units/ week and six more than 100 units/week (median 40, range 1-units/week), whereas CLO patients who drank did so more moderately (median 10, 1–100 units/week)(p).
Adenocarcinoma patients also had a somewhat greater alcohol intake than CLO patients, median 15 (1–100 units/week)(p).
Smoking and alcohol consumption do not predispose to the development of metaplastic columnar lined oesophagus in patients with severe gastro-oesophageal reflux but are strongly associated with the development of adenocarcinoma in patients with established Barrett's oesophagus.
The recognition of Barrett's columnar lined oesophagus (CLO) is important because of the well established association with the development of dysplasia and adenocarcinoma.
Endoscopic surveys suggest that 10–15% of patients with symptomatic reflux will be found to have CLO.
Most cases of adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus can be shown to arise in CLO that is already present and the incidence of adenocarcinoma of the oesophagis is rising.
The factors that start changes of an adenocarcinoma nature in CLO are unknown.
Smoking is known to be an important risk factor for development of squamous carcinomas of the oesophagus in the Western world and thus could be a likely candidate for adenocarcinomatous change.
Also an association with smoking and oesophageal adenocarcinoma has been noted.
Smoking has been implicated in the development of CLO in itself and the association with cancers arising in CLO could be explained on the basis of induction of oesophageal columnar metaplasia rather than transformation from metaplasia to neoplasia.
Consumption of alcohol is often closely linked with smoking.
CLO develops in a background of severe reflux and continous acid exposure of the ulcerated lower oesophagus as shown in animal models.
Smoking exacerbates gastro-oesophageal reflux by reducing lower oesophageal sphincter pressure and increasing the frequency of gastro-oesophageal reflux episodes, reducing oesophageal acid clearance, increasing gastric acid secretion, and duodenogastric reflux.
Smoking may prevent healing of oesophagitis by reducing salivary epidermal growth factor secretion and reduces the rate of healing in response to anti-reflux medication.
This study aims to assess the role of smoking and alcohol in the development of adenocarcinoma in CLO and to distinguish its role as a carcinogen from its possible role in the pathogenesis of Barrett's oesophagus.
Patients and methods
Three groups of patients were studied: patients with CLO (n=58), median age 64 (range 31–83), sex ratio 3:1 male to female.
Patients with adenocarcinoma arising in CLO (n=23), median age 65 (range 52–82), sex ration 7:1 male to female.
Patients with severe reflux oesophagitis (n=24), median age 67, sex ratio 3:1 male to female.
Patients with CLO who were under surveilance were identified on the Royal Liverpool Hospital and Broadgreen Hospital endoscopy unit computers.
The diagnosis was confirmed at endoscopy and biopsy specimens taken.
Patients with less than 5 cm of CLO proximal to the gastro-oesophageal junction defined by endoscope within the tubular oesophagus were excluded.
Adenocarcinoma arising in CLO was defined as either:(1) Adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus arising in patients with CLO already present;(2) Adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus confined solely to the oesophagus and associated with specialised type metaplastic CLO;(3) Adenocarcinoma in situ in Barrett's oesophagus requiring oesophagectomy.
Patients with adenocarcinoma in CLO were identified at follow up of existing CLO or presented de novo to the surgeons and gastroenterologists of the hospitals taking part in the study.
The Cardiothoracic Centre Liverpool is a regional referral centre.
Severe reflux oesophagitis was sefined as circumferential ulceration of the oesophagus in association with stricturing.
Patients with this condition occurring within three years of the date of the study were identified and those still under the care of the endoscopy service were recalled.
Biopsy evidence of the absence of metaplastic columnar epithelium was obtained in all cases, however, because the need to perform an additional endoscopy compliance was in the order of 60%.
Patients were questioned on the duration of symptoms and their current and past smoking histories.
Age of starting smoking, cigarettes per day and years of abstinence, and regular alcohol intake.
A pack year was defined as 20 cigarettes per day smoked for one year.
A unit of alcohol was defined as a half a pint of beer or one sixth of a gill of spirits.
All data were collected using a standardised face to face interview by one of the authors (MRG) in the endoscopy unit or on the ward.
All statistics were calculated using the ARCUS Professional statistics package.
Mann Whitney U non-parametric analysis was used throughout other than where stated.
Results are expressed as median and range.
Results
AGE, SEX, AND DURATION OF HISTORY
There was no significant difference between the age of the groups (median 64, 65, and 67 respectively) or the length of their reflux history (median 10 years in each group)(Fig 1).
The sex ratio of the CLO and severe oesophagitis groups was similar (3 males:1 female) but there was an excess of males in the adenocarcinoma group (7 males:1 female).
Only one patient was non-white.
Previous gastric surgery was uncommon in all three groups and showed no significant difference.
SMOKING HISTORY
A significant proportion of patients with CLO had never smoked (24 of 58); non-smokers were significantly less common in the severe reflux oesophagitis (6 of 24) and adenocarcinoma groups (1 of 23)(pχ 2 )(Fig 2).
Of those who smoked, patients with CLO had a smoking history of 15 median pack years (range 2–60 pack years) which was less than both the severe oesophagitis (median 45.5, range 5–150 pack years; p) and adenocarcinoma groups (median 55.25, range 4–200 pack years)(p)(Fig 2).
Severe oesophagitis patients (median 38.5, range 27–55 years) and adenocarcinoma patients had similar long histories of smoking, both of which were greater than CLO patients (p)(Fig 3).
Patients with adenocarcinoma had smoked for more years in total (median 38.5, range 4–54 years) than CLO patients (median 29.5, range 6–55 years)(p).
Severe oesophagitis patients had a similar long history of smoking to adenocarcinoma patients (median 38.5, range 27–55 years); again much greater than CLO patients (p)(Fig 3).
CLO patients who smoked started at a slightly later age (median 20, range 12–38) than patients with severe reflux oesophagitis (median 18, range 10–28), and adenocarcinoma patients (median 18, range 14–25)(p).
ALCOHOL HISTORY
A significantly greater proportion of CLO (23 of 58) patients were non-drinkers than severe reflux oesophagitis (4 of 23) and adenocarcinoma patients (5 of 24)(p).
Of those patients who drank alcohol, half of the severe oesophagitis group drank more than 40 units/week and six drank more than 100 units/week (mean 50.2, median 40, range 1-units/week).
CLO patients who drank did so more moderately (mean 15.3, median 10, range 1–100 units/week)(p).
Adenocarcinoma patients also had a significantly greater alcohol intake than CLO patients and two drank more than 100 units per week (mean 24.7, median 15, range 1–100 units/ week)(p)(Fig 4).
ROLE OF GENDER
In order to exclude a bias as a result of a higher proportion of men being included in the adenocarcinoma group the data were analysed again for male patients only who smoked or drank.
All male adenocarcinoma patients had smoked with a median value of 46 pack years (mean 55 pack years, range 4–200).
Eleven of 36 male CLO patients had never smoked and of those who had smoked the median pack years accumulated was 15 (mean 20.3, range 5–60 pack years).
Four of 19 male severe reflux oesophagitis patients had never smoked; for those who had smoked, values were median 62 packs years, mean 55, range 5–150 pack years.
CLO had significantly more non-smokers and those who had smoked lightly before than the severe reflux oesophagitis or adenocarcinoma groups (p).
Nine of 36 CLO, three of 19 severe reflux oesophagitis, and three of 21 adenocarcinoma patients did not drink.
Median alcohol consumption of those who drank was 11 units in CLO patients, which was less than the 50 units (p) in severe reflux oesophagitis patients but not as much as the adenocarcinoma group (12.5 units/week).
ROLE OF HIATUS HERNIA
The total study population (104 patients with complicated gastro-oesophageal reflux disease) was subdivided into those with hiatus hernia and those without hiatus hernias.
Those without hiatus hernias had heavier smoking histories overall (median 26 pack years) than those with hiatus hernias (median 9 pack years)(p)(Fig 5).
The alcohol intake of patients without hiatus hernia was also greater than those with hiatus hernias (median 10 v 4 units/week)(p)(Fig 6).
Discussion
The association of Barrett's columnar lined oesophagus (CLO) with gastro-oesophageal reflux has been well established and the causative nature of ulceration followed by prolonged acid exposure has been shown in the dog model.
The degree of acid reflux in association with CLO is greater than that seen in patients with reflux oesophagitis as a whole.
Lower oesophageal sphincter pressure, number and duration of reflux episodes of less than pH 4, and total duration of reflux episodes, however, is similar in CLO to patients with severe reflux oesophagitis without columnar metaplasia.
For this reason an additional agent has been hypothesised in the pathogenesis of CLO.
The main contender, bile reflux, has been excluded by both clinical and experimental studies, although bile reflux may be linked to stricture formation in patients with CLO.
We have shown that patients with CLO have low concentration and production of salivary epidermal growth factor compared with normal controls and patients with severe reflux oesophagitis.
Epidermal growth factor is cytoprotective in the upper gastrointestinal tract and the inability to resist and heal ulceration may be a factor influencing development of CLO in patients with severe gastro-oesophageal reflux.
This study seems to refute the hypothesis that CLO is an end stage disease occurring in old patients with longer histories of reflux because of age, sex ratio, and duration of symptoms is similar to the severe reflus oesophagitis group.
Although our sample may not be rigorously representative of the whole population with complications of reflux it is representative of the population presenting to physicians and surgeons with a gastroenterological intrest.
The CLO study group included a greater proportion of non-smokers and non-drinkers than the severe reflux oesophagitis group, strong evidence against smoking and alcohol as pathogenic factors for CLO.
CLO patients who did smoke started to smoke at a slightly later age, smoked for fewer years, and accumulated fewer pack years of smoking than the severe reflux oesophagitis group.
This supports the finding of Robertson et al who saw no difference between the smoking and drinking habits of their CLO group and controls drawn from an orthopaedic clinic.
This also supports the hypothesis that smoking and alcohol are not risk factors for development of CLO in patients with severe gastro-oesophageal reflux.
Patient sex does not seem to be an independent variable and exclusion of women from the analysis did not affect the differences seen between the groups.
Two of three women with adenocarcinoma had accumulated more than 45 pack years each and one was also a heavy drinker.
As with other respiratory and upper gastrointestinal tumours the male predominance seen is probably a result of the heavy smoking and drinking habits of men compared with women.
Interestingly 20 of 23 severe oesophagitis patients smoked or drank heavily and of those who claimed no such history one had scleroderma and another may not have disclosed full details.
Previous gastric surgery was not a feature of our tumour group as has been suggested by previous studies.
The prolonged oesophageal acid exposure seen in patients with hiatus hernia is because of reduced acid clearance but it is only seen in patients with lower oesophageal sphincter deficiency.
Our results suggest a link between smoking and alcohol and complications (CLO, severe oesophagitis, or adenocarcinoma) of acid reflux in patients without hiatus hernias.
Smoking and alcohol may promote the reflux inflammation lower oesophageal sphincter dysfunction cycle in those without a hiatus hernia.
Ninety five per cent of those patients who developed adenocarcinoma in CLO smoked and half of them drank more than 40 units of alcohol per week representing a subgroup of patients with metaplastic CLO at increased risk.
Patients with adenocarcinoma had smoking and drinking histories similar to those patients with severe oesophagitis.
This implies that, while development of CLO in itself is independent of smoking and alcohol, a combination of CLO and excessive smoking is required for the start and promotion of adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus.
In animal models of oesophageal carcinogenesis, gastro-oesophageal reflux promotes tumour development but reflux alone does not cause tumour formation in the absence of a carcinogen.
Increased proliferative activity in gastrointestinal epithelium promotes tumour formation and inhibition of proliferation reduces tumour incidence.
Adenocarcinoma and dysplasia are frequently associated with the specialised type CLO and dysplasia and carcinoma are thought to arise within specialised type CLO.
The specialised histological type is associated with a higher rate of cell turnover as shown by thymidine labelling and a higher proportion of cells in cycle (by proliferating cell nuclear antigen immunolocalisation) than junctional and fundic types.
Accelerated proliferation increases the likelihood of exposure of cellular genetic material to mutagenic stimuli which can cause the genomic instability that comes before the development of malignancy.
Our hypothesis is that specialised type CLO predisposes to the development of adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus because of increased proliferative activity and that tumour development occurs in patients exposed to an environmental carcinogen most commonly ingested in cigarette smoke.
Prospective screening of populations with known CLO require 52 to 440 patient years of follow up to detect one adenocarcinoma.
Most adenocarcinomas of the oesophagus, however, arise in CLO that is already established and the disparity between incidence and prevalence can be accounted for by the high proportion of the population with unrecognised disease, up to 20 times that of those detected.
It is necessary to identify a subpopulation of patients with CLO who are at especially high risk of developing adenocarcinoma so that a screening protocol that is cost effective and has an impact on patient survival can be developed.
Smoking does not predispose to the development of CLO in patients with severe gastro-oesophageal reflux.
The middle aged or elderly patient who presents with CLO and a heavy smoking history, however, is already at increased risk of developing adenocarcinoma, a risk not reversed by anti-reflux sugery.
Smokers and ex-smokers make up a subgroup at increased risk for development of adenocarcinoma in Barrett's oesophagus; those patients with specialised type metaplasia and who may benefit from surgical intervention warrant regular endoscopy and biopsy whereas non-smokers are at low risk.
Concentrations of 5-ASA and Ac-5-ASA in human ileocolonic biopsy homogenates after oral 5-ASA preparations
Abstract
Intramucosal 5-aminosalicyclic acid (5-ASA) and acetylated 5-ASA (Ac-5-ASA) concentrations were determined in ileocolonic biopsy specimens from 61 patients with irritable bowel syndrome treated for one week with near equimolar doses of different slow release preparations of 5-ASA (Claversal, Asacol, or Pentasa) or azo-bound drugs (Salazopyrine, Dipentum).
The transit time in these patients was accelerated by a laxative, metoclopramide, and colonic lavage.
The presence of 5-ASA in the mucosa was confirmed by autofluorescence.
The highest concentrations of 5-ASA were obtained after Asacol (mean (SEM), 298.5 (37.3) ng/mg wet wt), followed by Claversal 500 mg (108.8 (11.7) ng/mg wet wt) and Pentasa (25.7 (2.2) ng/mg wet wt).
Very low concentrations only were observed after Claversal 250 mg (0.3 (0.03) ng/mg wet wt), Salazopyrine (1.2 (0.1) ng/mg wet wt), and Dipentum (11.0 (3.2) ng/mg wet wt).
The results for Ac-5-ASA were similar but the concentrations were generally lower.
Serum concentration-time curves over eight hours were obtained from 34 healthy volunteers after a single oral dose of 400 to 500 mg of the different drugs.
For the slow release forms, an apparently inverse relationship was found between the area under the curve of the serum concentrations and the intramucosal concentrations, supporting the importance of the local availability of the drug.
This inverse relationship was absent for the azo-bound drugs.
Colonic washout induced mechanical removal of intraluminal 5-ASA with a secondary disturbance in absorption resulting in a rapid decline in the serum concentrations.
However, only for Dipentum did this result in significantly lower 5-ASA mucosal concentrations.
This is the first reported attempt to evaluate the mucosal availability of 5-ASA after different oral preparations.
It shows that where transit time is accelerated higher mucosal concentrations occur after slow release preparations (except for Claversal 250 mg) than after azo-bound drugs.
Additional studies are necessary to correlate these concentrations with clinical effects.
5-Aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) is the active moiety of sulphasalazine in inflammatory bowel disease.
Because orally ingested, uncoated 5-ASA is almost completely absorbed in the stomach and the proximal small intestine, several methods have been used to delay and prevent this proximal absorption.
In delayed release preparations (Asacol, Claversal), 5-ASA is coated with an acrylic based resin that dissolves at a pH greater than 6.
In a slow release preparation (Pentasa), 5-ASA is encapsulated in microspheres of ethyl-cellulose that gradually dissolve in the small intestine.
Finally, in azo-bound drugs, bacterial azoreductases liberate two 5-ASA molecules (Dipentum) or split off 5-ASA from sulphapyridine (Salazopyrin).
The presumptive topical mode of action of 5-ASA suggests that it would be best to obtain a maximal concentration at the site of disease (the terminal ileum and colorectum).
The urinary output of 5-ASA reflects the fraction that is absorbed in the small intestine, and that is not therefore available for the topical effect; the faecal concentrations represent the residual 5-ASA present in the bowel lumen.
An ‘ideal’ 5-ASA containing preparation would give a low plasma concentration and urinary recovery but high faecal concentration.
Faecal concentrations, however, provide only an indirect estimate of the drug available in the tissues.
We have therefore developed a high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system to determine 5-ASA and its metabolite acetylated 5-ASA (Ac-5-ASA) in biopsy specimen homogenates.
We confirmed the presence of 5-ASA in the mucosa by autofluorescence and correlated these concentrations with serum concentration-time curves in healthy volunteers.
At the same time we determined Ac-5-ASA concentrations to evaluate the mucosal acetylation.
Finally, we analysed the influence of oral colonic washout by comparing serum concentration-time curves in the steady state condition with those after the start of the lavage.
We excluded this effect as sole explanation for the very low mucosal concentrations after Claversal 250 mg tablets or azo-bound drugs by comparing rectosigmoidal concentrations in patients with and without lavage.
Methods
SUBJECTS AND STUDY DESIGN
Patients
Sixty one patients (27 men and 34 women)(mean age: 41.8 years; range: 17–74 years) with irritable bowel syndrome were treated for one week with one of the following drugs:
Salazopyrine (Pharmacia AB, Uppsala, Sweden), 500 mg×6 per day (n=22);
Pentasa (Gist Brocades, Delft, Netherlands) 250 mg×6 per day (n=7);
Dipentum (Pharmacia AB, Uppsala, Sweden) 250 mg×6 per day (n=6);
Claversal (Smith Kline Dauelsberg, Göttingen, Germany) 500 mg×3 per day (n=9), 250 mg×6 per day (n=8);
Asacol (Byk Cedona, Haarlem, Netherlands) 400 mg×3 per day (n=9).
These regimens provide near equal daily doses of 5-ASA.
On days five to seven, 7.5 mg sodiumpicosulfate (Laxoberon — Boehringer Ingelheim) were given to facilitate colonic washout.
The last dose of 5-ASA was given at 6 am on day eight, after overnight fasting.
No food or liquid was allowed until 9 am, when oral colonic lavage was started with an Endopeg solution (Vanden Bogaerde, Brussels, Belgium).
Before each litre, 5 mg metoclopramide were given orally.
Most patients needed 3 l (range 2–5 l) to obtain complete evacuation of the gut.
Ileocolonoscopy was performed between 2 and 3 pm with an Olympus CF 10 endoscope under sedation with 5 mg midazolam and 50 mg pethidine.
Two adjacent biopsy specimens were taken from the terminal ileum, the ileocaecal valve, and from eight different sites in the colon.
The specimens were weighed immediately, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C.
The interval between taking and freezing the biopsy specimens was less than 30 minutes.
In eight patients taking slow release preparations, the influence of colonic washout on the serum concentration-time curve was analysed by comparing the curves on days seven and eight.
The influence of lavage was evaluated by comparing the corresponding concentrations on both days.
In 13 patients, the influence of the washout on the mucosal Ac-5-ASA and 5-ASA concentrations was analysed by determining the concentrations in rectal and sigmoid biopsy specimens from patients who had not undergone lavage.
A similar time interval was respected between the intake of the last dose of drug and the endoscopy.
Its influence was analysed for the preparations with very low mucosal concentrations (Dipentum (n=6), Salazopyrine (n=4) Claversal 250 mg tablets (n=3)).
Six biopsies specimens were taken from every patient.
Finally, in a few patients treated with Asacol (n=2), Claversal 500 mg tablets (n=2), Salazopyrine (n=2), and Claversal 250 mg tablets (n=1) additional biopsy specimens were taken from the ileum, sigmoid, and rectum.
The specimens were frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen and subjected to autofluorescence microscopy.
Volunteers
Serum concentration-time curves over eight hours were obtained from 34 healthy volunteers after a single oral intake of 500 mg Pentasa (n=5), two Claversal 250 mg tablets (n=5), one Claversal 500 mg tablet (n=8), 1000 mg Salazopyrin (n=5), 500 mg Dipentum (n=5), or 400 mg Asacol (n=6).
ASSAY METHODS
HPLC
HPLC was used to determine 5-ASA and Ac-5-ASA in serum and in biopsy specimen homogenates as previously described.
The detection limit for both 5-ASA and Ac-5-ASA in biopsy homogenates was approximately 1 ng; the results were expressed as ng/mg wet wt.
The detection limit for serum was 2 ng/ml.
Autofluorescence microscopy
All samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.
Cryostat sections (6 µ) were cut within one hour (Frigocut model 2700 Reichert-Jung).
The slides were air dried for 10 minutes at room temperature and then embedded in Entellan.
The slides were examined immediately with an Orthomat microscope equipped with a Leitz Wetzlar fluorescence light source for epifluorescence.
Any delay was avoided since the lack of fixation and instability of 5-ASA at room temperature and daylight exposure promotes the fading of the autofluorescence.
Since 5-ASA fluoresces when excited with a light source at 300–400 nm, a heatfilter (4 mm BG38 suppression filter), an excitation light filter (broad band incident light 2 mm UG1) and an emission light filter (suppression filter K 430) were applied.
Results
The mean (SEM) concentrations of 5-ASA and Ac-5-ASA in biopsy homogenates from different sites of the ileum and colorectum after drug intake are given in Tables I and II.
The concentrations after the intake of Asacol, Claversal 500 mg tablets, and Pentasa are significantly (p; Mann-Whitney U test) higher than after Claversal 250 mg tablets, Dipentum, and Salazopyrin.
The serum concentration-time curves of 5-ASA and Ac-5-ASA after a single dose of the different preparations in healthy volunteers are given in the figure.
T m a x , C m a x , and AUC are listed in Table III.
For the slow release preparations an apparent inverse relationship is found between the AUC (Table III) and the mucosal concentrations (Table I).
This inverse relationship is absent for the azo-bound drugs.
Colonic washout reduces rapidly and significantly the serum concentrations of 5-ASA and Ac-5-ASA as seen in Table IV.
The effect of the colonic washout on the mucosal 5-ASA concentrations after the intake of Salazopyrin and Claversal 250 mg tablets was only moderate.
In contrast, a much higher effect was found for Dipentum (Table V).
Autofluorescence
Biopsy specimen homogenates from patients taking Claversal 250 mg tablets and Salazopyrin show only a faint fluorescence.
In contrast, patients on Claversal 500 mg tablets and Asacol show considerable staining of the cytoplasm of the covering enterocytes and the presence of fluorescence in single cells in the lamina propria with irregular cytoplasmatic extensions.
These cells are probably macrophages.
Discussion
In steady state conditions, 5-ASA and Ac-5-ASA concentrations in biopsy homogenates depend on the galenic formulation and the chemical structure of the oral preparations tested.
Significantly higher concentrations are found after most slow release preparations (Asacol, Pentasa, and Claversal 500 mg tablets) than after azo-bound preparations (Dipentum and Salazopyrin).
A large intra- and interindividual variation is found, as reported in all previous pharmacokinetic studies of the different 5-ASA formulations.
The apparent inverse relationship between the AUC and the intramucosal concentrations of the slow release drugs supports the hypothesis that the local availability of the drug is the major determinant of the mucosal concentrations.
After the intake of azo-bound drugs, the mucosal concentrations are very low despite a low systemic absorption.
This suggest impaired delivery of 5-ASA, also found in the study of Rijk et al in which the influence of the acceleration of the intestinal transit on urinary and faecal excretion of several 5-ASA preparations was analysed.
The diarrhoea induced by the colonic washout in our study provokes mechanical removal of the intraluminal 5-ASA.
This results, even in steady state, in a rapid decline in serum concentrations.
This reduction excludes early dissolution of the coat by Endopeg (pH 7.4).
Although this washout interferes with the pharmacokinetic profiles of the preparations, it is essential for the endoscopy and prevents the contamination of the biopsy specimens with the (Ac-) 5-ASA from the stools.
Furthermore, we can assume that this mechanical effect is similar for all preparations tested and does not greatly influence the results of the mucosal concentrations.
More difficult to study and quantify is the effect of the washout on the cleavage of the azo-bond.
The acceleration of transit shortens the time available for the bacteria to split the azo-bond.
The sterilisation of the gut by the washout can even prevent the cleavage.
This effect seems more important for Dipentum than for Salazopyrin resulting in significantly higher mucosal concentrations in the rectum and sigmoid in patients who had not had previous washout.
In contrast, mucosal concentrations after Salazopyrin remain low in both situations.
To minimise the effects of the washout we observed a delay of three hours between the intake of the last dose and the start of the washout to permit drug transit to the ileum, particularly because transit had already been accelerated in the previous three days by laxatives.
This delay was based on our serum curves after single doses and on the studies of scintigraphic images of tablet disintegration showing a correlation with serum blood levels of 5-ASA.
Our serum curves show the start of the release after one to three hours.
Apparently no correlation is seen between the time of maximal release (T m a x ) and the mucosal concentrations suggesting that although the release pattern of the different drugs has certainly influenced our results, this influence should not be overestimated.
A concentration gradient through the colon is not observed except for a slight predominance in the ileum and right hemicolon after Asacol and Claversal 500 mg corresponding to a large release of the drug.
To our knowledge, no previous studies of mucosal concentrations are available.
Faecal concentrations are used as indirect estimates of the local concentrations.
Comparative studies of faecal concentrations after different aminosalicylates are few and provide contradictory results.
Staerk Laursen et al estimated colonic concentrations by means of in vivo dialysis of faeces and found that in patients in steady state with inactive ulcerative colitis concentrations after olsalazine (Dipentum) and Asacol were almost double those seen with equimolar doses of Pentasa and salofalk (Claversal).
In contrast, Rijk et al evaluated the faecal excretions of healthy volunteers with accelerated transit time after a single dose.
The trend in their results was similar to our findings: faecal excretion of 5-ASA was highest after Asacol, followed by Pentasa and Claversal, and lowest after Dipentum and Salazopyrin.
In our study, autofluorescence microscopy confirmed that 5-ASA penetrates the mucosa and does not only cover its surface.
Moreover, this covering is reduced to a minimum by the colonic washout.
The important differences in intramucosal concentrations after Claversal 250 and 550 mg tablets were intriguing.
Both drugs differ from 5-ASA not only in terms of the dosage but also in the composition of the coating, giving rise to a different bioavailability.
Finally, we found significant Ac-5-ASA concentrations in the biopsy homogenates.
In contrast with serum, the ratios of 5-ASA to Ac-5-ASA are higher than 1, reflecting the abundant supply of 5-ASA.
This acetylation is an irreversible and partially local2 process.
However, the role of this probably therapeutically inactive metabolite remains unclear.
In conclusion, it can be said that during accelerated intestinal transit, slow release preparations, except for Claversal 250 mg tablets, provide higher steady state mucosal concentrations than azo-bound drugs.
These concentrations are inversely related to the AUC in serum supporting the role of the local availability of the drugs.
Because of the proved clinical efficacy of Salazopyrin, despite very low mucosal concentrations, studies to correlate these concentrations with clinical benefit are necessary.
Effect of acute cigarette smoking on gastric secretion
Abstract
The effects of smoking one cigarette on a plateau of submaximal gastric secretion induced by histamine acid phosphate () were measured in eight normal volunteers and in eight duodenal ulcer subjects.
The rate of secretion in both groups fell by 25% without any statistically significant change in pyloric loss or duodenogastric reflux.
It is concluded that smoking reduces gastric secretion.
The possibility that relative antral hypoacidity induced by regular smoking produces an increase in parietal cell mass via a feedback mechanism mediated by gastrin is discussed: such a mechanism would explain the previously reported positive correlation between maximal gastric secretion of acid and the total dose of cigarettes.
In 1604 James I of England published his famous Counterlaste to Tobacco in which he made what was probably the earliest statement on the effects of smoling on gastric secretion: ‘…and by causing over quick digestion, fill the stomach full of crudites.’
Nearly 400 years later three major studies have shown that maximal gastric secretory capacity is increased in smokers compared with non-smokers, in both controls and those with duodenal ulcers.
This increase in gastric secretion showed a positive correlation to the total number of cigarettes smoked.
To determine whether acute smoking has an acute effect on gastric secretion that can explain the findings of the chronic studies, the effect of this on gastric secretion was studied using the same methods as those used in the chronic studies of Whitfield and Hobsley.
Methods
Eight healthy volunteers considered free from peptic ulcer disease (controls) and eight patients with endoscopically proved duodenal ulcer disease were studied.
Before the study, which was always performed in the morning, all subjects were starved for eight hours, avoided all medicines known to affect the gastrointestinal tract for at least 12 hours, and refrained from smoking for at least 24 hours.
The effects of smoking a single cigarette of the subject's normal brand were studied on an approximately 50% submaximal plateau of gastric secretion.
All subjects studied were regular smokers but the duodenal ulcer patients were significantly older and had therefore smoked for a longer period (Table I).
The demographic data for the two groups are shown in Table I. Gastric secretion was corrected for pyloric loss using phenol red, and for duodenogastric reflux, using the sodium content of the aspirate.
Gastric secretion thus corrected is referred to as Vg and is measured in ml/h.
Vg reflects the true volume of gastric secretion under test conditions since any artefact caused by changes in pyloric loss and duodenogastric reflux is removed.
Basal secretion was measured before the induction of the submaximal plateau — formal maximal studies were not performed as this would have made the test unacceptably long.
Maximal values of Vg for similar groups are shown to allow comparison.
The submaximal plateau was started after a one hour basal period.
The submaximal plateau lasted for three hours, and half way through this the subject smoked one cigarette at the usual rate.
The submaximal plateau was induced with an intravenous infusion of histamine acid phosphate (16 nmol kg -1 h -1 ; 0.005 mg kg -1 h -1 ) because previous work in this department has shown that this concentration will produce a plateau of secretion that is about 50% of maximal.
The informed consent of the subjects and the permission of the Clinical Investigations Panel had been given.
Results
VG
In the control group, the median Vg before smoking was 145.8 ml h -1 ; after smoking a single cigarette gastric secretion fell by 23% to 112.2 ml h -1 ; this was significant (p).
In duodenal ulcer patients the median Vg before smoking was 237.6 ml h -1 ; after smoking a single cigarette there was a 26% fall in Vg to a median value of 175.2 ml h -1 (p)(Table I).
The median Vg in each group for each 10 minute collection period was found and plotted against time to show the relation between the change in Vg and cigarette smoking.
In both the controls and the duodenal ulcer subjects the new lower plateau of gastric secretion was attained by the end of 11th collection period, about 20 minutes after beginning to smoke the cigarette (Figs 1 and 2).
PYLORIC LOSS
In the control patients pyloric loss was 16.8 ml h -1 before smoking and was unchanged afterwards; an apparent rise in the duodenal ulcer patients from 30 ml h -1 to 37.5 ml h -1 (25%) was not significant (Table I).
In both controls and duodenal ulcer subjects the plateau of pyloric loss was not as stable as that of Vg.
There was no discernible change in the pattern of pyloric loss in relation to the smoking of a single cigarette.
DUODENOGASTRIC REFLUX
In both groups there was a fall of about 50% in duodenogastric reflux after smoking a single cigarette (controls, 1.3–0.7 ml h -1 and patients, 33.0–14.7 ml h -1 (Table I).
However, in neither group did this reach significance.
Again, no change in the pattern of duodenogastric reflux related to the smoking of a single cigarette could be discerned.
In summary, acute cigarette smoking caused a significant fall in Vg but seemed to have no significant effect upon transpyloric fluid shifts.
Discussion
Analysis of the results showed remarkable uniformity in the change in Vg after smoking a single cigarette.
In 15 of 16 subjects studied there was a fall in Vg, and in both control and patient groups this was of the order of 25% (range, 1.9–66.7%).
The effect of smoking did not seem to be greater in one group than the other; the percentage fall was the same in both.
Although factors such as stature, age, and duodenal ulcer disease affect the absolute values of Vg they can have little or no effect on the changes in someone consequent upon smoking a cigarette: thus despite the small numbers studied the 25% fall is highly significant.
This fall in Vg might, however, be an artefact caused by ‘fade’.
‘Fade’ is a pharmacological phenomenon in which the response of a steady state system to a given stimulus decreases with time; thus it might be argued that the cigarette smoking had no effect and that the observed reduction in secretion simply coincided with system fade.
Work from this unit, in which seven subjects were subjected to a three hour submaximal histamine stimulation preceded by a one hour basal period, did not show any evidence of fade.
This is in agreement with other workers who have shown that fade does not occur with histamine.
It is also possible that the fall in Vg is an indirect result of smoking, because nausea has been shown to inhibit significantly pentagastrin stimulated gastric secretion.
No subject, however, complained of nausea or any other gastrointestinal tract symptoms at any time during the submaximal plateau.
Over the years there have been many studies of the effects of smoking on gastric secretion.
The results have varied, showing no effect in some and decreased secretion in others.
Many studies can be discounted since they have used unnatural smoking protocols, or basal or maximal gastric secretion as a plateau.
Basal secretion is variable over short time periods and is also subject to the errors inherent in low volume collections.
Maximal stimulation overcomes these criticisms but cannot show a stimulatory effect and may well swamp any inhibitory effect of smoking.
A submaximal infusion of either pentagastrin or histamine to produce about 50% stimulation is ideal.
This produces a steady state in which any stimulatory or inhibitory effects can be measured.
The studies that fulfil these two simple criteria are few.
The volume and acidity of aspirated gastric juice are the net result of gastric secretions, duodenogastric reflux, pyloric loss, and swallowed saliva.
The failure to account for pyloric loss and duodenogastric reflux means that any true change in gastric secretion could be masked by changes in transpyloric fluid flux; the effect of swallowed saliva is at present impossible to correct for.
The only other study that made corrections for pyloric loss and duodenogastric reflux came to conclusions that are the same as ours.
After smoking a single cigarette there is a significant nicotine and carboxyhaemoglobin boost which reaches its peak within 10 minutes.
The half-life of nicotine and carboxyhaemoglobin is thought to be approximately two hours.
These chronological events relate well with the acute changes in gastric secretion seen after smoking a single cigarette (Figs 1 and 2).
Chronic nicotine administration to rats in a dose equivalent to a daily consumption of 10–15 ciragettes a day produced a significant increase in basal gastric secretion.
The acute response to nicotine in these chronically treated rats was a significant decrease in gastric secretion.
In man, nicotine given parenterally has been shown to have an acute inhibitory action on the gastric secretion.
Carboxyhaemoglobin concentrations have not been studied in direct relation to gastric secretion in man but this agent may cause relative anoxia of the cell; both anoxia and the thiocyanate ion (another cigarette product) have been shown to prevent the transformation by histamine of a resting parietal cell to its active acid secreting state.
It has been shown (see introduction) that chronic smoking leads to a chronically raised gastric secretory capacity in both control and duodenal ulcer subjects, and that the secretory capacity of an individual is related solely to the size of his parietal cell mass, and not to any change in the sensitivity of those cells; this also appears to be the case in smokers.
Acute cigarette smoking has been shown to reduce Vg significantly in controls and duodenal ulcer subjects.
Is there any evidence that links these acute and chronic changes in Vg which occur in relation with cigarette smoking?
Gastrin is released from the antral G cell and stimulates the parietal cell to secrete hydrochloric acid into the gastric lumen: the acid then acts on the antrum ot inhibit further release of gastrin and hence of hydrochloric acid.
Any factor that interferes with this negative feedback loop could lead to a rise in gastrin values.
It has been shown, for example, that taking antacids is associated with a rise in serum gastrin provided that alkalisation occurs, and that chronic acid inhibition with H 2 antagonists leads to a rise in serum gastrin in both rats and humans.
Thus, the chronic 20 cigarette a day smoker exposes himself to regular falls in gastric secretion associated with each cigarette smoked.
This could in turn lead to interference with the normal negative feedback loop and result in a rise in the circulating gastrin values; indeed serum gastrin has been found to rise significantly after cigarette smoking in patients with duodenal ulcer disease.
Recent work has shown that the maximal acid output and antral mucosal gastrin values were significantly raised in smokers compared with non-smokers with duodenal ulcer disease; there was though no difference in the parietal cell sensitivity to gastrin between smokers and non-smokers.
The authors concluded that increased antral gastrin is important in the pathogenesis of an increased maximal acid output in smokers with a duodenal ulcer.
If acute smoking and the associated fall in gastric secretion lead to a rise in circulating gastrin, what effect could this have?
As well a regulating the parietal cell secretion of H + and Cl -ions, gastrin is known to have a tropic effect on the parietal cells independent of its secretory potential; this has been shown experimentally and clinically; patients with the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome have an abnormally high circulating gastrin with marked gastric mucosal hyper-plasia and an increased parietal cell count.
It could also be argued that the increased maximal secretory capacity of smokers is the result of chronic vagal stimulation which enhances acid secretion.
If this were the case one would also expect to find increased basal secretion in smokers — in our study this was not the case.
In 48 controls and 106 duodenal ulcer patients we found no evidence of increased basal Vg in smokers compared with non-smokers.
We conclude that acute cigarette smoking causes a significant fall in gastric secretion (Vg), and suggest that this results in raised gastrin values that have a tropic effect on the parietal cell, thereby accounting for the raised secretory capacity of chronic smokers.
Endosonography can detect residual tumour infiltration after medical treatment of oesophageal cancer in the absence of endoscopic lesions
Abstract
Endoscopic ultrasound (endosonography) is usedul in the preoperative staging of oesophageal tumours.
It may also have a role in evaluation and surveillance of patients with inoperable carcinomas.
Thirty four patients with inoperable oesophageal cancer were investigated by endosonography and computed tomography before medical treatment.
In 10 patients receiving combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy, the endoscopic lesions resolved and biopsy specimens were negative.
When endosonography suggested the persistence of tumour infiltration in these patients, a local recurrence or distant metastases appeared within a few months.
In contrast, when no infiltration was detected, no tumoral recurrence or progression was observed within eight months.
These results suggest that endosonography is better than endoscopic biopsy specimens and computed tomography in assessing the response of oesophageal carcinoma to non-surgical treatment.
Assessing the response to chemotherapy in oesophageal carcinoma is not easy and is based on data provided by endoscopy, histopathology, and computed tomography.
This study aimed to assess the usefulness of endosonography in the surveillance of these patients.
Patients and methods
Between December 1989 and January 1991, endosonography was performed in 34 patients (31 men and three women, median age 62 years) with inoperable oesophageal cancer (squamous cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma in Barrett's oesophagus).
Studies were performed with an echo endoscope with switchable frequency of 7.5 MHz or 12 MHz (Olympus EU-M3).
Endosonography findings were staged according to the new TNM classification by the International Union Against Cancer (UICC) 1987 (Table I).
These patients were not operated on because of distant metastases (50%), poor general condition (42%), or concurrent cancer (8%).
Both endoscopic ultrasound and computed tomography were carried out in all patients.
The treatment consisted of combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy (three cycles of: fluorouracil 800 mg/m per day for five days, cisplatinum 70 mg/m per day on day 2 of the cycle, and radiation thereapy, 15 Gy in fractions of 3 Gy per day) in 24 patients; chemotherapy alone in four patients; radiotherapy alone in three patients; and endoscopic therapy alone (electrocoagulation of the tumour) in three cases.
A second evaluation was performed three months afterwards and included endoscopy, abdominal ultrasonography, and computed tomography.
Endosonography was systematically carried out when the endoscopic lesion had resolved, and when biopsy specimens were negative.
Subsequently, endosonography and computed tomographic examinations were performed every two or three months to assess the response to treatment or relapse.
Results
Twenty four patients still had an endoscopically detectable tumour or positive biopsy specimens.
Treatment was carried out and further evaluation was performed with endoscopy, computed tomography, and endosonography according to the endoscopic aspect (data not given).
Ten patients seemed to be tumour free endoscopically, and they all received combined treatment.
The initial evaluation of these patients was as follows: stage I (n=2); stage IIA (n=1); stage IIB (n=1); and stage IV (n=6).
After the three cycles of combined chemo and radiotherapy, the staging according to endoscopic ultrasound was the following (Table II): T0N0 (n=4)(3 T0N0M0, 1 T0N0M1); T0N1 (M1)(n=1); T2N1 (n=1); and T3N1 (n=4).
No parietal thickening or lymph node involvement was shown in two patients with tumours staged T3N1 and in one patient with tumour staged T2N1 by endosonography.
Among the three patients with T0N0M0 staging, two had no endoscopic recurrence after 10 months, and an intraepithelial recurrence was diagnosed in the third after 7.5 months.
No endoscopic recurrence was diagnosed in the two patients with T0N1M1 tumours, but the died five and 10 months later from metastases.
A recurrence was found in 3 of 5 patients with T3N1 or T2N1 tumours within two months.
Among the two patients with T3N1 tumours without endoscopic recurrence, metastases appeared in one and were responsible for death 10 months later but in the second the tumour diminished (T0N1) after chemotherapy and has remained unchanged with successive endoscopic ultrasound examinations.
Discussion
Endoscopic ultrasound has been considered the best procedure for assessing the preoperative staging of oesophageal carcinoma but few studies have considered its efficacy in evaluating the response to chemo or radiotherapy.
Roubein et al evaluated endosonography in eight patients with resectable carcinoma after pre-operative chemotherapy, and accurately predicted histopathological findings.
In the report of Souquet et al , when endosonography was considered normal, no recurrence was observed for the following three months, but a recurrence was usually confirmed immediately or within three months when endosonography indicated infiltration by tumour.
Tio et al have shown the accuracy of endosonography in the follow up of patients who were given combined intraluminal and external radiotherapy for inoperable oesophageal carcinoma.
In 5 of 8 patients who survived for more than one year without evidence of local recurrence, endoscopic ultrasound showed a characteristic hyperechoic pattern interpreted as radiation fibrosis.
Souquet et al also emphasised the difficulty in interpreting parietal thickening in patients evaluated after radiation therapy.
Our preliminary results suggest that endosonography is better than computed tomography in the evaluation of tumour infiltration in these patients.
Actually, we have noted either an endoscopic recurrence or the appearance of metastases in patients with evidence of tumour infiltration (Fig 2), but in those with no sign of tumour infitration there was no recurrence within eight months.
We therefore conclude the endoscopic ultrasound is better than endoscopic biopsy tissue and computed tomography in assessing correctly the response of oesophageal carcinoma to medical treatment.
Additional information provided by this technique can indicate whether current treatment should be maintained or the schedule changed.
Effect of the dietary fibre content of lifelong diet on colonic cellular proliferation in the rat
Abstract
The effect of the fibre content of lifelong (18 months) diets on proximal and distal colonic cellular proliferation and short chain fatty acid (SCFA) content was investigated in 20 rats.
Rats were fed a low fibre diet (17 g/kg non-starch polysaccharides NSP) or the stock diet (133 g/kg NSP).
The higher fibre fed rats had increased caecal and colonic total contents (p) and SCFAs than the low fibre fed rats (caecal SCFAs: higher fibre rats 96.4 (6.8) µmol/g wet weight v low fibre 22.7 (3.0): p, colonic SCFAs: higher fibre 52.3 (3.1) µmol/g wet weight v low fibre 6.9 (2.2) µmol/g wet weight: p).
Cellular proliferation was increased in the proximal colon (bromodeoxyuridine labelling index, higher fibre 9.3, low fibre 8.4 p; flow cytometry, % cells in S phase higher fibre diet 7.9, low fibre 6.9; p) and there was a shift of proliferating cells to a higher region in each crypt.
There was no significant difference in percentage of cells in S phase in the distal colon of rats in both diet groups.
The proliferative zone, however, was expanded in the distal colon of the higher fibre diet fed rats.
This study indicates that long term higher fibre intake in rats is associated with a modest increase in cellular proliferation in the proximal colon but not the distal colon.
It has now been shown by several laboratories that ingestion of fibre causes an increase in cellular proliferation in the colon of rats.
This is probably related to an increase in the exposure of the colonic epithelial cells to short chain fatty acids (SCFA), which in addition to being a possible energy source for the cells, may also promote cellular proliferation.
Most studies, however, have looked at short term ingestion of isolated dietary fibres compared with elemental diets and some have measured the effects of post starvation recovery.
In this study, we have fed rats diets containing 133 g/kg non-starch polysaccharides (NSP) or 17 g/kg NSP for 18 months, equivalent to lifelong ingestion in man, and have measured both cellular proliferation and colonc SCFA.
Although increased cellular proliferation does not necessarily relate to carcinogenesis, some researchers have suggested the use of increased cellular proliferation as a marker of cancer risk in man and since some dietary fibres have been shown to increase colonic cellular proliferation and to increase tumour yield in nimal models of colon cancer the effect of fermentable fibre on cellular proliferation may be a cause of concern.
The relevance of these animal models is difficult to assess, as by using carcinogens such as 1,2 dimethylhydrazine (DMH) they concentrate on the final development of the tumour and not on the previous initiating stages of this long multistage process.
Dietary fibre may have more inhibitory actions earlier in the process.
Since Deschner and Maskens have suggested that abnormalities in the distribution of S phase cells withinin the proliferative compartment of the colonic crypts are important in defining the degree of cancer risk in high colon cancer risk patients, we have measured the distribution of cells in S phase in addition to the overall numbers of S phase cells in each crypt in this study.
Methods
Forty male Wistar rats, caged in groups of five, were maintained on the test diets for 18 months and were housed on refined cat litter to prevent them eating the bedding.
There were 20 rats in each diet group, fed either a low fibre diet (Special Diet Services Ltd, Whitam) containing 17 g/kg non-starch polysaccharide (NSP 12 g/kg soluble NSP), 124 g/kg digestible protein, 801 g/ kg digestible carbohydrate, 20 g/kg lipid, and vitamin and mineral mixes at 55 g/kg providing 2990 cal/kg, or a higher fibre diet (CRMX; Labsure Ltd) containing 133 g/kg NSP (31 g/kg soluble fibre), 205 g/kg digestible protein, 569 g/ kg digestible carbohydrate, 24 g -kg lipid, and 63 g/kg vitamin and mineral mixes providing 2885 cal/kg.
(NSP measured by Englyst method.)
The rats were bred specifically for this study and the parents of experimental animals were fed the appropriate diet for one month before mating.
After 18 months, the rats were killed by overdose of ether.
After death, the caecum and colonic contents were collected, weighed wet, and then freeze dried and reweighed.
SCFA in the caecal and colonic contents of 10 rats in each group were analysed by gas liquid chromatography.
The caecum and colon were then carefully dissected and divested of fat, rinsed in isotonic saline, blotted, and weighed.
COLONIC MUCOSAL PROLIFERATION
This was assessed by two methods which measured the number of colonic cells in S phase of the growth cycle.
Five rats from each group were given an intraperitoneal injection of 50 mg/ kg bromodeoxyridine (BrdUrd) one hour before death.
After death, 1 cm sections of proximal (1 cm from caecum) and distal colon (2 cm from anal sphincter) were removed from all animals for cell proliferation analysis.
The colonic segments were fixed in Carnoy's fixative and processed to paraffin.
For BrdUrd analysis 3 µm sections were taken through the vertical crypt axis at intervals of 100 µm and plated onto Poly L-lysine coated slides for subsequent immunostaining.
Sections were immunostained with mouse anti-BrdUrd antibody (Becton-Dickinson) at a dilution of 1 in 400, visualised with diaminobenzidine, and counterstained with Myer's haematoxylin.
The sections were scored blind for Brd Urd labelling.
Sections were scored at the original magnification ×400 for the number of stained cells along each crypt.
Forty crypt columns were analysed for each section of colon.
Since the colonic tissue was to be analysed by x ray diffraction for another study, BrdUrd could not be used in all animals as we had not established that the label had no effect on x ray scatter, therefore similar segments of colon to those described above were taken from all 40 rats and the DNA content of the epithelium analysed by flow cytometry.
Colonic epithelium was shed after incubation in EDTA solution using the method of Bjerkness and Cheng and fixed in 50% ethanol.
Nuclear suspensions were then prepared by digestion of the fixed epithelium in 0.5% pepsin solution (pH 1.5) at 37°C for 30 minutes.
After washing and filtration, the nuclei were stained in propidium iodide solution (50 µg/ml) containing RNAase (1 mg/ml) for 30 minutes at 4°C and analysed in an EPICS CS flowcytometer (Coulter Corporation).
DNA histograms were collected for 3×10 nuclei and the proportion of cells in S phase calculated using a linear S phase fitting programme.
This was well correlated with the values obtained from those with BrdUrd labelling in the 10 rats in whom both methods were used (r=0.72, p=0.001).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results of the low fibre and higher fibre diet animals were compared by Student's t test.
Differences between the cululative BrdUrd labelling distributions of the colonic crypts of both groups were analysed by two sample, two tailed Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.
Results
Rats fed the higher fibre diet weighed less (at 18 months; higher fibre rats 570 g (26)v low fibre rats 675 (28) g) and were more healthy than the low fibre fed rats.
At post mortem, the low fibre diet rats had more abnormalities and tumours of body tissue than the higher fibre diet rats.
The higher fibre rats had eight testicular tumours and one mesenteric lesion.
In the low fibre group there were six rats with nodular and reticulated lungs, 14 with pale or nodular livers, eight with a pale or nodular pancreas, and 12 rats with testicular tumours.
Eight rats were so obese that they developed anterior abdominal wall abrasions.
There was also a higher incidence of diverticulosis in the low fibre diet rats (41.2% v 0%).
Three rats in the low fibre diet group suffered from middle ear infections and were removed from the study.
CAECAL AND COLONIC CONTENTS
The wet weight of caecal contents was significantly less in the low fibre compared with the higher fibre diet rats (Table I, p=0.001).
Dry weight, however, was not changed.
The proportion of water was therefore significantly less in the low fibre group (Table I).
The concentration and total amount of caecal and colonic SCFAs were less in the low fibre diet rats (Table II, p= 0.001).
The pattern was also different, with a higher proportion of SCFAs as butyric acid and a lower proportion of propionic acid in both the caecal and colonic content samples (Table II).
CAECAL AND COLONIC TISSUE WEIGHTS
The caecal and colonic tissue weights were significantly higher in the rats fed the higher fibre diet than those fed the low fibre diet (Table I, p=0.001).
MUCOSAL PROLIFERATION
The BrdUrd labelling index showed a trend for increased cell proliferation in the higher fibre rat group, which reached statistical significance in the proximal colon but not in the distal colon (Table III, p=0.05).
The labelling index was higher in the proximal colon than in the distal colon for both groups of rats (Table III, p).
Analysis of the distribution of the BrdUrd label along each crypt showed a significant shift in the population of dividing cells towards the luminal surface in both sites of the colon (Figure).
The results of the flow cytometry analysis showed similar changes in the rate of cellular proliferation as the BrdUrd method (Table III) but, these changs were of smaller magnitude indicating the lower sensitivity of this method.
Discussion
In this study we have shown that long term (18 months) ingestion of 133 g/kg dietary fibre resulted in a modest but significant increase in cellular proliferation in the crypts of the proximal colon but not the distal colon of the rat compared with an intake of 17 g/kg dietary fibre.
This was relatd to a several fold increase in the concentration of SCFA in the caecum.
Caecal contents were used to indicate the composition of the proximal colonic contents since it was difficult to obtain sufficient proximal clonic contents in the low fibre diet rats to assay for SCFA.
We have attributed these effects to the difference in fibre content of the two diets but some contribution may have been made by the difference in protein content as some protein may have reached the colon and also have been fermented.
The higher fibre diet fed to the rats could be regarded as their normal fibre intake and thus this study compared normal fibre intake with low fibre intake.
This may also be said of the fibre intake in man where we generally eat a low fibre diet but evolved eating a high fibre diet.
In addition since the rats on the low fibre diet were heavier at the end of the study, although food intake measurements at 12 weeks showed no difference between the two groups, it is possible that the differences in morbidity were due a variation in calorie intake since caloric restriction is known to prolong life in rodents.
In addition to the changes in the numbers of cells in S phase of the cell cycle, the cumulative distribution of these cells also changed so that the population of dividing cells was spready further up the crypt in the higher fibre fed rats.
This occurred in both the proximal and distal colon.
It has been proposed that an early event in the development of colorectal tumours is the loss of the ability of colonic epithelial cells to undergo terminal differentiation as they migrate up the crypt towards the luminal surface.
This is reflected in a retained capacity for DNA synthesis which leads to an expansion (stage 1) or a shift (stage 2) of the proliferative compartment towards the upper portions of the crypt.
In this study it seems that the higher fibre diet expanded the proliferative compartment in both the proximal and distal colon and would thus appear to increase the risk of colonic mucosal cell instability.
However, although significant, these changes in cell proliferation were very modest (<increase) and the most marked changes in cellular kinetics were seen in the proximal colon where most of the fermentation occurred and the highest SCFA concentrations were seen.
The butyric acid concentration was particularly high in the proximal colon and this has been reported to induce diffrentiation in colonic cancer cell lines.
Colonic cancer in the proximal colon is very rare, most lesions occur in the distal colon.
Furthermore, none of the rats developed colonic neoplastic changes in the 18 month period.
This many be because the rat model was not exposed to an intiating factor or that 18 months was still not long enough to allow cancer to develop.
Some of these rats (five animals in the low fibre group, six in the higher fibre group) did develop testicular cancer.
In addition to the large increases in colonic SCFAs, there were also important changes in the physical properties of the colonic contents.
The luminal volume was greatly increased, and this was more liquid.
Transit time was not measured but it would be expected to be shorter.
These factors may have led to a decrease in the exposure of the colonic mucosa to carcinogens and may have protected the colon and negated any effect of the modest increases in the proliferative zone in the distal colon.
It is difficult to assess the role of dietary fibre in the development of colonic cancer but our results suggest that the increases in cellular proliferation associated with long term higher dietary fibre intake are modest, occur mainly in the proximal colon and are unlikely to present a significant risk for mucosal instability in the distal colon.
Conversely, a low fibre diet did not lead to changes in cellular proliferation which might be associated with mucosal instability.
A reduced fibre content of the diet on its own might be an important contributor to the development of colonic cancer.
These experiments suggest that this is unlikely in the rat.
Many other contributing factors would appear to be necessary.
Mortality from Crohn's disease in Leicestershire, 1972–1989: an epidemiological community based study
Abstract
Mortality among 610 people with Crohn's disease identified in a population based study from 1972–89 was assessed.
In Europeans the overall mortality was not increased, the standardised mortality ratio (SMR) was 71.8 (95% confidence interval (CI) 49 to 101).
The SMR in South Asians was 0,(95% CI 0 to 1590).
The SMR varied with the site of disease () and was highest in those with duodenal and jejunal involvement (SMR=210, 95% CI 44 to 621).
Survival curve comparisons showed that colonic disease carried a worse prognosis than terminal ileal disease () or mixed site disease ().
Mortality was particularly high during the first six years.
It was increased in patients who had undergone more than one resection (SMR=137, 95% CI 28 to 401) or an ileoanal anastomosis (SMR=357, 95% CI 9 to 1070), although no difference was significant.
Mortality did not change significantly during the study.
Such information needs to be made available, not just to patients, their families, and their doctors, but perhaps more importantly, to actuaries, insurers, and those advising employers.
Crohn's disease causes chronic gastrointestinal symptoms which may require prolonged medication and surgical intervention.
There is concern from earlier studies that the disorder shortens life.
Patients are anxious that the diagnosis may jeopardise their chance of acquiring life insurance, mortgages, and employment.
Studies from various referral centres have suggested that these fears are justified, although community based reports offer some reassurance.
The aim of this study was to investigate the mortality from Crohn's disease among 610 patients on a community based register in Leicestershire.
Methods
Altogether 610 patients diagnosed as having Crohn's disease while resident in Leicestershire between 1 January 1972 and 31 December 1989 were included in this study.
A total of 582 were Europeans and 28 South Asians.
The site of disease and demographic details have been described elsewhere.
Each patient's state of health on 1 January 1990 was investigated during the spring of 1991.
This allowed a period of one year for information on deaths to emerge.
Patients were contacted at their last known address.
Those who had moved were traced through various means including the local Electoral Register, Leicestershire Family Health Services Authority, the local Registrar of Births and Deaths, and the NHS Central Register at Southport in Lancashire.
The date on which patients had died but not the cause was recorded.
In Europeans the expected mortality for each patient was found by summating the risk each year according to current age from standardised mortality statistics from the East Midlands obtained from the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys.
This was done from the year of diagnosis until 1 January 1990 or until death.
Patients were considered at risk of death until death or 1 January 1990.
For Asians, the expected mortality was calculated in a similar manner, using immigrant mortality data.
Age specific mortality was used throughout the study taking into account increasing age, but in Asians unlike Europeans this could not be adjusted for changing mortality rates from year to year as these data were unavailable.
The sum of each subject's cumulative hazard of death was compared with observed deaths to find the standardised mortality ratio.
Expected mortality was found for each age band, disease site, and decade of diagnosis.
Standardised mortality ratios (SMR) were compared with one another by χ 2 2 tests.
Confidence intervals (CIs) were found using a Poisson distribution.
A survival curve and life table were constructed using the Kaplan-Meier technique and CI calculated.
Survival curves were compared using a log rank test.
The survival for each diseas site and decade of diagnosis was also calculated by Cox's model, using stepwise regression with stratification by age at diagnosis with BMDP software.
Results
The state of health of 605 of the 610 patients was determined; the remaining five were lost to follow up, but their deaths had not been reported to the NHS Central Register.
In Europeans there were 32 deaths during the study period, although 44.6 were expected.
Those who died were aged between 15 and 84 years.
The SMR was 71.8 (95% CI 49 to 101, χ 2 2 1 =3.6, NS) in Europeans.
No deaths occurred in South Asians (95% CI 0 to 1590, χ 2 2 1 =0.2 NS), though only 0.2 would be expected.
In view of the small numbers and lack of deaths South Asians were not studied further.
The only group for which the estimated SMR was raised was that of patients aged under 20 years at diagnosis in which only one death occurred (SMR=191, 95% CI 5 to 1060, χ 2 2 1 = 0.44 NS)(Table I).
Overall, there was little evidence that the SMR varied with the age at diagnosis (χ 2 2 =2.8, NS).
The SMR varied with the site of Crohn's disease (χ 2 2 4 =10.6, NS)(Table II).
A comparison using the log rank test showed a difference in survival times in patients with disease at various sites.
A significantly smaller proportion of patients with colonic disease survived compared with those with Crohn's disease of the terminal ileum or mixed sites (χ 2 2 1 =9, pand χ 2 2 1 = 4.7, prespectively).
The highest mortality was among those who had had colonic disease for less than six years (Fig 1), although the CIs of the difference between survival proportions are wide.
These findings also reflect the higher proportion of elderly patients with colonic disease.
The survival curve for the study shows that the highest mortality is during the first four years after diagnosis.
Subsequently survival plateaus (Fig 2).
A log rank test analysis showed survival was significantly better in the 1970s than the 1980s (χ 2 2 1 =8, p).
To assess whether mortality was changing during the study, the SMRs for patients diagnosed from 1972–80 and from 1981–9 were compared at 1 January 1981 (SMR=44.7) and 1 January 1990 (SMR=94.5) respectively and were not significantly different (χ 2 2 1 =2.15 NS), which suggests the difference in survival curves for the two decades is due to a different age distribution of patients and does not reflect poorer clinical care in the 1980s.
Such survival curves take no account of the age structure of the patients.
The survival curve was steeper in the 1980s than the 1970s (Fig 2).
The differences between survival proportions at 3, 6, and 9 years were 0.04 (95% CI 0.016 to 0.08), 0.051 (95% CI -0.01 to 0.1), and 0.09 (95% CI -0.12 to 0.3) respectively.
Although this could suggest the improved survival in the 1970s was due to better management early in the disease, the similarity of the SMRs in each decade would again suggest that the age distribution of patients is the explanation.
Stepwise regression analysis with stratification by age confirmed that colonic disease was the only variable that was significantly related to survival (log likelihood=-132.894, χ 2 4 <).
The difference in survival between patients diagnosed during the 1970s and 1980s was due to the greater number of patients with colonic disease diagnosed during the 1980s.
Mortality was greatest in patients who had had more than one resection (SMR=137, 95% CI 28 to 401) or an ileoanal anastomosis (SMR=357, 95% CI 9 to 1070), although no difference was significant.
Patients who had only one resection or a panproctocolectomy had normal SMRs of 65 (95% CI 36 to 107) and 67 (95% CI 18 to 172) respectively.
Discussion
Among Europeans the prognosis for people with Crohn's disease is comparable with that of the general population irrespective of age at diagnosis.
Survival is least good for those people with isolated duodenal or jejunal disease.
Surgery does not effect survival in either an adverse or beneficial way, but there is a suggestion that mortality is increased in those who undergo ileoanal anastomosis.
However, observational studies such as these should be interpreted with care, all that can be fairly concluded is that the group operated on do not differ significantly from the remainder and the longer a patient is followed the greater the change of surgery.
There is still evidence that the young and newly diagnosed patients remain at increased risk of death and it is among these that we must concentrate our efforts.
Despite difficulties in diagnosis and subsequent communication the survival of South Asian migrants with Crohn's disease is good and may reduce our concern about their compliance with treatment.
The survival of patients diagnosed in the 1980s was poorer than that of those diagnosed during the 1970s, although it remains comparable with that of the general population.
The change was due to the greater proportion of patients with colonic disease, which in this study had a worse prognosis.
The incidence study has shown that there were more older patients and relatively more patients with colonic disease during the 1980s.
There have been few community based studies of mortality in Crohn's disease.
In one of earliest, an SMR of 216 was reported in a study of 219 patients in the City of Cardiff.
In a review of 185 patients in Copenhagen County, Binder et al reported that ‘survival did not differ from an age-sex matched background population,’ a finding directly comparable with that in Leicestershire.
The design of the studies was similar, so although the difference is likely to be real, the reason is unclear.
A different community based study in South Wales, based on 79 patients, found an SMR of 127, which was not significantly different from normal.
In contrast, hospital based series have usually shown an increased mortality, which probably reflects the severity of disease in patients referred to specialist units from outside the area.
Community studies give a better overall picture of disease outcome but as most are also based around units with a specialist interest in the condition they too should reflect the best rather than the average treatment.
These results, like those from Copenhagen, should offer reassurance to patients and their families.
Mortality is not increased in Europeans or South Asians.
Such information needs to be made available, not just to patients and their doctors, but perhaps more importantly, to actuaries, insurers, and those advising employers.
Bleeding varices in the elderly
Bleeding from oesophageal varices carries a high mortality.
Althugh endoscopic sclerotherapy is undoubtedly the first line of treatment today, 30% of patients fail to leave hospital alive, and even in specialist units this figure is not less than 20%.
Since the death rate after upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage from all causes rises sharply in the elderly one might be forgiven for assuming that this section of the population has such an appalling outlook that variceal haemorrhage should be most humanely ‘treated with limited transfusion and sedation.’
In reality the prognosis of this condition is a good deal better — several groups having reported both short and long term survival rates that are broadly comparable with those found in younger patients.
Three of these studies, from Cologne, Leeds, and Sheffield, have provided comparative data on large numbers of patients and their combined experience of 149 subjects over the age of 65 years (the German patients were 70 and over) is large enough to allow comparison with 475 younger patients from the same centres.
The message from all three units is similar — hospital mortality from the first variceal bleed is not significantly greater in the elderly than in patients under 65 years.
Two year follow up of those who survived to leave hospital shows that while there is an increased mortality among the elderly this is entirely due to non-hepatic causes and that once survival is corrected for age there is no difference between the two cohorts, being of the order of 55% at one year and 50% at two years.
The predictive value of the Child's classification at the time of variceal bleeding in terms of predicting survival seems to be as accurate in the elderly as in younger cirrhotic patient.
Closer examination of these studies shows a number of features that may help in the clinical management of these patients.
Firstly, the aetiology of the cirrhosis is somewhat different; alcoholic liver disease is less common in the elderly but there is an increased prevalence of both cryptogenic cirrhosis and primary biliary cirrhosis in this group.
Elderly women with bleeding varices seem to outnumber men, perhaps to be expected in view of the lower incidence of alcoholic cirrhosis and the longer life expectancy of women.
Although not explicitly stated, all the studies suggest that good early survival rates are a direct result of endoscopic sclerotherapy and its early energetic and effective use.
Nevertheless, variceal haemorrhage was the cause of death in almost half the patients who died during their first hospital admission while infection and hepatorenal failure accounted for most of the rest.
Although late rebleeding often occurred and resulted in readmission to hospital, it accounted for only a minority of deaths.
Myocardial infarction and stroke, two of the major causes of death in the elderly, are hardly mentioned in these series.
This could imply that individuals with portal hypertension are protected against these degenerative vascular disorders but the possibility of a selection bias against referring patients with bleeding varices who have multiple non-hepatic pathologies cannot be excluded.
The severity of the bleeding in the referred patients was similar to that in younger patients; at least 20% required balloon tamponade in order to control active bleeding at the time of initial endoscopy.
What general recommendations can be made about the overall management of bleeding varices in the elderly?
With a few notable exceptions, the policy should be similar to that advocated for younger subjects.
Regardless of age, any patient with suspected variceal bleeding should be submitted to immediate resuscitation and urgent endoscopy so that the source of the haemorrhage may be identified and appropriately treated.
Intravariceal injection of sclerosant should be performed at the same time, if the expertise is available.
If extensive and continuing bleeding precludes this, balloon tamponade should be considered, as this is highly effective and has a low complication rate in experienced hands.
Not only will this ‘buy time’ to assist with the resuscitation of the patient, but if necessary it will enable the patient to be transferred to a unit where endoscopic sclerotherapy can be undertaken.
Many would hesitate to use vasopressin in view of the high incidence of ischaemic heart disease in this age group, but it may be combined with nitroglycerin when the harmful vasconstrictor side effects are less common.
Terlipressin (glypressin) and somatostatin have been advocated as effective drugs in the management of acute variceal haemorrhage but there are no published reports of their use specifically in the elderly.
Once initial control has been achieved, a maintenance sclerotherapy programme should be instituted with repeated injections every three weeks or so until thrombosis of the varices has been achieved and subsequent periodic checks every three to six months to ensure maintenance of variceal occlusion.
Although not absolutely contraindicated, propranolol should be used with caution.
The elderly are more prone to heart failure and chronic obstructive airways disease so that the risk of adverse effects is likely to be proportionately greater.
Major problems arise when variceal bleeding is not adequately controlled by these procedures, which in the English series occurred in less than 10% of patients.
Portacaval shunt surgery has not enjoyed great popularity because of the very high incidence of postoperative encephalopathy in the elderly.
Early reports that the technically more complex distal splenorenal shunt might prevent this complication have not unfortunately been confirmed by subsequent experience.
Although there is no extensive published experience in elderly patients, oesophageal transection using a stapling device seems to offer an attractive emergency means of arresting haemorrhage.
This procedure will achieve temporary relief only since collateral veins are likely to develop across the anastomosis within a few months, and will ultimately bleed.
The likelihood of such a recurrence can be reduced by combining the operation with devascularisation of the upper stomach, although prolonged surgery may be undesirable in these patients.
The varices, if they recur and re-bleed, may then be amenable to sclerotherapy.
There is no clear evidence that prophylactic sclerotherapy is desirable for patients who have not bled from varices no matter how large these veins may be.
In addition to the problems of managing variceal haemorrhage, care and attention must be directed to other aspects of the liver.
Ascites should be treated with diuretics, although the elderly tolerate marked shifts in fluid and electrolytes less well than younger patients.
In particular, latent and overt potassium depletion is more common in older individuals.
Hypoglycaemia and infection are important and potentially lethal complications which should always be considered.
The increasing impairment of cerebral blood flow that accompanies senescence results in a greatr tendency to neuropsychiatric disturbances.
Thus an impaired conscious level frequently complicates variceal haemorrhage, and hepatic encephalopathy may be difficult to distinguish from a cerebro-vascular accident.
In common with other organs in the body, the metabolic activity of the liver is affectd by increasing age and prescription of all medication should be considered carefully with this in mind.
Extrahepatic disorders unrelated to cirrhosis in portal hypertension occur with greater frequency in the elderly: in our experience more than 10% of patients over the age of 65 years with variceal haemorrhage have glucose intolerance requiring treatment with either insulin or oral hypoglycaemic agents.
The increased frequency of malignant disease in this population is of importance in view of the major impact on overall management.
Both hepatoma (secondary to cirrhosis) and carcinoma of the head of the pancreas may induce portal hypertension and variceal bleeding by infiltration of the portal venous system, and haemorrhage is not infrequently the presenting clinical feature.
Rarely, other tumours may present in this way when extensive hepatic metastases interfere with the portal venous drainage.
These cases can usually be rapidly identified and diagnosed using non-invasive techniques such as ultrasound or computed tomography, and since the prognosis of these patients is so poor, management shuld be directed towards symptomatic relief alone.
Such cases exemplify th need for initial careful assessment so that appropriate immdiate and long term therapy can be instituted.
On the one hand variceal haemorrhage may be the final episode in a progressively deteriorating clinical disease state; alternatively, it may be a single potentially life threatening episode in a patient who can otherise expect several further years of good quality life.
In an understandable attempt to prevent unnecessary discomfort and suffering to the former we must be careful not to overlook or ignore the latter.
Role of dietary sulphate in the regulation of methanogenesis in the human large intestine
Abstract
Hydrogen produced during colonic fermentation may be excreted, or removed by H 2 consuming bacteria such as methanogenic and sulphate reducing bacteria.
In vitro, sulphate reducing bacteria compete with methanogenic bacteria for hydrogen when sulphate is present.
In this study we have tested the hypothesis that sulphate in the diet could alter CH 4 production in vivo.
Six methane excreting volunteers were fed a low sulphate diet (1.6 mmol/d) for 34 days with the addition of 15 mmol sodium sulphate from days 11–20.
Breath methane was measured and viable counts and metabolic activities of methanogenic bacteria and sulphate reducing bacteria determined in faeces.
Whole gut transit time and daily stool weight were also measured.
When sulphate was added to the diet, breath methane excretion decreased in three of the subjects while faecal sulphate reduction rates rose from 7.5 (0.5) to 20.3 (4.3) nmol SO 4 reduced/h/g.
Sulphate reducing bacteria, which were not detected during the control diet, were found and viable counts of methanogenic bacteria fell from 10 7 –10 9 /g faeces to 10 6 /g.
Methanogenic bacteria counts and breath CH 4 recovered after sulphate addition was stopped.
No change was found in the other three subjects.
Faecal weights and transit times were not different between study periods.
We conclude that methanogenesis is regulated by dietary sulphate if sulphate reducing bacteria are present.
Dietary sulphate may allow growth of sulphate reducing bacteria which inhibit the growth of methanogenic bacteria.
This may explain the absence of CH 4 in the breath of many people in western populations.
The large intestine salvages energy from dietary residues and endogenous organic matter not absorbed in the small intestine, through fermentation by colonic bacteria.
This process generates short chain fatty acids which are absorbed, and hydrogen and carbon dioxide.
Most people extrete hydrogen in breath and flatus but in 30–50% of western populations and in 80–90% of rural black africans, methane (CH 4 ) is also excreted.
CH 4 is produced by reduction of CO 2 with H 2 by methanogenic bacteria and epidemiological studies show that the carriage of these bacteria is determined in early childhood.
No dietary factors have been shown to affect colonisation of the large intestine with methanogens.
Molecular hydrogen is produced by oxidation of NADH 2 and FADH 2 generated during bacterial glycolysis.
High partial pressures of H 2 , however, slow bacterial hexose breakdown by impairing regeneration of NAD.
Energy efficient anerobic ecosystems therefore usually have H 2 consuming organisms.
In the rumen, H 2 is consumed by methanogenic bacteria and similarly, in methanogenic human subjects, 75% of the hydrogen excreted is as methane.
In non-methanogenic subjects, sulphate reducing bacteria consume some of the hydrogen produced in fermentation.
In vitro data show that sulphate reducing bacteria outcompete methanogens for H 2 but only if sufficient sulphate is available.
Sulphate availability may therefore be important in determining methanogenesis in man.
Sulphate concentration in the colon is largely dependent on dietary intake.
Changes in dietary sulphate could alter the activity of sulphate reducing bacteria and thus affect methanogenesis in the colon.
To test this hypothesis, six methanogenic subjects have been fed a low sulphate diet for 34 days supplemented with sodium sulphate from day 11 to 20.
Breath methane was monitored and metabolic activities of methanogenic bacteria and sulphate reducing bacteria studied in faecal samples.
Methods
SUBJECTS
Six healthy subjects (two men, four women, age 26–61 years) who had no history of gastrointestinal disease or use of antibiotics for at least three months took part in the study.
All excreted methane in their breath at least 5 ppm above background.
STUDY DESIGN
The study was conducted in the metabolic suite of the MRC Dunn Clinical Nutrition Centre, Cambridge.
The subjects were fed a controlled low sulphate diet for 34 consecutive days.
From day 11 to day 20, 15 mmol sodium sulphate was added to the diet.
End expiratory breath samples were collected three times daily throughout the study and analysed for hydrogen and methane concentration.
On day 10, 20, and 34 a faecal sample was collected for measurement of bacterial counts and metabolic activity.
Transit times were determined using a multiple dose marker technique.
Informed consent was obtained and the study protocol was approved by the ethical committee of the MRC Dunn Nutrition Unit.
DIET
The diets were prepared in the metabolic kitchen of the unit.
They consisted of three different, nutritionally balanced menus which were served in a three day rotation.
Average nutrient composition (% energy) was protein, 15%; carbohydrate, 55%; and fat, 29%.
The sulphate content of this diet has previously been measured at 1.7 mmol/day.
The subjects were allowed to drink tea and coffee, prepared with deionised water ad libitum.
From day 11 to 20 a dose of 5 mmol sodium sulphate in gelatin capsules, was given with each main meal (15 mmol/day).
GAS MEASUREMENTS
End expiratory breath samples were collected in dulplicate every day at 800 am, 300 pm, and 1000 pm using a collapsible tube with an open end as previously described.
Hydrogen concentrations were measured on a GMI Exhaled Hydrogen Monitor (FMI Medical Ltd, Renfrew, Scotland), and methane by gaschromatography (PYE 104, PYE-Unicam, Cambridge, England) using flame ionisation and a 2 m× 4 mm glass column packed with Poropak Q. Oven temperature was 50°C and the detector 100°C, with nitrogen as carrier gas.
Methane concentrations were calculated as the difference between breath and a corresponding room air sample.
BACTERIAL COUNTS
Viable counts of methanogenic bacteria were enumerated using the Hungate roll tube technique.
For enumeration of viable sulphate reducing bacteria the agar shake dilution method of Widdel et al was used with media and conditions of cultivation as described by Gibson et al .
The dilutions used give a detection limit of 10 2 viable counts per gram faeces for both methanogenic bacteria and sulphate reducing bacteria.
MICROBIAL ACTIVITY
Faecal slurries were prepared by diluting the stool samples in anaerobic sodium phosphate buffer (0.1 mol/l, pH 7.0) to a final concentration of 5% (w/v).
Lintners starch was added to a slurry portion of 60 ml in a serum bottle (70 ml capacity) to give a final concentration of 0.2% (w/v).
The bottles were gassed out with argon and then incubated for 48 hours at 37°C on an orbital shaker.
Hydrogen, methane and carbon dioxide production in the head space gas were measured by gas chromatography as described by Allison et al and hydrogen sulphide was determined using a colorimetric method after precipitation of S 2 -in 10% zinc acetate.
For determination of sulphate reduction rates the 3 5 S-SO 4 core injection and distillation method of Jorgensen was used (incubation time 18 hours).
GASTROINTESTINAL TRANSIT TIME
Transit times were measured once on the basal diet and once during sulphate feeding.
A modified version of the method described by Cummings et al was used.
On four consecutive days at 800 am 20 radiopaque plastic shapes, packed in gelatine capsules, were given orally.
The particles were distinctly shaped, and a different set was used for each day.
All faeces were collected, the times recorded, and the markers determined by radiography.
Transit time was calculated as the average passage time of all markers recovered.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Variations are expressed as sulphate reducing bacteria.
Analysis for significance were done using Student's t test for paired samples and the two group t test for unpaired samples.
Results
BREATH METHANE
Mean daily CH 4 concentrations in breath for each subject throughout the study are shown in Figure 1.
In three of the six subjects (responders) methane excretion showed a pronounced fall a few days after SO 4 was added to the diet, so that by 10 days with added sulphate methane concentration was less than 2 ppm in all samples measured in these three subjects.
By seven days after returning to the low sulphate diet, breath CH 4 concentrations had increased again and returned almost to control levels by the end of the study.
In the other three subjects (non-responders), methane excretion was not significantly affected by the sulphate supplement (Fig 1).
The average breath CH 4 concentrations during the last three days of each test period were calculated for responders and non-responders separately (Table I).
BREATH HYDROGEN
Table I shows mean breath hydrogen concentrations for the last three days of each test period for responders and non-responders.
There was no effect of the low sulphate and high sulphate diets.
BOWEL HABIT
When all subjects were taken together there were no differences in mean transit time, faecal weight, and faecal pH between the control diet and the sulphate supplemented diet (Table II).
In the three responders, initial faecal weight was higher, transit time was shorter, and pH was lower than in non-responders.
Both the basal diet and the sulphate supplement were well tolerated by all the volunteers and no gastrointestinal symptoms were reported.
BACTERIAL COUNTS AND MICROBIAL ACTIVITY
Typical gas production data from a faecal slurry of one responder is shown in Figure 2.
During the low sulphate period, there was active methanogenesis and little production of sulphide.
The latter increased markedly, however, when sulphate was added to the diet, while methanogenesis became suppressed by approximately 60%.
The complete data are shown in Table III.
In responders, viable counts of methanogenic bacteria decreased in the presence of extra sulphate in the diet while sulphate reducing bacteria were detected in low numbers.
Sulphate reducing activity and sulphide production rates in faecal slurries were significantly higher during the high sulphate period compared to the control diet (Table III).
Counts and metabolic parameters reverted to approximately pre-SO 4 levels when sulphate was stopped.
Non-responders had lower SO 4 reduction rates on the control diet than responders.
In these subjects, there was no difference in methanogenic counts and activities remained stable in the presence or absence of 15 mmol/d sulphate.
Viable counts of sulphate reducing bacteria were never found above the detection limit of 10 2 /g faeces in non-responders (Table III).
Discussion
In this study, the addition to the diet of 15 mmol sodium sulphate/day over a 10 day period inhibited methane production in three of six normally methanogenic subjects.
As methanogenesis was reduced signs of sulphate reduction, previously absent during the control diet, became apparent in faeces of these subjects.
When the supply of sulphate was stopped, methane production returned.
This experiment shows a previously unknown dietary effect upon bacterial activity in the human colon.
Methane gas is regarded as a harmless byproduct of fermentation in the large intestine of man.
CH 4 production is thought to be fairly constant in individuals and to be independent of diet.
The reasons why western populations separate into methane producers and non-producers has never been explained.
In recent studies, however, we have shown that methane production is more important than previously believed.
Quantitative measurements show that in methanogenic subjects the majority of gaseous hydrogen produced from fermentation is consumed by methanogenic bacteria.
During fermentation, hydrogen gas production is used by bacteria to allow oxidation of reduced cofactors ().
H 2 must be rapidly removed from the fermentation system, however, because high partial pressures of H 2 inhibit the reactivation of these coenzymes which are essential in glycolysis.
Reduction of CO 2 by H 2 to CH 4 by methanogenic bacteria is an effective way of lowering H 2 levels and allows bacteria to generate more oxidised products which result in higher energy yields.
In the absence of methanogenesis, large intestinal fermentation is inefficient and produces different organic end products unless an alternative pathway exists to dispose of reducing equivalents.
In previous studies we have shown that in the colon of non-methanogenic human subjects, significant populationsof sulphate reducing bacteria exist.
These bacteria use molecular hydrogen as well as other electron donors, for the dissimilatory reduction of sulphate to sulphide.
In marine sediments and faeces, sulphate reducing bacteria outcompete methanogenic bacteria because of their higher affinity for such substrates.
Methanogenic bacteria tend to predominate in a sulphate depleted environment, however.
The present study provides further evidence for these interactions in the colon.
Under stable dietary conditions, western populations may be separated into predominantly methanogenic or sulphate reducing subjects.
A proportion of CH 4 producers (three of six in this study), however, may also harbour small numbers of sulphate reducing bacteria (not detectable with the methods used in this study).
The presence of these bacteria was shown by higher sulphate reduction rates recorded in faeces of these subjects (responders) even on the basal diet.
When sulphate availability is increased sulphate reducing bacteria proliferate and eventually may outcompete methanogens when the sulphate supply is sufficient.
This is supported by our observation that sulphate reduction rates and sulphide production in faeces of the three responders increased when sulphate was supplemented to the diet, while methanogenesis became substantially reduced.
Correspondingly, sulphate reducing bacteria which were not found during the basal diet, became detectable while counts of methanogenic bacteria decreased 100-fold during this period.
Metabolic activity of sulphate reducing bacteria was, however, well below values usually found in non-methanogenic subjects, and viable counts of sulphate reducing bacteria were too low to explain the marked drop in methanogenesis.
A reason for this may be the relatively short study period which was probably not sufficient for the bacterial population in more proximal areas of the colon to equilibrate with that measured in faeces.
This may be important as a recent study has revealed some differences between caecal and faecal flora, an observation which may limit the conclusions made from measurements with faecal inocular.
Changes in both faecal sulphate reducing activity and sulphate reducing bacteria counts during the sulphate feeding period, however, strongly suggest a relation between the metabolism of these bacteria and the changes in methanogenesis observed in this study.
Breath hydrogen excretion was not significantly different between the low sulphate and the high sulphate diets, indicating that the volume of hydrogen consumed either by methanogenic bacteria or by sulphate reducing bacteria might be similar.
In three of the six subjects, sulphate reduction rates were low and did not show any change throughout the study.
Sulphate reducing bacteria were never detected, and methane excretion was not affected by sulphate feeding.
Small and undetectable numbers of sulphate reducing bacteria may have been present, unable to increase rapidly enough to be detected during the short period of this study.
Alternatively, sulphate may have been absorbed more completely in the small intestine of these subjects with insufficient amounts being available for colonic sulphate reduction.
It was noted that breath methane concentrations were generally higher in non-responders than in responders.
This may be explained by the fact that more hydrogen was used in a metabolism other than methanogenesis in these subjects even on the basal diet.
Moreover, during the badal diet breath CH 4 concentrations increased in responders duggesting that their usual diet contained enough sulphate for sulphate reducing bacteria to reduce the amount of hydrogen available to methanogens, whilst on the sulphate depleted basal diet more hydrogen could be used for methanogenesis.
Intestinal transit times were measured to see whether the effect of sulphate upon methanogenesis might be the result of faster bowel transit, because the laxative properties of sodium sulphate are recognised.
The amount used in this study given in three doses, however, is small compared with the usual lazative dose of about 60 mmol.
Transit times were not different between the control period and the period with SO 4 supplementation.
The sulphate content of an average United Kingdom diet is about 5 mmol/d.
It has been shown that during intakes of up to 5 mmol/d most of the sulphate is absorbed in the small intestine and very little is found in ileal effluent although endogenous sources such as mucopolysaccharides provide an unknown additional amount of sulphate.
This is probably not enough to allow significant dissimilatory sulphate reduction.
At intakes greater than 5 mmol/d, however, a greater proportion is delivered to the colon.
Recent studies of sulphate absorption in man indicate that on a diet of 16.6 mmol/d about 12 mmol would be expected to reach the colon.
During the bacterial reduction of one mole of sulphate, four moles of hydrogen are consumed.
Thus the reduction of 12 mmol SO 4 would require a volume of 1100 ml H 2 .
The average breath methane concentration in responders on the low sulphate diet was 25 ppm.
If ventilation rate is estimated to be 4 l/min this is equivalent to an excretion of about 140 ml/24 h in breath.
We have recently shown that at such an excretion rate, breath exhalation is about 50–60% of the total excretion.
Total methane excretion can therefore be estimated at 300 ml/d.
Thus, about 1200 ml of hydrogen were consumed in methanogenesis (4 mol H 2 /mol CH 4 ) when sulphate supply was limited.
This is equal to the volume assumed to be consumed by the reduction of 12 mmol SO 4 in the three responders.
Although this balance is not entirely based on direct measurements, it shows how the observed interactions between sulphate reducing bacteria and methanogenic bacteria in vivo can be understood as competition for the mutual substrate hydrogen.
When both types of bacteria are present in the large intestine, hydrogen metabolism may be regulated by the availability of sulphate in the colon.
We cannot exclude the possibility, however, that other unknown mechanisms may be involved in the effects observed in this study.
Some dietary components such as bread, food preserved with sulphur dioxide, and alcoholic beverages such as beer, wine and cider are rich in sulphate.
Their consumption may increase sulphate ingestion naturally to quite high amounts.
Thus, the amount of sulphate given in this study can be reached by dietary means in a proportion of people.
In conclusion, we have shown evidence for regulation of methanogenesis by dietary sulphate if sulphate reducing bacteria are present in the colon.
Sulphate feeding allows growth of sulphate reducing bacteria which then may inhibit methanogenic bacterial by substrate competition.
This may explain the absence of methane in the breath of 40–50% of western populations.
Colonic motility: practice or research?
Disorders of colonic motility are thought to play a part in several diseases, especially the irritable bowel syndrome, and also ulcerative colitis, diverticular disease, and constipation.
The genesis of abdominal pain or disordered bowel habit is generally ascribed to abnormal colonic motor function.
Despite research contributions for many countries the normal and pathological motor function of the colon remains poorly understood.
This is due to part to the relative inaccessibility of the organ, its regional differences in structure and function, and to the capricious nature of motor events in the large bowel.
It is difficult to measure colonic function simultaneously in its various parts and it is erroneous to extrapolate findings from one part to another.
Ritchie hoped that manometry would prove a ‘safe and reliable method of studying colonic movements’ and in 1965 Deller and Wangel expressed the view that understanding of intestinal motility may progress if pertinent problems were recognised.
They pointed out that motility patterns in normal subjects needed to be described in more detail, that the relation between pressure and transit needed to be further investigated, and that the analysis and classification of pressure waves had to be standardised and quantified.
Although some of these points have been considered, our understanding of colonic function has not increased much and measurements of colonic pressures have not found their way into routine clinical practice; measurements of transit have a more practical value in selected patients.
Why is it that clinical usefulness of colonic pressure measurements remains elusive?
The answer is partly methodological and partly dependent on the physiology of colonic smooth muscle.
Colonic motility can be conveniently considered under two related aspects, intraluminal pressure activity and transit of intraluminal contents.
The second has been measured by studying the movements of barium, or radio-opaque shapes and more recently radioactive isotopes.
Radio-opaque shapes are clinically the most useful for quantifying colonic transit; movement of barium involves unacceptably high doses of radiation and radioisotope studies need access to imaging equipment and the patient has to be immobilised during the scans.
Formulae have been devised to measure segmental colonic transit with radio-opaque shapes.
The need for repeated abdominal radiographs can be avoided by a modification of this technique and segmental transit can be measured from a single x ray film taken after the serial ingestion of rado-opaque shapes for three days.
This minimises exposure of the patient to radiation.
If the stools, rather than the patient's abdomen are screened for the shapes, there is not radiation risk but this approach is inconvenient.
Slow transit constipation can be distinguished from outlet obstruction by the ingestion of a capsule containing 20 shapes followed by an abdominal x ray film taken on the fifth day; 80% retention of the markers signifies slow colonic transit.
These simple methods can be used clinically to help establish a diagnosis and to measure the effect of treatment; they are also useful in research.
Colonic pressures can be measured with balloons, continually perfused catheters, freely mobile pressure sensitive radiotelemetry capsules, or solid state tube mounted strain gauges, each measuring different aspects of colonic motor function.
Most studies use water perfused catheters.
Solid state transducers have the important advantage that they can be used in the ambulatory patient and are becoming readily available.
Hardware and software exist for prolonged computerised collection (including the ambulant patient) and analysis of data.
The positioning of the recording devices in the colonic lumen and cleansing of the bowel before pressure measurements remain non-standardized.
It seems logical to study unprepared bowel in an unsedated patient, but this limits studies to the distal colon or requires invasive and time consuming intestinal transtubation.
Morphology of individual colonic pressure waves has eluded reliable classification.
This has led to the concept of the motility index (area under the time pressure curve) to describe pressure activity.
This has the advantage of being expressed as a number and is thus amenable to statistical analysis, but it does not recognise different types of colonic pressure waves.
As pressure measurements obtained from colonic probes 5 cm apart can be very different, some workers have summed the pressure activity from adjacent channels to obtain a value for the colonic segment under study as a whole in an attempt to standardise analysis.
Colonic motor function has also been investigated with electromyography, the electrodes being attached to the mucosa in the intact human.
A background slow variation in electrical potential has been described (basal electrical rhythm,) with superimposed shorter duration, larger amplitude potentials (spike potentials or electrical response activity).
The basel electrical rhythm controls the occurrence of the electrical response activity, which is thought to correlate with colonic smooth muscle contraction.
Normal motility of the small intestine in the fasting state is characterised by the cyclical appearance of the migrating motor complex.
This is a high amplitude burst of contractions that start in the stomach and are propagated distally into the lower small bowel.
After eating, this regular coordinated activity gives way to irregular, non-propagated pressure activity (phase II), or periods of quiescence (phase I).
Unfortunately in the colon the situation is far less clear.
Instead of orderly motility patterns, which can be analysed relatively easily, irregular contractions occur that are apparently tandomly distributed in location and time.
Low amplitude segmenting contractions coexist with contractions of higher amplitude that can be present simultaneously at points up to 10 cm apart, but do not propagate proximally or distally.
This type of segmenting pressure activity does not propel intraluminal contents over large distances and is probably responsible for the mixing of bowel contents.
High amplitude (100 and 200 mm Hg) contractions, travelling distally over distances of at least 24 cm have also been recorded.
These are termed high amplitude propagated contractions, or giant migrating contractions and differ greatly from the segmenting pressure activity that normally predominates.
The high amplitude contractions travel over relatively long segments of the colon and appear consecutively in the more distal bowel, suggesting that this activity is coordinated and propulsive.
These contractions occur infrequently, between four and five times a day, so that their recognition needs prolonged periods of intraluminal monitoring.
Alternatively, they can be stimulated with contact laxatives such as dulcolax.
They are thought to represent the manometric equivalent of colonic mass movements that were first described by radiologists at the turn of the century.
The relation between segmenting or propgagating pressure activity and transit can be investigated by simultaneously measuring intraluminal pressures and transit of intraluminal readionuclide markers with a gamma camera.
The isotope most commonly used for measurement of colonic transit is 9 9 m Tc-DTPA in liquid form, or it may also be incorporated into ispaghula husk to simulate the physical properties of faeces more closely.
In normal subjects in the fasted state segmenting pressure activity is low and little transit of marker is seen.
After a meal segmenting pressure activity increases and antegrade and retrograde transit of marker occurs in association with this activity.
Movement in these circumstances is over short distances and occurs down a pressure gradient.
Giant migrating contractions are associated with transit of market over larger distances in a distal direction.
Insight into abnormalities of transit and pressure activity in constipation or diarrhoea has been obtained with these techniques.
In functional diarrhoea there is more to and fro movement of intraluminal contents in the fasting state than in normal controls.
After eating, although intraluminal pressure does not increase appreciably, the number of high amplitude propagating contractions increases.
By contrast, in patients with chronic constipation fasting transit of marker was not recorded.
Moreover, there was no postprandial increase in segmenting colonic pressure activity, no propagating contractions, and no postprandial transit of marker.
Patients with idiopathic chronic constipation have a decreased number and duration of giant migrating complexes than healthy controls.
Measurements of colonic pressurss are confounded by pronounced intra and interindividual variation of colonic motility indices depending on factors that are obscure and thus difficult to control.
They probably include the nature of the intraluminal contents, the emotional and metabolic state of the patient, and the location of the recording devices.
This situation makes it difficult to use basal colonic motility as a basis for comparisons and has led to the development of provocation tests in a controlled environment in an attempt to characterise differences between groups of patients.
Appreciable variations between subjects, combined with the small numbers investigated in these invasive and time consuming studies, compound the difficulties of showing statistically significant differences and establishing a normal range of values.
Awakening stimulates colonic pressures, showing a link between the central nervous system and the bowel.
Apart from awakening, the most powerful and reproducible physiological stimulus to segmenting colonic activity is a meal.
The meal needs to contain 1000 kCal or more and have a relatively high fat contant (<).
High amino acid content in the meal abolishes the colonic response.
It is not abolished by gastrectomy, is related to the entry of food into the upper small bowel, and has a neural component.
A cephalic phase of this response has recently been described in normal subjects and in the irritable bowel syndrome, again emphasising the link between the ‘big brain’(central nervous system) and the ‘little brain’(myenteric and submucous plexuses) in the gut.
Unfortunately the colonic response to a meal is not consistent even in normal subjects and its absence does not point to a specific lesion in the nervous system-colon axis.
For example, it is absent in such diverse conditions as constipation, diabetes, multiple sclerosis, and thoracic spinal cord injuries.
Experiments on the effects of various gastrointestinal polypeptide hormones and drugs on colonic motility have sought further clarification of normal motility patterns or effective treatments for motility disorders.
Many hormones have been implicated in the colonic response to food, including cholecystokinin, gastrin, motilin, neurotensin, pancreatic polypeptide, and PYY. cholecystokinin increases recrosigmoid segmenting pressure activity when administered exogenously, and the response can be reproduced by the administration of intraduodenal nutrients known to cause release of cholecystokinin.
Motilin, administered exogenously at physiological doses, also increases the distal colonic motility index but these results were not confirmed with the motilin agonist erythromycin, which had no effect on segmenting sigmoid pressure activity or colonic transit.
Gastrin and pentagastrin do not affect proximal or distal colonic segmenting pressure activity, although pentagastrin does increase the number of sigmoid colonic myoelectrical spike potentials in normal subjects.
Despite much work, the roles of alimentary hormones in the control of colonic muscle in health and disease are not yet clear.
In the studies with gastrin and its analogues an often uncontrolled variable has been gastric acid secretion, although the presence of gastric acid is not essential for a colonic response as it is not abolished by total gastrectomy.
The role of acid secretion has been investigated in relation to the cephalic phase of the colonic response to food by means of H 2 receptor blockage and continual aspiration of gastric juice, but the cephalic response occurs independently of the presence or absence of acid or the entry of gastric juices into the duodenum.
As well as arousal from sleep and the complex effects of food and polypeptide hormones, neurotransmitters have been shown to affect colonic motility.
Thus selective or non-selective Β blockade stimulates segmenting pressures in the distal colon, suggesting that this part of the bowel is under sympathetic inhibitory control, even in an unsteassed situation.
The calcium channel blocker nicardipine decreases rectal postprandial motor activity in normal subjects.
It also inhibits motor activity induced by rectal distention and increases sensory thresholds for defaecation in patients with the irritable bowel syndrome.
The same drug given intravenously prevents the postprandial increase in sigmoid segmenting pressure activity in patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
These data suggest that calcium fluxes play a part in the normal functioning of the rectum and colon and imply potential use in the treatment of this disease.
Another possible way of controlling colonic pressures is through 5-HT 3 antagonists such as odansentron, a compound that slows colonic transit in normal sucjects.
Its main effect, however, is not on sigmoid segmenting pressure activity when given intravenously at doses of 2.5 or 10 mg (Amin Z, Misiewicz J J, personal communication).
In line with these uncertainties measurements of colonic pressures in the irritable bowel syndrome produce contradictory data and no common underlying abnormality has been defined.
Several years ago there was much interest in the finding of an apparently abnormal basal electrical rhythm in irritable bowel syndrome.
In normal subjects there are two components to the basel electrical rhythm, a predominant rhytym at a frequency of 6 cycles per minute with some at 3 cycles per minute.
In irritable bowel syndrome the 3 cycles per minute component was increased independently of changes in bowel habit, but further work has not confirmed these findongs.
Consistent differences in segmenting or propagating colonic pressures have not been identified between normal subjects and patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
Responses to eating are variable, some but not all investigators reporting an exaggerated response.
These inconsistencies may be in part due to the heterogenous nature of patients who are diagnosed as suggering from irritable bowel syndrome.
Grouping patients according to gross, fairly imprecise symptoms such as predominant diarrhoea or constipation, is perhaps unlikely to uncover a common pathological abnormality.
Classification of functional gut disorders is proliferating at present, but there is much overlap of various functional symptom clusters and labelling these does not necessarily prove a common cause and may lend a false validity to the diagnosis.
Even when abnormalities of colonic motor function are identified, it is not clear whether they are responsible for the symptoms.
This question is unlikely to be resolved in the non-ambulatory laboratory setting with short recording periods.
Indeed, it is reasonable to ask the question whether irritable bowel syndrome is a disease of the motor side of bowel motility at all; there is evidence that in some patients the abnormality is one of visceral sensation.
Patients with irritable bowel syndrome experience pain induced by inflating a balloon in the colon at different and more numerous sites and at lower distending volumes than normal subjects.
That the decreased pain threshold is not a generalised feature in patients with irritable bowel syndrome was shown by Whitehead et al who confirmed the decreased tolerance to balloon distention but showed that their tolerance for hand immersion in ice cold water was not different from normal controls.
These differences between somatic and visceral pain thresholds were confirmed by others who showed that patients with irritable bowel syndrome and Crohn's disease had higher thresholds than normal controls for somatic pain.
These changes in perception of distension at the lower end of the gut seem to be mirrored in the stomach.
Mearin et al have shown increased sensitivity to balloon distention of the stomach in patients with dyspepsia but without ulcers and the pain perception/distending volume relation in the stomach of such patients and in the rectum of patients with irritable bowel syndrome show a striking similarity.
The situation with respect to pressure changes and pain may be clarified by prolonged ambulatory measurements of colonic pressure activity, which allow the simultaneous recording of events such as abdominal pain andmotor changes.
This has been reported for clustered small intestinal contractions identified in patients with irritable bowel syndrome, which seem to coincide with pain.
Indeed, it has been claimed that irritable bowel syndrome is primarily a small intestinal condition and that symptoms originate mainly from this site.
Simultaneous records from the colon, however, have not yet been made, os that what happens to colonic pressures atthe time clustered contractions are present in the small bowel is not known.
It is possible that many with irritable bowel syndrome patients have a pan-intestinal motor disorder, and that extra-alimentary sites innvervated by the autonomic nervous system, such as the bladder, are involved.
Areas of uncertainty extend to other conditions.
Colonic diverticular disease is thought to occur in response to a combination of colonic wall weakness and high intraluminal pressures.
Support for this hypothesis consists of high pressures recorded in the basal and postprandial period, and after prostigmine, but some investigators have challenged these findings.
There has recently been a revival of interest in changes in colonic motility in ulcerative colitis.
Early studies showed decreased segmenting pressure activity in this disease with absence of the normal postprandial pressure response although the normal postprandial increase in myoelectrical spike activity was retained, suggesting some sort of electromechanical dissociation.
These findings are consistent with decreased transit in the proximal and rapid transit through the sigmoid colon in patients with active colitis.
Studies with an animal model of colitis confirmed the decreased segmenting contractile activity and showed increased giant migrating complexes, which were often associated with defaecation.
Thus research into colonic motor function remains a challenging and potentially rewarding area where progress has been facilitated by recent technological advances.
More precise knowledge of control of colonic motor function, coupled with basic research into the pathways that control colonic muscle, should eventually result in the development of drugs for modifying colonic motor function.
At present the use of colonic motility tests in clinical practice is limited and will remain so until normal ranges for colonic pressures can be defined and more effective treatments for the various motility disorders identified.
In patients disabled by severe dysmotility syndromes, however, they sometimes provide the only objective evidence of abnormality.
This can be useful in the management of persons drive to distraction by the relentless normality of all conventional tests in the face of severe abdominal symptoms.
Acid-base transport systems in gastrointestinal epithelia
Cell plasma membranes contain a variety of transport systems that carry acid or base into or out of the cell.
Research over the past decade has led to remarkable advances in our understanding of these acid-base transport systems and has established that they have several major physiological roles.
They are the primary means by which cells regulate their internal pH and they also contribute importantly to regulation of cell volume and possibly, cell proliferation.
Furthermore, in the gastrointestinal tract they mediate absorption and secretion, not only of acids and bases but of several other electrolytes and nutrients.
The major acid-base transport systems on mammalian cell plasma membranes are illustrated in Figures 1–3; their specific locations on different cell types are discussed later.
Hydrogen, potassium (H + , K + ) adenosine triphosphatase (ATPases) extrude H + in exchange for K + using energy derived directly from ATP hydrolysis.
They are present on the apical membranes of gastric parietal cells (Fig 1) and, in some species, colon epithelial cells, where they mediate acid secretion.
However, they are not widely distributed in gastrointestinal epithelia.
Other acid base transport systems derive their energy, not directly from ATP hydrolysis, but from coupling the movement of one ion to passive movement of another ion along its electrochemical gradient.
In the case of sodium/ hydrogen (Na + /H + ) exchange (Figs 1–3), H + extrusion from the cell is coupled, in a 1:1 ratio, to Na + entry down its chemical gradient.
This gradient depends on the sodium pump, Na + , K + ATPase, which is present on the basolateral membrane of all gastrointestinal epithelial cells and extrudes 3 Ma + ions in exchange for 2 K + ions, thus maintaining a low intracellular [Na + ], high intracellular [K + ], and negative intracellular potential.
Na + /H + exchange is almost ubiquitous in mammalian cells and can be inhibited by the diurecti amiloride.
There are several mechanisms for bicarbonate (HCO 3 -) transport across placma membranes.
In most tissues, the enzyme carbonic anhydrase mediates rapid equilibration of H + and HCO 3 -with CO 2 , which diffuses freely across all cell membranes.
Therefore, HCO 3 2 -transport into the cell is equivalent to H + transport out of the cell and vice versa.
In the case of chloride/bicarbonate (Cl -/HCO 3 -) exchange (Figs 1–3), HCO 3 -extrusion from the cell is coupled, in a 1:1 ratio, to Cl -entry along its chemical gradient.
This gradient is a result of the negative intracellular potential, which maintains a low intracellular [Cl -].
In the case of Na + -HCO 3 -co-transport (Figs 1, 3), HCO 3 -movement is coupled with that of Na + in the same direction.
In most, although not all, cells this sytem operates in the direction of Na + and NCO 3 -entry into the cell, the driving force, as for Na + /H + exchange, being the out to in Na + gradient.
Typically Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange and Na + -HCO 3 -co-transport are not affected by amiloride but can be inhibited by the disulphonic stilbene DIDS.
Finally, HCO 3 -can exit from some cells uncoupled to other ions, via plasma membrane HCO 3 -channels (Fig 3).
The driving force here is the negative intracellular potential.
There have been two major approaches to characterising acid-base transport systems.
Firstly, by studying radiolabelled ion uptake into isolated plasma membrane vesicles.
For example, in many tissues,2 2 Na can be shown to be concentrated into plasma membrane vesicles in the presence of an in to out transmembrane H + gradient.
Furthermore, a major component of this Na + uptake is a saturable function of Na + concentration, is temperature sensitive, is electroneutral (that is, unaffected by transmembrane potential), and is inhibited by amiloride.
These properties are characteristic of a Na + /H + exchange mechanism.
Isolated vesicles were used in the first direct demonstration of Na + /H + exchange, by Murer in rabbit jejunum.
Similar studies have shown that not only Na + /H + exchange, but also, Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange and Na + -HCO 3 -co-transport are widely distributed in gastrointestinal epithelial from several species including humans.
Furthermore, selective isolation of vesicles from basolateral and apical membranes has often revealed a polarised distribution of these transport systems between the two membranes (Figs 1–3).
This polarisation, as discussed below, is fundamental to the role of acid-base transport systems in transepithelial transport.
Acid-base transport systems can also be characterised in intact cells by their effects on intracellular pH (pH i ), an approach facilitated in recent years by the advent of pH sensitive fluorescent dyes.
This approach offers the important advantage that the normal environment of the transporter is preserved and has provided evidence for regulation of acid-base transport systems by many hormones, neurotransmitters, and growth factors, acting via intracellular mediators.
On the other hand, measurement of pH i using fluorescent dyes has usually necessitated cell dispersal, following which epithelial cells often loose their polarised characteristics.
Consequently, selective assay of apical and basolateral transport systems has usually not been possible.
Studies of isolated vesicles and studies of cell pH i , although providing complementary data on acid base transport systems, have defined them in purely functional terms.
However, application of molecular biological techniques has recently uielded information regarding the molecular structure of these transport systems.
For example, Sardet et al have obtained a human cDNA sequence from human fibroblasts, expression of which restores Na + /H + exchange activity in a mutant fibroblast which lacks intrinsic Na + /H + exchange.
The putative Na + /H + exchanger encoded by this cDNA sequence is a 815 amino acid glycoprotein with 10–12 hydrophobic (possibly membrane spanning) domains at its amino terminal.
The Cl -/HCO 3 -exchanger in red blood cells has also been cloned and sequenced.
Very recently, similar approaches have been used to isolate cDNA sequences encoding Na + /H + and Cl -/HCO 3 -exchangers from rabbit ileum (see below).
Functional roles of acid base transport systems
(1) regulation of intracellular pH (pH i )
In most cells, pH i is actively maintained between 7.00 and 7.40, almost one unit above the value expected if intracellular and extracellular H + were in electrochemical equilibrium.
Furthermore, pH i can recover spontaneously to baseline within minutes after exposure of cells to acute acid and alkaline loads.
Regulation of pH i is of major importance to cell homeostasis because many physiological phenomena are pH dependent; diverse examples include the rate of glycolysis, the level of intracellular calcium, and plasma membrane K + permeability which may regulate intracellular electrical potential.
In most cells, including several gastrointestinal cells, the major system regulating pH i , in the absence of HCO 3 -, is Na + /H + exchange.
Under HCO 3 -free conditions, blocking the Na + /H + exchanger with amiloride or removal of extracellular Na + typically causes a fall in pH i and inhibits recovery from an intracellular acid load (usually achieved by pulse exposure of cells to the weak base ammonia).
Rapid recovery of pH i after intracellular acidification is made possible by a distinctive property of the Na + /H + exchanger, first demonstrated in renal epithelia by Aronson.
The exchanger contains a modifier site on its intracellular face which is activated by H + ions.
Thus, intracellular acidosis causes a greater increase in Na + /H + exchange activity than that expected from the more facourable in to out H + gradient.
Conversely, the Na + /H + exchanger is down regulated by intracellular alkalosis and is usually inactive above a pH i of 7.20, despite ion gradients which facour continued Na + /H + exchange.
Hormones and growth factors that regulate the Na + /H + exchanger often do so by shifting this inverse relationship between activity and pH i ‘up’ or ‘down.’
This shift in pH i responsiveness may be a result of phosphorylation of the exchanger itself, or of intracellular proteins which regulate its activity.
When cells are maintained under more physiological conditions, where HCO 3 -and CO 2 are present, other pH i regulatory systems often predominate over Na + /H + exchange.
For example, in hepatocytes, the intestinal cell line IEC-6, partietal cells, and pancreatic acinar cells, the major mechanism of pH i recovery from an acid load is not affected by amiloride but is inhibited by DIDS; furthermore, it is dependent on the presence of Na + and HCO 3 -but not Cl -.
These properties are characteristic of a Na + -HCO 3 -co-transport system.
In some cells, pH i recovery from an intracellular alkaline load is mediated by HCO 3 -extrusion which is dependent on the presence of Cl -and is inhibited by DIDS, properties characteristic of the Cl -/HCO 3 -exchanger.
This exchanger is in some respects a ‘mirror image’ of Na + /H + exchange in that it possesses an intracellular modifier site which is sensitive to hydroxyl (OH -) ions and thus, although reglatively inactive at baseline pH i , is activated by intracellular alkalosis.
In some cells, Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange is coupled to the Na + gradient, which drives it ‘uphill,’ that is Cl -out of and HCO 3 into the cell.
Na + dependent Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange is an important pH i regulatory mechanism in invertebrate cells and in mammalian mesenchymal cells but has not yet been described in gastrointestinal epithelia.
(2) gastric acid secretion (fig 1)
Gastric acid secretion is mediated by a H + , K + ATPase on the apical membrane of the partietal cell which extrudes H + in exchange for K + .
The enzyme has recently been cloned and sequenced.
Its molecular weight is about 95000 Daltons and it consists of two subunits: a larger alpha subunit with several membrane spanning domains and a smaller beta subunit.
The structural, enzymatic, and ion transporting properties of gastric H + , K + ATPase have recently been reviewed.
In the resting state, H + , K + ATPase is localised, not on the apical membrane of the parietal cell, but in tubulo-vesicular structures in the cytoplasm which are impermeable to K + and Cl -.
Thus, its ability to transport H + into these vesicles in exchange for K + is normally limited by the availability of intravesicular K + .
H + transport into vesicles from resting cells can be observed however, if these vesicles are preloaded with K + .
H + secretion can also be induced by exposure of resting parietal cells to the K + ionophore valinomycin.
Stimulation of the parietal cell by secretagogues such as histamine, gastrin, and carbachol results in insertion of these H + , K + , ATPase containing tubulo-vesicles into the apical membrane, the area of which increases several fold.
The permeability of the apical membrane to K + and Cl -also shows a marked increase.
This is partly due to the appearance of Cl -conductive pathways in the apical membrane.
These pathways are probably Cl -selective ion channels, as demonstrated recently by path-clamp techniques.5 Whether the apical membrane K + permeability increases via opening of separate K + channels, as illustrated in Figure 1, or via activation of a CKl co-transport system is controversial.
It is also unclear whether the increased apical membrane K + and Cl -permeabilities result from activation of latent transport systems or, alternatively, from insertion of a separate class of K + and Cl -permeable cytoplasmic vesicles into the apical membrane.
Whatever the mechanism, the result is that:(a) the K + accumulated by H + , K + , ATPase can be recycled into the lumen, so that H + /K + exchange is no longer limited by availability of K + ; and (b) secretion of Cl -ions can accompany secretion of H + , thereby preserving electroneutrality.
Omeprazole, one of the group of substiuted benzimidazoles, is a weak base with a pK of 4.0.
In its uncharged (unprotonated) form, it diffuses into acid compartments such as the patietal cell lumen, where it becomes protonated and positively charged.
It is thus trapped in the acid compartment, where it accumulates.
The protonated omeprazole is then converted to an active metabolite, the sulphenamide, which reacts covalently with cysteine residues on the luminal face of the H + , K + ATPase alpha unit, resulting in irreversible inhibition of H + , K + ATPase and a parallel inhibition of acid secretion.
By itself, apical HCl secretion would progressively alkalinise the parietal cell and deplete it of Cl -.
However, parietal cell homeostasis seems to be maintained by modulation of three other acid base transport systems, all localised on the basolateral membrane: Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange, which lowers pH i by HCO 3 -extrusion and Na + /H + exchange.
and Na + -HCO 3 -co-transport, both of which act to alkalinise the cell.
After stimulation of HCl secretion by histamine, Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange across the basolateral membrane increases several fold; the HCO 3 -efflux represents the blood ‘alkaline tide.’
This increase in Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange can be partly ascribed to more favourable ion gradients, such as the fall in intracellular [Cl -]resulting from apical HCl exit, but it also reflects a true activation of the exchanger.
Any rise in pH i resulting from HCl secretion should activate Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange via its OH -sensitive modifier site; the exchanger may also be directly activated by intracellular mediators, such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and calcium, which activate acid secretion.
Simultaneously, there is downregulation of the basolateral transport systems which act to alkalinise the cell: Na + -HCO 3 -co-transport and, possibly, Na + /H + exchange (although this has been disputed).
The net effect of these various modifications is to oppose the alkalinising effect of apical HCl secretion, with the result that patietal cell pH i increases by less than 0.10 pH units after stimulation of HCl secretion.
The parietal cell thus provides a striking example of how, by selective modulation of apical and basolateral acid-base transport systems, it is possible to reconcile the conflicting demands of varying transepithelial transport and maintaining cell homeostasis.
The mechanisms by which secretagogues exert these multiple effects on the pareital cell are incompletely understood.
Carbachol, gastrin, and histamine all bind to specific receptors on parietal cell plasma membranes.
The effects of carbachol and gastrin on acid secretion seem to be mediated via an increase in intracellular calcium, achieved partly, as in many cell types, by inducing inositol phosphate turnover.
Histamine also increases intracellular calcium, by a mechanism independent of inositol phsophate turnover, however, its effect on acid secretion appears to be mediated mainly via a rise in intracellular cyclic AMP.
Calcium, cyclic AMP, and perhaps other mediators induce phsphorylation of several intracellular proteins, which may result in activation of plasma membrane transport systems.
(3) NaCl absorption (fig 2)
Electroneutral NaCl absorption is a major driving force for intestinal fluid absrption.
Studies in several species, including humans, have shown that electroneutral Na + and Cl -absorption in the ileum, colon, and gall bladder are largely interdependent processes.
Furthermore, they are usually inhibited by amiloride and the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide, and also (albeit less consistently) inhibited by HCO 3 -removal and by DIDS.
These results lend support to the model originally proposed by Turnberg on the basis of studies in humans, whereby Na + and Cl -are transported across the apical membrane via coupled Na + /H + and Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange.
More recent studies have directly confirmed the presence of both Na + /H + and Cl -/HCO 3 -exchangers on the apical membranes of gall bladder and colonic epithelial cells and ileal villus cells (Fig 2).
The two exchangers seem to be coupled indirectly via changes in pH i ; a rise in pH i resulting from stimulation of apical Na + /H + exchange activates apical Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange via its OH -sensitive modifier site, as recently shown in apical membrane vesicles from ileum and colon.
The Na + accumulated in the cell is then extruded in exchange for K + by the basolateral Na + , K + ATPase, and the accumulated Cl -leaves the cell via basolateral anion channels.
Intestinal NaCl absorption is regulated by several hormones and neurotransmitters.
It is inhibited by agents that increase intracellular cyclic AMP (for example, cholera toxin, prostaglandine E 2 , vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP)), intracellular calcium (serotonin, acetylcholine, substance P), or intracellular cyclic guanosine monophosphate (GMP)(Eschenchia coli toxin).
This regulation of NaCl absrption may be achieved largely by modulation of acid-base transport systems.
Cyclic AMP, cyclic GMP, and calcium all inhibit Na + /H + exchange in isolated enterocytes or in ileal apical membrane vesicles.
Calcium and cylic AMP also inhibit both NaCl absorption and apical membrane Na + /H + exchange in the gall bladder as do aldosterone and activators of protein kinase C in the clon.
In contrast, glucocorticoids and alpha adrenergic agonists increase intestinal NaCl absorption; although the effects of these agents on intestinal Na/H + exchange are not known, both stimulate renal Na + /H + exchange.
Intestinal NaCl absorption is also stimulated by respiratory acidosis and by exposure to volatile fatty acids, interventions which lower pH i and might thus activate apical membrane Na + /H + exchange via an intracellular H + sensitive modifier site.
Indeed, volatile fatty acids have recently been shown to activate apical membrane Na + /H + exchange in a human colon cancer cell line.
Taken together, these studies provide strong evidence that apical membrane Na + /H + exchange is a major regulated step in NaCl absorption.
Much less information is available regarding hormonal regulation of apical Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange, however the calcium releasing agent serotonin inhibits the exchanger in ileal villus cells as does cyclic AMP in the gall bladder.
Intestinal epithelial cells must also maintain homeostasis in the face of varying rates of transepithelial NaCl transport.
An increase in NaCl absorption initiated by stimulation of apical Na + /H + exchange and consequent activation of apical Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange via its OH -sensitive modifier site would result not only in some increase in pH i , but also rises in intracellular Na + and Cl -concentrations, cell volume, and cell membrane potential.
Such disturbances in cell homeostasis may, as in the parietal cell, be minimised by simultaneous regulation of apical and basolateral membrane transport systems.
In gall bladder and colonic, epithelia, intracellular [Na + ]is maintained virtually constant despite varying rates of NaCl absorption, suggesting that there is parellel regulation of basolateral Na + /K + ATPase.
The basolateral channels which mediate exit of Cl -and exit of the K + accumulated by Na + /K + ATPase are also regulated in parallel with apical membrane transport systems in several absorptive epithelia.
Intestinal acid-base transport systems may be subject to similar coordinated regulation.
Recent observations in isolated vesicles from jejunal, ileal, and colonic epithelial cells suggest that the basolateral membrane also possesses a Na + /H + exchanger.
Furthermore, the apical and basolateral exchangers have different kinetic characteristics; for example, the apical Na + /H + exchanger is relatively resistant to amiloride.
This difference between basolateral and apical Na + /H + exchangers was originally shown on a renal epithelial cell line and may be a general property of epithelial cells.
It is thus possible that the two exchangers have distinct functional roles and are selectively regulated.
The apical Na + /H + exchanger might be concerned primarily with transepithelial transport and respond selectively to agents which regulate intestinal NaCl absorption.
On the other hand, the basolateral Na + /H + exchanger might be concerned mainly with cell homeostasis, contributing to regulation of pH i and, possibly also, cell volume and cell proliferation (see below).
The apical and basolateral HCO 3 -transport systems might also have distinct characteristics and functional roles.
Further evaluation of these possibilities awaits selective study of apical and basolateral acid-base transport systems and their regulation in intact NaCl absorbing epithelia.
Malabsorption of NaCl as a result of dysfunction of acid-base transport systems may be important in the pathogenesis of diarrhoeal disease.
The syndrome of diarrhoea with chloridorrhoea and alkalosis, seems to result from an absence of intestinal Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange.
Other cases of congenital diarrhoea have been ascribed to absence of intestinal apical membrane Na + /H + exchange.
In several diseases, including cholera,E coli and amoebic infections, bile acid induced diarrhoea, the carcinoid and Werner Morrison syndromes, and inflammatory boewl disease diarrhoea results from disordered intestinal electrolyte transport caused by a variety of hormones, toxins, and neurotransmitters.
These agents may act via increases in enterocyte cyclic AMP (for example, cholera toxin, prostaglandin E 2 , VIP), cyclic GMP (E coli toxin), or calcium (serotonin, substance P, bile acids).
The diarrhoea is partly mediated by intestinal secretion of Cl -and HCO 3 -(see below), however, malabsorption of NaCl via inhibition of apical membrane Na + /H + exchange and possibly Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange also plays a role.
(4) HCO 3 -secretion (fig 3)
HCO 3 -secretion by the stomach, duodenum, and pancreatic and bile ducts is an important means of neutralising gastric acid and of limiting its damaging effects on the mucosa.
Biliary HCO 3 -secretion may be an important driving force for bile acid independent canalicular bile flow, although whether this secretion orginates from hepatocytes or from small bile ductules is unclear.
HCO 3 -secretion by the ileum and colon is an important cause of watery diarrhoea.
In the stomach and duodenum, ileum, colon, and pancreas.
HCO 3 -secretion is dependent on the presence of serosal (or bath) Na + and is partly dependent on the presence of Cl -in the luman.
These findings are consistent with a model involving Na + dependent HCO 3 -accumulation by the cell across the basolateral membrane and HCO 3 -exit across the apical membrane via Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange, the accumulated Cl -recycling via apical membrane Cl -channels.
Such an asymmetrical distribution of transport systems has been shown (using isolated vesicles) in cells from ileal crypts, which seem to be the site of HCO 3 -secretion.
The apical membrane contains Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange but not Na + /H + exchange.
This is in contrast to the apical membrane of the absorptive ileal villus cells, which contains both exchangers (compare Figs 2 and 3).
The ileal crypt cell basolateral membrane contains two Na + dependent mechanisms for HCO 3 -accumulation (Na + -HCO 3 -co-transport and Na + /H + exchange, the latter accumulating HCO 3 -indirectly via its alkalinising effect on the cell.
Amiloride only modestly inhibits ileal HCO 3 -secretion, suggesting that Na + -HCO 3 -co-transport may be the more important of the two mechanisms.
Hepatocytes have a similar distribution of acid base transport systems: basolateral Na + /H + exchange and Na + -HCO 3 -co-transport, canalicular membrane Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange and Cl -channels.
Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange and Cl -channels are also present on the apical membranes of duodenal epithelial cells.
Finally, both Na + /H + and Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange are present in intact pancreatic and bile ductular cells, although in these cells their localisation remains to be established.
In the duodenum and ileum, a major component of HCO 3 -secretion is independent of luminal Cl -and therefore, may not be mediated by apical Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange.
Possible alternative mechanisms for HCO 3 -exit across the apical membrane include HCO 3 -permeable channels and Na --HCO 3 -co-transport.
Na --HCO 3 -transport has been discussed above as a mechanism for cellular accumulation of HCO 3 -, energised by the out to in Na -gradient.
However, in some epithelia, such as the proximal renal tubule, the Na --HCO 3 -co-transporter has a stochiometry of three HCO 3 -ions for each Na + ion.
It thus carries a net negative charge and normally operates in the direction of HCO 3 -and Na + extrusion, the drving force being the negative intracellular potential.
HCO 3 -secretion, like NaCl absorption, is under elaborate neurohormonal control.
It is usually stimulated by agents which increase intracellular cyclic AMP, for example, secretin in the bile and pancreatic ducts and prostaglandin E 2 in the duodenum.
Cholera toxin induces severe diarrhoea by stimulating HCO 3 -and Cl -secretion throughout the intestine, via increases in intracellular cyclic AMP.
HCO 3 -secretion predominates in vivo and Cl -secretion in vitro; the reason for this discrepancy is not known.
Leukotriones and prostaglandins, often produced in association with intestinal inflammation, also stimulate HCO 3 -secretion.
In contrast, HCO 3 -secretion in the duodenum and ileum is inhibited by alpha adrenergic agonists.
Mediators such as cyclic AMP might induce HCO 3 -secretion via several mechanisms.
These include activation of apical membrane Cl -recycling by opening of Cl -channels.
Cyclic AMP causes opening of apical Cl -channels in several secretory epithelia.
This effect is absent in patients with cystic fibrosis, who have impaired pancreatic HCO 3 -secretion and may possibly have a generalised defect in gastrointestinal HCO 3 -secretion.
Cyclic AMP and/or other mediators might also directly activate apical HCO 3 -exit:(a) via Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange, as demonstrated in duodenal apical membrane vesicles;(b) via HCO 3 -channels, as in salivary acinar cells; or (c) via Na + -HCO 3- co-transport.
Alternatively, HCO 3 -secretion may be induced via activation of basolateral Na + /H + secretion may be induced via activation of basolateral Na + /H + exchange or Na + -HCO &co-transport, resulting in cellular HCO 3 -accumulation and thereby increasing the driving force for HCO 3 -exit across the apical membrane.
The accompanying cell alkalinisation should also activate apical Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange via its OH -senstive modifier site.
As discussed in the section on NaCl absorption, cyclic AMP and calcium usually inhibit Na + /H + exchange in absorptive epithelia.
However, recent studies suggest that serotonin, which increases intracellular calcium, and forskolin, which increases intracellular cyclic AMP by direct stimulation of adenylate cyclase, both stimulate the basolateral Na + /H + exchanger in ileal crypt cells.
The HCO 3 -secretagogue carbachol also activates Na + /H + exchange in salivary acinar cells.
Yet another mechanism has been suggested for secretin induction of HCO 3 -uptake into bile ductular cells: insertion of cytoplasmic vesicles containing H + ATPase into the basolateral membrane.
Evaluation of these possible mechanisms awaits more detailed characterisation of acid-base transport systems in intact HCO 3 -secreting epithelia.
However, by analogy with the parietal cell (see section 2), it seems likely that HCO 3 -secretion involves parallel regulation of both basolateral and apical HCO 3 -transport systems, thereby allowing maintenance of a near constant pH i through varying rates of transepithelial HCO 3 -transport.
Finally, HCO 3 -secretion may result not from direct activation of acid-base transport systems but from movement of weak acids in their protonated form in the opposite direction, that is from lumen to cell.
The net result would be consumption of luminal H + and therefore (in the presence of carbonic anhydrase), generation of HCO 3 -.
Ursodeoxycholic acid and certain other bile acids induce a ‘hyper’ choleresis in several species, including man, which results mainly from active secretion of HCO 3 -.
This HCO 3 -rich choleresis may partly explain the apparently beneficial effects of ursodeoxycholic acid in cholestatic liver diseases, and also its tendency to induce surface gall stone calcification, one of the factors limiting its efficacy as a cholesterol gall stone dissolving agent.
Recent studies involving measurement of both intracellular and canalicular pH in isolated rat hepatocyte couplets suggest that ursodeoxycholic acid does not directly activate acid base transport systems in hepatocytes (although an effect on bile ductular cells has yet to be excluded).
An alternative hypothesis has been proposed, based on the observation that these ‘hyper’ choleretic bile acids are excreted by the liver partly in an unconjugated form.
According to this ‘chole-hepatic shunt’ hypothesis, the unconjugated bile acid is transported in its ionised form across the hepatocyte canalicular membrane.
Unconjugated bile acids have high pKs, and will thus tend to combine with H + in the bile canaliculus, thereby generating a HCO 3 -ion.
The protonated uncharged (and therefore lipid soluble) bile acid then recycles across the apical membrane of the bile ductular cell, is returned to the liver, redissociates, and the bile acid anion is re-excreted.
In theory, one bile acid molecule could recycle several times, thereby generating several HCO 3 -ions in the canaliculus, and this would explain the ‘hyper’ choleresis.
However, each cycle will result in hepatocyte accumulation of one H + ion which, to maintain the generation of biliary HCO 3 -, must be extruded across the basolateral membrane.
The HCO 3 -rich ‘hyper’ choleresis induced by ursodeoxycholic acid is partly inhibited by amiloride and by Na + removal, suggesting that the hepatocyte basolateral Na + /H + exchanger contributes to this H + extrusion.
(5) absorption of other electrolytes and nutrients; the acid microenvironment
The luminal pH near the intestinal apical membrane is maintained at a more acid level than bulk luminal pH.
The presence of this acid microenvironment was first suggested by studies in the 1950s on intestinal absorption of weak acids, and has been subsequently confirmed by microelectrodes in several species, including man.
Na + /H + exchange is present on the apical membranes of jejunal epithelial cells.
Here, it may function independently of Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange, which has not been convincingly shown in the jejunum.
A role for apical Na + /H + exchange in maintaining the acid microenvironment is suggested by observations that the microenvironment pH is increased by luminal perfusion with amiloride or with Na + free media, although other studies have failed to confirm these findings.
Microenvironment pH is also increased by cyclic AMP, cyclic GMP, and activation of protein kinase C, interventions which, as discussed in section (3), inhibit intestinal Na + /H + exchange.
In the ileum and colon, microenvironment pH is higher than in the jejunum, possibly because the apical Na + /H + exchanger is largely neutralised by parallel Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange (see section 3 and Fig 2).
The acid microenvironment contributes to intestinal absorption of weak acids.
It favours conversion of these weak acids to their protonated uncharged form which can then diffuse across the apical membrane into the cell.
An example of this process is HCO 3 -absorption by the jejunum and gall bladder.
In the human jejunum, Na + and HCO 3 -absorption are interdependent, are associated with an increase in intraluminal pCO 2 , and are inhibited by acetazolamide.
Thse observations suggest that HCO 3 -is not absorbed directly but rather as a result of H + secretion via apical Na + /H + exchange.
The pCO 2 of human gall bladder bile exceeds that of hepatic bile and blood, suggesting that the gall bladder may also absorb HCO 3 -via H + secretion.
Gall bladder H + secretion is impaired in patients with calcified (calcium carbinate rich) gall stones; the result is an abnormally alkaline gall bladder bile that is supersaturated with calcium carbonate.
Volatile fatty acids (VFAs), are produced by bacterial degradation of non-absorbed dietary carbohydrate and are rapidly absorbed by the colon, where they constitute a significant energy source.
In several species, including humans, colonic VFA absorption in vivo is associated with HCO 3 -secretion and a lower luminal pCO 2 than in the absence of VFAs.
These findings suggest that VFAs combine with luminal H + (thereby depleting CO 2 and generating HCO 3 -) and are then absorbed passively in their protonated (uncharged) form.
Other observations suggest that the acid microenvironment, maintained by apical Na + /H + exchange, also contributes H + to this process and thereby assists in VFA absorption.
For example, VFA absorption is, like the microenvironment pH, relatively independent of bulk luminal pH.
Furthermore, VFA absorption is associated with enhanced colinic Na + absorption and can be partly inhibited by amiloride and by luminal Na + removal A third possible mechanism for VFA absorption is via a VFA-HCO 3 -exchange mechanism, recently demonstrated on apical membrane vesicles from human ileum and rat colon.
The acid microenvironment also plays a role in intestinal absorption of folic acid and oligopeptides.
Patients with coeliac disease or Crohn's disease have an abnormally alkaline jejunal microenvironment, which may explain the frequently observed malabsorption of folic acid and other nutrients in these patients.
(6) regulation of cell volume
When exposed to sudden changes in medium osmolality, cells behave initially as osmometers, swelling in hypo-osmotic media and shrinking in hyperosmotic media.
However, cells then tend to return their volume towards normal, despite continued exposure to anisotonic media.
Regulatory volume decrease (RVD) and regulatory volume increase (RVI) are typically achieved by activation of plasma membrane ion transport systems, which result ultimately in loss or gain of cell electrolytes and water respectively.
There are two major mechanisms for RVI in mammalian cells.
The first mechanism is activation of Na + /H + exchange with coincidental or secondary (via a rise in pH i ) activation of Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange, resulting in cell accumulation of NaCl.
The accumulated Na + is extruded by Na + /K + ATPase in exchange for K + and thus the net effect is cellular accumulation of KCl.
This mechanism seems to be the major means of RVI in gall bladder and renal epithelial cells, hepatocytes, and lymphocytes.
The evidence includes observations that RVI in these cells is dependent on the presence of Na + , Cl -, and HCO 3 -and furthermore, can be inhibited by amiloride and by DIDS.
In addition, activation of Na + /H + exchange can be demonstrated by measurement of the effects of hyperosmotic stress on pH i .
The mechanism(s) of activation remain obscure but may involve phosphorylation of the Na + /H + exchanger.
The other major mechanism of RVI uses the out to in Na + gradient to drive K + and Cl -into the cell.
This electroneutral Na + -K + -2Cl -co-transport system is present on the basolateral membranes of intestinal epithelial cells and can be inhibited by the diuretic bumetanide.
It is this system, rather than Na + /H + and Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange, which seems to mediate RVI in jejunal villus enterocytes.
The mechanisms of RVI in other intestinal epithelial cells are not known.
Regulatory volume decrease (RVD) after cell swelling in hypo-osmotic media is mediated by KCl loss, for which there are two main mechanisms.
The first involves opening of K + and Cl -channels and mediates RVD in hepatocytes and jejunal villus enterocytes.
Other cells may loose KCl via activation of a bumetanide inhibitible KCl co-transport system.
The above cell volume regulatory mechanisms have usually been demonstrated by suddenly exposing cells to large changes in medium osmolality.
It is not clear to what extent these mechanisms are operative in vivo, where extracellular fluid osmolality is usually regulated within a narrow range.
However, for epithelial cells to maintain their volume through varying rates of transepithelial transport, net ion fluxes across the apical membrane must balance those across the basolateral membrane.
Therefore, cell volume regulatory mechanisms might also play a major role in balancing ion fluxes across the two membranes.
Indeed, in some epithelia, the opening of basolateral membrane K + and Cl -channals after an increase in Na + absorption across the apical membrane is mediated partly via the resulting increase in cell volume.
Conversely, carbachol induced stimulation of HCO 3 -secretion by salivary acinar cells results in activation of basolateral Na + /H + exchange, which is mediated partly via a decrease in cell volume, presumably a consequence of apical HCO 3 -and water exit.
(7) regulation of cell proliferation
One of the most intriguing and controversial aspects of acid-base transport systems is their possible role in the regulation of cellular proliferation.
In white blood cells, fibroblasts and in various invertebrate cells, several agents which induce cell proliferation activate Na/H exchange; the exchanger is also spontaneously activated in some tumour cell lines.
Furthermore, exposure of cells to amiloride or removal of Na + often inhibits their proliferation.
Based on these observations, it was suggested that a rise in pH i resulting from activation of Na + /H + exchange was a trigger for initiation of cell division.
however, most studies on the effects of mitogens on pH i have been performed in HCO 3 -free media.
Under more physiological conditions, when HCO 3 -is present, mitogens activate not only Na + /H + exchange but also other transport systems such as Cl -/HCO 3 -exchange, which in some cells, minimises the changes in pH i .
Nevertheless, it is likely that activation of Na + /H + exchange and also the HCO 3 -transport systems play a permissive role in cell proliferation by maintaining pH i at a level which will permit DNA and protein synthesis; these processes often have pH optima above basal pH and are inhibited by intracellular acidosis.
Indeed, in some cells, simply raising pH i induces proliferation, as was demonstrated recently in fibroblasts by inserting and inducing expression of the gene for H + ATPase.
It is also possible that acid base transport systems regulate cell proliferation not via changes in pH i but via secondary effects on intracellular Na or Cl -concentrations or cell volume.
Gastrointestinal epithelial cell proliferation is influenced by many hormonal, paracrine, and intraluminal agents.
It is still unclear whether acid-base transport systems are involved in regulating proliferation.
However, Na + /H + activity is enhanced in several models of increased gastrointestinal cell proliferation, including the neonatal liver, the pancreas after exposure to trophic hormones, and the intestine after partial resection or exposure to the carcinogen 1,2 dimethylhydrazine.
In contrast, differentiation and cessation of proliferation in some human colon cancer cell lines is associated with down-regulation of Na + /H + exchange.
Finally, blocking Na + /H + exchange with amiloride or its analogues inhibits proliferation of a pancreatic cell line and of the liver and jejunum after partial intestinal resection.
Further studies in this are will be of great interest.
Conclusion
Gastrointestinal epithelial cells possess a variety of acid-base transport systems.
The location of these transport systems is often highly polarised between the apical and basolateral plasma membranes.
They are subject to regulation by many neural, hormonal, and paracrine factors, acting via intracellular mediators.
There is some evidence that different transport systems, and even similar transport systems on the apical and basolateral membranes, are selectively regulated.
These distinctive properties may partly explain how acid-base transport systems can play several major physiological roles, including regulation of pH i and cell volume, transepithelial transport, and, perhaps, cell proliferation — roles which might at first seem mutually incompatible.
Our understanding of these systems is, however, still incomplete.
For example, the role of coordinated regulation of apical and basolateral acid base transport systems in mediating intestinal NaCl absrption and HCO 3 -secretion needs to be systematically evaluated.
This evaluation will require selective assay of acid base transport systems on the apical and basolateral membranes of polarised gastrointestinal epithelial cells.
Such studies have proved difficult because most epithelia are heterogenous and therefore, measutement of pH i using fluorescent dyes in one cell type has usually required selective cell isolation, following which the cell's prolarised characteristics are often lost.
Recent advances in methodology offer several possible solutions to this problem.
Firstly, culture of some epithelial cell lines to form monolayers on semipermeable membranes has resulted in retention of cell polarity and has enabled selective study of the apical and basolateral membranes of renal and gastrointestinal cell monolayers.
Secondly, assay of acid base transport systems in one cell type in an intact heterogeneous epithelium can sometimes be achieved by selective loading of pH sensitive dye into that cell type, or alternatively by use of single cell fluorescence microscopy.
Yet another advance has been the application of molecular biological techniques to the study of gastrointestinal acid-base transport systems.
Tse et al have recently obtained two related but distince cDNA sequences from rabbit ileum, which induced expression of Na + /H + activity in a fibroglast cell line that lacks intrinsic Na + /H + exchange.
The first of these putative Na + /H + exchangers has 95% homology with the previously cloned human fibroblast Na + /H + exchanger, with which it also shares several functional characteristics, including extreme sensitivity to amiloride. furthermore, immunocytochemical studies showed that polyclonal antibodies to a fusion protein incorporating this sequence localise to basolateral but not apical membranes from rabbit ileum.
The Na + /H + encoded by the second cDNA sequence has been less extensively characterised but has some properties common to those of the ileal apical membrane Na + /H + exchanger, including a relative resistance to amiloride.
Detailed studies on the neurohormonal regulation of these two putative Na + /H + exchangers should now be possible and are awaited with interest.
Progress has also been made in cloning the ileal Cl -/HCO 3 -exchanger.
Approaches such as these should lead to further major advances in our understanding of these fascinating and versatile transport systems over the next decade.
Gallstone reccurence and its prevention: the British/ Belgian gall stone study group's post-dissolution trial
Abstract
The British/Belgian Gall Stone Study Group (BBGSG) post-dissolution trial was a prospective, multicentre, randomised, double blind trial of:(i) low dose ursodeoxycholic acid,(ii) placebo, and (iii) a high fibre, low refined carbohydrate diet in the prevention of gall stone recurrence in patients with complete gall stone dissolution.
further aims included establishing the timing and frequency of recurrence and its association with biliary symptoms, a comparison of the sensitivity of ultrasonagraphy v oral cholecystectography in detecting recurrent stones, and a search for risk factors predicting recurrence.
Ninety three patients entered the study, and 82 were followed up for up to five years (mean (SEM) 28 (1.5) months) with six monthly ultrasonagraphy and yearly oral cholecystectography.
There were 21 recurrences (26 by oral cholecystectography or ultrasonagraphy, or both), only two of which were symptomatic, which were detected between 12 and 42 months after trial entry.
This corresponded to an actuarial recurrence rate of 33.9 (7.0%) by lifetable analysis at 42 months and subsequently.
There were four recurrences in the ursodeoxycholic acid, six in the placebo, and 11 in the diet groups, corresponding to 21.9 (9.9) %, 27.4 (10.1) %, and 45.8 (12.4) % respectively at 42 months by lifetable analysis (NS).
Variables including age, obesity, menopausal state, pregnancy, and oestrogen containing drugs were not shown to affect recurrence rate.
Men had more frequent recurrence than women (NS).
Patients who had had multiple stones experienced more recurrences than did those with single stones (NS).
Recurrence did not occur in patients who took non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)(p).
The stone free interval between stone dissolution and trial entry proved to be important — those stone freemonths had a recurrence rate of only 12.7 (6.0) % at 42 months compared with 55.4 (12.5) % in those stone freemonths (p).
There was imbalance between the ursodeoxycholic acid and placebo groups for this factor, and after applying a statistical correction, the adjusted recurrence rate in the ursodeoxycholic acid group was 15% compared with 30% in both placebo and diet groups (NS).
These data suggest that after medical dissolution, the risk of gall stone recurrence is not reduced by a high fibre, low refined carbohydrate diet: it may be lowered, but not abolished, by low dose ursodeoxycholic acid.
When gall stones have been dissolved and oral bile acid treatment is withdrawn, bile reverts to being supersaturated with cholesterol over one to four weeks and in some patients, gall stones recur.
Initial reports suggested that stones recurred in 30–50% of patients within two to five years.
These reports, however, were based mainly on small groups of patients studied for short periods of time.
Furthermore, there were no prospective trials examining the effects of post-dissolution treatment in preventing recurrence.
Therefore, eight British and two Belgian centres pooled their resources to establish the British/Belgian Gall Stone Study Group's (BBGSG) post-dissolution trial.
The principal aim of this prospective, random allocation, double blind, controlled trial was to compare the efficacy of three regimens in patients with confirmed complete gall stone dissolution (CGSD):(i) a high fibre (>g per day), low refined carbohydrate (<g per day) diet,(ii) low dose (3 mg kg -1 day -1 ) ursodeoxycholic acid, and (iii) placebo (given double blind with the ursodeoxycholic acid)— in preventing gall stone recurrence over a two, extending to a five, year period.
Additional aims included gaining further information about the timing and frequency of recurrence and learning how often this was associated with symptoms.
Evidence was sought for factors that might predict gall stone recurrence.
The trial also compared the efficacy of oral cholecystography and ultrasonagraphy in the diagnosis/detection of recurrent stones.
(These results have been published elsewhere.)
In a small number of consenting patients, the study also examined the effect of the three post-dissolution treamtnettreatment regimens on bile acid and bile lipid secretion, measured by a duodenal marker perfusion technique, before and during post-dissolution treatment.
Patients
DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS: RISK FACTORS AND PREDICTIVE VARIABLES (TABLE I)
Ninety three patients fulfilled the entry criteria (see below) and were admitted to the trial.
There were 73 women and 20 men, aged between 20 and 85 (median 56) years.
With the exception of two women (one Afro-Caribbean and one Pakistani), the remaining 91 were white.
Body weight/obesity — Table I gives the results for initial body weight, expressed both as a percentage of ideal body weight (%IBW) and as the body mass index (BMI:wt/h 2 ).
Based on an arbitrary definition of obesity as >, 25 patients were obese and 68 non-obese.
Similarly if obesity is defined, again arbitrarily, as a BMI of >in women and >in men, there were 32 obese (a number which includes all 25 with %IBW values >) and 61 non-obese.
Large changes in body weight (increases or decreases equal to or >of starting weight) were also considered as a possible risk factor.
Such changes were seen in 12 patients (six of whom gained and six of whom lost equal to or >of their pre-trial weight).
Previous bile acid treatment and gall stone characteristics — Most (n=62) of the patients had previously taken chenodeyxholic acid for dissolution of their original or ‘primary’ gall stones but 27 had taken ursodeoxycholic acid and four had taken a combination of chenodeyxholic acid and ursodeoxycholic acid.
After complete gall stone dissolution, most (n=77) of the patients had taken no post-dissolution treatment but 16 had been given maintenance treatment with half the full dissolution doses of either chenodeyxholic acid or ursodeoxycholic acid.
Six patients who had had gall stone recurrence in the past, followed by successful re-dissolution, were included in the trial.
Before primary gall stone dissolution, 16 patients had had solitary stones: the remaining 77 had had multiple stones.
Stone free interval — The median stone free interval between gall stone dissolution and trial entry was nine (range 1 to 80) months.
The stone free interval was greater, however, in patients whose primary gall stones had been dissolved with chenodeyxholic acid (median 14: range 1–80 months) than in those who had been treated with ursodeoxycholic acid (median 4: 1–24).
Menopausal state, pregnancy, and oestrogen containing drugs — Because of the possible influence of menopausal state, pregnancy and oestrogen containing drugs, details about these factors were sought by questionnaire in the 65 women who were followed up for more than six months.
Of these, 20 were pre-menopausal and 45 post-menopausal.
Forth five of the 55 women (82%) who replied to the questionnaire had had one or more pregnancies before dissolution treatment began.
Ten women (18%) were nulliparous.
Four became pregnant after their primary gall stones had dissolved but before trial entry.
Only 12 patients had taken oestrogen containing preparations.
Ten had taken an oral contraceptive (oestrogen content unspecified) for periods ranging from four months to 13 years.
Although nine patients had taken oral contraceptives before gall stone dissolution, only one did so afterwards.
Two further patients had taken oestrogen containing hormone replacement treatment (again dose not known) for menopausal symptoms, before and during the trial.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug ingestion — The influence of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) was also examined retrospectively: these results have been published in full elsewhere.
ADMISSION CRITERIA
Patients with complete gall stone dissolution, confirmed by two oral cholecystectographies three months apart during continued oral bile acid treatment, were eligible for inclusion into the study.
Toensure those who hadnot had recent oral cholecystectographies or ultrasonagraphy studies were still gall stone free, these investigations were repeated not more than six weeks before trial entry.
Although a normal ultrasonagraphy was not one of the original admission criteria, it became one in 1982–83.
In fact, all butfour patients had a pre-trial ultrasonagraphy that invariably showed no gall bladder stones.
Women at risk of becoming pregnant were accepted only if they undertook to use effective contraceptive measures.
Despite this undertaking, two patients became pregnant during the trial.
As both were in the diet group, they continued in the study and subsequently had normal babies.
RANDOMISATION/STRATIFICATION
Patients who fulfilled the inclusion criteria were randomised, from a central office, to one of three groups (see above) with stratification and secondary ‘biased randomisation’ for obesity and the stone free interval, as follows:
Obesity — Obesity is a risk factor for primary gall stone formation and, therefore, possibly also for the development of recurrent stones.
Furthermore, the results of most studies suggest that obese individuals respond less well to oral bile acid treatment than the non-obese.
For these reasons, the patients were stratified (as described above) into obese (arbitrarily >) and non-obese (<) subgroups, using Metropolitan Life Insurance tables.
This ensured that after randomisation, there were about equal numbers of obese patients in the three treatment groups (diet, n=5; ursodeoxycholic acid, n=8; placebo, n=9).
Stone free interval — Earlier reports suggested that if gall stones were going to recur, most would do so within two years of stopping bile acid treatment or not at all.
Therefore, we reasoned that patients who had been stone free for two years or more might represent a ‘protected’ subgroup at low risk for recurrence.
For this reason, the patients were also stratified according to stone free intervals of >, or <, two years and biased randomisation performed as described above.
FOLLOW UP PROTOCOL
The patients were seen every three months at their local hospital jointly by their own physician and the trial coordinator.
At each visit, symptoms and side effects were noted and blood was taken for haematological and biochemical screening tests.
Ultrasonography was performed six monthly and oral cholecystectography yearly.
If biliary pain developed, however, before these investigations were due, they were performed early.
Study design
CRITERIA FOR DIAGNOSING GALL STONE RECURRENCE
The trial was planned in 1979/1980, began in 1981, and ran until 1987.
When it was designed, oral cholecystectography was the method of choice for the diagnosis of gall stones.
At that time, ultrasonagraphy was less developed than it is today and was not available in all 10 treatment centres.
(Over the intervening years, technical advances and improved operator expertise have now made ultrasonagraphy the imaging technique of choice for gall stone detection.)
Therefore, the main trial criterion for diagnosing gall stone recurrence was oral cholecystectography unless the patient was, or became, sensitive to the oral contrast media (n=7) or refused cholecystography (n=4) in which case the diagnosis was based on two successive ultrasonagraphy scans, not more than four weeks apart.
With the exception of these 11 patients, when ultrasonagraphy suggested gall stone recurrence it was always accompanied by an oral cholecystectography.
In the event of a discrepancy between the two techniques, decisions about the presence or absence of recurrent stones were based on oral cholecystectography rather than on ultrasonagraphy.
In the results section, however, the outcome is shown based on both imaging techniques.
RATIONALE FOR THE CHOICE OF POST-DISSOLUTION TREATMENT
In 1980, studies of gall stone pathogenesis (primary and recurrent) were directed mainly at biliary cholesterol supersaturation and this was the reason for the choice of the two post-dissolution treatments.
Choice of bile acid — Ursodeoxycholic acid was chosen in preference to chenodeoxycholic acid because it is virtually free from side effects.
Choice of ursodeoxycholic acid dose — As full dose (10 mg kg -1 day -1 , ursodeoxycholic acid dissolves cholesterol gall stones, we reasoned that continued full dose treatment should prevent gall stone recurrence indefinitely — unless the patient developed ‘acquired tolerance’ to the oral bile acid treatment.
Longterm full dose ursodeoxycholic acid treatment, however, is expensive and we reasoned that by giving one third of the full therapeutic dose, the cost of maintenance treatment would be acceptable.
Further, low dose ursodeoxycholic acid frequently desaturates bile in gall stone patients.
Moreover, it has been suggested that only a short period of desaturation — perhaps as little as 30 minutes during a 24 hour period — may be all that is necessary to prevent cholesterol crystal nucleation from bile.
Timing of ursodeoxycholic acid dose — The low dose ursodeoxycholic acid was given as a single bedtime dose because of the reported superiority of this timing of administration for reducing biliary cholesterol supersaturation.
It is also likely to improve patient compliance in taking the daily quota of bile acid.
The choice of diet — Two dietary factors — supplementing the diet with wheat bran and reducing the intake of refined carbohydrates — reduce cholesterol saturation of bile in subjects with supersaturated bile.
It is not known if the combination of these dietary factors has an additive effect.
None the less, by combining the two measure we hoped to maximise our chances of identifying a dietary method of preventing gall stone recurrence.
This would be the least expensive and most acceptable form of longterm prophylaxis against gall stone recurrence.
TREATMENT AND COMPLIANCE
Tablets
Ursodeoxycholic acid (Roussel Uclaf, Paris) was dispensed as 100 mg plain, white, scored tablets: the placebo tablets were identical in appearance.
Compliance in taking the prescribed tablets was assessed by history, and by counting residual tablets when the prescriptions were renewed.
Diet
In all three groups, dietary assessments were made before starting treatment and again at each follow up visit.
These assessments were performed by a senior dietitian in each centre whose work was supervised by a central coordinating dietitian.
The patients were asked to keep a record of all foods they had eaten during a typical midweek day and during a typical weekend day, once every three month period.
In addition, the dietitians completed a standardised questionnaire for each patient at every follow up visit.
This recorded the pattern of the meals, and the amount and frequency of certain good types, consumed.
From this, scores for sugar (1 point= 5 g sugar) and fibre (1 point=1 g fibre) intake were derived.
Patients randomised to the tablet groups were advised to continue their pre-trial diets — unless they had already been taking a high fibre diet — in which case they were encouraged to reduce their fibre intake during the trial.
Those in the diet group were asked both to reduce their intake of refined carbohydrates and to increase their dietary fibre by substituting high for low fibre products and by taking supplements of standardised wheat bran (three or four ×7.5 g sachets of Prewett's coarse wheat bran).
In addition, the patients in the diet group were given dietary advice, printed information sheets, and suggested recipes for high fibre, low refined carbohydrate meals.
Table II shows the results of analysing the standardised wheat bran in two separate laboratories.
To avoid variation in bran composition over the period of the study, a large supply, adequate for the whole study, was stored centrally and distributed to the patients as necessary.
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
In each of the participating hospitals, Ethical Committee permission was obtained for the study and all patients gave their informed consent.
STATISTICAL METHODS
Recurrence rates were calculated by lifetable analysis (LTA) and compared by the log rank test.
Cochran, Mantel Haenzel statistics were used to test the association between variables (SAS package on an IBM computer).
The direct standardisation method was used to correct for inadvertent imbalance of risk factors between the three treatment groups (see below).
Results
DEFAULT/WITHDRAWALS
Eleven patients, three men and eight women, aged 31–70 (median 62) years, withdrew from the study before their first, on trial ultrasonagraphy examination at six months.
Of these, one 66 year old man died from a myocardial infarction and three further patients stopped because of ill health or fraility, or both, unrelated to gall stone disease or trial treatment.
Two patients withdrew because they claimed intolerance to the trial tablets.
One complained of diarrhoea and the other of abdominal discomfort and bloating.
Subsequently, when the code was broken, both were found to have been taking ursodeoxycholic acid.
Two further patients could not tolerate the high fibre diet and the remaining three defaulted for no apparent reason.
This subgroup of 11 defaulters was comparable with the remaining group of 82 patients in terms of age, sex, body weight, and distribution among the three treatment groups.
The 82 patients who contributed to analysis were distributed among the three treatment groups as follows: ursodeoxycholic acid, n=23; placebo, n=28; and diet, n=31.
SIDE EFFECTS
In the 82 patients followed up for more than six months, all three post-dissolution regimens were well tolerated.
None of the 82 reported diarrhoea or other side effects.
With few exceptions (see below), all the haematological and biochemical values were normal at the start of the study and remained so throughout.
At trial entry, however, there were mild abnormalities of fasting serum lipids in 12 patients.
Thus in four the serum cholesterol ranged from 8.9 to 9.7 mmol/l (normal <); in five the serum triglyceride concentrations were raised at 2.4–3.6 mmol/l (normal <) whilte in three thre was mixed hyperlipidaemia.
In these and the remaining 70 patients, the serum lipids remained unchanged throughout the study.
There was no hypertransaminasaemia either before or during the trial.
One patient, who had radiological evidence of Paget's disease of bone, had consistently raised serum alkaline phosphatase concentrations (600–905 U/l: n).
COMPLIANCE WITH DIET
Figure 1 shows the results for the fibre (A) and sugar (B) scores.
The mean pre-trial fibre scores (approximately 20 points) were almost identical in all three groups.
(These scores may be somewhat higher than normal as, before joining the study, some patients had already been encouraged to take a high fibre intake.)
During the trial, the mean fibre score in the diet group rose to 33.6 and over the three years for which reliable results are available, compliance in taking the high fibre diets seemed good with very little ‘drift’ in mean values that ranged from a minimum of mean (SEM) 31.0 (3.7 points) at 36 months to a maximum of 325.5 (2.2) at 12 months.
In the two tablet groups, the mean fibre scores both dropped slightly at six months — to 17.9 (2.2) in the ursodeoxycholic acid treated, and to 16.5 (1.3) in the placebo treated groups — probably because, for the purposes of the trial, the patients were encouraged to avoid high fibre foods.
Thereafter, however, the fibre scores remained relatively constant.
At the point of entry into the study, the mean sugar scores were comparable in the ursodeoxycholic acid (8.4 (1.3) points) and diet (8.6 (1.1)) groups but, largely because three obese individuals in the placebo group consistently took large amounts of refined carbohydrates, the mean score in this group was 13.6 (1.9).
During the trial, the sugar scores remained constant in both tablet groups but, as intended, the scores in the diet group fell by an average of 40–48%.
In all three groups, however, the mean values remained constant throughout the study — again implying good compliance in controlling sugar, as well as fibre, intake.
COMPLIANCE WITH TABLETS
This was judged by patient history and counting residual tablets (the placebo and ursodeoxycholic acid were given double blind) when the prescriptions were renewed and compliance in taking the prescribed tablets were excellent.
A small number of patients admitted to missing the capsules on single days but only one patient admitted to stopping treatment for several weeks.
He had previously claimed 100% compliance in taking his tablets over three to four years.
When the code was broken, it was found that he had been taking placebo rather than ursodeoxycholic acid.
None the less, his results were censored from the trial analysis at the point of his last ‘on treatment’ oral cholecystectography/ ultrasonagraphy.
RECURRENCE
The overall gall stone recurrence rates, independent of treatment, are considered in three ways based on different diagnostic techniques:(i) according to the trial criteria (mainly oral cholecystectography — see above);(ii) ultrasonagraphy alone; and (iii) either method.
Trial criteria — Twenty one patients developed gall stone recurrence.
These were all detected between 12 and 42 months after trial entry corresponding, by LTA, to 0% at six months, 8.9 (3.2) % at 12 months, 14.3 (4.0) % at 18 months, 22.9 (4.9) % at 24 months, 29.2 (5.7) % at 36 months, and 33.9 (7.0) % at 42 and subsequent months (Fig 2).
Ultrasound alone — A total of 24 recurrences was recognised by ultrasonagraphy corresponding to actuarial rates of 8.5 (3.1) % at six months, 14.9 (3.9) % at 12 months, 20.5 (4.6) % at 18 months, 23.4 (4.9) % at 24 months, 34.4 (6.2) % at 36 months, and 39.1 (7.2) % at 42 months, and thereafter (Fig 2).
Either method — If recurrence is defined as stone detection by either imaging technique, the total number was 26 which corresponds, by LTA, to 8.5 (3.1) % at six months, 17.4 (4.2) % at 12 months, 22.8 (4.7) % at 18 months, 25.7 (5.0) % at 24 months, 36.4 (6.2) % at 36 months, and 41.0 (7.2) % at 42 and subsequent months.
Comparative sensitivity of different imaging techniques in detecting gall stone recurrence — Ultrasound detected gall stone recurrence earlier and more frequently than did either the trial criteria or oral cholecystectography alone (Fig 3).
Thus, at six months, no recurrences were detected by oral cholecystectography, but five were apparent by ultrasonagraphy.
All five were confirmed subsequently by oral cholecystectography and repeat ultrasonography.
By one year, 12 recurrences had been diagnosed by ultrasonagraphy but only seven had been detected by oral cholecystectography.
In five of these seven, the stones were also found by ultrasonagraphy but in two, recurrences were identified by oral cholecystectography, which had not been detected by echography.
In 16 patients who had had both imaging techniques, gall stones recurrence was identified simultaneously in only five.
In the remaining 11, the recurrence was detected 6 to 18 months earlier by ultrasonagraphy, than by oral cholecystectography.
Frequency of symptomatic gall stone recurrence — Of the 21 patients who developed gall stone recurrence by the original criteria, only two had complained of biliary colic during the study.
In the remainder, the recurrent stones were silent or asymptomatic.
The same finding applies to the 26 patients whose gall stone recurrence was detected by either imaging technique.
Recurrence in the three treatment groups (Fig 4)— Of the 21 recurrences diagnosed according to the trial criteria, there were four in the ursodeoxycholic acid treated, six in the placebo, and 11 in the diet groups.
In those taking ursodeoxycholic acid, this corresponds, by LTA, to 0% at 6 and 12 months, 4.8 (4.6) % at 18 months, 14.8 (7.9) % at 24 months, and 21.9 (9.9) % at 36 and subsequent months.
(There were no recurrences after three years in the ursodeoxycholic acid treated patients.)
In the placebo group, the recurrence rates were 15.4 (7.1) % at 12 and 18 months, 20.1 (8.1) % at 24 months, and 27.4 (10.1) % at 36 months and thereafter.
In those taking the diet, they were 9.7 (5.3) % at 12 months, 19.4 (7.1) % at 18 months, 29.9 (8.4) % at 24 months, 34.9 (9.2) % at 36 months, and 45.8 (12.4) % at 42 and subsequent months.
These rates were not significantly affected by subdivision of the diet group into those who achieved a high fibre score from mainly non-bran sources (n=7) and those who were compliant in taking bran supplements (31.4 (18.6) % v 49.4 (13.9) % respectively by LTA at 42 months: NS).
Thus, despite a twofold difference between mean values in the ursodeoxycholic acid treated and diet groups at 42 months, when the recurrence rates are considered independent of the stone free interval (see below), there were no significant differences between the results in the three groups.
If recurrence is considered to have developed when diagnosed by either oral cholecystectography or ultrasonagraphy (n=26), then the rate at 42 and subsequent months by LTA is 25.7 (10.4) % in the ursodeoxycholic acid treated, 26.2 (9.8) % in the placebo and 60.2 (12.0) % in the diet, groups (diet v placebo; p).
RISK FACTORS AND PREDICTIVE VARIABLES
Age
Gall stone recurrence was equally common in all age groups.
Sex
There was a non-significant trend towards a higher gall stone recurrence rate in men than in women: 46.4 (13.3) % v 20.4 (7.8) % respectively by LTA at 42 months.
TYPE OF DISSOLUTION TREATMENT
Patients who had initially been given chenodeyxholic acid as dissolution treatment had a significantly lower recurrence rate than those who had been treated, originally, with ursodeoxycholic acid (17.8 (5.8) % at 42 months by LTA compared with 67.1 (16.4) %; p).
This apparent difference, however, was compounded by the stone free interval between gall stone dissolution and trial entry, which was 6.78 (1.46) months (range 1–24) in the ursodeoxycholic acid treated v 21.0 (2.6) months (range 1–80) in the chenodeyxholic acid treated patients (p).
Patients who joined the study between 1981 and 1985 tended to have been treated with ursodeoxycholic acid as it had become widely available at that time and was considered to be the oral bile acid treatment of choice for gall stone dissolution.
Furthermore, they were recruited into the trial immediately after their gall stone dissolution had been confirmed — rather than months or years later.
As patients who have been stone free for >months constitute a low risk group for recurrence (see below), the apparently lower recurrence rate in the chenodeyxholic acid treated patients may be an artefact.
Only four patients were given a combination of ursodeoxycholic acid plus chenodeyxholic acid: this group was too small for statistical scrutiny.
Previous history of gall stone recurrence
Of the six patients who had previously had gall stone recurrence, five (83%) developed a further recurrence during the trial compared wth 16 recurrences in the 76 patients who had not previously had recurrent stones (21%).
Byt the χ 2 2 test, this difference is statistically significant (p).
This comparison, however, does not take into account the duration of follow up, and the number of patients who had previously had recurrence is too small to permit valid conclusions from a multivariate analysis.
None the less, the results suggest that a history of previous recurrence does indeed predict a high risk for subsequent recurrence.
Previous stone number
Before their initial gall stone dissolution treatment, 15 of 82 patients followed up for more than six months had had solitary stones, compared with 67 who had had multiple stones.
There were only two recurrences in the solitary stone group compared with 19 in the multiple stone group — equivalent to LTA recurrence rates of 14.8 (9.7) % and 41.7 (9.3) % at 42 months respectively.
As the number of patients who originally had had solitary stones was small, the difference does not reach statistical significance and this was also true when the analysis was based on the 26 patients who had recurrence diagnosed by oral cholecystectography or ultrasound, or both (14.5 (9.5) % for those who had had single stones and 46.4 (8.1) % for those with multiple stones: NS).
Patients who originally had multiple ‘primary’ gall stones always had multiple recurrent gall stones while those who initially had solitary stones invariably had solitary recurrent stones.
Obesity
The overall recurrence rate was similar in non-obese (<) and obese (>) patients: 33.5 (8.6) % v 35.3 (12.3) % by LTA at 42 months respectively.
With regard to the possibility that large changes in body weight (equal to or >of initial weight) might represent a risk factor, only one case of gall stone recurrence was detected in those who lost >of starting weight and none was seen in those who gained weight.
Effect of pregnancy and oestrogen based treatment
There was no significant difference in actuarial recurrence rates at 42 and subsequent months, for pre-menopausal (24.6 (10.9) %) and post-menopausal (35.9 (13.1) %) women (Table III).
Moreover, there was no correlation between recurrence rates and the number of either past or recent pregnancies.
Forty five patients had previously been pregnant and in this subgroup, there were 11 recurrences compared with only one in the 10 patients who were nulliparous — corresponding to LTA rates of 31.2 (9.0) % and 20.0 (17.9) % respectively at 42 months (NS).
Of the 10 patients who had taken oral contraceptives, only one developed gall stone recurrence but neither of the two patients taking hormone replacement treatment developed recurrent stones.
Non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
None of the patients who regularly took aspirin and other NSAIDs experienced gall stone recurrence, compared with 20 recurrences in the 63 patients who did not (pFisher's exact test).
The only patient who had previously had gall stone recurrence, but who did not experience a further recurrence, had taken NSAIDs regularly.
Stone-free interval (Fig 5)
In those who, at the point of entry into the trial, had already been stone free for >the nine month median, there was a significantly lower recurrence rate (12.7 (6.0) % at 42 months by LTA) than in those who had been stone free for <months (55.4 (12.5) %; p).
Despite the study design and our attempts to stratify for the stone free interval (based on >or <years), there was an imbalance between the three treatment groups on either side of the median (nine months).
Although the distribution of patients who were stone free for >or <months was about equal in the diet group (43% >months and 57% <months), it was appreciably different in the two tablet groups.
At trial entry, 19 of 28 patients (68%) in the placebo group had already been stone free for equal to or >months — compared with only eight of 23 (35%) in the ursodeoxycholic acid group.
As the stone free interval proved to be one of the most important predictive factors for gall stone recurrence, this imbalance introduced a potential bias towards a greater recurrence rate in the ursodeoxycholic acid group, than in the placebo group.
After correcting for this imbalance by the direct standardisation method, the recurrence rate in the ursodeoxycholic acid treated patients (15%) was only half that seen in the other two groups (30%) although this difference still failed to reach statistical significance.
Discussion
PATHOGENESIS OF RECURRENT GALL BLADDER STONES
Before primary gall stones form, there must be at least a triple defect:(i) the secretion of bile that is supersaturated with cholesterol,(ii) a nucleation defect due to an excess of promotors or a deficiency of inhibitors of crystallisation, or both, and (iii) stasis within the gall bladder secondary to impaired gall bladder motor function.
The same triple defect probably contributes to the formation of recurrent gall bladder stones.
Thus, recurrence of supersaturated bile is almost invariable after withdrawing oral bile acid treatment.
The defect in gall bladder contractile function also persists after gall stone clearance by oral bile acids alone, or by extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy plus adjuvant bile acids.
It is not known, however, if the nucleation defect also persists after the stones have been removed.
Conventionally, cholesterol crystal nucleation times are measured in gall bladder bile obtained by needle aspiration at the time of surgery: they cannot be measured reliably in bile rich duodenal fluid.
As access to the gall bladder is rarely possible after gall stone clearance, it seemed that, until recently, they could not be studied in patients with complete gall stone dissolution.
Swobodnik and colleagues, however, showed that percutaneous ‘skinny’ needle puncture of the gall bladder can be performed safely for diagnostic aspiration of gall bladder bile.
As yet, there is no information about nucleation times measured in this way in patients with complete gall stone dissolution.
Importance of cholesterol crystal nucleation
Several indirect lines of evidence suggest that nucleation may be more important than biliary cholesterol supersaturation in the pathogenesis of recurrent gall bladder stones.
Firstly, as shown by the present results and those of Villanova et al , gall stones recur two to three times more frequently in patients who originally had multiple stones than in those who, before dissolution treatment, had solitary stones.
This suggests that in patients who form multiple stones, there is a more severe nucleation defect than in those who form single stones.
Indeed, Groen et al showed recently that the nucleation time is shorter in patients with multiple gall bladder stones than in those with solitary stones.
Secondly, the results of three studies suggest that aspirin or other NSAIDs, or both may prevent both primary and recurrent gall stone formation — apparently by inhibiting gall bladder mucosal prostaglandin synthesis, mucus glycoprotein production, and nucleation.
Thus in prairie dogs fed a lithogenic diet, aspirin inhibits mucus glycoprotein secretion by the gall bladder, cholesterol microcrystal formation, and the development of gall stones that would otherwise have occurred.
Similarly, in obese patients receiving weight reduction, Broomfield and colleagues found that in a dose of 1300 mg/day, aspirin inhibited (albeit to a non-significant extent) the development of microcrystals, microstones, and gall stones — which developed with high frequency in untreated patients.
In this trial, longterm (>months) NSAID ingestion seemed to prevent gall stone recurrence.
Our emphasis on biliary cholesterol saturation in the pathogenesis of recurrent stones, therefore, may have been incorrect.
In retrospect, our attempts to prevent recurrence should, perhaps, have been directed at identifying and manipulating (by increasing the amounts of inhibitors or decreasing the amounts of promotors) nucleating factors that induce crystal, and thereby gall stone, formation from supersaturated bile.
STUDY DESIGN
The choice of ursodeoxycholic acid dose
In doses as low as 3 mg kg -1 day -1 , oral ursodeoxycholic acid significantly lowers biliary cholesterol secretion and saturation.
Initially, we postulated that any protective effect of ursodeoxycholic acid against gall stone recurrence would be mediated through changes in biliary cholesterol saturation.
The results of recent studies suggest, however, that ursodeoxycholic acid, but not chenodeyxholic acid, also inhibits the nucleation of cholesterol microcrystals from supersaturated bile.
This may explain why low dose chenodeyxholic acid does not prevent gall stone recurrence while the results of this and other studies suggest that low dose ursodeoxycholic acid may do so.
Duration of follow up 
After the present study was designed, longterm studies using actuarial analysis were published, which showed that a longer follow up period than two years was required to establish reliable recurrence data.
For this reason, and also to ensure that adequate numbers of patients had been recruited, the present trial was extended from two, to a maximum of five, years.
In the event, we never saw gall stone recurrence beyond 3.5 years with the result that there was a plateau in the actuaral recurrence rate after this time.
Similar findings have been made by others although in the different studies, the time of onset of the plateau has varied from three to seven years.
In all such studies, however (including this trial), the number of patients at risk diminishes appreciably with time so that the confidence of the prediction that there really is a plateau, also diminishes with time.
The stone free interval
The present and other results suggest that there is a linear increase in cumulative recurrence rates with time (about 10–15% per annum) until the plateau is reached.
If so, how can we reconcile this with the finding that patients stone free for >months before joining the study, represent a ‘protected’ subgroup at low risk for recurrence?
One possibility is that some patients thought to be stone free may, in reality, have had residual debris despite our use of the best available techniques (ultrasonagraphy+oral cholecystectography) to ‘confirm’ complete gall stone dissolution.
(Neither imaging technique is sensitive in detecting individual gall bladder stones measuring <mm.)
By contrast, those still stone free nine months or more after dissolution treatment has stopped are genuinely likely to have had complete gall stone dissolution.
The only way to prove this would be to subject the patients with apparent complete gall stone dissolution to surgery when the contents of the gall bladder could be examined directly.
This is not possible for obvious ethical reasons.
EFFECT OF POST-DISSOLUTION TREATMENT ON GALL STONE RECURRENCE
As the results in Figure 5 show, before correcting for the imbalance in the distribution of low risk patients (stone free >months) between the three groups, there was no significant difference in the actuarial recurrence rates between the ursodeoxycholic acid and diet groups — despite a twofold difference in mean values.
The absence of a significant difference in LTA recurrence rates, however, may represent a type II error due to inadequate numbers towards the end of the study, rather than to a lack of effect.
Effect of the high fibre, low refined carbohydrate diet
Despite reservations about comparatively small numbers of patients, we can say that by the trial criteria, the diet did not prevent or reduce gall stone recurrence — whether or not an adjustment is made for the stone free interval.
Indeed, when the diagnosis of recurrence was based on either oral cholecystectography or ultrasonagraphy, the only significant difference between the three groups was a higher rate of recurrence in the diet treated patients than in the other two groups.
Why increases in dietary fibre or decreases in refined carbohydrate intake should reduce cholesterol supersaturation of bile in control subjects, but should fail to prevent recurrence in our gall stone patients, is unknown.
One possible explanation relates to the differing effects of different types of dietary fibre on bile lipid composition.
In this study, the fibre score was based on the total fibre intake, and not just on fibre derived from the standardised wheat bran.
All the evidence that high ‘fibre’ intake reduces biliary cholesterol saturation is based on studies using wheat bran.
Legume seeds, however, which are high fibre foods may actually increase biliary cholesterol saturation and probably predispose to gall stone formation.
Effect of low dose bile acids
In this study, low dose bedtime ursodeoxycholic acid did not significantly reduce gall stone recurrence rates diagnosed either by the original criteria or by the use of either imaging technique (oral cholecystectography or ultrasonagraphy).
Even when the recurrence rates were adjusted, the 15% rate in the ursodeoxycholic acid treated patients was not significantly different from the 30% rate in the other two groups.
Again, this lack of statistical significance may represent a type II error.
Chenodeyxholic acid — In the United States National Co-operative Gallstone Study (NCGS), there was no significant difference in recurrence rates between placebo treated patients (5 of 27 or 28.5%) and those given 375 mg CDCA/day (5 of 26 or 23.9%).
The dose of chenodeyxholic acid used, however, was low (again about one third of the full gall stone dissolution dose) and the follow up comparatively short (three years).
By contrast, in a preliminary report from Valencia, Perez-Aguilar and colleagues found only three recurrences in 12 post-dissolution patients (25%) given 250 mg chenodeyxholic acid/day, compared with six recurrences in 10 patients (60%) given no treatment.
Ursodeoxycholic acid — In a large but uncontrolled study from Bologna, Villanova et al reported recurrence rates in 86 patients who had had 96 episodes of gall stone dissolution (in 10, recurrent stones were dissolved with a further course of oral bile acid treatment).
On 36 occasions, the patients were treated with 300 mg ursodeoxycholic acid/day, which resulted in a recurrence rate of 32 (18) % by LTA at seven and subsequent years, compared with 69 (12.4) % on the 60 occasions when no post-dissolution treatment was given (p).
This protective effect of ursodeoxycholic acid was confined to patients aged 50 or less.
Although we could not confirm this finding statistically, none of the small number of our patients aged less than 50 (n=18) who was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid, developed recurrence.
In this study, the dose of ursodeoxycholic acid varied with body weight.
Eighteen of 23 ursodeoxycholic acid treated patients took only 200 mg/day while two took 250 mg and only three took 300 mg/day.
There were no obvious differences in recurrence rates as a function of ursodeoxycholic acid dose but with only five patients taking >mg/day, the number is too small to draw valid conclusions.
Given that it was impossible to predict the response to the three post-dissolution treatment regimens, some degree of imbalance between the groups was almost inevitable.
Indeed, in prospective random allocation trials, this happens frequently and the application of an adjustment or correction factor is common.
Having done so, we found a twofold difference in the recurrence rates between the ursodeoxycholic acid treated and placebo treated patients and although this was not statistically significant, these data, when coupled with the results of the Italian and Spanish studies suggest that ursodeoxycholic acid reduces and probably delays, but does not prevent, gall stone recurrence.
Symptomatic vasymptomatic recurrence
Only two of the patients with gall stone recurrence in this study had symptoms of biliary colic: in the remainder, the recurrent stones were silent or asymptomatic.
This shows that the presence of symptoms is unreliable as a predictor of recurrence.
In a preliminary report, however, Tint et al noted that 75% of their patients who developed gall stone recurrence after dissolution of their primary stones by oral bile acid treatment had symptoms.
Furthermore, in 58 patients rendered stone free with extra corporeal shock wave lithotripsy and adjuvant bile acids, Sackmann et al found that 100% of their patients with recurrent stones had symptoms.
The difference in the frequency of symptomatic recurrence may be explained by an evolving policy of management when considering gall stone patients for non-surgical treatment.
In the past, many patients were accepted for bile acid treatment without specific, gall stone related symptoms.
As extra corporeal shock wave dissolution was introduced in 1985, however, the consensus has changed and most investigators now recommend active treatment only if patients have specific symptoms attributable to their gall stone disease.
Frequency of gall stone recurrence
In this study, the highest figure for gall stone recurrence is 26 (diagnosed by either oral cholecystectography or ultrasonagraphy) of 82 patients followed up for at least six months (60 of whom were followed up for not less than two years) giving a crude recurrence rate of 31.7% which correspondes, by LTA, to a cumulative actuarial rate of 41.0 (7.2) % at 3.5 and subsequent years.
These overall results may be distorted, however, by the influence of post-dissolution treatment.
Therefore, they may not be representative of recurrence rates in untreated individuals.
Although gall stone recurrence rates of 30–40% are substantial, they are, nonetheless, considerably less than those reported in many other studies.
One reason for these variable results may relate to the differing degress of stringency applied to the diagnosis and confirmation of complete gall stone dissolution.
These studies are important not only for gall stone recurrence after oral dissolution treatment but also for recurrence in any situation where the gall bladder remains in situ but the stones have been removed by percutaneous cholecystolithotomy, instillation of contact solvents such as MTBE and, to a lesser extent because of patient selection, by extra corporeal shock wave dissolution with or without adjuvant bile acids.
Based on these findings, and on those by Villanova et al showing that:(i) patients with multiple primary stones tend to develop multiple recurrent stones while those who originally had solitary stones tend to develop single stone recurrence; and (ii) the recurrence rate in those who initially had solitary stones is only one third of that in patients who originally had multiple stones, we can predict that as patients selected for extra corporeal shock wave dissolution mainly have solitary stones, the recurrence rate after lithotripsy should be lower than that reported here.
Data for gall stone recurrence after extra corporeal shock wave dissolution are only now starting to emerge but the initial results showing 11–15% gall stone recurrencerates one to two years after lithotripsy certainly confirm this prediction.
These studies are important not only for recurrent stone disease but also because a knowledge of gall stone recurrence is likely to provide valuable clues about the pathogenesis and treatment of primary gall stone disease.
In the future, the emphasis on studies of recurrence should, perhaps, be directed not at subjects who develop recurrent stones but at the significant percentage of patients who do not and who, given the best currently available information, may never do so.
The assumption that once a gall stone inducing risk factor is present it will persist may not always apply.
Thus, the primary stones may have developed in women during the childbearing period of life as a result of the cylic production of hormones, pregnancy or the ingestation of oestrogen containing oral contraceptive drugs, or both.
Transfer of these subjects from premenopausal to postmenopausal ‘status’ should, theoretically, reduce the risk of developing recurrent stones.
Conversely, the prescription of hormone replacement treatment as prophylaxis against postmenopausal oesteoporosis, could diminish this potential benefit.
In this study, there were too few patients who became menopausal during the study for valid analyses.
More longterm studies would be necessary to answer this point.
furthermore, patients who were obese, or actively having weight reduction at the time when the primary gall stones developed might, on achieving ideal body weight, no longer suffer this risk factor.
Again there are too few patients who fall into the category of significant changs in body weight to permit valid conclusions but given the limited information, this did not seem to influence these results.
Cryptosporidium , chronic diarrhoea and the proximal small intestinal mucosa
Abstract
The association between Cryptosporidium , chronic diarrhoea and a proximal small intestinal mucosal enteropathy was reviewed over a six and a half year period.
One hundred and twenty three children with cryptosporidiosis and no clinical evidence of immune deficiency were identified.
50% of children excreting only Cryptosporidium had chronic diarrhoea.
Most cases (63%) of chronic diarrhoea occurred in the first two years of life.
A mild to moderate enteropathy was present in all nine children undergoing a small intestinal biopsy and seven showed the presence of Cryptosporidium adhering to villous epithelium.
All patients eventually recovered spontaneously.
Cryptosporidium is a cause of chronic diarrhoea and a proximal small intestinal mucosal enteropathy in children without immune deficiency.
Screening for the parasite should be part of the investigative procedures in children with chronic diarrhoea.
Cryptosporidium is a coccidian protozoan parasite found in birds, fish, reptiles, and mammals.
It is an obligate parasite with a complex life cycle.
There are at least four species of which C parvum seems to be responsible for most human infection.
The parasite was originally described in 1907 but the first human case was not recognised until 1976 and only eight cases were described in the literature before 1982.
Between 1982 and 1986 it changed from being described as an uncommon parasite to the most common parasite identified and over 11000 cases were reported between 1985 and 1988.
There is good evidence that Cryptosporidium caused acute gastroenteritis as it has been found more frequently in the stools of children with diarrhoeal disease than controls and has been detected in diarrhoeal outbreaks.
It has been accidently transferred from animals to man and has been experimentally transmitted from man to calves and mice.
Cryptosporidium has been detected in the proximal small intestine, the large intestine and the rectum in man.
Seroconversion has been shown but there are no human volunteer studies.
Cases have been reported from Europe, Africa, India, the West Indies, North and South America indicating world wide prevalence.
Two main forms of clinical presentation have been described; a chronic, life threatening illness in the immunocompromised and an acute self limiting gastroenteritis in immunocompetent patients.
Indeed, chronic diarrhoea has been an infrequently reported finding in studies of immunocompetent children with Cryptosporidium .
We have previously reported two cases associated with chronic diarrhoea, failure to thrive and a proximal small intestinal enteropathy.
In order to further study the relationship with chronic diarrhoea we have reviewed patients presenting at Queen Elizabeth Hospital for Children with cryptosporidiosis since 1983 when routine screening of the stools was introduced.
Methods
PATIENTS
Patients presenting at Queen Elizabeth Hospital for Children between October 1982 and April 1990 found to be excreting Cryptosporidium in the stool were reviewed retrospectively to assess the presenting symptoms, duration of diarrhoea and patient characteristics.
Chronic diarrhoea was defined as diarrhoea persisting for at least 14 days.
The routine microbiological examination of the stools included: negative staining electron microscopy for gastrointestinal viruses and light microscopy for ova, cysts, and parasites.
Bacterial culture was performed in order to identify pathogens including Salmonella , enteropathogenic E coli ,Aeromonas ,Campylobacter , and Shigella .
Cryptosporidial occysts were identified by a modified Ziehl-Nielsen stain as described previously.
The total number of patients who had stool samples analysed could only be accurately assessed in the one year period (1989) when records were computerised.
In nine patients with chronic diarrhoea and severe failure to thrive a proximal small intestinal biopsy was done using a pediatric twin port biopsy capsule after obtaining informed consent.
The small intestinal mucosa was studied by histology, morphometry, biochemistry, and electron microscopy.
The immune competence of patients with the most severe symptoms was screened by studying serum immunoglobulins, lymphocyte transformation in response to phytohaemagglutinin stmulation, the formation of T cell rosettes with sheep erythroxytes, yeast opsonisation, and neutrophil chemotaxis and nitro blue tetrazolium chloride reduction.
Results
In the 6.5 year study period 123 children had Cryptosporidium identified in the stool and the notes of 109 of these were found and reviewed.
In the single one year period (1989) when computer records were available a total of 1662 children provided stools for microbiological examination and 27 (1.6%) had cryptosporidiosis.
The annual figures (Fig 1) showed marked variation from year to year: on average 18 cases were identified per year, with fewer cases in 1984 and 1988, and more cases in 1986 and 1989.
Significantly more cases of cryptosporidiosis occurred between April and June and less cases were seen between October and December (Fig 2) over the whole period of the study (χ 2 test, both p).
The most common presenting symptom was diarrhoea in 100/109 (92%) patients.
This was usually watery and offensive with occasional mucus or blood staining.
Fifty six patients (51%) had vomiting and 23 (21%) had significant abdominal pain.
Nine patients without diarrhoea had unexplained pyrexia (three), nausea (one), abdominal pain (four), and/or vomiting (four).
There was no clinical evidence of immunodeiciency in any of the 109 patients.
Duration of diarrhoea was documented in 90/109 cases and is shown in Figure 3.
Firty two of 90 children (58%) had chronic diarrhoea.
In 35 cases (39%) the diarrhoea persisted for at least 21 days and in seven cases (8%) for more than six months.
In all cases the diarrhoea eventually resolved spontaneously.
Sixty four of 90 children had Cryptosporidium alone, 32 of these (50%) had diarrhoea persisting for 14 days or more, and 21 (33%) had diarrhoea persisting for over 21 days.
Half of the cases (32/ 64) occurred in children under two years of age and 20 (63%) of these had chronic diarrhoea compared with only 38% (12/32) of children aged greater than two years (p).
Details concerning the length of excretion of Cryptosporidium in relation to symptoms is not available in the majority of cases.
Chronic diarrhoea was more frequent in those with mixed infections (20/26 (77%)) compared with those with Cryptosporidium alone (p); 14 had diarrhoea for 21 days or more.
The other organisms detected in the children with mixed infections included Giardia lamblia ,Aeromonas , enteropathogenic E coli ,Shigella ,Salmonella ,Campylobacter , rotavirus, adenovirus, calicivirus, and astrovirus.
Nineteen children had one other organism, five children had two, and two children had three.
Weight was documented in 82/90 and 19 (23%) were below the third percentile.
This was not related to the duration of diarrhoea (χ 2 test, p).
Seven children who were above the third percentile had recently lost weight or were failing to thrive.
Although a greater proportion of patients with mixed infections had weight below the third percentile (eight of 21) this was not significantly different to those with Cryptosporidium alone (11/61).
Two patient subgroups were identified: these were children who had recently travelled abroad (11), and children who had an itinerant existence within the United Kingdom, generally living in caravan sites (11).
Mixed infections were common in both (seven cases in the former subgroup, and six in the latter).
Considering the children who were only excreting Cryptosporidium , chronic diarrhoea occurred in nine of 11 children (82%) who had returned from travel abroad (Indian subcontinent (eight), Europe (two), and Africa (one)) and in seven of 11 children (64%) from itinerant families (eight of nine and four of seven respectively having diarrhoea for greater than 21 days).
In comparison four of seven with the remaining cases, chronic diarrhoea was more frequent in those who had travelled abroad (χ 2 test, p), and just significantly increased in patients from itinerant families (p).
Nine patients with Cryptosporidium , chronic diarrhoea and severe failure to thrive had a proximal small intestinal biopsy performed.
The documented length of excretion of Cryptosporidium in these children was 60, 20, 19, 15, 8, 7, 7, 1, and 1 days.
This information is incomplete however, as stool excretion was not regularly monitored and the latter two children only had single stools examined.
One child had previous failure to thrive and developed diarrhoea which persisted for 14 days; the other eight failed to thrive after the onset of diarrhoea.
In all eight cases the diarrhoea continued for over 21 days, in five it persisted for more than three months.
Linear growth was impaired in four of the nine children.
Light microscopy of the small intestinal mucosa showed a mild to moderate enteropathy in all nine patients (Fig 4a).
In seven of the nine patients Cryptosporidium was identified adhering to the mucosa.
Cryptosporidium was found on villous, not crypt, epithelium (Fig 4b) and there was evidence of brush border effacement at sites of attachment (Fig 4c).
Scanning electron microscopy, which affords a high resolution view of the mucosal surface, proved a very effective way of detecting the organism (Fig 4d).
Giardia lamblia was identified in the mucosa in one patient but only Cryptosporidium was seen in the other patients.
Villous height was reduced in all patients compared with controls (p) whereas crypt depth, although increased in individual cases, was not significantly increased in the group as a whole (p)(Fig 5).
Activity of the disaccharidases lactase, sucrase, and maltase was significantly reduced compared with controls (p)(Fig 6) and the intraepithelial lymphocyte count was significantly increased (p)(Fig 7).
Immune function was screened in five of the nine patients requiring biopsy and all tests were normal.
Patients with diarrhoea were given oral rehydration therapy for 24 hours and then returned to their normal feeds.
Five of the nine patients undergoing a small intestinal biopsy were subsequently placed on a diet free from cow's milk protein and lactose with no apparent clinical response.
All patients eventually recovered spontaneously.
Discussion
The detection rate of cryptosporidiosis in the one year in which it was possible to be calculated was similar to the finding of 1.4% reported by Baxby and Hart.
The Public Health Laboratory Service (UK), in a study of 9880 patients in England and Wales with presumed infective diarrhoea, found 5% of children aged between one and four years had Cryptosporidium in the stool.
Although chronic diarrhoea (defined by them as greater than 21 days duration) occurred most frequently in this age group, this amounted to only 6% of cases — that is, 94% had diarrhoea which lasted for less than 21 days.
A surprising finding in the present study was that 32 of the 64 children — that is, 50% excreting only Cryptosporidium had chronic diarrhoea, and 33% (21/64) had diarrhoea for 21 days or more.
In view of these findings and the world wide distribution of Cryptosporidium it is possible that the parasite may play an important role in chronic diarrhoea in developing countries, and in its associated morbidity and mortality, as indicated by others.
It also appears to be a cause of traveller's diarrhoea in early childhood, as reported in older children and adults, and to be associated with chronic diarrhoea in such circumstances.
Indeed, the reason for the greater frequency of chronic diarrhoea in this study in comparison with others in the United Kingdom, may be partly explained by the subgroups of children who had recently travelled abroad and those who had an itinerant existance.
This highlights the remaining 50% (16/32) of cases with chronic diarrhoea for whom there is no ready explanation for the persistence of their symptoms.
It is possible that the natural history of cryptosporidiosis in the United Kingdom includes diarrhoea extending up to 21 days.
Nine of these 16 remaining children, however, had diarrhoea for over 21 days, indicating that host factors may be important in the continuation of their symptoms.
Twenty nine per cent of cases had a mixed infection, and chronic diarrhoea was more frequent in these patients.
There was insufficient evidence to determine if the mixed infections were concurrent, intercurrent, or sequential.
Indeed, more information is required concerning the pattern of excretion of Cryptosporidium and other organisms, in order to investigate whether the chronic diarrhoea in these cases is a result of persistent infection or is a postinfective phenomenon.
In general, in immunocompetent children, it appears that Cryptosporidium and Giardia lamblia infections may be associated with chronic diarrhoea, bacterial infections may extend into the chronic period, and viral infections are of short term duration.
Around one quartr of the children in this study were below the third percentile for weight suggesting an association between cryptosporidiosis and failure to thrive, as described in other centres.
In developing countries it is uncertain whether cryptosporidiosis leads to failure to thrive or whether malnutrition predisposes to cryptosporidiosis.
These two postulates are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
In this study infection with Cryptosporidium appears to be the primary event.
Four of the nine patients requiring a small intestinal biopsy had impaired linear growth emphasising the potential serious effects of this illness.
This also highlights the need to find an effective treatment, particularly as diagnosis is not relatively straightforward.
The association between a proximal small intestinal enteropathy and cryptosporidiosis in man has not been well established.
In this study there was a remarkably consistent proximal small intestinal enteropathy of mild to moderate severity.
Such an abnormality might be considered to be insufficient to explain the severity and chronicity of symptoms, however, involvement of widespread areas of the intestine including the colon have been described in cryptosporidiosis and the extent of the enteropathy may be an important factor in these cases.
The organism was only seen on villous epithelium.
In immune deficient states Cryptosporidium is also found attached to crypt epithelium within the crypt lumen, indicating differences in the extent of colonisation of the mucosal surface in the two conditions.
This observation is of interest in relation to the involvement of the immune system in influencing the topography of mucosal colonisation, and requires further investigation.
We conclude that Cryptosporidium is an important cause of chronic diarrhoea with failure to thrive in immunocompetent children and is associated with a proximal small intestinal enteropathy.
Screening for Cryptosporidium should be routinely carried out in such children.
Importance of endogenous prostaglandins for the toxicity of cyclosporin A to rat endocrine and exocrine pancreas?
Abstract
Previous work has shown that cyclosporin A is toxic to the endocrine and exocrine pancreas.
The aim of this study was to examine whether endogenous eicosanoids play a role in controlling cyclosporin A induced toxicity.
Rats were treated for eight days with indomethacin (2 mg/ kg, twice daily) in addition to cyclosporin A (5 or 10 mg/kg daily).
Effects of drug treatments on exocrine (as assessed by amylase and protein secretion into the pancreatic juice) and endocrine (as assessed by the glucose dependent insulin release) pancreatic functions, and pancreatic formation of prostaglandin and thromboxane were evaluated.
Treatment with cyclosporin A in the doses used did not inhibit eicosanoid formation by the pancreatic tissue ex vivo.
Indomethacin caused significant inhibition of pancreatic formation of prostaglandin E2, 6k prostaglandin F1a and thromboxane B2.
Combined treatment with indomethacin and cyclosporin A (5 or 10 mg/ kg) augmented cyclosporin A induced pancreatic toxicity with further impairment of insul release, amylase secretion, and pancreatic juice protein content, but did not result in more pronounced inhibition of pancreatic eicosanoid formation.
The increased toxicity of the combined treatment was, however, associated with raised cyclosporin A whole blood concentrations.
The data suggest that the protentiation of pancreatic toxicity of cyclosporin A observed during coadministration of indomethacin is not the result of suppression of endogenous pancreatic eicosanoid biosynthesis, but more likely results from altered cyclosporin A pharmacokinetics which may be caused by an interference of indomethacin with the hepatic cytochrome P-450 dependent monooxygenase involved in cyclosporin A metabolism.
The possibility that coadministration of non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs aggravates toxic effects in cyclosporin A treated patients should be considered.
Cyclosporin A is a unique cyclic undecapeptide of fungal origin with potent immunosuppressive properties used to prevent the rejection of transplanted organs and to treat autoimmune diseases.
This drug has a narrow therapeutic window between inadequate immunosuppression and toxicity.
The best known clinical side effects of cyclosporin A are nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity.
We have recently shown in rat pancreas that adverse effects include pancreatic toxicity.
Chronical application of cyclosporin A in immunosuppressive doses caused dose dependent impairment of endocrine and exocrine pancreatic functions.
In addition, it has been shown that cyclosporin A induced toxicity in rats corresponds with severe degranulation and hydropic degeneration of islet B-cells and a decrease in pancreatic insulin content and release.
Concomitant administration of prostaglandins partially alleviated cyclosporin A induced nephrotoxicity.
In addition we have recently shown that in rats treatment with a synthetic prostaglandin E1 analogue (Rioprostil) protects the pancreas against cyclosporin A induced damage.
This study was designed to investigate the role of endogenous eicosanoids in the sensitivity of endocrine and exocrine pancreatic ells against the toxic effects of cyclosporin A. Depletion of pancreatic eicosanoids was achieved by use of the cyclooxygenase inhibitor, indomethacin.
Methods
ANIMALS
Male Wistar rats (mean body weight 300 g), housed under conditions of constant temperature and 12 hour lighting cycle, were used for the study.
They were allowed free access to food (standard diet purchased from Altromin, Germany) and water.
Before operation, the rats were fasted for 18 hours with free access to water and then anaesthetised with pentobarbital (60 mg/kg, intraperitoneally).
MEDICATION
Groups of 10–12 rats received the following drug treatments:(i) 5 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A intragastrically once daily;(ii) 2 mg/kg indomethacin subcutaneously twice daily;(iii) 2 mg/ kg indomethacin subcutaneously twice daily in addition to 5 or 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A intragastrically once daily.
Indomethacin (Merck, Sharp and Dohme, Germany) was suspended in saline.
Cyclosporin A (Sandimmun Sandoz, Switzerland) in pure olive oil was administered intragastrically using a metal feeding tube.
Controls were treated with the corresponding vehicles (saline subcutaneously and/or olive oil intragastrically).
Drugs or vehicles were administered for eight days.
Pancreatic perfusion experiments and incubation experiments to determine pancreatic eicosanoids formation were performed on day 9.
In cyclosporin A treated rats whole blood concentrations of cyclosporin A were determined 24 hours after the last dose applied of cyclosporin A. Pancreatic eicosanoid formation was determined about 18 hours after the last administration of cyclosporin A and calcium four hours after the last dose of indomethacin.
OPERATION
The isolated arterially perfused rat pancreas model was used to evaluate effects on exocrine and endocrine pancreatic functions.
Briefly, the perfused preparation consisted of pancreas with a small remnant of duodenum according to the method as described elsewhere.
The pancreas was perfused in situ through the superior mesenteric artery and the coeliac trunc at a constant flow of 4 ml/minute without recirculation.
The vascular effluent was collected in one minute fractions through the portal vein.
The exocrine secretions were collected in 10 minute fractions through the cannulated pancreatic duct.
PERFUSATES AND TEST SOLUTIONS
The perfusate consisted of Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate buffer containing 0.2% bovine serum albumin (Serve, Germany), 3% dextran T 70 (Pharmacia, Germany), 7.9 or 15.8 mmol/l glucose, gassed with 95% O 2 5% CO 2 to achieve a final pH of 7.4.
The perfusion rate was 4 ml/ minute with a perfusion pressure between 50 and 60 cm H 2 O.
The preparation was equilibrated by perfusion for 15 minutes with a buffer containing 7.9 mmol/l glucose.
After the equilibration period the perfusion medium was changed to buffer containing 15.8 mmol/l glucose and sampling started for a further 30 minute period.
Synthetic cholecystokinin-8 (100 pg/ml final concentration; Sigma, Germany) was additionally infused over the last 20 minutes of the sampling period at a constant flow of 0.2 ml/minute to stimulate the exocrine pancreas.
Infusion of cholecystokinin-8 did not change the perfusion pressure.
ASSESSMENT OF PENCREATIC EICOSANOIDS FORMATION
The pancreata were carefully removed and cut into fragments of 2–5 mg wet weight.
The fragments were blotted, weight and tissue aliquots of 100 mg were immediately incubated in 1.0 ml of oxygenated Tyrode solution at 37°C for 10 minutes.
Release of prostaglandin E2, 6k prostaglandin F1a, and thromboxane B2 into the incubation media was determined radioimmunologically as described previously.
Validation experiments have acertained that standard prostanoids added to aliquots of pancreatic tissue media are recovered quantitatively.
Furthermore, thin layer chromatography has shown that the immunoreactivity released into pancreatic tissue incubation media cochromatographs exclusively with the corresponding standard prostanoids.
ANALYSES
Insulin concentrations in the portal vein effluent were determined by a specific radioimmunoassay as described elsewhere.
Pancreatic juice volume was sampled in 10 minute collection periods and the total amount collected over a 10 minute period was defined as pancreatic volume output.
Amylase secretion into the pancreatic juice was measured according to the method of Street and Close, protein content of the pancreatic juice according to the method of Lowry et al .
Whole blood concentrations of cyclosporin A were measured with the TDx fluorescent polarisation immunoassay (Abbott Diagnostics, Germany) according to the method of Schroeder et al .
Enzyme determinations were done immediately after the end of the experiments.
Radioimmunoassays of insulin and cyclosporin A were performed after storage of the samples at -20°C within two weeks after the experiments were done.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are expressed as mean (SEM).
Comparisons between different groups of data were made using Student's t test for unpaired data and differences with p values <were considered significant.
Results
EFFECTS OF CYCLOSPORIN A AND/OR INDOMETHACIN ON GLUCOSE DEPENDENT INSULIN RELEASE
Treatment with cyclosporin A (5 or 10 mg/kg) alone significantly reduced (pand p, resp) insulin release.
Treatment with indomethacin (2 mg/kg) had no significant influence on insulin release.
Combined administration of cyclosporin A and indomethacin caused a further significant decrease of insulin release as compared with cyclosporin A treated rats only (cyclosporin A 5 mg/kg 1091 (187) µU v cyclosporin A 5 mg/kg+indomethacin 490 (70) µU, p; cyclosporin A 10 mg/kg 447 (44) µU v cyclosporin A 10 mg/kg+indomethacin 222 (60) µU, p; Fig 1).
EFFECTS OF CYCLOSPORIN A AND/OR INDOMETHACIN ON CHOLECYSTOKININ-8
STIMULATED AMYLASE SECRETION
Amylase secretion was not clearly affected after treatment with 5 mg/kg cyclosporin A alone.
10 mg/kg cyclosporin A alone significantly (p) reduced amylase secretion.
While indomethacin alone did not affect amylase secretion, together with cyclosporin A it caused significant (pv controls) inhibition of enzyme secretion (Fig 2).
EFFECTS OF CYCLOSPORIN A AND/OR INDOMETHACIN ON CHOLECYSTOKININ-8 STIMULATED PROTEIN CONTENT OF THE EXOCRINE JUICE
Pancreatic juice protein content was not reduced after treatment with 5 mg/kg cyclosporin A, but was significantly reduced after 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A (p).
Indomethacin given alone had no significant effect.
Cyclosporin A applied together with indomethacin significantly decreased pancretic juice protein content with both doses used (5 mg/kg cyclosporin A+ indomethacin p; 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A+indomethacin p; p v controls; Fig 3).
EFFECTS OF CYCLOSPORIN A AND/OR INDOMETHACIN ON THE EXOCRINE PANCREATIC VOLUME OUTPUT
Both doses of cyclosporin A did not diminish the volume output (control 29.6 (5.6) µl, 5 mg/kg cyclosporin A 26.6 (5.9) µl, and 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A 27.0 (5.3) µl).
Indomethacin alone caused a significant reduction of the volume output (18.6 (2.2) µl, p).
Indomethacin plus 5 or 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A tended to further decrease volume output (5 mg/ kg cyclosporin A+indomethacin 14.0 (3.1) ul, pv controls; 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A+ indomethacin 12.2 (2.2) µl, pv controls).
Differences between indomethacin treated and indomethacin+cyclosporin A treated rats, however, did not reach statistical significance.
EFFECTS OF INDOMETHACIN ON WHOLE BLOOD CONCENTRATIONS OF CYCLOSPORIN A
Treatment with 5 or 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A once daily for eight days resulted in blood concentrations of 401 (88) ng/ml and 1353 (145) ng/ml, resp, 24 hours after the last dose.
In rats with combined treatment with indomethacin and cyclosporin A over the same period cyclosporin A blood concentrations were significantly higher than in rats treated with the corresponding dose of cyclosporin A only (Fig 4).
EFFECTS OF CYCLOSPORIN A AND/OR INDOMETHACIN ON SYNTHESIS OF PROSTAGLANDINS AND THROMBOXANE B2 BY PANCREATIC TISSUE EX VIVO 
As shown in Figure 5, treatment with cyclosporin A (5 or 10 mg/kg for eight days) did not affect synthesis of prostaglandin E2, 6k prostaglandin F1a, and thromboxane B2 by pancreatic tissue ex vivo.
Formation of all three eicosanoids was inhibited after treatment with indomethacin (2 mg/kg) for eight days.
Inhibition of eicosanoid formation after combined administration of indomethacin and cyclosporin A (5 or 10 mg/kg) was not more pronounced than after indomethacin alone.
Discussion
This study confirms previous reports of our group and others that immunosuppressive doses of cyclosporin A impair endocrine and exocrine pancreatic functions in rats.
While the glucose dependent insulin release was reduced by treatment with 5 and 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A for eight days, the cholecystokinin-8 stimulated amylase secretion was only impaired at the higher dose of 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A. Insulin promotes the synthesis of amylase by a direct effect on exocrine pancreatic cells via the insuloacinar axis.
Whether the noxious effect of cyclosporin A on amylase secretion is the consequence of reduced insulin release, is not known.
Treatment with indomethacin at a dose of 2 mg/kg twice daily had no influence on pancreatic functions.
Indomethacin treatment, however, significantly aggravated the toxic action of cyclosporin A on the endocrine and exocrine pancreas.
Reports on the effect of cyclosporin A on prostaglandin synthesis in the kidney are controversial.
Most studies have, however, reported that cyclosporin A comparably inhibited renal prostaglandin formation.
In contrast, treatment of rats with 5 or 10 mg/kg cyclosporin A in our study did not reduce the ex vivo synthesis of prostaglandin E2, 6k prostaglandin F1a, and thromboxane B2 by pancreatic tissue.
The more pronounced inhibition of formation of thromboxane B2 as compared with formation of 6k prostaglandin F1a and particularly prostaglandin E2 may be the result of different cellular sources of the eicosanoids studied.
Thus, thromboxane B2 released during incubation of pancreatic fragments may be derived mainly from trapped platelets which are known to be particularly sensitive to the effect of cyclooxygenase inhibitors.
Although the time interval between the last dose of cyclosporin A and the assessment of pancreatic eicosanoid formation was 18 hours, this cannot explain the lack of inhibitory action of cyclosporin A on pancreatic eicosanoid formation.
High concentrations of circulating cyclosporin A have been measured in our study 24 hours after the last dose of cyclosporin A. Furthermore, tissue concentrations of cyclosporin A in the pancreas are still high after such a period of time.
Indomethacin in the dose used significantly reduced eicosanoid formation in the pancreas ex vivo.
Combined treatment with indomethacin and cyclosporin A did not further increase the inhibitory action of indomethacin on pancreatic eicosanoid formation.
This finding supports the concent that cyclosporin A has no inhibitory action on pancreatic prostaglandin and thromboxane formation under the experimental conditions used.
The discrepancy of our results to the reported inhibitory action of cyclosporin A on renal prostaglandin formation may be caused by an organ selective effect of cyclosporin A or to the higher doses of cyclosporin A — that is, 50 mg/kg, used in studies on renal prostaglandin formation.
Administration of indomethacin caused no decrease in the glucose induced insulin release in our preparation confirming previous studies.
Investigations in man have shown controversial results.
Thus, treatment with cyclooyxgenase inhibitors has been reported to augment or to suppress glucose induced insulin release.
In our investigations, cholecystokinin-8 induced amylase secretion and total protein content of the pancreatic juice were not altered by indomethacin, findings that are in agreement with studies in man and dogs.
We have not studied whether indomethacin affects arterial blood flow.
A dose of 5 mg/kg indomethacin has, however, been reported to be without influence on pancreatic arterial blood flow.
It is therefore not likely that the aggravation of cyclosporin A induced pancreatic toxicity by indomethacin is caused by vascular effects.
When two potentially toxic agents are coadministered the resultant toxicity may be greater than that observed with either agent when given alone.
Treatment with the immunosuppressive agent cyclosporin A is associated with pancreatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and hepatotoxicity.
Other agents that alter the degree of cyclosporin A induced toxicity — that is, nephrotoxicity, have been suggested to act by altering circulating cyclosporin A blood concentrations as a consequence of induction or inhibition of cytochrome P-450 dependent (new nomenclature: P-450IIIA; 36) hepatic drug metabolism.
Both cyclosporin A and indomethacin are known to decrease cytochrome P-450 dependent monooxygenase activity in primary cultures of hepatocytes of rats, rabbits, and man, although the mechanism whereby cyclosporin A causes the decrease is not known.
The hepatic monooxygenase system is supposed to be involved in the detoxication of cyclosporin A. Conjoint treatment of rats with cyclosporin A and indomethacin was found to be associated with increased whole blood concentrations of cyclosporin A as a consequence of the decreased cyclosporin A metabolism.
These reports are in agreement with our findings showing increased cyclosporin A blood concentrations, but not increased inhibition of pancreatic eicosanoid formation after combined treatment with cyclosporin A and indomethacin.
In our study cyclosporin A whole blood concentrations were measured with the new cyclosporin A TDx fluorescent polarisation immunoassay which realises also the cyclosporin A metabolites.
This assay has been proved to provide reliable whole blood and serum concentrations that correlate well with monoclonal or polyclonal radioimmunoassay measurements carried out in renal transplant recipients.
In conclusion, coadministration of indomethacin aggravated the noxious effects of immunosuppressive doses of cyclosporin A on rat endocrine and exocrine pancrease.
This effect does not seem to be the result of inhibition of pancreatic eicosanoid formation as indomethacin alone exhibited no pancreatic toxicity and combined treatment with indomethacin and cyclosporin A did not further augment the inhibitory action of indomethacin on pancreatic eicosanoid formation.
The indomethacin induced increase in cyclosporin A toxicity to the pancreas is associated with raised whole blood concentrations of cyclosporin A possibly resulting from an interference with P-450 dependent hepatic drug metabolism by indomethacin.
Thus, the protection conferred by administration of exogenous prostaglandins of the E-series may not be caused by substitution of endogenous prostaglandins, but involves other as yet unknown mechanisms.
Finally, the possibility that coadministration of non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs results in increased toxic effects in cyclosporin A treated patients should be considered.
Mathematical correlation between villus height and the nutritional state in Sprague-Dawley rats
Abstract
Three different experiments were carried out on growing male Sprague-Dawley rats.
In the first experiment, dietary nitrogen was given in casein at four different protein values ranging from 5 to 16%.
Rats were fed ad libitum for 21 days.
In the second experiment, which lasted 17 days, animals were given three diets that differed in the molecular form of the nitrogen supply — that is, proteins or peptides.
The protein value (N=6.25) was 10% in each diet.
In the third experiment, malnourished rats were refed diets with a protein value of 15% (N=6.25) for eight days.
The dietary nitrogen was either in the form of protein, peptide, or amino acid.
Body weight was recorded daily.
At the end of each experiment the intestinal villus height was measured by light microscopy.
Data were statistically analysed by Exner's coefficient.
The results assessed the validity of the correlation between villus height and gain in body weight.
One of the important problems in nutrition is to determine how animals respond and adapt to a new diet.
They must adapt to various nutritional conditions, particularly to the value, nature, and molecular form of the nitrogen in the diet to survive.
The quality of nitrogen supply in foodstuffs is generally assessed by nutritional indices such as gain in body weight and how effectively protein is digested.
Morphological measurements and enzyme activities carried out on intestinal mucosa are another good method of assessing dietary nitrogen quality.
Changes in villus and microvillus height are relevant to such an adaptive response.
Some authors have emphasised the use of mucosal enzyme activities — that is, those of disaccharidases and leucine aminopeptidase — as indicators of dietary protein quality.
On the other hand, assessment of morphological changes has more often been used in the diagnosis and assessment of intestinal pathology or in studies on intestinal development during fetal life.
Finally, King et al , have pointed out a trophic effect of the dietary nitrogen value on mucosal growth, triggering off an increase in villus height.
The villus height depends upon two factors; firstly on cellular multiplication and differentiation from the crypts; and secondly on the migration of mature cells along the villus axis, accompanied by the cellular shedding from the apex.
The regulation of these factors is widely considered to be the way in which the small intestine adapts to nutritional demands.
Nevertheless it remains to be varified whether villus height is relevant to the previous dietary history — that is, nitrogen supply quality — and whether it depends on body weight at the time it is measured.
This study aimed at working out a simple mathematical correlation between the villus height and gain in body weight in rats adapted to different experimental conditions.
Methods
ANIMALS AND DIETS
Three experiments were carried out.
These differed not only in duration but also in the molecular form in which the nitrogen was supplied (protein, peptide, or amino acid).
These experiments were performed on Sprague-Dawley rats (Iffa Credo, France).
Experiment 1
Growing male rats weighing mean (SEM) 114 (2) g, were divided into four equal groups of six animals according to the average body weight.
They were fed ad libitum isocaloric diets with increasing protein values (5, 8, 10.5, and 16%); the dietary nitrogen was supplied by casein.
The composition of the diets has been previously published.
The experiment lasted for 21 days.
Experiment 2
Fifteen male rats, 25 days old, and weighing 80 (4) g were divided into three equal groups.
They were fed isocaloric and isonitrogenous diets (1.6% N — that is, 10% concentration protein) containing either casein (control group), bovine plasma protein, or an enzymatic hydrolysate of these proteins containing 75% of dipeptides and tripeptides.
The experiment was carried out over 17 days.
Experimental diets have already been described.
Experiment 3
Twenty growing male rats were submitted to 15 days protein malnutrition (2.4% protein concentration, supplied by casein) and were then randomly distributed to four equal groups of five animals weighing 105 (5) g.
On day 16, they were given isocaloric and isonitrogenous diets (2.4% N — that is, 15% protein value) containing either casein, blood protein, an enzymatic hydrolysate of these proteins (see experiment 2) or an amino acid mixture equivalent to blood proteins, as the sole nitrogen source.
Twenty other rats were submitted to a 15 day period of protein-calorie malnutrition and were then distributed to four equal groups of five animals (81 (2) g) and subjected to an identical diet.
The refeeding periods lasted for eight days.
The composition of the diets has been reported.
In each experiment the animals were kept in individual metabolic cages at a constant temperature (25 (1) °C) with a 12 hour dark-light period and free access to water.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
At the end of each experiment rats were killed by cervical dislocation and the abdomen was opened immediately.
The procedure described below was carried out at 4°C.
The intestine was removed, intact from the pylorus to the ileocecal value, and a standard jejunal segment consisting of the portion between 30 and 45 cm distal to the Treitz's ligament was excised.
After flushing with ice cold saline, 1 cm specimens were taken from the beginning of the segment in all cases, fixed in Bouin's solution, embedded in paraffin wax, cut perpendicular to the longitudinal axis, and stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
The length of the villi was measured by light microscopy (Nikon 104 equipped with a projector).
All rats were killed between 1400 and 1600 hours to prevent circadian variations.
CALCULATIONS AND STATISTICS
Several regresson models were tested.
Their validity was evaluated by the following:(a) analysis of variance (ANOVA), which gives the significant difference in regression on the horizontal or vertical axis.
The regression will be greater as the difference becomes significant; or (b) the coefficient of correlation, which expresses the intensity of the relation between the experimental points as follows:(c) Exner's coefficient, which assesses the degree of adjustment of an experimental distribution to fit a theoretical model.
This coefficient is more sensitive than the correlation insofar as it tests the theory as a whole — that is, both the form of empirical function and the values of the parameters.
Results and discussion
The table shows experimental data.
Figure 1 shows possible association between animal body weight and villus height.
The ANOVA for the different models of regression tested is very explicit.
The points distribution is not significantly different from a horizontal line and a relation between the villus height and the body weight cannot therefore be considered in this body weight range.
On the other hand Figure 2 shows a well ordered point repartition, significantly different from a horizontal line; the selected mathematical example for this repartition is a hyperbolic graph described by the following equation:
With such indicators (R and O8) the hyperbolic model is well validated.
The coefficient of correlation value is good, considering that we tried to get a mathematical relationship from a physiological response.
Exner's coefficient confirmed the pattern validity as its value shows fair agreement between the theoretical equation and the experimental data points.
Moreover, this model has the advantage of giving, by means of a simple calculation:(i) a minimal villus height (about 358 µm), which related experimentally to protein malnutrition,(ii) a limit to villus growth reaching about 710 µm as maximum height related experimentally to a protein value of 20%, or higher.
This study justified the use of villus height as an indicator of the nutritional state in rats.
Indeed, villus height was mathematically correlated to daily body weight gain, another indicator of nutritional state, and was independent of body weight, which is an indicator of the state of development.
It is proposed that this is a new, complementary criterion to use.
Role of active oxygen, lipid peroxidation, and antioxidants in the pathogenesis of gastric mucosal injury induced by indomethacin in rats
Abstract
The roles of active oxygen, lipid peroxidation, and the antioxidative defence mechanism in gastric mucosal injury induced by treatment with indomethacin in rats were investigated.
The total area of gastric erosions and concentration of lipif peroxidesin the gastric mucosa increased with time after administration of indomethacin (20 mg/kg orally).
The α-tocopherol:total cholesterol ratio in serum was significantly decreased and the activity of glutathione peroxidase, an important enzyme to scavenger of lipid peroxides, was inhibited by the administration of indomethacin.
Treatments with superoxide dismutase and catalase inhibited the increases in gastric mucosal erosions and lipid peroxides in the gastric mucosa, and the reduction of serum α-tocopherol.
Treatment with these scavengers did not improve the decreased glutathione peroxidase activity.
These findings suggest that active oxygen species and lipid peroxidation play an important part in the pathogenesis of gastric mucosal injury induced by indomethacin, and that the decreased glutathione peroxidase activity aggravated the injury due to accelerated accumulation of hydrogen peroxide and lipid peroxides in the gastric mucosal cell.
Indomethacin, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), is known to induce erosions and ulcers in the gastrointetinal tract.
Although it has been proposed that a deficiency of endogenous prostaglandins due to inhibition of cycloocygenase by indomethacin is involved in these effects, the exact pathogenic mechanism remains to be elucidated.
Recent studies showed that a low dose of indomethacin or aspirin inhibited cyclooxygenase activity in the gastric mucosa of rats by 90% without causing any haemorrhagic erosions.
Takeuchi et al postulated that the enhanced gastric motility induced by indomethacin causes microcirculatory disturbances that lead to increased microvascular permeability and cellular damage.
Rainsford aslso noted, with transmission electron microscopy, that microvascular injury was present during gastric mucosal injury produced by indomethacin.
These reports suggested that inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis was unlikely to be sole mechanism responsible for the gastric damage induced by indomethacin.
Much recent attention has been focused on the role of reactive oxygen species in mediating the microvascular disturbance that preceded gastric mucosal injury induced by several kinds of stress and ischaemia-reperfusion.
Furthermore, lipid peroxidation mediated by oxygen free radicals is believed to be an important cause of destruction and damage to cell membranes, because polyunsaturated fatty acids of the cellular membranes are degraded by the lipid peroxidation with consequent disruption of membrane integrity.
Membrane peroxidation can lead to changes in membrane fluidity and permeability, enhanced rates of protein degradation, and ultimately, cell lysis.
We have already reported that lipid peroxidation plays a significant part in the pathogenesis of gastric mucosal lesions induced by water immersion restraint stress, burn shock, and ischemia-reperfusion.
The present study was undertaken in rats to measure changes in lipid peroxides and antioxidants in serum samples and gastric mucosa after administration of indomethacin.
Also, we investigated the effects of a superoxide radical scavenger (superoxide dismutase (SOD)), a hydrogen peroxide scavenger (catalase), and a hydroxyl radical scavenger (dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO)) on gastric mucosal injury and lipid peroxide formation induced by giving indomethacin to rats, and the effects of a combination of SOD and catalase on indomethacin induced changes in antioxidants.
Materials and methods
Male Sprague-Dawley rats, weight range 190–210 g from Keari Co Ltd, Osaka, were used.
The animals were deprived of food but allowed free access to water for 24 hours before the experiment.
Gastric haemorrhagic damage was induced by oral administration of indomethacin (Sigma Chemical Co, St Louis, MO) at a dose of 20 mg/kg, suspended in 0.5% carboxymethylcellulose solution with a few drops of tween 80 in a volume of 0.5 ml/100 g body weight.
In the control groups, the rats received an equivalent volume of the vehicle.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
Time course study of indomethacin induced gastric mucosal injury
Groups of indomethacin treated rats were killed three or six hours after administration of indomethacin.
Animals were killed by exsanguination via the abdominal aorta under inhaled ether anaesthesia.
The stomachs were removed, opened along the greater curvature, and examined under a dissecting microscope with a square grid for lesions developed in the glandular portion.
The extent of the gastric damage was expressed as the total area ((mm) of haemorrhagic erosion.
The gastric mucosa was scraped off by means of two glass slides on ice, and homogenised with 1.5 ml of 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.8) containing 30 mM KCl in a Potter-Elvehjem homogeniser, to measure concentrations of lipid peroxides and tocopherols.
To measure the activities of SOD and glutathione peroxidase, the homogenates were sonicated over ice for two minutes.
The sonicated samples were centrifuged at 20000 g for 20 minutes and the supernatants were stored frozen at -80°C until assay.
Effects of scavengers of active oxygen on indomethacin-induced gastric mucosal injury
Activity of SOD in serum reached a maximum of about 100 U/ml after 150 minutes when SOD was subcutaneously injected at a dose of 50000 U/kg.
Therefore, the interval of injection is important to maintain effective plasma SOD activity.
To assess the effect of SOD and catalase, recombinant human Cu, Zn-SOD (Nippon Kayaky Co, Ltd, Tokyo) at a dose of 50000 U/kg, or catalase from bovine liver (Sigma Chemical Co, St Louis, MO) at a dose of 90000 U/kg dissolved in 1 ml of pphysiological saline, or both were injected subcutaneously one hour before and three hours after giving indomethacin.
The same amount of physiological saline was injected in the same manner into the control rats.
Dimethylsulphoxide (Wake Pure Chemical Co, Osaka) at a dose of 550 mg/kg diluted in 0.5 ml of physiological saline was administered by intraperitoneal injection 30 minutes before and three hours after indomethacin to keep DMSO at a sufficiently high concentration to force efficient scavenging of hydroxyl radicals.
Control animals received 0.5 ml of physiological saline in the same manner.
Six hours after indomethacin treatment the rats were killed by exsanguination via the abdominal aorta and the extent of gastric damage was expressed as the total area of haemorrhagic erosion.
The concentration of lipid peroxides in the gastric mucosa was also measured.
Effect of SOD plus catalase on indomethacin induced changes in antioxidants
The effects of treatment with SOD plus catalase on the activities of SOD and glutathione peroxidase in gastric mucosa, on the concentration of α-tocopherol in gastric mucosa and serum, samples and on the concentrations of reduced and oxidized glutathione after administration of indomethacin were investigated.
Rats received SOD (recombinant human Cu, Zn-SOD) and catalase at the same doses as previously described, by subcutaneous injection one hour before and three hours after indomethacin administration.
Control animals received the same amount of physiological saline.
Gastric mucosal homogenates were prepared as described earlier, serum samples were collected, and the activities or the concentrations of antioxidants were measured by the methods described next.
ASSAYS
Concentrations of thiobarbituric acid (TBA) -reactive substances, an index of lipid peroxidation, were measured in serum samples by the method of Yagi, and the concentrations in tissue homogenates were measured according to Ohkawa et al .
The concentration of the TBA-reactive substances were expressed as nmol malodialdehyde.
Thiobarbituric acid (BDH Chemicals, Poole, England) and 1,1,3,3-trimethoxypropane (Tokyo Kasei Co, Tokyo) were used for the TBA assay, and all other chemicals were of reagent grade.
Protein concentration in the gastric mucosal homogenates was measured by the method of Lowry et al .
The concentration of α-tocopherol in serum samples and gastric mucosa was measured by the method of Abe et al with a high speed LC-6A liquid chromatograph (Shimizu Co, Kyoto).
To eliminate the influence of lipids, the radio of α-tocopherol:total cholesterol in serum samples was determined.
The serum cholesterol concentration was assayed according to the method of Richmond.
The activity of SOD was measured by a recently developed chemiluminescence assay, which involved inhibition of a Cypridina luciferin analog with chemiluminescence dependent on superoxide generated by the hypoxanthine-xanthine oxidase system.
Recombinant human, Cu, Zn-SOD (a gift from Nippon Kayaku Co, Tokyo) was used as a standard and its activity was determined by the cytochrome c method.
Activity of SOD in tissue was expressed as U/mg protein.
The activity of glutathione peroxidase in the gastric mucosa was assayed spectrophotometrically by the method of Gunzler et al with t -butyl hydroperoxidase as the substrate.
This assay is based on the oxidation of reduced glutathione by glutathione peroxidase coupled to the oxidation of NADPH by glutathione reductase.
The rate of NADPH oxidation was monitored photometrically.
For the glutathione assay, the stomach was perfused intraluminally with 5% sulphosalicylic acid and then homogenised in 10 vol/g of the same solution.
The tissue homogenate was centrifuged for five minutes at 10000 g , and then the supernatant was stored on ice until use.
The amount of reduced glutathione (GSH) was measured by the method of Griffith and the amount of oxidised glutathione (GSSG) was measured by masking GSH with N-ethylmalimide (NEM).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are presented as means (SEM).
For statistical analysis, the tests used were the Bartlett test for homogenicity of variance, Kruskal-Wallis analysis of variance for effects in time and comparison of differences between control and groups treated with scavengers, and the Mann-Whitney test for individual comparison of the group means.
Differences between the groups were considered significant if the p value was less than 0.05.
Results
CHANGES IN MUCOSAL INJURY, LIPID PEROXIDES, AND ANTIOXIDANTS AFTER ADMINISTRATION OF INDOMETHACIN
Gastric haemorrhagic erosions increased with time after administration of indomethacin.
The total area of erosions at three hours and six hours after the administration was 12.6 (3.5) mm and 23.2 (3.2) mm respectively (fig 1).
The lesions were linear or dotted in shape, and were often located on the upper part of the mucosal folds.
TBA-reactive substances in the gastric mucosa, an index of lipid peroxidation, increased significantly (p) from a basal concentration of mean (SEM) 0.521 (0.014) nmol/mg protein to 0.626 (0.019) nmol/mg protein and 0.663 (0.036) nmol/mg protein three hours and six hours after administration of indomethacin respectively.
Indomethacin did not affect the level of TBA-reactive substances in serum, however (fig 2).
χ 2 -Tocopherol in serum samples, but not in the gastric mucosa, decreased significantly (p) with time after indomethacin administration.
The α-tocopherol: cholesterol ratio in serum decreased to 4.99 (0.19) ×10 -3 and 4.96 (0.26) ×10 -3 at three hours and six hours after indomethacin administration respectively, from 5.88 (0.24) ×10 -3 measured before the experiment (fig 3).
The activities of SOD and glutathione peroxidase in the gastric mucosa of rats treated with (0.5% control carboxymethylcellulose) solution were 14.5 (0.48) U/mg protein and 288.0 (30.2) mU/mg protein respectively.
Intragastric administration of indomethacin did not affect the activities of SOD in the gastric mucosa at three or six hours after indomethacin.
The activity of glutathione peroxidase at six hours after the administration was significantly reduced (p) to195.6 (15.6) mU/mg protein (fig 4).
Concentrations of reduced and oxidised forms of glutathione in the gastric mucosa of control rat stomachs were 1.49 (0.11) µg/g tissue and 5.4 (4.4) ng/g tissue respectively.
Six hours after administration of indomethacin the level of reduced glutathione was significantly decreased (p) to 46.9% of the control value, but the level of oxidised glutathione was not affected.
EFFECTS OF ACTIVE OXYGEN SCAVENGERS ON INDOMETHACIN INDUCED GASTRIC MUCOSAL INJURY
The mean (sem) of the total area of gastric haemorrhagic erosions in control animals receiving subcutaneous physiological saline was 26.8 (4.5) mm at six hours after indomethacin administration.
SOD and a combination of SOD and catalase significantly reduced (p) the lesion area to 46.6% and 49.6% of the mean of control values.
The lesion area of the group treated with catalase was not significantly different from that of the control rats.
The increase in TBA-reactive substances in the gastric mucosa at six hours after indomethacin administration was significantly inhibited by combination treatment with SOD and catalase, but not by treatment with SOD or catalase alone.
The total areas of gastric erosion six hours after indomethacin administration were 22.8 (3.5) mm in the control rats receiving intraperitoneal saline and 12.1mm in the DMSO group.
There was a significant difference (p) in the lesion area between the two groups.
The increase in TBA-reactive substances was also significantly inhibited (p) by intraperitoneal treatment with DMSO.
EFFECTS OF SOD PLUS CATALASE ON INDOMETHACIN INDUCED CHANGES IN ANTIOXIDANTS
The decrease in the α-tocopherol:total cholesterol ratio in the serum of the control (indomethacin only) rats recovered to that of the normal (untreated) rats after treatment with SOD and catalase (fig 5).
There was no significant difference in the concentration of α-tocopherol in the gastric mucosa among the normal, the control, and the SOD plus catalase groups.
Figure 6 shows that indomethacin significantly (p) reduced the activity of glutathione peroxidase in the gastric mucosa in groups treated and not treated with SOD and catalase.
There were no significant differences in the activity of SOD among these three groups.
Even when SOD was administered, its activity in the gastric mucosa did not increase.
The level of reduced glutathione in the gastric mucosa was 1.49 (0.11) µg/g tissue in the untreated group, 0.70 (0.15) µg/g tissue in the control group, and 1.10 (0.07) µg/g tissue in the SOD plus catalase group respectively (fig 7).
There were significant differences between the normal group and the control group (p), and between the control group and the SOD plus catalase group (p).
Discussion
Our present studies implicate active oxygen and lipid peroxidation in the pathogenesis of gastric mucosal injury induced by indomethacin.
Itoh and Guth first showed that SOD could significantly protect against gastric mucosal injury induced by haemorrhageic shock for 20 minutes and retransfusion in rats.
We also produced an ischaemia-reperfusion injury model with rat stomach, and found a suppression of both gastric mucosal lesions and increased lipid peroxidation by SOD and catalase.
Also, Perry et al have shown that a hydroxyl radical scavenger, DMSO, significantly reduced both Cr-red cell loss and the less sensitive index of gastric mucosal injury, I-albumin loss produced by ischaemia.
Cochran et al and Terano et al also reported that DMSO inhibited gastric mucosal injury induced by stress or ethanol.
Rats received intraperitoneal DMSO at a dose of 550 mg/kg, because previous work had shown that peak concentrations occur within 30 minutes and that the average half life is about six hours at that dose and route of administration.
In the present study, indomethacin produced gastric haemorrhagic erosions and increased TBA-reactive substances, which are indicators of lipid peroxidation, in the gastric mucosa with time after administration.
Also, lipid peroxide accumulation closely paralleled the development of gastric mucosal injury.
This indicates that lipid peroxidation lays a significant part in the pathogenesis of the gastric mucosal lesions induced by indomethacin, as well as gastric injuries produced by burn shock, water immersion restraint stress, and ischaemia-reperfusion.
Also, the treatment with SOD, SOD plus catalase, and DMSO significantly inhibited the pathological changes induced by indomethacin.
As is well known, the superoxide radical can interact with hydrogen peroxide in the presence of iron to generate the hydroxyl radical, which is thought to be the most toxic reactant and to abstract methylene hydrogen atoms from polyunsaturated fatty acids, which initiates lipid peroxidation.
The protection by radical scavengers, therefore, suggests that lipid peroxidation mediated by oxygen radicals, especially hydroxyl radicals, plays an important part in the formation and development of the gastric mucosal lesions induced by indomethacin.
The source of oxygen radicals in gastric mucosal injury induced by indomethacin in rats is not clear.
Recent studies, however, suggest a possible role of neutrophils in the early pathogenic process.
The severity of gastric damage induced by indomethacin can be significantly reduced by prior depletion of circulatory neutrophils and by treatment with a monoclonal antibody against the CD18 leucocyte adhesion molecule.
Both SOD and DMSO have been shown to diminish leucocyte adherence in microvessels.
Therefore, the protective action of these scavengers in this model is consistent with the proposal by Wallace et al .
Vitamin E, a lipid soluable antioxidant, interacts with oxygen and lipid radicals and prevents the propagation of free radical lipid peroxidation.
Our previous work showed that the concentrations of α-tocopherol decreased both in serum samples and in gastric mucosa during ischaemia-reperfusion injury in rats, which suggests that α-tocopherol was consumed in the process of lipid peroxidation mediated by oxygen radicals in ischemia-reperfusion to prevent the development of tissue damage.
When the radicals are formed initially in the aqueous phase of whole blood, the water soluble antixoidants in the plasma such as vitamin C and plasma vitamin E participate in the primary defence and later vitamin E in the erythrocyte membrane decreases.
In the present study, α-tocopherol in the serum but not that in the gastric mucosa significantly decreased with time after indomethacin administration, and, also, the decrease of α-tocopherol in the serum was returned to the normal range by concomitant treatment with SOD and catalase.
Our previous study showed that subcutaneously injected SOD was predominantly localised in extracellular compartments, and our present study showed that the SOD activity in intracellular compartments of the ratstomach did not increase after the subcutaneous injection of human SOD.
Thus we speculated that a free radical reaction occurred first in the extracellular space after indomethacin administration, and SOD and catalase after the concentration of α-tocopherol by their actions as scavengers of superoxides and inhibitors of the production of hydroxyl radicals.
Glutathione is an important constituent of intracellular protective mechanisms against a number of noxious stimuli including oxidative stress.
Reduced glutathione is known as a major low molecular weight scavenger of free radicals in cytoplasm.
On the other hand, the antioxidant activity of GSH peroxidase is coupled with the oxidation of GSH to GSSG, which can subsequently be reduced by GHS reductase with NADPH as the reducing agent.
Concentration of glutathione is exceedingly high in the glandular stomach compared with concentrations in other portions of the gastrointestinal tract or in most other organs.
Boyd et al reported that depletion of gastric glutathione by diethyl maleate produced gastric ulceration.
Mutoh et al showed that intracellular glutathione was mainly responsible for protecting against gastric cell injury induced by ethanol.
These findings suggest that in the gastric mucosa free radicals or lipid peroxides are injurious offensive factors and GSH is a protecting defensive factor.
Depletion of glutathione results in enhanced lipid peroxidation and excessive lipid peroxidation can cause increased GSH consumption.
The decrease in GSH in our study was accompanied by an increase in lipid peroxides measured as a TBA-reactive substances in the gastric mucosa.
The content of GSSG, however, showed no significant increases in response to the depletion of GSH and the activity of GSH peroxidase was significantly inhibited by indomethacin administration, which indicates that GSH was consumed during the reaction with oxygen radicals, organic radicals, and peroxide radicals.
Glutathione peroxidase is important in the elimination of hydrogen peroxide and lipid hydroperoxides in the gastric mucosal cell.
Thus inhibition of this enzyme may result in the accumulation of hydrogen peroxide with subsequent oxidation of lipids.
The GSH peroxidase actvity of this study was decreased six hours after indomethacin administration and its activity could not be recovered by the elimination of oxygen radicals.
These findings suggest that indomethacin itself, or depletion of prostaglandins, inhibits GSH peroxidase activity of the gastric mucosa.
Our findings are in line with those of Banergee, who recently showed the inhibition of peroxidase activity in the mitochondrial fraction of rat gastric mucosa by indomethacin.
In summary, the results indicate that excessive generation of oxygen radicals in the extracellular space and the depletion of GSH in conjunction with inhibition of GSH peroxidase activity is responsible for the oxidative tissue damage of gastric mucosa after administration of indomethacin.
New forms of treatment for inflammatory bowel disease
Until the aetiology of inflammatory bowel disease is established the development of new forms of treatment is limited.
Induction of remission is associated with inhibition or a decrease in the formation of the inflammatory mediators or, alternatively, may be achieved by blocking their specific receptors.
Prostanoids, leukotrienes, platelet activating factor, cytokines, and free oxygen radicals may all contribute to the pathogenesis of the inflammatory response.
The drugs that effectively modulate the disease process — such as steroids, sulphasalazine, and 5-aminosalicylic acid — affect most or all of the inflammatory mediators.
Current efforts, however, are directed to the development of new drugs with selective inhibition or receptor blockade of a single mediator.
In addition, new therapeutic aproaches include manipulation of eicosanoid formation by dietary fatty acids, development of topically active new steroid components, and the blockade of neuroimmune interactions.
In view of the raised leukotriene concentrations in rectal mucosa and rectal dialysates of patients with active inflammatory bowel disease — concentrations that also reflect the disease severity — treatment with selective 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors and with leukotriene receptor antagonists is a logical new therapeutic approach.
The results of a double blind study of an oral specific 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor, Zileuton (Abbott Labs) are disappointing.
In this study, statistically significant improvement was achieved only in patients with mild to moderately active ulcerative colitis who were not receiving concurrent treatment with sulphasalazine: no significant improvement was shown in patients receiving sulphasalazine.
More potent inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase activity using higher doses of the drug have been suggested since unless a high level of inhibition is achieved, endogenous leukotrienes may still be present in sufficient amounts to exert their effects.
A specific leukotriene receptor antagonist awaits development.
Platelet activating factor may be involved in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis as well as in experimental colitis.
However, the effect of specific inhibition of platelet activating factor by a specific receptor antagonist has so far been evaluated in models of experimental colitis only.
The results obtained indicate that inhibition of its action induced a significant reduction of colonic inflammation in the chronic model of colitis induced by trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid.
The possible therapeutic effect of a specific receptor antagonist in inflammatory bowel disease remains to be evaluated.
The recent interest in the role of cytokines, such as interleukin-1 and interleukin-6 in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease has prompted a search for drugs that may inhibit their formation or, alternatively, block their receptors.
The recent modulation of immune colitis in rabbits given interleukin 1 receptor antagonists is encouraging and their use in human inflammatory bowel disease may follow.
Prolonged dietary supplementation with large quantities of fish oil has been tried in ulcerative colitis patients but the results are not encouraging and, at best, may be considered as an adjunctive treatment in chronic ulcerative colitis.
The hypothesis is based on the observation that fish oil contains large quantities of eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) that is structurally similar to arachidonic acid, but metabolised by 5-lipoxygenase to leukotriene B 5 , which lacks most of the proinflammatory properties of leukotriene B 4 .
The reduction in leukotriene B 4 values induced by fish oil supplementation does not seem to be large enough to modulate active inflammatory bowel disease.
Pronounced changes have been found in gut neuropeptides in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
These changes include the participation of the enteric nervous system, hyperplasia of the mucosal adrenergic innervation, and th possible role of substance P and vasoactive intestinal pepside in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis.
A preliminary study in which topical treatment with the local anaesthetic lidocaine was evaluated, is therefore of interest but further controlled studies are needed.
Corticosteroids are still the most effective treatment for active inflammatory bowel disease, but side effects are common and dose related.
New corticosteroid compounds with high topical and little systemic activity seem to offer great benefit to inflammatory bowel disease patients.
Studies with enemas of budesonide, a new corticosteroid drug with high topical anti-inflammatory activity and extensive first pass hepatic metabolism to biologically inactive metabolites, have shown efficacy in patients with proctitis and proctosigmoiditis.
Moreover, preliminary data also suggest that oral budesonide is effective in active ileocaecal Crohn's disease.
Recently an open pilot study showed that fluticasone proprionate, a topically active corticosteroid of low systemic bioavailability after oral administration, helped patients with mild to moderately active Crohn's disease.
In both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, immunological mechanisms seem to play a role in either perpetuating or increasing the inflammatory response.
Several studies have shown the efficacy of 6-mercaptopurine and azathioprine in the treatment of both ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
New immunosuppressive agents have been used recently and are claimed to be beneficial in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.
Twelve weeks' treatment with intramuscular methotyrexate induced clinical remission in 16 of 21 patients with refractory inflammatory bowel disease.
However, when the drug was administered orally for 18 weeks its effect was less pronounced.
Methotrexate works more quickly than mercaptopurine and azathioprine, and steroid sparing has been shown to be one of its advantages.
When administred for short periods its toxicity seems low but may cause nausea, abdominal cramps, and abnormal liver function tests.
Cyclosporine is an immunosuppressive drug that was found to be of benefit in a recent double blind study in Crohn's disease and in an open study conducted in ulcerative colitis.
One of the advantages of cyclosporine is its rapid onset of action (about two weeks) compared with the mean response time of about three months with 6-mercaptopurine and azathioprine.
The side effects of this treatment include paraesthesias, hypertrichosis, and increased plasma creatinine concentrations.
Until more data become available, however, the use of cyclosporine should be restricted to formal clinical trials.
Controlled trials have shown that topical 4-aminosalicylic acid enemas are effective in patients with proctitis and left sided colitis.
The place of 4-aminosalicylic acid in the treatment of ulcerative colitis is not clear, especially since its mechanism of action is not known.
4-Aminosalicylic acid, though similar in structure to 5-aminosalicylic acid, does not inhibit eicosanoid generation and is not an effective free radical scavenger.
Ketotifen has recently been suggested as a new treatment for maintaining remission and preventing relapse.
Ketotifen, a drug used for the prevention of asthma, was found to decrease significantly the extent and severity of experimental colitis in two rat models.
Ketotifen may prevent the release of the inflammatory mediators from mast cells as well as from other inflammatory cells.
Its potential use in inflammatory bowel disease deserves clinical trials.
In recent years the physician's armamentarium for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease has increased significantly.
However, it is also clear that since inflammatory bowel disease is a process that involves several agonists, only drugs which affect most or all of the agonists are likely to be of proven benefit.
Drugs which affect one single mediator and/or block one single receptor are unlikely to be helpful.
Unless the sequence of events in which the various inflammatory mediators is established there is little chance that a specific receptor antagonst or inhibitor of the synthesis of a single mediator will be of important therapeutic benefit.
Enhanced gastric mucosal leukotriene B 4 synthesis in patients taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Abstract
The effects of longstanding non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) treatment on gastric mucosal synthesis of leukotriene B 4 (LTB 4 ), leukotriene C 4 (LTC 4 ), and prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ) was studied.
Gastric antral biopsies in 65 patients with arthritis taking NSAIDs and 23 control patients were taken and eicosanoid concentrations, stimulated by vortex mixing or calcium ionophore, were measured by radioimmunoassay.
Median gastric mucosal synthesis of LTB 4 was increased in patients taking NSAIDs compared with non-users:(0.9 (0.2–2.5) pg/mg v 0 (0–0.6) pg/mg (p)).
These differences persisted when subgroups of patients were analysed according to Helicobacter pylori colonisation or degree of mucosal injury.
Synthesis of LTB 4 was strongly associated with the presence of type C (chemical) gastritis.
Increased synthesis of LTC 4 was associated with Helicobacter pylori colonisation but not NSAID use.
Synthesis of PGE 2 was decreased in patients taking NSAIDs compared with control patients (p).
Enhanced gastric mucosal synthesis of LTB 4 in patients taking NSAIDs may represent a primary effect of these drugs and could be implicated in the pathogenesis of gastritis and ulceration associated with NSAIDs.
Non-steroidal anti inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are associated with gastric mucosal injury that may result in peptic ulceration, upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage, and perforation.
Mucosal injury is often ascribed to the well established ability of NSAIDs to inhibit synthesis of prostaglandins, as prostaglandins stimulate mucosal defence mechanisms such as secretion of mucus and bicarbonate and enhance mucosal blood flow.
Profound inhibition of synthesis of prostaglandins can occur in the absence of mucosal injury, and depletion of mucosal prostaglandins may be only one of several factors responsible for the pathogenesis of injury related to NSAIDs.
Theoretically, as a result of substrate diversion of arachidonic acid, inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase by NSAIDs may lead to the increased formation of the leukotrien series through the 5-lipoxygenase pathway.
Leukotrienes are known proinflammatory mediators and leukotriene B 4 (LTB 4 ) is a potent chemoattractant of polymorphonuclear cells and causes degranulation and release of lysosomal enzymes, which could play an important part in amplifying the inflammatory response to NSAIDs.
Similarly leukotriene C 4 (LTC 4 ) could mediate gastric mucosal damage both by its vasoconstrictive actions and its effects on vascular permeability promoting vascular stasis and subsequent reduction in tissue perfusion.
Animal studies have shown a correlation between the bastric mucosal injury induced by ethanol or acid and increased synthesis of leukotrienes.
Some authors have shown that lipoxygenase inhibitors are protective in such protocols, but more recently this has been questioned.
Where mucosal protection has been shown it does not correlate well with potency of inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase and could be due to another property such as oxygen radical scavenging.
Enhancement of gastrointestinal synthesis of leukotrienes by NSAIDs in humans has not hitherto been shown and experimental evidence is conflicting; indomethacin has been reported to enhance synthesis of LTB 4 , have no effect on synthesis of LTB 4 , and hinhibit synthesis of LTC 4 , albeit to a lesser extent than its effects on prostaglandins in the rat stomach.
To clarify a possible role for synthesis of leukotrienes in damage caused by NSAIDs we investigated the effects of long term NSAID treatment on gastric mucosal LTB 4 , LTC 4 , and prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ) concentrations in patients with arthritis compared with control subjects not taking NSAIDs.
We correlated these findings with endoscopic mucosal damage, the presence or absence of Helicobacter pylori , and the degree of histological gastritis.
Patients and methods
Sixty five patients with rheumatoid arthritis (n= 57) or osteoarthritis (n=7) on NSAIDs for >months (mean (SD): 4.7 (3.1) years) were recruited from a rheumatology clinic to undergo screening upper gastrointestinal endoscopy before entry into a therapeutic trial, approved by the hospital ethics committee.
Patients were not included in the study if they had undergone previous gastric surgery or if they were receiving cytotoxic drugs or >mg/day prednisolone.
Patients receiving other second line agents — namely, gold, penicillamine, sulphasalazine, or hydroxychoroquine — were included in the study.
Those taking H 2 receptor antagonists stopped this medication at least one week before endoscopy.
The control subjects were 23 patients concurrently undergoing endoscopy for dyspeptic symptoms.
The control subjects had received neither aspirin nor NSAIDs in the three months before study.
Informed consent was obtained before endoscopy.
At endoscopy, a visual assessment and video recordings were made of ulceration and gastropathy (Olympus GIF XV10).
Nine antral gastric biopsies were taken 3–4 cm from the pyloric ring.
One sample was placed in a CLO test (a gel based rapid urease test) for assessment of Helicobacter pylori colonisation (a positive result was denoted by a colour change at four hours).
Two samples were immediately fixed in 10% formalin for histological assessment.
Paraffin wax sections were cut and stained by both haematoxylin and eosin and giemsa and assessed for evidence of gastritis and Helicobacter pylori organisms.
Gastritis was defined according to the system proposed by Wyatt and Dixon.
Type C (chemical) gastritis was characterised by the presence of foveolar hyperplasia and tortuosity, vasodilatation, and congestion with a paucity of inflammatory cells in the lamina propria layer.
Type B gastritis (chronic active gastritis) was characterised by an increase in inflammatory cells (lymphocytes, plasma cells, histiocytes) in the lamina propria of the mucosa and polymorphonuclear neutrophils infiltrating the epithelium.
Histopathology assessments were made without knowledge of the endoscopic or biochemical findings.
The remaining six biopsy samples were divided into pairs and washed in 1 ml of Tris saline buffer.
Each pair was then vortex mixed for six seconds and centrifuged for 10 seconds, the supernatant stored, and the procedure repeated.
A further 300 µl of Tris saline buffer was then added.
Synthesis of eicosanoids was stimulated by vortex mixing for a further minute.
After centrifiguration for 10 seconds the supernatant was removed and stored at -70°C until assayed (within three months.)
In a subgroup of patients further biopsy samples were stimulated by calcium ionophore A23187 for a period of 20 minutes, as described elsewhere, before the supernatant was stored.
Immunoreactive LTB 4 , LTC 4 , and PGE 2 were measured by radioimmunoassay and results were expressed as pg/mg wet weight of gastric biopsy sample.
Chemicals for radioimmunoassay were from Amersham International except PGE 2 antiserum, which was from Sigma Chemical Company.
VALIDATION OF ASSAYS
Intra-assay coefficients of variation were 3.8% for LTB 4 , 3.9% for LTC 4 , and 2.5% for PGE 2 (n=10).
Interassay coefficients of variation were 7.6% for LTB 4 , 5.3% for LTC 4 , and 12.4% for PGE 2 .
Experiments with exogenous compounds showed a good correlation between amounts added and amounts measured.
Overall correlations for measured v added were 0.998 for LTB 4 , 0.988 for LTC 4 , and 0.990 for PGE 2 (n=6).
Cross reactivity and sensitivity of all three radioimmunoassays has been previously described.
The lower limits of detection by radioimmunoassay were: LTB 4 0.2 pg, LTC 4 1 pg, and PGE 2 2 pg.
STATISTICAL METHODS
The influence of age, sex, smoking, use of prednisolone or second line treatments,Helicobacter pylori colonisation, and NSAID use on each of the dependent variables was analysed by stepwise multivariate regression analysis with the SPSS programme (statistical package for social sciences).
Non-parametric methods were used with significance determined at the 5% level.
The Mann-Whitney U test was used for pairwise comparisons where the influence of independent variables was identified as significant by the multivariate analysis.
Results are expressed as medians (interquartile ranges).
Results
PATIENTS
Overall 65 patients taking NSAIDs for arthritis and 23 control non-users were analysed.
Table I shows characteristics of sex, age, smoking, and duration of NSAID use.
Of 65 patients taking NSAIDs nine had endoscopic evidence of ulceration (six gastric, three duodenal), as defined by a mucosal lesion greater than 3 mm in diameter with definite depth.
Seventeen had gastric erosions, mainly confined to the antrum.
Sixteen patients had minor gastropathy consisting of submucosal or petechiae haemorrhage and the remaining 23 patients had endoscopically normal mucosa.
Twenty five of the patients taking NSAIDs were positive for Helicobacter pylori as determined by histology and CLO test.
Of the 23 control subjects who did not use NSAIDs ulceration was present in five (three gastric, two duodenal), five had erosions, and 14 had an endoscopically normal mucosa.
Twelve of these controls were positive for Helicobacter pylori .
Twenty (31%) patients taking NSAIDs had a histologically normal antral gastric mucosa.
Twenty (31%) patients had a type C (chemical) gastritis, and the remaining 25 (38%) had a type B (active) gastritis.
Helicobacter organisms were identified in all but two patients with type B gastritis and in two patients with type C gastritis.
EFFECT OF NSAID USE ON SYNTHESIS OF EICOSANOIDS
Leukotriene B 4 
Treatment with NSAIDs, gastritis, and use of second line treatment were the only independent variables identified as exerting a significant influence on synthesis of LTB 4 in the multivariate analysis.
Median gastric mucosal synthesis of LTB 4 in patients taking NSAIDs as determined by vortex mixing was 0.9 (0.2–2.5) pg/mg (n=65).
this was significantly higher than the value of 0 (0–0.6) pg/mg seen in controls (n=23, p, fig 1).
Similarly when synthesis of LTB 4 was stimulated by calcium ionophore there was also a significant increase in LTB 4 concentrations found in NSAID users (1.5 (0.3–2.6) pg/mg (n= 60)) compared with non-users (0 (0–0.1) pg/mg (n=14)(p).
The increase in synthesis of LTB 4 seen in patients taking NSAIDs remained significant when the subgroups who were Helicobacter pylori positive or negative were analysed separately.
Among those patients who were Helicobacter pylori positive NSAID treatment was associated with synthesis of LTB 4 of 1.2 (0.4–2.6) pg/mg (n=25) compared with 0 (0–0.4) pg/mg in non-users (n=12, p).
In those who were Helicobacter pylori negative NSAID use was associated with LTB 4 synthesis of 0.8 (0.0–2.2) pg/mg (n=40) compared with 0 (0–1.0) pg/mg in non-users (n=11)(p).
Within the two groups, NSAID users and non-users, there were no significant differences between synthesis of LTB 4 in patients colonised or not colonised with the organism.
A similar pattern of results of enhanced synthesis of LTB 4 with NSAID use across all subgroups was seen with calcium ionophore stimulation.
Leukotriene C 4 
By contrast with LTB 4 , colonisation by Helicobacter pylori , but not NSAID use was associated with increased vortex stimulated LTC 4 synthesis.
Among NSAID users those with Helicobacter pylori colonisation synthesised 3.1 (1.5–4.0) pg/ mg (n=23) compared with 3.2 (0.6–5.3) pg/mg (n=12) in non-users.
In those not colonised with the organism synthesis of LTC 4 was 2.0 (1.2–2.8) pg/mg (n=32) in NSAID users and 2.2 (0–2.6) pg/mg (n=11) in non-users.
The values for synthesis of LTC 4 in those colonised with Helicobacter pylori were significantly higher (p) than in those not colonised (fig 2).
Prostaglandin E 2 
As found in previous studies patients taking NSAIDs synthesised less PGE 2 than those not taking these drugs.
Median gastric mucosal synthesis of PGE 2 stimulated by vortex mixing was 16.2 (8.0–40.3) pg/mg (n=65) in NSAID users and 51.4 (22.3–75.0) pg/mg (n=23) in non-users (p).
Concentrations of PGE 2 were not measured in samples stimulated by calcium ionophore because limited material was available.
CORRELATION OF SYNTHESIS OF LEUKORTIENES WITH ENDOSCOPIC INJURY
Although there was a trend of higher synthesis of LTB 4 in those NSAID subjects with endoscopic evidence of more severe mucosal injury this did not reach statistical significance.
Patients with ulceration or erosions synthesised 2.2 (0.1–3.0) pg/mg of LTB 4 .
In comparison those with only submucosal haemorrhages synthesised 1.0 (0.4–2.1) pg/mg and those with an endoscopically normal mucosa synthesised 0.7 (0.0–1.7) pg/mg (p=0.11, fig 3).
By contrast no such trend was seen with synthesis of LTC 4 .
In NSAID users with ulcers or erosions synthesis of LTC 4 was 1.9 (1.2–3.1) pg/mg LTC 4 (n=22) compared with 2.8 (1.2–3.7) pg/mg (n=20) in those with a normal mucosa (p=0.4).
CORRELATION OF SYNTHESIS OF LEUKOTRIENE WITH GASTRITIS
Synthesis of LTB 4 was also measured in patients according to the histological state of antral biopsies.
All controls with type B (active) gastritis were Helicobacter pylori positive with LTB 4 values of 0 (0.0–0.4) pg/mg, whereas those who were Helicobacter pylori negative all had a normal histological appearance and values of 0 (0.0–1.0) pg/mg.
In patients taking NSAIDs those with type C (chemical) gastritis synthesised LTD 4 concentrations of 2.2 (0.4–3.0) pg/mg, significantly higher than 0.6 (0.0–0.9) pg/mg in patients with a normal mucosa (p).
Patients with type B gastritis synthesised 1.0 (0.4–2.6) pg/mg, again significantly higher than those with a normal mucosa (p, fig 4).
By contrast there were no significant differences in synthesis of LTC 4 in NSAID users between those with type C gastritis (2.3 (1.5–3.0) pg/mg) compared with those with normal mucosa (1.8 (1.2–2.8) pg/mg) although enhanced synthesis in those with type B gastritis (3.2 (1.5–4.0) pg/ mg) reflected the higher concentrations seen in patients colonised with Helicobacter pylori (p).
CORRELATION OF SYNTHESIS OF LEUKOTRIENES WITH SECOND LINE TREATMENT
The use of second line drugs in the management of rheumatoid arthritis was also identified as an independent variable that significantly influenced leukotriene concentrations.
Thus in patients taking NSAIDs synthesis of LTB 4 was 2.2 (0.8–4.5) pg/mg (n=24) in those taking second line treatment compared with 0.8 (0.0–2.3) pg/mg (n=41) in patients not on these drugs (p).
In patients taking NSAIDs but not taking second line treatment synthesis of LTB 4 was still significantly higher than in controls (p).
Use of prednisolone, however, did not influence synthesis of LTB 4 .
Synthesis of LTC 4 was also unrelated to second line treatment (2.3 (1.4–3.5)v 2.8 (1.6–3.9) pg/mg).
Discussion
In this paper we have shown that longstanding NSAID treatment in patients with arthritis is associated with increased gastric mucosal synthesis of LTB 4 compared with controls.
This increase was seen whether synthesis was stimulated by vortex mixing or by calcium ionophore and persisted across subgroups of patients with or without mucosal damage and with or without Helicobacter pylori colonisation.
Our study also shows that NSAID treatment results in reduced gastric mucosal synthesis of PGE 2 , as is well known, but no significant changes in synthesis of LTC 4 related to NSAIDs.
Although age and sex did not influence the results, enhanced synthesis of lipoxygenase products has been reported in the synovial fluid and tissue of patients with rheumatoid arthritis or spondyloarthritis and it is possible that this was a confounding variable.
As most patients with rheumatoid arthritis take NSAIDs it may be difficult to discriminate between these factors.
We also found an independent correlation between second line treatment and increased LTB 4 concentrations that may either reflect a pharmacological effect or a correlation with disease activity.
The confounding use of second line drugs does not explain the increased synthesis of LTB 4 seen in patients taking NSAIDs overall.
Dexamethasone has also been reported to suppress leukotriene activity in vitro although we found no effect of low dose prednisolone in this study.
Similarly, although smoking is known to suppress gastric mucosal cyclo-oxygenase activity we found no correlation with synthesis of LTB 4 .
Accurate assessment of mucosal eicosanoid concentrations is notoriously difficult.
Biopsy trauma is itself a stimulus to the synthesis of eicosanoids, but tissue fragments used for short incubation periods overcome the problems of tissue viability and both mechanical and chemical stimulation of synthesis of leukotriene are well established methods of generation under standardised conditions.
Extraction procedures were the same in patients and controls and values can be regarded as an index of the capacity of the mucosa to synthesis eicosanoids.
Previous studies in humans have shown that synthesis of leukotrienes correlates with gastroduodenal mucosal injury.
In patients with duodenal ulcers gastric and duodenal mucosal synthesis of LTB 4 and synthesis of LTC 4 were raised compared with controls and were significantly reduced after the ulcer healed.
Similarly we found a trend towards higher synthesis of LTB 4 in patients with endoscopic evidence of injury.
Increases of both LTB 4 and LTC 4 have also been reported with gastritis associated with Helicobacter pylori .
We also found enhanced synthesis of LTC 4 associated with Helicobacter pylori colonisation.
There was, however, no significant enhancement of LTB 4 associated with Helicobacter pylori colonisation among patients taking NSAIDs.
Values were too low to judge whether there was any effect associated with Helicobacter pylori colonisation in controls.
Our study does not identify the mechanism by which NSAID treatment leads to enhanced synthesis of LTB 4 .
Although the possibility that inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase results in diversion of the substrate arachidonic acid down 5-lipoxygenase pathways has been much discussed it has been difficult to confirm.
In vitro concentrations of indomethacin that completely block cyclo-oxygenase seem to increase production of 5-hydroperoxy-eicosatetraenoic acid (5-HETE), another lipoxygenase product in leukocytes.
Peskar, however, found that high doses of indomethacin actually inhibited synthesis of LTC 4 in rat gastric mucosa.
As this inhibition was less than the accompanying inhibition of PGE 2 it was possible to argue that some substrate diversion might have occurred, although weak inhibition of the 5-lipoxygenase enzyme by indomethacin seems a simpler and more plausible explanation.
Clayton and colleagues have reported findings in isolated rat stomach antrum in vitro where indomethacin enhanced the release of LTB 4 as well as LTC 4 , LTD 4 , and LTE 4 in the presence of calcium ionophore A23187, but other studies by Wallace et al have failed to show any increase in gastric mucosal synthesis of LTB 4 after acute administration of indomethacin.
We have shown enhanced LTB 4 with no significant effect on LTC 4 in patients on NSAID treatment.
This raises the possibility that a mechanism other than substrate diversion is involved or that the various eicosanoids arise from different cellular sources and substrate diversion only occurred in a cell capable of synthesising LTB 4 but not LTC 4 .
Synthesis of LTB 4 by gastric mucosal epithelial cells has been reported and it is possible that these are an important source of the increased concentrations we have seen in patients taking NSAIDs.
An alternative explanation of the raised synthesis of LTB 4 is that it is a secondary consequence of gastritis or injury related to NSAIDs.
The multivariate analysis showed significantly increased synthesis of LTB 4 in NSAID users, however, compared with controls independent of the degree or type of the accompanying gastritis.
Again there was a dissociation between LTB 4 and LTC 4 with significant increases in LTB 4 being particularly associated with type C gastritis and increases in LTC 4 with type B gastritis associated with Helicobacter pylori .
Increases in LTC 4 could be secondary to the invasion of inflammatory cells that accompanies Helicobacter pylori colonisation and that characterises type B gastritis.
By contrast type C gastritis is characterised by foveolar hyperplasia and elongation and tortuosity of vessels together with oedema, vasodilatation, and congestion with a paucity of inflammatory cells.
Our data confirm the previous reports of an association iwth NSAID use.
The paucity of inflammatory cells in the lamina propria that is usually seen with this type of gastritis makes it difficult to argue that the increased synthesis derives from inflammatory cells.
If gastric mucosal epithelial cells are the main source of LTB 4 , enhanced synthesis could simply be a consequence of the hyperplastic epithelium characteristic of chemical gastritis.
Conversely, these hyperplastic features could be taken to imply epithelial remodelling possibly under the influence of a chemical mediator.
Our data raise the possibility that LTB 4 is a candidate for this role as it is plausible that LTB 4 contributes to the vascular changes and oedema that characterise type C gastritis.
If NSAIDs directly enhance leukotriene synthesis this may also contribute to mucosal injury.
Whereas removal of prostaglandin dependent mucosal defence mechanisms remains a central mechanism in the development of gastric mucosal injury related to NSAIDs, this could be enhanced by increased synthesis of leukotriene, as LTB 4 attracts and activates polymorphonuclear leucocytes and peptidoleukotrienes are potent vasoconstrictors capable of increasing vascular permeability and causing microcirculatory stasis.
Establishment of a causal role for leukotrienes in the pathogenesis of mucosal damage has, however, remained elusive.
Studies in rats have shown a correlation between gastric damage induced by ethanol and other agents and endogenous LTC 4 concentrations, and infusion of peptidoleukotrienes can potentiate ethanol mediated gastric damage.
Although some studies have shown lipoxygenase inhibitors to be protective, more recent studies have not.
Dietary replacement of arachidonic acid by eicosapentaenoic acid results in an enhanced resistance to ethanol induced gastric damage.
This might be due to the accompanying reduction in synthesis of the 4 series leukotrienes.
More recent reports suggest that acute indomethacin induced gastric mucosal injury in rats is accompanied by neutrophil adherence of mesenteric microvascular endothelium and that the severity of gastric injury can be greatly reduced by prior neutrophil depletion with neutrophil antibodies.
Moreover neutrophil adhesion to the endothelium seems to correlate with increased LTB 4 concentrations and adhesion is prevented by inhibitors of the synthesis of leukotrienes.
This finding suggests a direct interaction between NSAIDs, synthesis of LTB 4 , and mechanisms of subsequent mucosal injury.
Measurement of gastric mucosal leukotrienes in humans after acute dosing with indomethacin and other NSAIDs and investigation of the effects of other inhibitors of 5 lipoxygenase will be necessary to define more precisely the role of leukotrienes in mucosal injury related to NSAIDs.
In conclusion, we have shown that enhanced in vitro synthesis of LTB 4 by human gastric mucosa occurs with NSAID use and is strongly associated with type C gastritis.
There are reasons to believe that the association may be a primary affect of drug treatment, which could mediate some of the pathological changes associated with NSAID use rather than a secondary consequence of these changes.
Changing pattern of gastric cancer in Oxfordshire
Abstract
This study compares the incidence rates of histologically confirmed gastric carcinoma in Oxfordshire in two five year periods (1960–64, 1984–88).
Data were available for 215 patients in the first period, and 200 in the second.
The overall incidence fell from 18/100000 to 15/100000 but when analysed for site, the incidence of antral tumours fell from 10 to 4.5/ 100000.
In contrast, there was an increase from 2.8 to 5.2/100000 of tumours of the cardia.
These changes were more pronounced in men.
There was a marked association between smoking and tumours of the cardia (relative risk 4.5).
Helicobacter pylori was associated with 37.5% of tumours in the 1960s series compared with 25% in the later series.
The changing patterns of incidence of gastric carcinoma may, in part, be related to changes in smoking habits and perhaps a change in incidence of H pylori infection.
Although the incidence of gastric cancer is declining worldwide, especially in the developed countries of North America, Europe, and Japan, there have been several recent reports showing that there has been an increase in carcinomas of the cardia compared with carcinomas in the antrum.
Cancer of the cardia is different in the sex ratio, histological type, prognosis, and in relation to aeriological factors such as the consumption of alcohol and tobacco, when compared with gastric cancer in other locations.
These differences have led some investigators to consider cancer of the cardia as a separate entity.
The reasons for the apparent change in relative incidence at different sites are poorly understood and there is controversy about whether the increase of cardia cancer represents an absolute increment or whether the apparent increase is related to a decreased incidence of antral tumours.
The aim of this study is to compare the incidence rates of gastric cancer in two five year periods (1960–64 and 1984–88) by site, sex, and age, histological type, the nature of the inflammation adjacent to the tumour, and alcohol and tobacco consumption.
The association between gastric histopathology and Helicobacter pylori was also investigated.
Methods
The slides of all consecutive histologically confirmed gastric carcinomas of two five year periods diagnosed at the Radcliffe Infirmary between 1960–64 (n=215, 154 men and 61 women) and at the John Radcliffe Hospital between 1984–88 (n=200, 138 men and 62 women) were reviewed and compared with respect to sex, age, site of the tumour, gross morphology, histological classification, differentiation, and the pattern of inflammation in the surrounding mucosa.
The location, staging, and gross morphology of the cancers were classified according to the criteria of the Japanese Society for gastric cancer, and the revised tumour node metastasis classification.
In tumours affecting the cardia and the lower oesophagus, the tumour was included in the series if the majority of the tumour was gastric.
Adenocarcinomas arising from Barrett's epithelium were excluded.
All the available histology was analysed by an independent pathologist (NAS).
Tumours were typed according to the Lauren classification into intestinal, diffuse and mixed types.
A tumour was considered mixed if the minority component comprised more than 20% of the total tumour mass according to the criteria of the British Stomach Cancer Group (Levison DA, personal communication).
The World Health Organization criteria were used to assess the degree of differentiation.
The presence of inflammatory changes in the mucosa surrounding the cancer were assessed according to the method of Whitehead et al :
(i) No significant inflammation)(ii) chronic superficial gastritis;(iii) chronic atrophic gastritis;(iv) chronic active gastritis.
Chronic atrophic gastritis and chronic active gastritis were graded as mild, moderate and severe.
The presence of H pylori was determined using a modified Giemsa stain.
Where possible, the presence or absence of the organisms was assessed in the mucosa surrounding the tumour as well as in the tumour itself.
Helicobacter like organisms were scored as absent, scanty, moderate or numerous.
The degree of intestinal metaplasia was classified as absent, incomplete, complete or mixed according to the criteria of Filipe and Jass.
In a retrospective study such as this, it is impossible to fully assess the type of intestinal metaplasia and therefore for analysis intestinal metaplasia was simply judged to be present (+) or absent (-).
Some caution should be applied when comparing histological data from the two time periods.
In the earlier series, specimens available for histological review were mostly operative resection specimens (95.4%), whereas in the later series only 70.3% were operative specimens and 29.7% biopsy specimens.
For the 1984–88 series, data on alcohol and tobacco consumption were recorded in the hospital records but there was insufficient data on the quantity of consumption to allow detailed analysis.
Recorded data in the earlier series was incomplete and no analysis was attempted.
The population at risk was obtained from the Oxford Record Linkage Study to calculate crude annual incidence rates per 100000 from 1964 to 1988.
Gastric cancer rates were also age standardised to a ‘world population’ to allow appropriate comparison between the two time periods.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The significance of means were studied using the Student's t test, and the Mann Whitney U-test for non-parametric values.
The significance of proportions was tested using χ 2 test, and the Mantel-Heinzel χ 2 test for significance of the odds ratio was used to compare the effects of alcohol and tobacco consumption.
Results
INCIDENCE
The incidence of gastric cancer for men and women in the Oxfordshire region fell slightly from 18/100000 inhabitants at the beginning of the 1960 decade to 15/100000 inhabitants in the 1980s.
These figures are similar to the incidence calculated in the west Midlands using independent data.
When analysed by site, there was a marked fall in the incidence of antral tumours from 10 to 4.5/ 100000 inhabitants between the two study periods, whereas the incidence of body and cardia tumours increased from 3.3 to 4.2 and from 2.8 to 5.2/100000 inhabitants respectively (Fig 1).
The data were analysed for sex and age in each location (Table I).
The greatest changes were seen in men.
Detailed analysis by age was unreliable because of the small numbers.
The changing prevalence of antral and cardia tumours was mostly seen in 45–64 year old men (data not shown).
Diffuse tumours (linitis plastica, or Borrman IV) affecting more than one part of the stomach, accounted for 5.1% of the early series and 5% of the later.
AGE
The mean age (SD) of the 1984–88 series was significantly older than the mean age of the 1960–64 series (68.9 (11.3)v 63.3 (11.4), p=0.007) probably reflecting an ageing population.
The mean age of patients with cancers of the cardia, however, was significantly younger than for the other sites (64.7 (11.0)v 70.0 (11.0), p=0.009)(Table I).
In each site in both series, the mean age of the women was greater than the mean age of the men.
SEX RATIO
For all patients, there was a slight fall in the sex ratio (male/female) from 2.5:1 in the 1960–64 series to 2.2:1 in the 1984–88 series.
The difference was not significant.
When analysed for each site, however, there was a marked male prodominance for the cardia site in both series.
In the later series these ratios were 1.3:1 in the antrum, 2.1:1 in the body, and 3.7:1 in the cardia (antrum v cardia, p=0.001)(Table I).
HISTOLOGY
Tissue from 196 of 215 (91%) cases was available for histological study in the earlier series, and from 179 of 200 (89.5%) in the later series.
LAUREN CLASSIFICATION
The distribution of diffuse and intestinal type cancers was similar to that described by Lauren.
In the 1984–88 series, 38% of carcinomas were of type I (diffuse), 55.7% type II (intestinal), and 6.3% mixed.
The distribution was similar in the 1960–64 series (39.6% diffuse, 51.3% intestinal, and 9.1% mixed).
These proportions remained unchanged when the data were analysed for sex and for site in both series.
DIFFERENTIATION
Table II shows that there was a small increase in the proportion of well and moderately differentiated tumours (6.1% and 9.5–24.5% and 33.0% for 1960s and 1980s respectively, and a corresponding decrease in the proportion of poorly differentiated tumours from the 1960–64 series to the 1984–88 series (69.4% and 57.5% respectively).
When this was analysed by site, the proportion of moderately and poorly differentiated tumours significantly decreased (p= 0.001) in the antrum from the earlier to the later series, whereas the same relatively poorly differentiated tumours increased significantly in the carida over the same periods.
Furthermore, in the 1960–64 series, the proportion of moderately and poorly differentiated tumours in the antrum was significantly higher than in the body and the cardia (antrum v cardia, p=0.001) whereas in the 1984–88 series, the reverse was found (antrum v cardia, p=0.001).
GASTRITIS SCORE
In the 1980s series gastric mucosal specimens adjacent to the tumour were available for 413 of the 179 patients with gastric carcinoma, 33.6% of gastric cancer patients showed no evidence of chronic gastritis in the surrounding mucosa.
Of the 66.4% with chronic gastritis, 39.1% showed chronic active gastritis, 23.8% chronic superficial gastritis, and 3.5% chronic atrophic gastritis.
In the 1960s series, there was adjacent mucosa available from 145 of the 196 patients with gastric cancer.
Twenty per cent showed no evidence of chronic gastritis, and of the 80% with chronic gastritis 53.8% showed chronic active gastritis, 19.3% chronic superficial gastritis, and 6.9% chronic atrophic gastritis (Table III).
In the 1980s series only 13% of antral tumours were surrounded by normal mucosa whereas this proportion was higher in cancers found in the body (28.2%) and especially in the cardia (53.5%)(antrum v cardia, p).
On the other hand, the proportion of tumours associated with chronic active gastritis was highest in the antrum (60.9%) and was significantly lower in tumours affecting the body (46.1%) and the cardia (17.2%)(antrum v cardia, p).
The results and significance were similar for the earlier series although more pronounced (Table III).
In the 1980s series, chronic active gastritis was associated more with tumours of Lauren's intestinal type (39 of 87, 44.8%) than with the diffuse type (20 of 55, 36.4%, p=0.1).
The proportion of tumours associated with a normal surrounding mucosa showed no significant differences between the two main types.
A similar relationship was seen in the 1960–64 series, chronic active gastritis was more associated with the intestinal type (44 of 79, 55.7%) compared with the diffuse type (29 of 61, 47.5%).
The trend was not significant in either series.
INTESTINAL METAPLASIA
In the 1984–88 series, 52.1% of all gastric cancers were associated with intestinal metaplasia in the mucosa around the tumour.
When studied by site, however, 82.5% of antral tumours were associated with intestinal metaplasia, compared with 23.5% of tumours of the cardia (p=0.001).
In the 1960–64 series, 69.7% of all gastric tumours were associated with intestinal metaplasia. 79.8% of antral tumours were associated with intestinal metaplasia compared with 33.3% in the cardia (p=0.001).
The presence of intestinal metaplasia was related to the tumour type (Lauren classification).
In the 1984–88 series the intestinal type was seen more often with intestinal metaplasia (46 of 74, 62.2%) compared with the diffuse type (20 of 50, 40%)(p=0.01).
In the 1960–64 series, the relationship between intestinal metaplasia and intestinal type carcinoma was even more pronounced when compared to diffuse type tumours (83.8% v 51.8%, p) respectively.
HELICOBACTER PYLORI
In the 1960–64 series, the presence of H pylori was identified in 37.5% of patients (54 of 144 available specimens).
The proportion decreased in the later series to 25% (37 of 148 available specimens)(p).
In the 1960–64 series 83.3% of carcinomas associated with H pylori were situated in the antrum compared with 1.8% in the cardia (p).
In the 1984–88 series, the proportion of H pylori positive cases was 40% in the antrum compared with 32.5% in the cardia (p=ns).
The difference between series was significant (p).
The presence of H pylori correlated with the degree of inflammation.
In both series,H pylori was associated with chronic active gastritis (92.6% for the 1960s and 47.6% for the 1980s) compared with its presence in the mucosa without active inflammation (0% in the 1960s and 19% in the 1980s)(p).
H pylori was particularly associated with the presence of intestinal metaplasia in both series (77.2% in the 1960s and 56.1% in the 1980's).
The presence of H pylori was related to tumour type according to the Lauren classification.
H pylori was more associated with the intestinal type in earlier and later series (59.1% and 48.1% respectively) than with the diffuse type (36.4% and 42.6%) but the differences were not significant.
A noteworthy feature in both series was that the bacteria colonised not only the mucosa surrounding the tumour, but also the malignant glands of some cases of intestinal type carcinoma (Fig 2).
TOBACCO AND ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION
Of the 200 patients in the 1984–88 series, there were insufficient data on alcohol and tobacco consumption recorded in 70.
Thus, relative risks were calculated on 130 patients.
Relative risks for gastric carcinoma in relation to alcohol and tobacco consumption are given in Table IV.
There was a significant risk of tumours of the cardia for smokers (RR: 4.5, p), but alcohol did not appear to be a risk factor.
Smoking appeared to be negatively associated with antral carcinomas (RR: 0.16, p).
Discussion
A decrease in the incidence of gastric carcinoma has been widely reported over the last three decades.
The magnitude of the decrease has varied from a fall of 88% in the white population of USA to a much smaller decrease in Norway.
No satisfactory explanation has been found for this spontaneous decline although changes in the nitrosamine content of foods may be one factor.
Reports from Finland, Norway, and USA suggest that the declining incidence of gastric carcinomas is mainly because of a marked decrease in tumours of intestinal type.
It is probable that the pathogenesis of the ‘intestinal’ type differs from the ‘diffuse’type (defined by the Lauren Classification).
Thus, the high risk areas such as Japan, Chile, and Colombia have a predominance of intestinal type tumours whereas there are more diffuse tumours in the low risk areas such as USA and the UK.
In this study, the decrease in the incidence of gastric carcinoma over two decades was 17% which is similar to that reported from Birmingham.
The incidence in the 1960s, however, might have been underestimated as endoscopic biopsy was not available and this study required histological verification rather than a radiological diagnosis.
Another source of bias might be changing referral patterns within Oxfordshire.
There was no evidence to support this and it would seem unlikely that the referral pattern would differ according to site of tumour.
Despite this declining incidence, several reports consistently show a rise in the incidence of carcinomas of the cardia.
This could be relative to a dramatic decrease in antral tumours but a number of studies, including the present one, suggest that the increase in proximal lesions is absolute.
The increase was particularly seen in males with a rise in the male:female ratio from 3.1:1 to 3.7:1.
Other studies have related antral carcinomas with lower social class, whereas tumours of the cardia have been associated with higher social class and with those of Caucasian origin.
It was not possible, however, to obtain such data in this retrospective study.
Histological review of the tumours showed that the proximal lesions tended to be more poorly differentiated in the 1980's than in the earlier series.
Although caution is required in retrospective interpretation, similar trends have been reported from Denmark and Boston but not in all studies.
In this study no difference was found in the proportion of diffuse and intestinal tumours between the two time periods and no relation was found between lauren type and age, sex, stage or site.
This is in agreement with previous studies.
Perhaps the most striking finding in the present study was the histological analysis of the gastric mucosa surrounding the tumour.
Only 13% of antral tumours were surrounded by histologically normal mucosa compared with over 50% of tumours in the cardia.
In contrast, antral tumours mainly arose from mucosa showing the changes of chronic active gastritis.
As reported in other studies, there was a predominance of intestinal type tumours associated with chronic inflammation in both time periods studied.
The expected association between antral tumours and intestinal metaplasia was also seen.
The strong association between antral tumours and chronic active gastritis suggests the possibility that H pylori infection may have a pathogenic role.
It now seems established that this organism is inolved in the development of chronic inflammation and it has been associated with 19 to 80% of gastric carinomas.
In these reports the organisms have been found in the surrounding mucosa rather than in the tumour itself.
Despite the limitations of a retrospective study and the heterogeneity of the tissue available for review, the present findings show that over 80% of antral tumours were associated with H pylori in the 1960s although this fell to about 40% in the 1980s.
In this later period H pylori was associated with a high proportion of cardia tumours and was found in 19% of patients with a normal surrounding mucosa.
One possibility for the decrease in antral carcinomas over time is a decrease in H pylori infection and hence a fall in the prevalence of chronic gastritis.
This study cannot provide data to confirm or refute this hypothesis, however.
If true, it should follow that antral cancer would be more common and would occur at an early age in those parts of the world where the majority of the population already have serum antibodies to the organism before adult life.
Evidence from Colombia and Bolivia supports this hypothesis.
In many series, smoking and/or alcohol has been associated with gastric cancer, and especially with cancer of the cardia.
In the present study, cancer of the cardia was strongly associated with smoking whereas smoking and alcohol appeared to be negatively associated with antral tumours.
Thus, the marked increase in tumours of the cardia may relate to past smoking habits, and may represent a cohort phenomenon as smoking increased between 1915 and 1950.
In conclusion, this study shows an absolute increase in the incidence of proximal gastric tumours in a defined population over a 20 year period.
This has occurred when there has been a decline in antral tumours.
Changes in the overall incidence of H pylori gastritis, as a result of rising standards of living and improved public health, together with past smoking habits, may partly explain these observations.
Quantication of disease activity in Crohn's disease by computer analysis of Tc-99m hexamethyl propylene amine oxime (HMPAO) labelled leucocyte images
Abstract
The reliability and clinical applications of computerised image analysis measurement of bowel uptake of Tc-99m HMPAO labelled leucocytes has been examined as a measure of disease activity in Crohn's disease.
In 54 studies carried out on 33 patients with established Crohn's disease, the mean ‘scan score’, a quantitative assessment of image intensity, was 82.1 SEM (13.6), in patients with clinically active disease compared to 24.7 (7.0) in those with quescent disease, p=0.0005.
A significant correlation was found between the scan score and Crohn's Disease Activity Index (rs=0.52, <), and Harvey and Bradshaw Simple Index (rs=0.4, p).
A low scan score correctly identified seven patients whose raised Crohn's Disease Activity Index incorrectly indicated active disease because symptoms used in calculation of the index were not caused by active inflammation.
Of the laboratory measurements, the scan score correlated with the haemoglobin (rs=0.66, p), albumin level (rs=0.6, p), C-reactive protein (rs=0.7, p), alpha-acid glycoprotein (rs=0.57, p), and platelet count (rs=0.47, p=0.006), but not with the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (rs=0.2, p=0.25).
The scan score was raised in all patients who had clinically active disease but normal laboratory tests.
The results of this study indicate that the scan score provides an objective indicator of disease activity in Crohn's disease which may be superior to clinical indices, and also to laboratory tests which although objective are often normal in the presence of active disease.
There continues to be no generally accepted indicator of disease activity in Crohn's disease.
Clinical indices depend heavily upon subjective features such as abdominal pain and well being.
Laboratory measurements, although more objective, are no more specific for Crohn's disease than the clinical indices.
Endoscopic and radiological methods of assessment are invasive, need bowel preparation and are not suitable for all patients, particularly when repeated examinations are required.
Bowel scintigraphy using Indium-111 labelled leucocytes has been applied to the assessment of disease extent and activity in Crohn's disease.
Early results showed that bowel scans correlate with radiological, endoscopic, and histological methods of assessment.
Measurement of faecal excretion of Indium-111 labelled leucocytes has been used to assess disease activity and has been shown to effectively distinguish active from quiescent Crohn's disease and to correlate with other clinical and laboratory activity indices.
This, however, needs patient cooperation, depends upon bowel frequency and for optimum results requires granulocyte purification which is time consuming.
Tc-99m hexamethyl propylene amine oxime (HMPAO) has recently been introduced for regional cerebral blood flow imaging, but has subsequently been found to selectively label granulocytes in mixed leucocyte suspensions.
Although hitherto largely used to localise infection and inflammation, preliminary experience with this tracer as a leucocyte label in inflammatory bowel disease has been encouraging.
As a result of the short half-life of Tc-99m and its biliary excretion, meaningful faecal excretion studies using this isotope are not possible.
Disease activity must therefore be derived from the degree of abnormal bowel uptake on abdominal scans.
The only method previously applied to quantify the abnormal bowel uptake on abdominal scans obtained using either Indium-111 or Tc-99m HMPAO lavelled leucocytes has been the visual comparison of the intensity of bowel uptake with that of liver, spleen and bone marrow.
This method is very crude and subjective.
We have therefore developed a computer based technique for the quantification of bowel uptake and have applied it to images of the distribution of Tc-99m HMPAO lavelled leucocytes.
The bowel uptake as a measure of Crohn's activity was then correlated with other established clinical and laboratory indicators of disease activity.
Methods
PATIENTS
Fifty four studies were performed on 33 patients with Crohn's disease, the diagnosis having been established by standard clinical, radiological, and/or histological criteria.
There were 23 women and 10 men (mean age 43 years, range 19–75).
In six cases the diagnosis was confirmed shortly before the scan; the remaining 27 had long standing disease (mean duration 8.4 years, range 1–32).
The disease had recurred at a previous ileocolonic anastomosis in seven patients and predominantly affected the small bowel, the large bowel and both small and large intestine in nine, nine, and eight patients respectively.
DISEASE ACTIVITY
Disease activity was assessed using:(A) Crohn's Disease Activity Index — CDAI, the disease being considered active if the CDAI value was greater than 150.
(B) Simple Index of Harvey and Bradshaw — SI.
A value of 4 denotes active disease.
(C) Laboratory tests reflecting active gut inflammation, these included: haemoglobin: normal: male 12.5 g/dl, female 11.5 g/dl; platelet count: normal: 150–440× 10/l; erythrocyte sedimentation rate: normal: 20 mm in first hour; serum albumin: normal: 35 g/l; C-reactive protein: normal: 4 mg/ gl; alpha-1 acid glycoprotein: normal: 1.2 g/l.
The clinical indices and laboratory measurements were made within one week of having the bowel scan.
The CDAI and Simple Index calculations were available for analysis on 51 and 50 studies (33 patients) respectively.
The results of haemoglobin, platelet count, C-reactive protein, alpha-1 acid glycoprotein, serum albumin, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were available from 32, 32, 30, 30, 30, and 28 patients respectively.
All available studies were used in examining the correlations between the scan score and the CDAI and Simple Index.
Because some patients had repeated studies to monitor the effects of treatment, however, and as such treatment may affect the scan score without necessarily affecting the laboratory tests, only the initial scans obtained before administering any therapy were used in correlations between scan score and laboratory indicators of disease activity.
All images were evaluated by one of the authors (WBT) without previous knowledge of the results of the clinical or laboratory tests, which were collected separately without knowledge of the scan score.
LEUCOCYTE LABELLING
The technique of labelling granulocytes in mixed leucocyte suspensions using Tc-99m HMPAO has previously been described.
Briefly, 102 ml venous blood were taken into 18 ml of acid-citrate-dextrose.
Twenty millilitres were centrifuged at 1500 g for 10 minutes to obtain cell free plasma.
To the remaining 100 ml of blood 10 ml of 6% hydroxyethyl starch (Hespan, Dupont, USA) was added and left to sediment at room temperature.
The supernatant containing platelets and white blood cells was centrifuged to separate the leucocytes which were then resuspended in cell free plasma.
Tc-99m HMPAO was reconstituted according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Four millilitres of the complex were immediately added to the leucocyte suspension, gently mixed and left for 10 minutes at room temperature.
The labelled cells were washed once with cell free plasma before being transferred to a heparinised plastic syringe for reinjection.
An average of 200 MBq of Tc-99m labelled cells were injected into each patient.
IMAGING AND CALCULATION OF THE SCAN SCORE
A dynamic study of the posterior lung fields was carried out for the first 15 minutes after injecting the radiolabelled leucocytes.
Subsequently anterior and posterior abdominal scans were obtained at 40, 120, and 240 minutes using a large field of view gamma camera fitted with a low energy high resolution collimator and interfaced to a Research Machines Nimbus microcomputer.
No scintigrams showed prolonged lung retention of labelled cells, which has been shown to indicate cell injury during labelling.
The bowel activity was quantified by calculating a scan score from the images obtained at 120 minutes.
The method involves the generation of a ‘normal’ or background image which contains only bone marrow, liver and spleen activity.
Any patient image can be considered to be composted of this normal image, upon which abnormal gut uptake is superimposed.
By subtracting a ‘normal’ image from the patient's abdominal scan, abnormal gut uptake may be isolated from the background distribution of labelled cells.
The ‘normal’ image was generated from the first 12 scans obtained from patients with Crohn's disease.
Details of the technique used are given in Tindale et al .
Briefly, the method involves scaling all the images to a standard body size and postion and to a fixed magnitude.
A weighted mean of all the scaled images is then calculated, with the weighting factor being selected in order to bias against the presence of any abnormalities.
This procedure will tend to remove features which are only present on individual images, while retaining those features which are common to all images.
The resulting weighted mean image is shown in Figure 1A and was taken to represent the average background activity in the population studied.
To determine the scan score for an individual patients, the patient's image is first scaled in size to fit the normal image (Fig 1B), and the normal image is then subtracted, from that of the patients.
This gives good separation of the abnormal bowel from the background activity (Fig 1C).
The scan score is then calculated from the counts in a 20% contour based on the maximum pixel value in the abnormal gut.
This value is normalised to correct for variation in injected dose and image acquisition times.
All images were evaluated by one of the authors (WBT) without previous knowledge of the results of the clinical or laboratory tests, which were collected separately without knowledge of the scan score.
In addition, disease activity was assessed on the two hour films by visually comparing the bowel uptake of Tc-99m HMPAO with that of bone marrow, liver, and spleen.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The scan score is a dimensionless quantity, the magnitude of which is related to the degree of abnormal uptake in the gut.
All values for patient groups are presented as mean (SEM).
The Mann-Whitney test was applied to examine the difference between the scan score in active and quiescent disease.
Correlations between the scan score and the CDAI, Simple Index, and the laboratory measurements were tested by Spearman's equation, where rs denotes Spearman's coefficient and p, the associated probability.
Results
The viability of the injected leucocytes was estimated at 95% using the standard trypan blue exclusion test.
After injection of the labelled leucocytes, radioactivity on the abdominal scan was distributed so that spleenmarrow; in some cases, urinary bladder activity also appeared.
Bowel uptake was evident as early as 40 minutes.
Some hepatobiliary excretion was evident on some of the four hour images, as noted by previous workers.
Compared with Indium-111, the image quality of Tc-99m HMPAO scans was superior.
Reproducibility studies on the data used to calculate the scan score yielded a coefficient of variation of 5.5%.
DISEASE ACTIVITY
Figure 2 shows that patients with active Crohn's disease have significantly higher scan score (mean 82.1 (13.6), median 51) than those with quiescent disease (mean 24.7 (7.0), median 15)(p≥0.005).
Optimum separation between the groups was attained with a threshold scan score of 20.
On this basis, the technique had a sensitivity of 82%, a specificity of 77%, a predictive value of 91%, and a false positive rate of 8.8%.
Discordance between the CDAI and the scan score was observed on 10 occasions.
In seven of these, raised CDAI >was associated with relatively low scan score (≤20).
In each of these patients it was clear that the raised CDAI was caused either by the presence of symptoms which although contributin substantially tot he CDAI were not caused by active inflammation — for example, superimposed symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome in three patients and subacute intestinal obstruction from fibrous stricture in two patients, or to symptomatic anaemia (one case).
One patient with Crohn's colitis had CDAI of 376 (main symptoms were diarrhoea and feeling unwell) and scan score of 13.1 but only ‘mild’ inflammatory changes were demonstrated endoscopically and histologically.
On the other hand, a normal CDAI of less than 150 but a high scan score indicating active Crohn's disease was recorded in three scans.
Two of these were from one patient with newly diagnosed and radiologically active terminal ileal Crohn's disease who was treated with elemental diet for four weeks.
An initial scan score of 77.9 decreased to 29.9 after dietary treatment.
The third scan came from a patient with Crohn's colitis who despite the absence of symptoms continued to have persistently abnormal laboratory tests and a scan score of 80.6.
Clearly in these three patients the abnormal scan score was a more accurate indicator of the degree of activity than the CDAI.
When disease activity was assessed using the visual grading method by two independent observers, there was complete agreement in only 26% of scans.
A difference of at least two grades was recorded in 30% of cases.
The visual grading score was high indicating active disease in nine (45%) of the 20 scans taken from patients with clinically quiescent disease and who had a low (≤20) scan score.
As shown in Figures 3 and 4, the scan score correlated significantly with the CDAI and the Simple Index.
The scan scores were not statistically different in patients with predominantly small bowel disease (mean CDAI 209 (28), mean scan score 73.3 (16.2)), large bowel involvement (mean CDAI 275 (44), mean scan score 94.4 (33)), and disease affecting both small and large intestine (mean CDAI 344 (61), mean scan score 94.1 (19.2)).
Data in the Table show that the scan score correlated significantly with all laboratory measurements except the erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Correlations with the C-reactive protein and serum alpha-1 acid glycoprotein which some authors have claimed to be the most reliable laboratory indicators of activity are further illustrated in Figures 5 and 6.
It can be seen that no patient with a serum C-reactive protein above 4 mg/dl or alpha-1 acid glycoprotein above 1.2 g/l had a scan score below 20.
Twelve patients with clinically active disease had normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate values; all of these had raised scan score.
Similarly the scan score was raised in all patients with clinically active disease (CDA9 150).
But normal haemoglobin (7), platelet count (7), or alpha-1 acid glycoprotein (7).
Correlation between the scan score and laboratory tests varied with disease location.
In patients with Crohn's colitis, the scan score correlated with all tests except for erythrocyte sedimentation rate and alpha-1 acid glycoprotein (Table).
On the other hand, when the disease was confined to the small bowel, significant correlations were found only with the serum albumin, alpha-1 acid glycoprotein, and haemoglobin.
Correlation with platelet count was particularly good in colonic disease.
Discussion
The ideal test for the assessment of disease activity in Crohn's disease should be simple, objective, reliable, and amenable to serial measurements to allow the assessment of various therapeutic interventions, particularly in severely ill patients who usually tolerate other invasive diagnostic tests badly.
Unfortunately, none of the available tests meet these goals.
The various clinical activity indices in general use depend on subjective features for their calculation and are of little use in day to day patient management, but do at least provide a tool which enables comparison of data obtained from different centres.
They have hitherto been the most generally used in clinical trials.
The laboratory tests lack specificity and can be normal in the presence of clinically active disease.
The use of radiolabelled leucocytes to localise and estimate disease activity in inflammatory bowel disease provides an objective technique for the assessment of disease activity.
Of the radioisotopes which have been used for labelling leucocytes, Indium-111 is the most widely studied.
Its long half life (67 hours) permits faecal excretion studies, which are considered by some as the ‘gold standard’ parameter of disease activity in Crohn's disease.
The need for collection of stools over four days, and a radiation dose limiting repeated studies are the main disadvantages of faecal indium excretion studies.
Tc-99m HMPAO, unlike other Tc-99m agents, is relatively stable in granulocytes compared with other blood cells and can therefore be used as a selective granulocyte label without the need for the tedious technique required for the separation of these cells from mixed leucocyte suspensions.
From the point of view of radiation dosimetry, image quality, availability and relative expense Tc-99m is preferable to Indium-111.
The presence of non-specific biliary excretion and short half life, however, render faecal collection studies after Tc-HMPAO lavelled leucocytes of little clinical use.
Disease activity must be estimated from the bowel scintigrams instead.
The only method hitherto available for the quantification of bowel activity on abdominal scans has been the grading of the bowel uptake by visually comparing it with that of the spleen, liver, and bone marrow.
This method is as subjective as the clinical indices and depends upon the presence of normal spleen, liver, and bone marrow.
Variations in the uptake of labelled leucocytes in these organs have been reported and patients with inflammatory bowel disease may have associated hyposplenism which may affect the splenic uptake.
In calculating the scan score, it is essential to separate the abnormal bowel uptake from the background activity.
Without such separation disease activity will frequently be overestimated particularly when the disease is quiescent (data not shown).
Although not the objective of this study, we have compared our method with that in which disease activity was estimated by comparing the bowel uptake with that of the bone marrow, spleen, and liver.
We found poor correlation between the two methods with the visual grading method having a significant interobserver variation.
A significant proportion of our patients who had clinically quiescent disease and who had a low scan score were classed as having active disease by the visual grading method.
In patients with active disease, the visual score tended to under estimate disease activity.
The computer based analysis of bowel images described in this paper meets most of the criteria for an ideal activity marker activity in Crohn's disease.
The scan score is objective, and reliably differentiates between active and inactive Crohn's disease.
The seven patients with spuriously raised CDAI as a result of non-inflammatory conditions or complications of Crohn's disease, such as fibrous strictures, were correctly identified by the scan score.
We found the scan score particularly helpful in the accurate estimation of disease activity in these circumstances, often enabling unnecessary therapeutic manipulations to be avoided.
Conversely our three patients with a normal CDAI value but raised scan score all had some other confirmatory evidence of active gut inflammation such as persistently abnormal laboratory tests or palpable abdominal mass.
This shows that the clinical indices can underestimate disease activity, this being particularly likely when there are minimal abdominal symptoms presentation is with features such as weight loss.
The scan score correlated with all laboratory tests generally accepted to reflect active gut inflammation except for the erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Although the erythrocyte sedimentation rate has been used to measure disease activity in inflammatory bowel disease and to predict relapse after treatment, it is frequently normal in some patients with unequivocally active disease.
Our data support the results of other studies which have found the erythrocyte sedimentation rate to be of very limited value.
Powell-Tuck found no significant correlation between the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and sigmoidoscopic appearance in patients with ulcerative colitis and in Crohn's disease Cooke and Prior showed that serum C-reactive protein and albumin but not the erythrocyte sedimentation rate correlated with disease activity.
The scan score correlated well with C-reactive protein and alpha-1 acid glycoprotein.
Both are considered by some as the most reliable markers of disease activity in Crohn's disease.
Although haemoglobin concentration and serum albumin may be affected by factors other than active gut inflammation such as malnutrition and bleeding, hypoalbuminaemia, and anaemia are frequent features of active Crohn's disease.
The scan score correlated with both albumin and haemoglobin.
It is of interest that the correlation between the scan score and albumin is highest in patients with small bowel involvement.
One of the main applications of the scan score is in difficult cases when accurate estimation of disease activity will have important therapeutic implications.
Laboratory tests are frequently normal in patients with unequivocally active disease and vice versa .
Symptoms may therefore be erroneously attributed to other non-inflammatory conditions.
The scan score is particularly useful in these circumstances for its sensitivity approach 100%.
Conversely, patients with quiescent disease who continue to have persistently abnormal blood tests have a high recurrence rate.
The scan score showed that this is probably caused by the presence of subclinical active gut inflammation for all of these patients had raised scan score.
A further important value of the scan score is in serial studies in individuals particularly in the context of therapeutic trials.
We have recently shown that in patients with Crohn's disease treated with elemental diet remission can be defined more objectively by the use of the scan.
In summary, the computer based analysis of bowel images obtained from patients with Crohn's disease meets most of the criteria for an ideal marker of disease activity.
Tc-99m HMPAO is widely available, delivers a relatively small radiation dose, has a short half life and because of its emission characteristics produces pictures of superior quality to those obtained with Indium-111.
The calculation of the scan score from these images provides a reliable and objective indicator of disease activity.
This indicator can reliably differentiate between active and quiescent disease and is particularly useful in difficult cases when symptoms may not reflect active disease or when severe symptoms are not backed by abnormal laboratory tests.
The scan score correlates well with widely used clinical and laboratory markers of disease activity.
Of these, correlations with the serum albumin, and alpha-1 acid glycoprotein particularly in small bowel disease, and the C-reactive protein, particularly in the large bowel disease, were the most significant.
The complete lack of correlation with the erythrocyte sedimentation rate reinforces the finding of other studies showing that this laboratory test may not be as useful as once thought in the assessment of Crohn's disease activity, whereas the value of raised platelet count was confirmed, particularly in colonic disease.
The method is particularly valuable as an objective measurement to assess the response to therapy.
Natural history of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis: a study of 20 cases
Abstract
A case control study of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis indicates that it has no overall influence on prognosis, but is responsible for a striking reversal of the usual inverse correlation of age and survival in HIV infection.
Pain, the principal symptom, was controlled in surviving patients with analgesics alone.
Twenty consecutive patients with AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis, defined from at least two characteristic lesions at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, were followed for a minimum of 10 months or until death.
Median age was 33.5 years (range 27–50).
All had abdominal pain; 11 had diarrhoea.
Alkaline phosphatase was >normal in 13, but the bilirubin was raised in only three.
The median CD4 was 0.02410/l (0.005–0.341).
Thirteen had cryptosporidiosis, six had active cytomegalovirus, five had no gastrointestinal pathogen.
Three patients are alive without AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis symptoms at 10, 11, and 21 months.
Seventeen have died at median 7 (1–23) months.
Cytomegalovirus therapy had no apparent influence.
The initial CD4 was <in all those dying within six months, but correlation of CD4 with prognosis was otherwise poor.
Controls, matched for age, CD4, and opportunistic infections had virtually identical overall outcome (median survival 7.5 months) and the expected worse prognosis with increasing age.
Increasing age, however, appeared protective in AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis (r=0.6; p): this is not explained by disproportionate degrees of immunosuppression, nor by opportunistic infections.
Investigation of HIV infected patients with abdominal pain has led to the recognition of a condition now widely termed AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis.
Typically patients have right upper quadrant or epigastric pain and obstructive liver function tests.
Ultrasound scanning may show thickening of the bile ducts and less often provides evidence of bile duct stricturing and/or dilatation.
Diagnosis is made from features on direct cholangiography indistinguishable from those of primary sclerosing cholangitis, but there is no link with inflammatory bowel disease.
In some cases AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis and cryptosporidial or cytomeglaovirus enteritis coexist, but whether this is a causal relationship remains unresolved.
The natural history of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis has not been clearly documented, and it is not known whether its presence has an independent influence on the prognosis of the affected patient.
Twenty consecutive patients with AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis have therefore been studied to address these questions.
Methods
PATIENTS
All patients presenting to the Westminster AIDS Unit with abdominal pain severe enough to require admission and with a life expectancy considered to be of three months or more are investigated in accordance with a previously described protocol.
This usually implies upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, ultrasound examination, and investigation for enteric pathogens.
Unexplained pain, abnormal liver function tests or biliary abnormality at ultrasound lead to endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, and thereby a potential diagnosis of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis.
The present report concerns consecutive patients with a firm diagnosis of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis made between March 1987 and May 1991: all were investigated prospectively to the agreed standard protocol.
Diagnosis of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis for the purpose of this study required HIV seropositivity by two separate methods, and changes on direct cholangiography that were compatible with diagnostic criteria for primary sclerosing cholangitis.
Thus all patients had at least two biliary lesions (strictures/irregularities) shown at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.
Patients with gall stones or established inflammatory bowel disease were excluded.
All patients were investigated for bowel pathogens at the time of diagnosis of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis.
At least three stools were cultured for faecal pathogens and mycobacteria; concentrated specimens were examined by direct microscopy for ova, cysts, and parasites, and smears were stained by a modified Ziehl Neelsen method with concentration for cryptosporidium.
Each patient had a sigmoidoscopy with rectal biopsy; specimens were fixed in buffered formol saline, and standard paraffin sections were examined after staining with haematoxylin and eosin, and Ziehl Neelsen staining.
Liver biopsy was performed if the prothrombin time and general state of the patient allowed.
When cytomegalovirus was suspected, the diagnosis was confirmed immunohistochemically.
Ampullary biopsies were taken at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and similarly processed.
The fundi were examined (after mydriatics) by an experienced ophthalmoscopist for evidence of cytomegalovirus retinitis.
All patients had standard haematological and biochemical tests, and an upper abdominal ultrasound scan.
CASE CONTROL STUDY
For each patient with AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis a control was selected from the contemporaneous unit data base.
The following criteria were required for selection as a control: AIDS diagnosis during the same calendar year as the case (similar duration of HIV positivity in non-AIDS cases); age within one year of case; CD4 count within 10% of case; evidence for cytomegalovirus and cryptosporidial enteritis matched to case; normal liver function tests; absence of upper abdominal pain.
Results
CLINICAL AND LABORATORY PARAMETERS AT DIAGNOSIS
Nineteen patients were homosecual/bisexual men and one was a male heterosexual whose route of infection is unknown.
The median age was 33.5 years (range 27–50), and the patients had been HIV seropositive for a median of 22 months (range 2–72) before diagnosis of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis.
Eighteen of the patients had a previous AIDS defining diagnosis.
All patients had abdominal pain and 11 had diarrhoea.
Nineteen of the patients had been treated with zidovudine, and 17 were on the drug at the time of diagnosis; two patients were taking dideoxyinosine.
Other medication included prophylaxis for pneumocystis pneumonia in 17, acyclovir for recurrent herpes infections in 11, and triazole antifungals for candida in 14.
One patient was on maintenance foscarnet for cytomegalovirus retinitis.
General examination revealed evidence of substantial weight loss (>ideal weight) in 18, and four had cutaneous Kaposi's sarcoma.
None had clinical or microbiological evidence of bacterial sepsis.
Five patients had smooth firm hepatomegaly; none had palpable splenomegaly.
Liver biopsy, performed in 10 patients, showed changes compatible with sclerosing cholangitis in non-AIDS patients in five cases.
Standard liver function tests revealed serum alkaline phosphatase concentrations at least twice the upper limit of normal in 13 subjects, but a raised serum bilirubin in only three.
Liver function tests were normal in four.
The median CD4 lymphocyte count was 0.024×10/l (range 0.005–0.341)(normal >).
A potential infective cause for the condition was found in 15.
Cryptosporidiosis was found in 13 (on ampullary biopsy in two, intestinal biopsy in five, and in the stools in 12).
Cytomegalovirus infection was found contemporaneously at some site in the body in six individuals (ampullary biopsy in three, intestinal biopsy in five, and in the retina of one patient).
Four patients had both infections.
Cytology of smears obtained after insertion of a cytology brush into the biliary tree produced necrotic material only in five patients and cryptosporidial organisms were not isolated from bile samples of eight patients.
Upper abdominal ultrasound was abnormal in 10; the most common abnormality was of dilatation of the common bile duct (eight) but pathological biliary thickening was noted in three of these and in an additional two without duct dilatation.
All patients had many lesions on endoscopic retrograde cholangiography, which were confined to the intrahepatic system (above the confluence of the main right and left hepatic ducts) in two, limited to the extrahepatic ducts in three, and were more widespread in the remaining 15 (Fig 1).
Two patients had apparently cystic lesions affecting the bile ducts (Fig 2).
The pancreatic duct was markedly dilated in three patients and in four individuals the duct exhibited minor changes similar to those seen in the elderly unaffected by HIV.
IMMEDIATE MANAGEMENT
All six patients with active cytomegalovirus infection were treated with infusions of foscarnet.
In one, experimental therapy with interleukin II was attempted without success.
In one patient in whom there appeared to be delay in biliary drainage at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (>minutes), an endoscopic sphincterotomy was performed.
No attempt at specific therapy was made in the remaining 12 patients.
Analgesics were given in increasing doses and ascending potency until pain was controlled.
Opiates (usually morphine) were required at least temporarily in all.
Diarrhoea was treated symptomatically, usually coincidentally by morphine given primarily for pain.
PROGRESS AND PROGNOSIS
Seventeen patients have died, at a median of seven months from the time of diagnosis of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis (range 1–23 months).
Three patients are alive and free of pain at 10, 11, and 21 months after (Fig 3).
In four patients abdominal pain, controlled by analgesics, persisted until death at 2, 2, 8, and 12 months from the time of diagnosis.
In one patient symptoms became much less marked after one month but persisted to death at three months.
The patient in whom sphincterotomy was performed had a reduced analgesic requirement for three months but subsequently relapsed; pain control remained a problem to death at 19 months, with progression of the cholangiographic abnormalities shown at 15 months (Fig 4).
In the remaining 14 patients, symptoms resolved (apparently spontaneously) after a median of four weeks (range 2–26 weeks): 11 of these have died from apparently unrelated causes without relapse of symptoms attributable to AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis.
The median time to symptom control in those with cytomegalovirus infection (and therefore treated with foscarnet) was four weeks, which does not differ from the median time to control on those without cytomegalovirus infection treated with analgesics alone.
One of the patients with uncontrolled pain had active cytomegalovirus.
The median survival of 7.5 months (range 2–13) for patients with cytomegalovirus and AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis is identical to that for the whole AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis group.
Neither the presence of cryptosporidiosis nor the absence of enteric pathogens had a significant effect on prognosis.
In 13 cases liver function tests improved or remained static from the time of diagnosis, and have remained normal in two of those still alive who had normal values at diagnosis.
In seven patients (including one with initially normal results), however, alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin have risen since diagnosis; six of these are dead.
Initial alkaline phosphatase concentration showed a weak inverse correlation with survival (r=-0.3) which did not reach statistical significance; a rising titre after diagnosis may predict a poorer prognosis but numbers are small.
Increasing age was significantly protective in AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis (r=0.64)(Fig 5).
Median survival in patients below the median age for the present group was only 3.5 months as compared with 11 months in those above the median age (p; 2-tailed Mann-Whitney).
CD4 count at AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis diagnosis did not correlate with survival (r=0.1)(Fig 6).
Although all those dying within six months of diagnosis had an initial CD4 of less than 0.11×10/l, three patients with CD4 counts below 0.05 have survived for 17 months or more.
CASE CONTROL STUDY
Despite the stringent criteria it was possible to identify a matched control for each case.
Survival of the controls was to a median of 7.5 months (range 1 to >)(Fig 3) which corresponds remarkably closely to that in cases (7.5; 1–23).
The controls showed a weak negative correlation between age and survival (Fig 5), and a strong positive correlation between CD4 count and survival (r=0.60; p)(Fig 6).
The overall incidence of opportunistic enteritis within the unit during the period of recruitment of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis patients included 82 cases of chronic cryptosporidiosis, 49 cases of cytomegalovirus colitis (in isolation), and 18 cases of cytomegalovirus enteritis at other or multiple sites.
During the study period, five additional patients had endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography for putative AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis; in two cases there were intraductal stones, and in the remainder no definite abnormality was identified.
To date no patient with right upper quadrant pain and a raised alkaline phosphatase but a non-diagnostic endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography has progressed to AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis despite an increasing readiness to repeat cholangiograms in this situation.
During the study period six patients with pain and ultrasound scans strongly suggestive of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis were not assessed by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; each had a Karnofsky score of less than 40 and had entered the terminal phase of AIDS (multiple unresponsive opportunistic infections, very low CD4 counts, profound weight loss), and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was either contraindicated on respiratory grounds or inappropriate ethically.
Discussion
It appears that AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis had had no major overall influence on the outcome of HIV infection in the present series, but there are a number of possible confounding issues.
The most important source of bias is in the selection of patients, and there is little doubt that some mid/early cases have been excluded by the symptom led investigatory protocol and by the requirement for unequivocal features at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.
On the other hand patients presenting with very advanced disease were not included through compassionate avoidance of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.
That AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis is the cause of pain in affected patients is supported by earlier work in HIV-infected patients (which included 10 of the patients described here) where a diagnosis of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis was only made after the exclusion of other causes of pain, but the possibility that pain arises in the pancreas is raised by the discovery of coexistent abnormal pancreatograms.
A primarily pancreatic origin is, however, unlikely given the absence of typical pancreatic pain, or pancreatic malabsorption, the presence of a normal pancreatogram in the majority of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis patients and a lack of pancreatic abnormalities on ultrasound or computed tomography scan.
Moreover there were no clinical or prognostic differences between those with and those without abnormal pancreatic radiology.
It seems likely that the abnormalities in both biliary and pancreatic ducts are different manifestations of the AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis syndrome.
Apparently cystic abnormalities within the biliary ducts of several of the present patients do not appear to have been recognised in other contexts: it is suggested that these too are a constituent of the radiology of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis.
Unlike Payne et al , we have found a high frequency of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis in AIDS patients with substantially raised serum alkaline phosphatase.
This may well reflect differences in case definition and the limitations inherent in their retrospective study, in which endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was not a routine investigation.
Nevertheless there are, in both units, large cohorts of patients with HIV infection with mildly abnormal liver function tests who have not been subjected to endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.
Whether these individuals have AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis is unknown.
It is recognised that primary sclerosing cholangitis may exist (on histological criteria) in the absence of cholangiographic abnormalities, and it is possible that early AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis may likewise be present with a normal cholangiogram.
Although patients with pain and obstructive liver function tests are now subjected to liver biopsy after negative endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, a consistent histological pattern is yet to be recognised.
AETIOLOGY
The threshold for performing endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography on patients with cryptosporidial infection is low given the suggestion that many (or even all) patients with cryptosporidiosis have biliary involvement.
It appears that about two-thirds of well documented cases of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis in the United Kingdom will prove infected, and that at least a sixth of patients with cryptosporidiosis will have AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis if subjected to endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography.
Our policy on endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography may have led us to over estimate the association, but without performing endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography on unselected patients with HIV infection (with and without cryptosporidiosis), precise figures cannot be given.
Cytomegalovirus was associated with AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis in only two of the present patients in whom cryptosporidiosis was not also implicated and in less than a third overall; these represent less than 10% of all cases of cytomegalovirus enteritis seen during the study period.
The early impression that the virus was of prime aetiological significance in AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis is not supported by the present prevalence; the absence of a better outlook in AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis patients (with cytomegalovirus) treated with foscarnet compared with untreated patients in consistent with the conclusion that it is unlikely to be important.
A quarter of the present patients had no identifiable gastrointestinal infection/infestation; it is possible that new organisms or occult infection are implicated, and, although unlikely given the absence of CD4 receptors on healthy biliary epithelium, HIV may itself damage the biliary tree.
An autoimmune aetiology for AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis akin to that of primary sclerosing cholangitis is also possible.
Although autoimmune phenomena in HIV disease seem inherently unlikely, there is increasing evidence that these occur and may be important in pathogenesis.
As inflammatory bowel disease occurs with approximately equal frequency in the HIV seropositive and control populations, it must be assumed that primary sclerosing cholangitis may also, and a clear distinction between AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis would not then be possible; this has not yet been a diagnostic problem.
Although a small proportion of patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis develop colitis only after the biliary presentation — follow up of AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis patients (particularly those with pathogen negative diarrhoea) has not yet yielded any patients with non-infective colitis.
PROGRESS AND PROGNOSIS
In primary sclerosing cholangitis standard liver function tests may improve after diagnosis — a result of diagnosis tending to be at times of maximal abnormality in a fluctuating course and likely therefore to be followed by a period of partial remission.
A similar phenomenon has been observed in some patients with AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis, but a halting progression with worsening of the biliary disease is not often seen, and there are no reports of hepatic fibrosis deteriorating to cirrhosis and liver failure.
Such progression may of course merely be preempted by the worse prognosis of HIV disease itself.
The present data indicate that a suggested prognostic scoring system for primary sclerosing cholangitis based on the presence or absence of hepatomegaly and splenomegaly, the serum alkaline phosphatase, the patient's age, and the histological stage is not valid in AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis.
Presently available therapeutic interventions appear without value in AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis.
When the urgently needed effective treatment for cryptosporidiosis emerges it will be important to assess its effect in AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis, not least because indirect information on the pathogenesis of the condition should result.
Although occasional patients with evidence of biliary outflow obstruction due to ampullary stenosis have been described, we saw only one patient in this study with delayed biliary drainage.
Although anecdotally, sphincterotomy has been suggested to improve pain, it is difficult currently to justify such an approach outside the context of controlled trials, particularly as spontaneous resolution of pain occurred in a number of our patients.
In contrast with patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis, and to HIV-infected patients in general, increasing age was protective in AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis; this paradoxical effect is unexplained but has wide confidence limits and a type I error (of small numbers) cannot be absolutely excluded.
The effects of differential immunosuppression and of coexistent serious opportunistic infections have probably been important given the poor protection effected by youth in our matched controls, but the significant reversal of even this minor association should probably not be ignored.
This is especially relevant since the presence of cytomegalovirus and/or cryptosporidiosis had little prognostic significance, and CD4 levels correlated poorly with prognosis.
It may not be coincidental that two of the long survivors with very low CD4 counts were also the oldest patients in the study, and it remains possible that the genetic background or immune changes responsible for AIDS related sclerosing cholangitis are, with increasing age, more likely to indicate a good prognosis independently of the CD4 count.
Duodenal ulcer: a model of impaired mucosal defence
Abstract
There is a new model of chronic duodenal ulcer in which the ulcer is generated by irradiating the lower mediastinum of mice with a single dose of 18 Gy 250 kV x rays.
Single ulcers develop in the proximal duodenum of about half the animals.
Previous studies have shown a remarkable morphological and behavioural similarity to duodenal ulcer in man.
Ulceration occurs because of an imbalance between agressive and defensive forces within the duodenum and an attempt has been made to elucidate the pathomechanism of this ulder by determining acid and pepsin secretion.
The basal and pentagastrin stimulated secretion of acid, pepsin, and histamine were measured and no changes in acid or pepsin secretion were shown to occur (risk of type II error <).
It is therefore concluded that this chronic ulcer is a model of imapred duodenal defence.
Duodenal ulcer is still a common disease and despite recent advances in the understanding of its mechanisms mortality from this disorder is increasing, especially in those over 65 years.
The main, unsolved clinical problem is chronic duodenal ulcer.
Understanding of the basic pathomechanisms in duodenal ulcer has been hampered by the absence of an experimental model that is truly chronic rather than an acute ulcer in which healing is delayed.
There is a new animal model that seems promisingly similar to chronic duodenal ulcer in man (Fig 1).
Ulcers were found by chance during an experiment on ulcerative oesophagitis after thoracic irradiation in the mouse.
Ulcers are induced by irradiation of the lower mediastinum.
A single dose of 18 Gy of 250 kV x rays induces an ulcer tendency that leads to the development of ulcers in the proximal duodenum in around 45% of animals by day 9.
Both acute inflammation and healing take place simultaneously for three months or more without further treatment and ulcers may cause bleeding, perforation, or pyloric or duodenal stenosis with time.
No other model of chronic ulcer shows such morphological and behavioural similarity to the human duodenal ulcer.
The ulcer arises as an abscopal effect of irradiation; the duodenum does not receive a significant dose of x rays.
The effect is target specific because irradiation of the upper mediastinum (the adjacent portal) never leads to ulceration.
Above a threshold dose (14 Gy) the incidence of ulcer rises rapidly to a maximum of 45% at nine days with no increase in frequency with doses above 18 Gy.
There is evidence that the ulcer is mediated by an indirect mechanism rather than being the result of direct irradiation of the duodenum.
Firstly, studies of scattered radiation show that a maximum of 2 Gy is absorbed in the duyodenal area — a dose insufficient to cause radiation ulcer.
Secondly, the induction time for the ulcer is too short to be compatible with a direct radiation ulcer and the anatomical consistency and histological appearances are not those of acute radiation sickness.
Thirdly, the irradiation target is specific in that exposure of the adjacent portal (the upper mediastinum) with the same dose of x rays and volume of tissue never causes an ulcer.
Fourthly, the dose-response relationship is not a direct one because one would expect that with increasing dose, a 100% yield of ulcer could be achieved, and this is not the case.
Fifthly, deliberate addition irradiation of the stomach and duodenum with the doses that might be received by scatter lowers the incidence of duodenal lesions.
Specific effects which occur at a site remote from the target of partial body irradiation are defined as ‘abscopal’.
Because the duodenal ulcer is generated in mice as an abscopal effect of irradiation we call it the ‘abscopal ulcer.’
In this paper the abscopal ulcer is studied as a model of duodenal ulcer in man, but this method of inducing duodenal lesions is also of considerable radiobiological interest.
Duodenal ulcer arises because aggressive forces outweigh duodenal defences and most attempts to study and treat it focus on acid-pepsin attack.
We have therefore studied gastric secretion in this model to test whether ulcer formation is associated with an increased acid-pepsin attack.
We have measured basal and pentagastrin stimulated gastric secretion of acid and pepsin and mucosal pepsin levels, and have studied the control of secretion by quantifying luminal and mural histamine levels as well as changes in the activity of histidine decarboxylase to estimate histamine formation capacity (HFC).
Methods
IRRADIATION
The source was a verically downward beam of 250 kV x rays obtained from a Marconi constant potential x ray generator.
The measured half value layer of the beam was 1.3 mm copper.
The apparatus in which the animals were irradiated was designed to accommodate six animals arranged radially about the central axis of the x ray beam with their heads toward the centre.
A minimum of 7 mm lead shielding was used over the central area and over the body of each animal.
The central shielding was made in two overlapping sections to allow adequate ventilation and to obtain sharp field definition.
Changes in the size and shape of the field were effected by 3.5 mm lead inserts.
Any possible variation of dose delivered from position to position was eliminated by rotating the entire assembly at six revolutions per minute.
Scattered radiation was reduced to a minimum by raising the platform 30 cm above the supporting table top.
SECRETION STUDIES
Animals were female CFLP mice aged 20–35 weeks, weighing 25–40 g, and obtained from InterFauna UK.
Irradiation was administered under barbiturate anaesthesia with a single intraperitoneal (ip) dose of 72 mg kg -1 pentobarbitone sodium (Sagatal, May &Baker).
Spontaneous recovery occurred within one hour, during which time the animals were kept warm by infrared heat from a lamp before being returned to the standard conditions of the animal house.
Three groups of animals were studied.
Control mice (C) were anaesthetised and placed in the irradiation jig but were completely shielded.
Animals undergoing upper mediastinal irradiation (U) received a single dose of 18 Gy 250 kV delivered at 1.68 Gy per minute.
The field was 10 mm wide and 12 mm long and included the thoracic vertebra T4 caudally.
Mice receiving lower mediastinal irradiation (L) were given the same dose of radiation to the same sized but adjacent field (T5-T10).
Since U never leads to ulceration this group of mice was used as irradiated controls.
Effects seen in the L mice, the ulcer group, could, therefore, be differentiated from any non-specific effects of thoracic irradiation.
Measurements of gastric secretion were performed on fasted animals (food and bedding removed overnight) but the mice were allowed tap water freely.
Anaesthesia for all procedures except initial irradiation (when barbiturate was used) was the ‘CRC cocktail’ which is a mixture of: midazolam (5 mg/ml, Hypnovel, Roche), Hypnorm (fentanyl citrate 0.315 mg/ml and Luanisone base 10 mg/ml, Janssen), and sterile water in a ratio of 1:1:2. the initial dose was 0.01 mg/g ip followed by a subcutaneous (sc) dose of 0.01 ml/g divided between two sites, with further aliquots of 0.005 ml/g sc as required.
Anaesthetised mice were placed supine on cork boards and steadied by elastic bands around the four limbs.
The temperature of the animals was monitored using a rectal thermometer with a digital read out (Comark).
Warmth was maintained by radiant heat from lamps.
A transverse epigastric incision was made through skin and muscles sparing the pigastric arteries.
The stomach was then gently delivered onto the abdominal wall.
The pylorus and oesophago-gastric junction were each ligated in continuity with 4/0 Dexon (Davis and Geck).
The oesophagus was ligated flush with the wall to spare the vagi.
The aglandular forestomach was opened to allow gentle removal of the resting contents with forceps and moistened cotton wool before insertion of the cannulae.
Polythene tubes (Sterilin; internal diameter 0.75 mm (input) and 2 mm (output)) were inserted; the output catheter had a tip with multiple perforations to allow sump collection of fluid.
The stomach was then returned to the abdominal cavity and the wound covered with a moistened cotton wool pad.
The inlet cannula was attached to a peristaltic pump (P3, Pharmacia) and isotonic, isothermic saline was perfused through the stomach at a rate of 0.4 ml/minute.
Effluent was then delivered into polythene scintillation counter vials (Sterilin) on an ice bath (Fig 2).
The vials were changed every 10 minutes so that fractions of 4 ml were collected for each time interval.
An initial period of washing and equilibration of 30 minutes was allowed.
Saline, 0.1 ml, was njected via the tail vein, to act as a control for the subsequent pentagastrin, and a one hour basal collection was then made.
Pentagastrin (Peptavlon, ICI), 62.5 µg kg -1 in 0.1 ml saline was then injected.
This dose gave a submaximal secretory response for both acid and pepsin in a preliminary dose-response study covering 6.7–500 µg kg -1 .
The collection continued for a further 90 minutes.
At the end of the secretion study each animal was killed by cervical dislocation and the stomach was immediately removed en block for tissue assays.
Results were expressed as basal acid output (BAO), defined as the mean of the last two recordings during the basal collection, and peak acid output (PAO) defined as the highest mean obtainable from two consecutive recordings during the stimulated period.
The measurements of luminal pepsin, histamine, and potassium were analysed in the same manner.
ASSAYS
Perfusate
The volume of each of the perfusate samples collected over the course of the experiment was measured, to confirm complete collection without leakage from the circuit, and was then divided for assay of acid, pepsin, and histamine by the following methods:
(i)
Acid in 0.1 ml aliquots: titration to pH 7 with 1 mM sodium hydroxide by an automatic titrimeter (Radiometer, Copenhagen);
(ii)
Pepsin in 0.1 ml aliquots: spectrophotometry using haemoglobin as substrate;
(iii)
Histamine in 2.5 ml of perfusate: fluorometry after extraction via a short Dowex ion exchange resin column;
(iv)
Potassium: flame photometry (Corning 405).
Tissue
After removal of the stomach, a 50–100 mg full thickness strip from the oxyntic region was immediately homogenised in 3.5 ml of 0.01 M hydrochloric acid and centrifuged at 2000 g for 15 minutes before removal of the supernatant for the following measurements:
(i)
Histamine in 1 ml of supernatant: pipetted in duplicate into tubes containing 0.4 ml 2 M perchloric acid for assay as for perfusate;
(ii)
Histidine decarboxylase (histamine formation capacity — HFC) in 1 ml of supernatant;
(iii)
Pepsin: as for perfusate.
SECRETION AFTER IRRADIATION
Studies of secretion were carried out three days after irradiation (during the induction period) and seven days after irradiation (at the time that the ulcers appeared) to see whether the lesion was induced or maintained by hypersecretion of acid or pepsin caused by lower mediastinal irradiation.
For the initial experiment, at day 7, 70 mice were randomly allocated to one of three groups.
Allocation was weighted so that there were 30 controls in order to form a solid baseline and 20 mice each irradiated to the upper or lower mediastinum.
For the second series, at day 3, 45 mice were randomly allocated with even weighting so that there were 15 in each group.
The size of the experimental groups was calculated to yield a power of 90% to detect a change of biological importance (40%), allowing for some experimental failures and given the SD of data calculated from preliminary studies.
STATISTICS
Data in this study are continuous.
Data were examined initially using the Francia and Shapria W' test of normality.
Although not normally distributed on initial testing, the data were rendered normal by logarithmic transformation.
All statistical comparisons have therefore been made on logarithmically transformed data.
Bartlett's test was performed to confirm equality of variances and data sets were then compared using one way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Where the two control groups (C and U) were sufficiently similar to appear to be drawn from one parent population, these data were pooled and compared with the test group (L) using ANOVA with contrast.
Means and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the mean are used for descriptive statistics and graphs.
Results
SECRETION AFTER IRRADIATION
Technical failures due to anaesthetic deaths, death due to haemorrhage during operation, or leakage from the stomach meant that a number of animals did not yield usable data.
Results from 27 controls (C), 17 irradiated controls (U), and 19 ulcer group (L) mice were available for analysis from the first (day 7) series and 15 C, 14 U, and 15 L animals from the second (day 3) series.
ACID
Acid secretion showed a satisfactory response to pentagastrin in each group with a two to threefold rise over basal values.
There was no important difference in either basal or stimulated secretion of acid between any of the three test groups (C, U, L) at either of the time point (day 3 or day 7)(Fig 3).
POTASSIUM
Potassium secretion was unchanged by treatment (C, U, or L), although day 7 concentrations were lower than those of day 3 for both basal and stimulated rates (Fig 4).
PEPSIN
Pepsin secretion doubled after pentagastrin stimulation.
No important differences were seen between the test groups at either time point (Fig 5).
Secretion in both the basal and stimulated states was less at day 7 than at day 3, an inverse trend to that seen for acid secretion, where basal but not stimulated levels were higher at day 7 (Fig 3).
Tissue pepsin values were also unchanged by treatment (Fig 6).
HISTAMINE
Histamine secretion responded to pentagastrin stimulation in every case.
Both basal and stimulated output of histamine were significantly higher in the L group on day 7 compared with the U and C group (p=0.03 ANOVA with contrast).
No changes between groups were seen at day 3, although levels decreased by about sixfold in all groups between days 3 and 7 (Fig 7).
Gastric tissue concentrations of histamine and activity of its precursor enzyme histidine decarboxylase (a measure of the histamine forming capacity (HFC) of the mucosa) were unaffected by treatment at day 3.
At day 7, however, histamine concentrations tended to be less in the L group than in the C and U groups but this was statistically insignificant (Fig 8).
POWER CALCULATIONS FOR ACID AND PEPSIN
Acid and pepsin secretion were unaffected by treatment to induce duodenal ulcer.
Histamine secretion alone differed significantly among the groups.
Because this seems to be largely a ‘negative’ result, in the sense that differences in the secretion of acid and pepsin were not discovered, the confidence that a type II error (a false negative) has not been made was estimated.
Power calculations (the power of a study of a given size to detect a particular difference) were applied prospectively to quantify the size of study required to detect a change of 40% with a power of 90% (vide supra).
With the results available, by using the actual difference in observed means, the probability that a change of given size might have been overlooked in the study can then be calculated according to the following formula:
The p value is then taken from standard tables of ‘t’ using the appropriate number of degrees of freedom.
The difference between mean rates of secretion of acid and pepsin in control subjects and patients with duodenal ulcer is about 190%.
Using the equation above, the probability that a difference of this order has been missed in this series of experiments is less than 1% for both acid and pepsin.
These studies therefore show that the ulcer formation is not due to hypersecretion of acid or pepsin.
Discussion
The abscopal ulcer is an ideal model of acute to chronic duodenal ulcer both morphologically and in terms of its natural history of chronicity and occasional complication.
Yet we have confidently shown that the ulcer is not caused by hypersecretion of acid or pepsin.
There was a tendency for the mucosal pepsin values to be higher at day 7 than at day 3, which, although not statistically significant in this study, was also seen in a smaller, preliminary study in which a significant change was shown.
The tissue pepsin value changed inversely compared with secreted pepsin, which suggests that pepsin is released from stores more readily, both in the resting and stimulated state, at day 3 than at day 7; although this tendency was seen in all groups.
Histamine secretion was decreased about sixfold in all groups at day 7 compared with day 3.
The reason for this is not clear but it may relate to the more recent stress associated with handling and anaesthesia for irradiation.
Histamine secretion was significantly higher in the ulcer group at day 7 compared with the other groups.
The concomitant decrease in tissue histamine suggests increased sensitvity to pentagastrn stimulation similar to that seen for pepsin responses at day 3.
Increased histamine secretion was not, however, associated with increased acid or pepsin output at day 7.
Histamine has effects other than the stimulation of acid and pepsin secretion, such as marked vasoactivity.
The changes in histamine secretion may be important in that they change mucosal blood flow and thus alter mucosal defence.
An incidental byproduct of these studies has been the establishment of a reliable way of measuring several variables of gastric secretion in both the basal and stimulated states in the intact mouse.
The mouse has the advantage over the rat in having a 10 fold smaller body volume — thus less substance is needed for each set of measurements.
This may be useful when test compounds are being developed and their production in large amounts is difficult and expensive.
The abscopal duodenal ulcer is not mediated by gastric hypersecretion of acid or pepsin.
This might, at first sight, seem to reduce the validity of the model for the study of duodenal ulcer in man.
However, although the acid secretory rates in the human duodenal ulcer population are nearly double those in non-ulcer subjects, less than half of patients with duodenal ulcer have acid secretion above the upper limit of normal.
Furthermore, there is a wide band of acid secretory rates where an individual may or may not bear an ulcer.
Acid hypersecretion is not, therefore, the sole factor in ulcer development; mucosal changes must also occur.
Although these studies do not reveal the mechanism by which the ulcer is induced, some logical proposals can be made.
Since the ulcer occurs as a remote effect of irradiation, it follows that it must be mediated by humoral or neural means.
Either possibility is open at the moment but a humoral mechanism seems unlikely in view of the lack of a suitable potential targt within the irradiated volume.
A neural mechanism seems, by contrast, to be feasible.
The spinal cord within the irradiated volume contains the cell bodies of the sympathetic nerves supplying the upper intestine and although nerves are relatively radioresistant, their cell bodies are less so.
The cell bodies of the sympathetic nerves to the upper gastrointestinal tract which are located within the irradiated volume thus represent a credible target since they might reasonably be expected to influence the duodenum in such a way that would lead to a susceptibility to ulcer by, for example, reducing mucosal blood flow or bicarbonate secretion, both of which functions are under sympathetic control.
Stress and smoking both increase sympathetic drive and both are associated with duodenal ulcer, so that changes in sympathetic activity are probably important in the pathogenesis of this disorder.
Irradiation seems to be able to mediate these effects in humans since irradiation for testicular seminoma or teratoma, which includes the spine, leads to duodenal ulcer more frequently than does treatment for the same condition without irradiation.
What is the relevance of this ulcer model?
Are not the problems of duodenal ulceration, for practical purposes, solved?
The modern therapeutic armamentarium includes H 2 antagonists, mucosal protective agents, bismuth salts, and anti- Helicobacter pylon chemotherapy, as well as omeprazole which allows complete blockade of acid secretion under which condition all peptic ulcers will heal.
Yet, despite all this, duodenal ulcer is still a common disease and the associated mortality is increasing, especially in thos over 65 years.
Relapse is usual after therapy has ceased and may occur despite treatment.
A better understanding of duodenal ulcer might confer the avility to predict risk, to identify resistant ulcers before months or years of ineffective therapy have made them apparent, and to develop new means of treatment.
New research into the underlying duodenal mucosal defect is required and since the basic science of duodenal ulcer cannot easily be studied in man, an animal model of chronic duodenal ulcer is required.
There are many models of duodenal ulcer — do we need a new one?
Ulcers induced by a deliberate state of hypersecretion, such as the histamine in beeswax model, cannot be expected to reveal any new insights into alternative mechanisms.
Cysteamine has been used to induce ulcer and, although an alternative to other models, the cysteamine ulcer could not accurately represent human chronic duodenal ulcer.
This is because its chronicity can be achieved only by delivering a massive insult or repeated dosing so that it takes a long time for the acute ulcer to heal and often leads to the death of the animal in the acute phase.
Spontaneous gastric ulcers occur in genetically mast cell depleted mice and duodenal ulcer can occur spontaneously in autoimmune mice, but the physiological situation is not normal in either case and nor are these suitable comparisons with human ulcers.
Models of mucosal damage in which a noxious agent such as ethanol is employed are simply not relevant to chronic duodenal ulcer.
What is needed is an ulcer model which is a single, truly chronic, proximal duodenal ulcer.
Ideally, such an ulcer would arise in an idiosyncratic way after the induction of an ulcer diathesis, and would behave similarly to human chronic duodenal ulcer, sometimes proceeding to the typical complications of bleeding, perforation, and stenosis and responding to treatment in a way analogous to man.
The abscopal model seems to have the potential to fulfil these criteria, although evidence that it mimics the spontaneous healing and recurrence of human duodenal ulcer is so far lacking.
Previous studies have shown that the abscopal lesion is a proper model of duodenal ulcer in that acute inflammation and healing attempt take place simultaneously — this is true chronic inflammation.
The complications of bleeding, perforation, and stenosis may occur.
The results of the present studies show that no hypersecreton of either acid or pepsin occurs and we conclude, therefore, that the model is mediated by a diminution of mucosal defence.
Further studies will attempt to elucidate the mechanism of this mucosal defect which may help us to understand better the underlying pathogenesis of human duodenal ulcer and to improve treatment.
Increased activity of ionised calcium in gall bladder bile in gall stone disease
Abstract
The activity of ionized calcium (Ca 2 + ) in gall bladder bile determined with an ion-selective electrode was significantly higher in patients with gall stone disease (n=15) than in patients without gall stones (n=10)(0.43 mmol/kg v 0.31 mmol/kg; p).
No change in the Ca 2 + activity in any of the gall bladder bile samples was observed during equilibration with CO 2 .
During titration with HCl/NaOH, however, the Ca 2 + activity fell with increasing pH in a biphasic manner, with the breaking point occurring at a significantly lower median pH in patients with gall stones than in patients without (pH7.1 v 8.2; p).
The combination of a higher activity of calcium in bile and precipitation of bile salts taking place at a lower pH in patients with gall stone disease than in patients without gall stones suggests a major role for calcium and pH in the pathogenesis of gall stones.
Strict anaerobic sampling is not necessary for the measurements of cCa 2 + in gall bladder bile, because the cCa 2 + was not significantly affected by the changes in pCO 2 .
The metabolic studies suggest, however, that simultaneous measurements of the activity of Ca 2 + and pH is important in order to interpret data for the calcium activity in gall bladder bile.
In the Western world cholesterol is the predominant component of stones in the gall bladder.
Cholesterol gall bladder stones may be initiated by precipitation of calcium salts to form a nidus, with subsequent laying down of cholesterol from its supersaturated state on this nidus.
Bile salts are important buffers for calcium ion, which may act to reduce free calcium ions (Ca 2 + ) in the bile thereby reducing calcium lithogenicity.
Although several studies have focused on bile calcium, specifically the Ca 2 + as a major factor involved in gall stone formation, conflicting results have been achieved on the level of Ca 2 + in bile.
Studies in artificial solution of bile salts or in animal bile report increased concentration of Ca 2 + in gall stone formation.
In man both increased and decreased concentrations of ionized calcium in bile have been reported.
All studies convert the measured activity to a concentration, although such a conversion may be inaccurate because of the unknown activity coefficient (variation in ionic strength and effects of bile salts anions).
Gall bladder bile collection is traditionally collected anaerobically, although the effect of aerobic/anaerobic — that is, CO 2 loss from the bile sample, sampling techniques on the activity of Ca 2 + is unknown.
We present results for the actual activity of Ca 2 + and pH in human gall bladder bile from patients with gall stone disease and in patients without gall stones (controls).
We also investigated the relationship between the activity of Ca 2 + and pH in vitro by equilibration with two different CO 2 tensions and by titration with HCl/ NaOH.
Methods
PATIENTS
Fifteen patients, 12 women and three men (age range 31–57 years) with gall bladder stones were included.
Patients with previous cholecystitis diagnosed by scintigraphic examination of the gall bladder were excluded.
Ten patients, six women and four men (age range 29–67 years) without gall bladder stones, who underwent cholecystectomy and liver resection comprised the control group.
Liver resection was performed for hepatic metastases (eight), cystic echinococcus (one), and hepatic haemangioma (one).
All patients had normal serum concentrations of liver enzymes and bilirubin and were included consecutively in the study.
Informed written consent was obtained before the study.
The study was approved by the local ethical committee.
In patients with gall bladder stones gall bladder bile was aspirated after ligation of ductus cysticus during elective cholecystectomy.
In controls the liver was examined before resection by ultrasound in order to assess whether liver resection was possible or there were multiple hepatic metastasis.
In 10 patients who were found suitable for biliary/hepatic surgery the ductus cysticus was then ligated and gall bladder bile was aspirated.
The latter procedure was in agreement with the recommendations from the local ethical committee.
BIOCHEMICAL ANALYSIS
Biochemical analysis and titration studies were done withoutknowledge of the diagnosis.
Whole bile samples were collected anaerobically and into sterile tubes.
Measurements of Ca 2 + and pH were carried out immediately after the collection.
The Ca 2 + in bile was measured in duplicate at 37°C with an ICA 1 analyser (Radiometer, Copenhagen, Denmark), which provides simultaneous measurements for the activity of Ca 2 + and pH.
The primary calibration solution had a molality of Ca 2 + =1.25 mmol/kg; mCa 2 + ; ionic strength, I=160.0 mmol/kg; molal activity coefficient 0.304; activity molality=mCa 2 + (1.25 mmol/l) ×molal activity coefficient (0.304) =0.380 mmol/kg.
The relative standard deviation within series (CVs) and between series (CVd) were 0.9% and 1.2% (n=22), respectively.
IN VITRO Ca 2 + EQUILIBRATION
The relationship between pH and the activity of Ca 2 + was studies by equilibrating bile in duplicate for 11 patients with gall stones and nine controls at two different CO 2 tensions (5.3 kPa and 10.6 kPa).
CO 2 tension was changed by the use of the BMS2 Mk2 Blood Micro System analyser (Radiometer, Copenhagen, Denmark).
TITRATION STUDIES
Titration studies in gall gladder bile were undertaken with HCl and NaOH in the same patients as studied by CO 2 equilibration.
We used 2 ml of each gall bladder bile sample for titration studies.
The titration curve was established by stepwise addition of approximately 5 µl 1 molar HCl, or NAOH.
Each titration curve comprised approximately 25 measurements of the activity of Ca 2 + and pH.
Bile sodium (Na + ), potassium (K + ) were measured potentiometric by a multichannel analyser (Technicon SMAC analyser, Tarrytown, USA), which also was used for measurements of albumin and bilirubin concentrations.
Chloride Cl -) was measured by coulometric titration (CMT10, Radiometer, Copenhagen).
LIQUID JUNCTION POTENTIAL (E j )
The liquid junction potential of the junction sodium formate (4.6 mol/kg) and ‘test solution’ was calculated using the Henderson equation to be -2.1 mV for the calibration solution and in gall bladder bile (Table)(containing 150, 7.0, 60, 30 mmol/kg) for Na + , K + , Cl -, HCO 3 -) to be -3.4 mV.
The limiting molar conductance for cholic acid conjugated with either glycine or taurine is theoretically negligible considering the molar conductance of the other electrolytes.
These results indicate that the residual liquid junction potential (E j ) =E j (gall bladder bile) -E j (calibr) is -1.3 mV corresponding to a bias on the measured Ca 2 + activity of -9.5%.
The presented data for the activity of ionised calcium have not been corrected.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The difference between median values were examined by Mann-Whitney test.
Linear regression analysis was used to evaluate the relationship between the activity of Ca 2 + and pH.
The relationship between the activity of Ca 2 + and pH during titration studies included approximately 25 measurements of Ca 2 + and pH in each bile sample.
The best fit between these measurements for each patient was calculated by non-linear regression analysis.
The breaking points were defined without knowledge of the diagnosis.
The statistical analysis were performed by Statistical Analysis System computer package 4.10 (SAS Institute Inc).
A p value less than 0.05 was chosen as statistically significant.
Results
As shown in Table the activity of Ca 2 + was significantly increased and pH significantly lower in gall stone patients compared to controls (p), whereas no significant differences were observed as regard other electrolytes, albumin, or bilirubin.
IN VITRO STUDIES
TITRATION WITH HCl AND NaOH
When the relationship between the Ca 2 + activity and pH was studied by titrating each collected gall bladder bile with HCl and NaOH (Fig 2), a highly significant negative relationship was found between the activity of Ca 2 + and pH (r=-0.98; p).
In bile form patients with gall bladder stones all curves showed a significant ‘breaking point’ at pH 7.1, where the slope of the curve changed from -0.09 to -0.21 (median values).
In controls the slope changed from -0.07 to -0.27 at pH 8.2.
The breaking point was located at a significantly lower pH in patients with gall stones than in controls (pH 7.1 v pH 8.2)(p).
Discussion
The actual activity of Ca 2 + in gall bladder bile in patients with gall stone disease was significantly higher combined with a significantly lower pH than in the controls.
It is observed that pH in the samples from patients without gall stones was higher than what is normally reported in human gall bladder bile.
Whether this may be because of some sort of ‘contamination’ of gall bladder bile with common duct bile (pH in the range of 7.5 to 8.05) during liver examination can not be discounted.
Theoretically this influence could have been eliminated by including controls (patients) who were not scheduled for biliary/ hepatic surgery.
We did not find it feasible, however, because of potential ethical problems, to collect bile from such a patient group.
We have, therefore, chosen a control group, which comprised patients with normal liver function tests and in whom the gall bladder was removed during liver resection.
Furthermore, the levels of other biliary electrolytes did not differ among patients with gall stones and controls suggesting that contamination had not occurred.
We observed an inverse relationship between Ca 2 + and pH whether the change in Ca 2 + and pH was the result in variations in CO 2 tensions or to added HCl or NaOH.
Therefore some of the higher activity of Ca 2 + observed in gall bladder bile from patients with gall stone disease may be caused by the lower pH.
When we recalculated the activity of Ca 2 + at the same pH (pH 7.7) using the formula for changes in PCO 2 , however, the difference between the two groups was still apparent, indicating that the difference in pH may have only a minor influence on the observed difference in the Ca 2 + activity when the pH changes are caused by variations in pCO 2 (recalculating the actual activity in gall bladder bile from patients with gall stone disease and controls to a pH 7.7 gives an activity of 0.407 and 0.315 mmol/kg, respectively)(Fig 1).
Previous authors have attempted to convert the measured ionised calcium activity to the substance concentration of free calcium.
From a physicochemical point of view such a conversion seems inappropriate because the activities of the participating ions determine the solubility product for a given salt and hence the possibility for precipitation.
Furthermore, calculation of the substance concentration as the activity divided by the activity coefficient is rather inaccurate.
The activity coefficient of Ca 2 + may vary considerably depending upon the ionic strength in gall bladder bile according to the Debye-Hückel equation.
The activity coefficient in gall bladder bile may vary from 0.3 to 0.9 as estimated from measurements of the concentrations of sodium and potassium in pure bile salt solutions.
Because of these difficulties artificial bile solutions have been prepared to a total ionic strength of 0.295 mmol/l.
From these artificial bile solutions formation constants and solution products for different calcium complexes have been calculated.
If the previous data on substance concentration of free Ca 2 + in gall bladder bile are converted back to active molality we find values in the same range as our values.
The concentration of electrolytes in bile from patients with stones in the gall bladder did not differ significantly from controls.
From our data the interference of the major cations in bile on the calcium electrodes may be considered very small (selective coefficients for Na + , K + about 10 -1 , and for Mg 2 + 10 -).
We have previously shown that hydrogen interference is negligible in the pH interval 5.0 to 9.0.
The small negative slope after in vitro CO 2 equilibration of gall bladder bile () is much lower than that found in human serum of -0.23.
In serum the changes in Ca 2 + with the changes in pH are caused predominantly by the albumin concentration, which explains the lower slope of  pH in gall bladder bile (median albumin concentration 200 µmol/l compared with 650 µmol/l in human serum).
The theoretical calculated slope in gall bladder bile containing an albumin concentrations of 200 µmol/l gives a slope of -0.05 close to the observed value.
Therefore, anaerobic sampling which is a necessity in serum because of the possible CO 2 loss from the sample is not as crucial for the measurements of gall bladder bile because of the small effect on Ca 2 + activity with a CO 2 loss from the sample where pH changes only minimal.
The titration studies, with a pH change of 4 to 10 units, however, showed that it is essential to measure the activity of Ca 2 + and pH simultaneously because of the strong relationship between the Ca 2 + activity and the pH of gall bladder bile.
The increased activity of Ca 2 + and the location of the breaking point at a significantly lower pH in patients with gall stone disease than in controls (pH=7.1 v 8.2) may increase the risk for precipitation of bile salts and may, as suggested by Moore, be a principal factor in the initiation of gall stone formation.
In conclusion was find a higher activity of Ca 2 + in gall gladder bile in patients with gall stone disease than in controls.
Our results suggest that the activity of Ca 2 + can pH may be important factors in the nucleation and ultimately the growth of gall stones.
For the measurements of Ca 2 + in gall bladder bile strictly anaerobic sampling is not crucial, as the activity of Ca 2 + was not significantly affected by the small changes in pH caused by different pCO 2 tensions.
The close relationship between the Ca 2 + activity and pH as a result of metabolic changes, however, may indicate the need to measure both parameters simultaneously in order to interpret data for the Ca 2 + activity in gall bladder bile.
Diagnostic value of serum pepsinogen C in patients with raised serum concentrations of pepsinogen A
Abstract
Hypopepsinogenaemia A is often found in patients with gastric atrophy and gastric surgery.
In these conditions serum pepsinogen C provides additional diagnostic information, especially when expressed as pepsinogen A:C ratio.
Hyperpepsinogenaemia A has been shown in patients with duodenal ulcer disease, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, hypertrophic gastropathy, chronic renal failure, and during omeprazole treatment.
As patients with hyperpepsinogenaemia A often overlap in symptoms, endoscopical findings, and serum gastrin values, this study has evaluated whether measurement of serum pepsinogen C in subjects with hyperpepsinogenaemia A can help in differentiating clinical conditions.
Serum concentrations of pepsinogen A and C were measured in serologically Helicobacter pylori negative blood transfusion donors (127) as reference population, and in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (24), duodenal ulcer (50), hypertrophic gastropathy (5), and chronic renal failure (50), and also in reflux oesophagitis patients on longterm omeprazole treatment (28).
A low pepsinogen A:C ratio was found in all patients with hypertrophic gastropathy.
A pepsinogen A:C ratio above the critical value of 4.7 was found in 14 (70.0%) of Zollinger-Ellison patients, two (9.5%) of the duodenal ulcer patients, 11 (25.6%) of the patients with chronic renal failure, and in one (7.1%) of the patients receiving longterm omeprazole treatment.
In fact, all but three hyperpepsinogenaemia A patients with a pepsinogen A:C ratio greater than 4.7 and normal renal function had the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
In patients with hyperpepsinogenaemia A, a low pepsinogen A:C ratio may point to hypertrophic gastropathy, while a pepsinogen A:C ratio greater than 4.7 is suggestive for the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
Serum pepsinogen A and C values, formerly called pepsinogen I and II, respectively, have been determined in various gastric disorders.
Hypopepsinogenaemia A has been found to be associated with gastric atrophy and gastrectomy.
In these conditions serum pepsinogen C provided additional diagnostic information, especially when expressed as pepsinogen A:C ratio.
Hyperpepsinogenaemia A has often been seen in duodenal ulcer, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, hypertrophic gastraophy, and chronic renal failure.
High values of serum pepsinogen A have also been found during omeprazole treatment.
As it is unknown whether measurement of serum pepsinogen C can help in the differentiation of patients with hyperpepsinogenaemia A, serum concentrations of both pepsinogens were determined in patient groups known to have an increased incidence of hyperpepsinogenaemia A.
Methods
SUBJECTS
Blood transfusion donors, serologically negative for Helicobacter pylori ,(87 men, 40 women, mean (SD) age: 35 (10) years) were used as the reference population.
Furthermore, 24 patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (15 men, nine women; age: 50 (10) years) were investigated.
Twenty of them had an abnormal high increase (>ng/l) of serum gastrin after provocation with 1 CU/kg secretin GIH.
Twelve of these 20 patients suffered from the MEN I syndrome.
Metastases were detected in 13 of 24 patients, including those with a negative secretin test.
Five patients with endoscopically and histologically proved hypertrophic gastropathy (three men, two women; age: 52 (13) years), 50 patients with an endoscopically proved duodenal ulcer (43 men, seven women; age: 52 (14 years), 50 patients with chronic renal failure on regular haemodialysis treatment (31 men, 19 women; age: 52 (16) years), and 28 patients with reflux oesophagitis treated with omeprazole for three months (13 men, 15 women; age: 62 (14) years) were investigated.
None of these patients had had previous gastric surgery.
MEASUREMENTS
Serum pepsinogen A and pepsinogen C were measured by sensitive and specific radioimmunoassays as described previously.
In brief, antibodies to pepsinogen A and pepsinogen C were raised in goats against pepsinogen A and pepsinogen C purified from human gastric resection specimens and were used in final dilutions of 1:300000 and 1:200000, respectively.
The antibody to pepsinogen A showed no cross reactivity with pepsinogen C, whereas the antibody to pepsinogen C did not cross react with pepsinogen A. Purified human pepsinogen A and pepsinogen C were coupled to 1 2 5 I by the chloramine T method and used as label in the assays.
Purified human pepsinogen A and pepsinogen C were also used as standard preparations.
Serum samples were diluted 10-fold for pepsinogen A and fivefold for pepsinogen C and incubated with labelled pepsinogen and antibody in a final volume of 1 ml for four days at 4°C.
Free pepsinogen was subsequently separated from antibody bound pepsinogen by a double antibody solid phase technique and the pellets were counted in a gammascintillation counter.
Intra-assay variations vary from three to 10 per cent for pepsinogen A and 13 to 15 per cent for pepsinogen C. The detection limit for the pepsinogen A radioimmunoassay was 0.12 µg/l and for the pepsinogen C radioimmunoassay 1.8 µg/l.
Dilution curves of a serum sample containing high concentrations of pepsinogens were parallel to the standard curve.
The squared limits of the 95% confidence intervals for the mean of the square root transformed values of the blood transfusion donors and resulted in the upper and lower normal value for serum pepsinogen A and C. For the pepsinogen A:C ratio these limits and the mean have been calculated with values transformed by the decadic logarithm.
STATISTICS
Values of serum pepsinogens are given as means and standard deviations (SD).
Analysis of variance and the Newman-Keuls procedure were applied to measure the statistical significance of means from different diagnostic categories.
To discriminate patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome from other subjects, the mean of both respective group means was chosen as the critical value of the pepsinogen A:C ratio.
The χ 2 with Yates's correction was applied to test the significance of differences between frequencies.
Results
The upper limit of normal for pepsinogen A was 95 µg/l, for pepsinogen C 24 µg/l, and for the pepsinogen A:C ratio 14.1.
The lower limit for normal of pepsinogen A was 19 µg/l, of pepsinogen C 2 µg/l, and of the pepsinogen A:C ratio 2.1.
Two of 127 (1.6%) blood transfusion donors had hypopepsinogenaemia A (<µg/) and normal pepsinogen C values, resulting in abnormal low pepsinogen A:C ratios.
Both were deficient for vitamin B 1 2 .
One of these had also hypergastrinaemia.
Four of 127 (3.1%) blood transfusion donors, all five patients with hypertrophic gastropathy, 20 of 24 (83.3%) patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 21 of 50 (42%) of patients with duodenal ulcer, 43 of??(86%) of patients with chronic renal failure, and 14 of 28 (50%) of patients with reflux oesophagitis on longterm omeprazole treatment had a raised serum pepsinogen A concentration above 95 µg/l.
Figure 1 shows the individual values of serum pepsinogen C and normal range (2–24 µg/l) in subjects with normal and raised serum pepsinogen A concentrations.
High values of serum pepsinogen C were frequently found in all groups of patients with hyperpepsinogenaemia A. In the group of subjects with raised concentrations of serum pepsinogen A, four blood transfusion donors had a mean (SD) serum pepsinogen C concentration of 34 (20) µg/l, 20 patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome of 73 (81) µg/l, 21 duodenal ulcer patients of 65 (34) µg/l, 43 patients with chronic renal failure of 69 (42) µg/l, and 14 patients with reflux oesophagitis on longterm omeprazole treatment of 66 (39) µg/l.
The mean of serum pepsinogen C values in five hypertrophic gastropathy patients with hyperpepsinogenaemia A was 296 (131) µg/l.
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) of serum pepsinogen C values followed by the Newman-Keuls procedure showed that the mean value of hypertrophic gastropathy differed significantly from the other diagnostic groups.
In patients with hyperpepsinogenaemia A raised serum pepsinogen C values (>µg/l) were found in two (50%) of blood transfusion donors, in all patients with hypertrophic gastropathy, in 17 (85%) of patients with Zollinger-Ellison, 19 (90.5%) with duodenal ulcer patients, 41 (95.3%) with chronic renal failure, and 13 (92.9%) on longterm omeprazole treatment.
In subjects with hyperpepsinogenaemia A, four blood transfusion donors had a mean (SD) pepsinogen A:C ratio of 3.9 (1.9), five patients with hypertrophic gastropathy of 1.2 (0.3), 20 patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome of 5.9 (2.4), 21 duodenal ulcer patients of 2.6 (1.3), 43 patients with chronic renal failure of 4.2 (2.1), and in 21 patients with reflux oesophagitis on longterm omeprazole treatment of 2.9 (1.5)(see Fig 2).
ANOVA of the pepsinogen A:C ratio followed by the Newman-Keuls procedure showed that the mean value of hypertrophic gastropathy differed significantly from those of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and chronic renal failure.
The mean value of Zollinger-Ellison patients differed significantly from those of all other patient groups.
Low pepsinogen A:C ratios occurred in all patients with hypertrophic gastropathy, in eight (38.1%) with duodenal ulcer patients, in one (2.3%) patient with chronic renal failure, and in five (35.7%) patients on longterm omeprazole treatment.
Only one of the subjects with hyperpepsinogenaemia A had a pepsinogen A:C ratio above the upper value of normal of 14.1.
To discriminate patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome from other subjects with hyperpepsinogenaemia A by the pepsinogen A:C ratio, the critical value is 4.7.
This value is the mean of the group mean of Zollinger-Ellison patients (5.9) and the group mean of the other subjects together (3.5).
Patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome had a significantly higher frequency (70%) of pepsinogen A:C ratios above 4.7 than all other groups of patients with hyperpepsinogenaemia A. Duodenal ulcer patients, chronic renal failure patients, and patients after three months omeprazole treatment had a frequency of A:C ratios greater than 4.7 of, respectively, 9.5, 25.6, and 7.1%.
Discussion
This study shows that in patients with hyperpepsinogenaemia A measurement of serum pepsinogen C concentrations may provide additional diagnostic information.
Among the various groups studied, the differentiation between patients with hypertrophic gastropathy, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, and those receiving omeprazole treatment for reflux oesophagitis is sometimes hard to make, because all these three groups often have, in addition to a high serum pepsinogen A value, dyspeptic complaints and hypergastrinaemia.
Furthermore, the presence of large gastric folds and gastric protein loss is a feature of both hypertrophic gastropathy and the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
The differentiation between these conditions is especially difficult if Zollinger-Ellison patients have a negative secretin provocation test and no obvious tumours shown by computed tomography.
The differentiation between hypertrophic gastropathy and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome can readily be made by the serum pepsinogen A:C ratio, as all five patients with hypertrophic gastropathy had a low, and all Zollinger-Ellison patients a normal ratio.
The number of patients with hypertrophic gastropathy is small, however, and it is unknown whether the ratio is also helpful in the differentiation from other conditions with large gastric folds, such as linitis plastica and lymphosarcoma.
The differentiation between patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and those with omeprazole treatment for reflux oesophagitis cannot be made on the basis of the pepsinogen A:C ratio, although a low ratio may suggest treatment with omeprazole and a pepsinogen A:C ratio greater than 4.7 Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
The differentiation between Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and duodenal ulcer is impossible by measurement of pepsinogen C, while a low pepsinogen A:C ratio is found in about 40% of the duodenal ulcer patients and in none of the Zollinger-Ellison patients.
A pepsinogen A:C ratio greater than 4.7 is found in 70% of the Zollinger-Ellison patients, but only twice in duodenal ulcer patients.
Obviously, this differentiation can readily be made by measurement of serum gastrin.
The results in patients with chronic renal failure are interesting, but clinically irrelevant.
In the control group of blood transfusion donors we have excluded the patients with serological evidence of H pylori infection, because of its association with chronic active gastritis.
As we did not perform endoscopy in this control group, we cannot rule out the inclusion of a few patients with gastritis.
In particular, the low pepsinogen A concentration and pepsinogen A:C ratio in two of the patients, may point to atrophic gastritis, which is supported by an increased gastrin concentration in one of them.
The mechanism for the abnormal pepsinogen values in the various patient groups is not fully elicidated.
The low pepsinogen A:C ratio in patients with hypertrophic gastropathy is mainly caused by the extremely high concentrations of serum pepsinogen C in these patients.
Whether this low pepsinogen A:C ratio is caused by hyperplasia of the mucous neck cells in the gastric body or inflammation of the antrum remains to be established.
Patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and raised concentrations of serum pepsinogen A are often found to have high serum pepsinogen C values.
The reason for the high serum pepsinogen C concentrations in this group is probably related to the trophic effect of gastrin on the oxyntic mucosa.
In fact, hyperplasia of the oxyntic mucosa has been reported in the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
The high pepsinogen C concentrations in patients with duodenal ulcer are probably related to H pylori related chronic active gastritis.
The cause of the high pepsinogen C concentrations in patients on omeprazole treatment is unknown, but it may be due to a direct effect of omeprazole on the gastric mucosa to omeprazole induced hypergastrinaemia or bacterial overgrowth of the stomach because of acid inhibition.
The high pepsinogen C concentrations in chronic renal failure are obviously due to impaired renal function.
In summary, measurement of serum pepsinogen C in hyperpepsinogenaemia A subjects yields additional diagnostic information for the diagnosis of hypertrophic gastropathy and the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome; a low pepsinogen A:C ratio may point to hypertrophic gastropathy and a pepsinogen A:C ratio greater than 4.7 suggests Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
Genetic predisposition to alcoholic liver disease
Most people who abuse alcohol will develop hepatic steatosis but only a few alcoholics develop more serious forms of liver disease — hepatitis, fibrosis, and cirrhosis.
Despite extensive research, the mechanisms underlying between-individual variation in susceptibility to alcohol induced liver damage remain elusive.
There is some evidence to support a dose-response relationship between the total amount of alcohol consumed and the risk of developing cirrhosis but within drinking categories there is considerable variability in the presence and severity of liver damage.
Recent prospective studies have been unable to confirm a linear relationship between alcohol intake and the development of cirrhosis, and even for steatosis, the severity has been found to be unrelated to the amount, duration, or type of alcohol consumed.
Perhaps most important is the observation that up to a third of confirmed alcoholics have completely normal liver histology.
Clearly, therefore, factors other than the cumulative amount of alcohol consumed are involved in determining which patients develop liver disease.
These factors are likely to include both other exogenous (environmental) and endogenous (genetic) influences.
Environmental factors that have received most attention include nutritional status and past or present hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection.
The specific contribution of malnutrition to the pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease has been extensively reviewed and remains highly controversial.
There is no doubt that some patients with alcoholic liver disease have evidence of malnutrition, but it is not a universal finding.
Furthermore, fibrosis and cirrhosis have been produced in the baboon model of alcoholic liver disease in animals fed diets purportedly high in nutritional value, although this has been disputed.
The extent to which variation in nutritional status contributes to tissue injury remains unclear but it seems to offer only part of the explanation.
With regard to HBV, markers of past or current infection have been found more commonly in patients with alcoholic liver disease than in the general population in some studies but not others.
In view of these discrepant results it seems unlikely that coexisting HBV infection plays a significant role in the aetiopathogenesis of alcohol related liver damage, at least in areas of low HBV prevalence such as Britain.
With regard to endogenous factors, there is no doubt that gender differences play a role, with women more susceptible to alcohol induced liver injury than men.
This is probably the result of both the lower volume of distribution and the lower first-pass gastric metabolism of alcohol in women compared with men.
Clearly, however, gender differences do not explain differences in susceptibility to the hepatic effects of alcohol among members of the same sex.
Evidence for a genetic predisposition to alcoholic liver disease
The absence of any clear cut environmental influences on the variable hepatic response to alcohol has recently diverted attention towards a search for genetic factors that might offer an explanation.
Evidence supporting a genetic component to predisposition comes mainly from a large study of 15924 male twin pairs.
The concordance rate for alcoholic cirrhosis was 14.6% in monoxygotic twins and 5.4% in dizygotic twins.
Importantly, the difference in concordance rates could not be accounted for by the different concordance rates for alcoholism alone.
This remarkable study has provided the stimulus for a number of investigations employing the ‘candidate gene’ strategy, to search for genes involved in a predisposition to alcohol induced liver injury.
In this approach, a gene (or nearby DNA sequence) suspected of involvement in predisposition to disease, is used specifically as a probe in an association or linkage study.
However, a number of problems confront investigators applying this technique to studies of alcoholic liver disease.
There is convincing evidence that a predisposition to alcoholism itself has a significant genetic component and therefore to examine the role of any genetic factors in predisposition to end-organ damage distinct from predisposition to alcoholism, any study should ideally include two groups of alcoholics, well matched for alcohol intake, with and without end-organ damage.
In the case of alcoholic liver disease, this may be logistically impossible, since even if biopsy specimens could be obtained from alcoholics with normal liver blood tests to ensure the absence of occult disease, there is not way of predicing whether these patients will develop disease at a later date.
In addition, since it is probable that alcohol produces liver damage by a number of different mechanisms, any explanation for a genetic predisposition to cirrhosis is likely to involve several genes, rather than variation at a single locus.
Potential investigators must therefore also cope with problems inherent in investigating a ‘polygenic disease’.
An appreciation of these difficulties is important when interpreting the results of studies which have examined factors potentially involved in genetic susceptibility to alcoholic liver disease.
GENES ENCODING ENZYMES INVOLVED IN ETHANOL METABOLISM
It seems likely that at least some of the pathological effects of alcohol are related to its tissue concentration or the concentration of its metabolites, in particular acetaldehyde.
The vast majority of alcohol metabolism occurs in the liver.
At least three hepatic enzyme systems are capable of catalysing the oxidation of alcohol to acetaldehyde (see Figure), although under normal conditions only alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) is important.
Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) is the only enzyme that catalyses the oxidation of acetaldehyde to acetate.
The resent identification, therefore, of polymoprhisms at the gene loci encoding alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde deydrogenase, had lead to speculation concerning their potential role in predisposition to alcoholic liver disease.
ADH subunits are encoded at five different gene loci on chromosome 4 and polymorphisms have been observed in two: ADH2 (producing three different Β subunits) and ADH3 (producing two different γ subunits).
The variant homodimeric and heterodimeric isoenzymes arising from these subunits exhibit widely different kinetic propoerties with correspondingly different rates of alcohol oxidation in vitro.
Human ALDHs are encoded at four independant loci on four different chromosomes.
ALDH2 on chromosome 12 encodes the major mitochondrial enzymes, which has a low Km for acetaldehyde and is responsible for the majority of acetaldehyde oxidation.
The ALDH2 gene exists in at least two allelic forms, ALDH2*1 and ALDH2*2.
Isoenzymes present in individuals homozygous for the ALDH2*2 allele have little or no catalytic activity, while those present in heterozygotes have measurable, although reduced, activity compared with the isoenzymes present in ALDH2*1 homozygotes.
Investigation of the role of these polymorphisms in a predisposition to alcoholic cirrhosis has, until recently, been hampered by the need to use liver biopsy specimens to determine the isoenzyme phenotype.
However, advances in molecular biology have overcome this problem, allowing direct genotyping of ADH and ALDH loci using allele specific oligonucleotides to probe amplified leukocyte DNA.
It has been known for some time that the inactive form of ALDH2 is present in about 50% of Japanese and Chinese and is associated with high acetaldehyde concentrations, an exaggerated flush response to alcohol, and seems to protect against alcoholism.
It is now evident that possession of the most active forms of ADH2 and ADH3 (ADH2*2 and ADH3*1) is also ‘protective’ against alcoholism, presumably because of faster rates of acetaldehyde accomulation and lower alcohol tolerance.
Perhaps not surprisingly, in view of its negative association with alcoholism, patients with alcoholic liver disease have a much lower incidence of the deficient ADLH2*2 allele compared with controls, with no ALDH2*2 homozygotes and only occasional heterozygotes in the disease populations studied.
However, the most recent of these studies has also shown that habitual drinkers who are heterozygotes for the normal and mutant ALDH2 genes develop alcoholic liver disease at lower levels of alcohol intake than alcoholics who are homozygotes for the normal gene.
This is consistent with the recent finding of an increased frequency of the more active ADH3 allele, ADH3*1, in patients with fibrotic alcoholic liver disease compared with locally matched healthy controls.
Together, these studies suggest that although individuals with the less active form of ALDH and more active forms of ADH are less likely to become alcoholic, they have a greater risk of developing alcoholic liver disease if they do drink than people with the normal form of ALDH and less active forms of ADH.
These results strongly implicate acetaldehyde as one of the important pathogenetic factors in the development of alcoholic liver disease.
The role of genes encoding other alcohol metabolising enzymes in a genetic predisposition to alcoholic liver damage has yet to be explored.
The gastric oxidation of alcohol has been implicated in the enhanced vulnerability of women to complications of alcoholism.
The gastric mucosa was originally thought to contain only the ADH3 and ADH5 encoded isoenzymes (γ-ADH) and χ 2 -ADH respectively), but recently a ‘new’ alcohol dehydrogenase isoenzyme type (designated s-ADH) has been identified in the stomach of both rats and humans.
The human enzyme has now been purified and characterised and its properties suggest that, at the high ethanol concentrations in the stomach after drinking, s-ADH is probably the ADH form with the largest contribution to gastric alcohol metabolism.
Identification of the gene encoding s-ADH and the eventual search for polymorphisms are awaited with interest.
Also of potential importance concerning genetically determined individual variation in alcohol metabolism, is the gene encoding the ethanol inducible form of cytochrome P-450, P450IIE1; this enzyme probably plays an important role in alcohol metabolism in chronic alcoholics following enzyme induction.
The gene has been cloned and sequenced, and a restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) has been described, no studies on these genetic variants in alcoholic liver disease have yet been reported.
Recently, a non-oxidative pathway of alcohol metabolism that leads to the production of fatty acid ethyl esters (FAEEs) has been described, catalysed FAEE synthase.
This pathway was originally thought to be important only in those tissues lacking ADH, such as the heart, but a recent study has shown in vivo formation of FAEEs in the liver and pancreas during ethanol exposure.
In view of the suggestion that FAEEs may have a pathophysiological role via their effect on lipid metabolism and their incorporation into cell membranes, the gene encoding FAEE synthase, when it is identified, would seem to be another ‘candidate gene’ worthy of study in relation to alcoholic liver disease.
GENES INVOLVED IN FIBROGENESIS
Since the final common pathway in the pathogenesis of cirrhosis must be either excess production or deficient degradation of collagen by the liver, genes involved in these mechanisms are an obvious second group of potential candidates for consideration as a basis for predisposition to alcoholic fibrosis.
Type I collagen is the predominant collagen in cirrhotic livers, and RFLPs have been observed at both of the loci encoding its two different constituent polypeptide chains; COL1A1 on chromosome 17, encoding the α1(1) chain and COL1A2 on chromosome 7, encoding the α2(1) chain.
The role of these polymorphisms in a predisposition to alcoholic liver disease has now been examined in two studies.
The earliest study reported a significant association of a particular RFLP haplotype of the COL1A2 locus and alcoholic cirrhosis.
This suggested that COL1A2 might be a susceptibility locus for alcoholic cirrhosis with one, or very few, predisposing mutations possible.
However, a more recent study, with larger numbers of patients and controls, drawn from an identical ‘genetic pool’ has not confirmed the initial report; not particular haplotype of either type I collagen gene was found to be associated with cirrhosis.
Polymorphisms of the genes encoding enzymes involved in the metabolism of collagen, such as the collagenases and their inhibitors, or genes controlling the transcription of collagen may ultimately prove to be more important than polymorphisms of the collagen genes themselves in determining individual susceptibility to the fibrotic effect of alcohol.
GENES ENCODING HISTOCOMPATIBILITY ANTIGENS
There is some evidence to support an immunological component in the pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease.
In view of this, numberous groups have investigated the role of the highly polymorphic HLA antigen system (which determines immune responsiveness) in susceptibility to alcohol related liver damage.
Several studies, in diverse populations, have reported isolated and conflicting significant associations of the class I HLA-A and B antigens with alcoholic liver disease including A1, A2, A9, A28, B5, B8, B13, B15, Bw35, and B40.
Other studies have failed to show any relationship between these histocompatibility antigens and susceptibility.
Several groups have also examined HLA class II antigen frequency in alcoholic liver disease and reported associations with DR2, DR3, and DRw9.
Many of these reports should be interpreted with caution in the light of several factors that can account for misleading results.
Only one investigation took into account the patient's alcohol history; interestingly this showed a shorter duration of intake in cirrhotic patients with HLA-B8/DR3 compated with those without this haplotype.
Many of these studies screened large numbers of HLA antigens in large population samples which, of course, can lead to the occurrence of significant associations by chance.
If the results are corrected for the number of alleles screened, the significance of the reported associations disappears.
A large number of alleles in the human major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6p21 have now been cloned, generating a considerable number of informative FRLPs.
In other ‘polygenic’ diseases, such as insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, the HLA system has now been extensively studied at the molecular level and alleles identified which determined both disease susceptibility and restance.
However, given the inconsistency of the tissue type associations with alcoholic liver disease, it is perhaps not surprising that no studies have yet been reported using molecular techniques to examine the role of HLA class I and II genes in susceptibility to alcohol related end-organ damage.
OTHER ‘CANDIDATE GENES'
Several distinct pathogenetic mechanisms are currently considered to play a role in the hepatotoxicity of alcohol, with investigators disagreeing as to their relative importance.
These include induction of a hypermetabolic state, alteration of cell membrane structure and function, lipid peroxidation, induction of cytochrome P-450 enzymes increasing the hepatotoxicity of environmental toxins, acetaldehyde toxicity, immunologically mediated mechanisms, and endotoxin mediated cytokine release.
Each of these mechanisms may involve proteins encoded by polymorphic genes which would therefore be potential ‘candidate genes’ explaining individual susceptibility to alcoholic liver injury.
Further genetic studies must awaut more precise information on the biochemical pathways underlying these different mechanisms.
Alpha-1 antitrypsin (α 1 AT) gene, whose structure and protein biochemistry have been extensively studied is worth of consideration as a potential ‘candidate gene’ in predisposition to alcoholic cirrhosis.
Alpha-1 antitrypsin is the major serum protease inhibitor, the glycoprotein is encoded by a single locus on chromosome 14 and is principally produced by hepatocytes.
Over 30 phenotypes of α 1 AT can be differentiated by isoelectric focusing.
Some phenotypes are associated with serum deficiency (PiZ, PiS, and PiM m a l t o n ) and intrahepatic α 1 AT inclusion granules (PiZ, PiM m a l t o n ).
Inividuals homozygous for PiZ are at increased risk of adult chronic liver disease: chronic active hepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma.
It is thus possible that the α 1 AT gene is a susceptibility locus for alcohol induced liver damager.
This hypothesis has been examined in several studies looking at the PiZ phenotype and periportal α 1 AT granules in patients and controls, and no evidence to support involvement of α 1 AT in genetic predisposition has been found.
However, more heterogeneity is seen at the gene level and it is now possible to examine that α 1 AT genotype using techniques including polymerase chain reaction and hybridisation to ASO probes.
A preliminary study using these molecular techniques has also failed to show a significant increased risk of alcoholic liver disease in individuals who are homozygous or heterozygous for both the PiZ and PiS mutant alleles.
Conclusions and perspectives
In summary, why only a few alcoholics develop significant liver disease remains largely a mystery.
Cumulative alcohol intake certainly plays a role and other environmental factors, in particular nutrition, may also be important.
There is now little doubt that women are more susceptible to the hepatic complications of alcohol excess than men.
Neither environmental influences or gender differences, however, offer the whole explanation and evidence from twin concordance studies suggests at least a contributory role for genetic factors in determining individual susceptibility to alcohol related liver disease.
This susceptibility is not caused by a single gene defect but is thought to result from the cumulative interaction of a number of genes.
Analysis of such a complex ‘polygenic’ disorder is not easy but ‘candidate genes’can be identified and recombinant DNA techniques used to investigate whether any particular genotype or haplotype is associated with increased risk of disease.
This approach is already suggesting that genetically determined variation in the oxidative metabolism of alcohol may play a role in individual susceptibility to alcohol related liver damage implicating acetaldehyde an an important factor in disease pathogenesis.
Thus, the molecular genetic approach has the potential to contribute to our understanding of the underlying biochemical mechanisms of alcoholic liver disease and may ultimately enable ‘high risk’ individuals to be identified in whom preventive measures such as counselling can be undertaken.
Different DNA changes in primary and recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma
Abstract
DNA restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis was carried out on a primary and recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma in a hepatitis B virus negative patient.
For the primary tumour, allele losses were found on the short arm of chromosome 17 (probe: p144-D6, 17p13) and the long arm of chromosome 5 with the probe Lambda MS8 (5q35-qter); other probes showed either no allele loss or a non-informative pattern.
The recurrent cancer also showed allele loss with p144-D6, but not with Lambda MS8.
In addition, the recurrent tumour had allele losses with Lambda MS43 (12q24.3-qter), pYNZ22 (17q13), and DNA rearrangement revealed by the probe Lambda MS32 (1q42–43), a pattern not seen in the primary lesion.
These results indicate that the second hepatocellular carcinoma was of independent clonality and probably represents a de novo neoplasm rather than a recurrence.
Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the most lethal malignancies in the world.
At present only surgical resection offers a change for cure.
Intrahepatic tumour recurrence rates, after liver resection, however, can be as high as 50–82%.
Information on the clonal origina of tumours is important for prevention of recurrence, as management strategies are formed based on the exact cause of this.
It has been shown that, genetically, recurrence in hepatocellular carcinoma can either be monoclonal, with recurrent tumours originating from the primary lesion, or polyclonal, where recurrent tumours represent de novo neoplasms.
Detecting the integrated hepatitis B virus DNA in hepatocellular carcinoma genome is an effective means of determining the clonal origin of hepatitis B virus related hepatocellular carcinoma.
This approach is not possible for hepatitis B virus negative hepatocellular carcinoma, however, which is more common than hepatitis B virus related hepatocellular carcinoma in the West.
Using DNA restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis, we report a case where a recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma showed a different clonality from the primary neoplasm.
Case report
A 74 year old man was noted to have a 10 cm mass in the left lobe of the liver on follow up ultrasonography for colorectal carcinoma.
This was confirmed on computed tomography and biopsy showed it to be a well differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma.
Laparotomy revelaed a large lesion involving segments II, III, and IV of the liver, and a left hepatectomy was performed.
Histology showed complete resection of tumour.
A follow up computed tomography scan, performed 15 months later, revealed a 6 cm nodule in segment VI of the liver, with no extra hepatic metastasis (Fig 1).
These findings were confirmed at laparotomy and local resection of segment VI was undertaken.
Histology showed this to be a recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma.
Serum neurotensin was normal throughout.
Hepatitis B virus status, determined by blood assay and Southern analysis of hepatic tissue DNA, using the hepatitis B virus genome probe Peco63, was negative.
At both operations, biopsies from the tumour and non-tumour liver tissue were collected and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.
Lymphocytes from peripheral blood, obtained before any blood transfusion, were also used as a source of constitutional (normal) DNA.
Tissue and blood were stored at -70:C until DNA extraction.
DNA was prepared from blood and tissue samples by standard phenol/chloroform methods.
Samples were digested with the appropriate restriction endonuclease and were size fractionated by electrophoresis through 0.9% agarose gels.
The DNA was transferred to Hybond-N hybridisation filters (Amersham) according to the manufacturer's specifications.
DNA probes recognising restriction fragment length polymorphisms were radiolabelled with alpha- 3 2 P-dCTP (3000 Ci/mol) by the random hexanucleotide primer method to a high specific activity.
Hybridisations were performed at 65:C in 1% sodium dodecyl sulphate, 1 M HaCl and 5% dextran sulphate (W:V) for 16–24 h.
Filters were washed to stringency of 2×standard saline citrate 1% sodium dodecyl sulphate (W:V) at 65°C and were autoradiographed at -70:C using Fuji: RX-L x-ray film.
DNA extracted from the tumours was compared with that from blood lymphocytes and normal liver.
The detection of chromosomal DNA loss is dependent on the constitutional DNA being heterozygous for restriction fragment length polymorphisms at the various loci for which probes were available.
Two bands are visible on the autoradiograph, representing different sized fragments of DNA.
A deletion of loss of intensity of one of these bands in tumour DNA is indicative of loss of heterozygosity, or allele loss, in tumourigenesis.
In some cases, rearrangement in tumour DNA can be shown with gain of one or more bands, compared with normal DNA.
In this study, 11 probes assigned to chromosomes 1, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12, 16, and 17 were used (Table I).
Of the 11 probes studied, three showed different patterns of loss of heterozygosity between the primary and recurrent hepatocellular carcinomas (Table I, Fig 2).
The primary tumour had allele loss on the long arm of chromosome 5 (probe: Lambda MS8, 5q35-qter) and the short arm of chromosome 17 shown by the probe p144-D6 (17p13) but not by the probe pYNZ22 (17p13), while the recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma had allele losses on chromosome 12 shown by Lambda 43 (12q24.3-qter) and chromosome 17 shown by both p144/D6 and pYNZ22, but no allele loss on chromosome 5 (Table I, Fig 2a-c).
This patient was shown as homozygous with the probe Lambda MS32, assigned on the long arm of chromosome 1 (1q43–43), for his normal and primary tumour DNA.
DNA from the recurrent tumour showed three bands, however, a gain of two, indicating a rearrangement (Fig 2d).
Thus it was clear that the clonality was different between primary and recurrent tumours.
Discussion
DNA restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis in this patient showed differences in DNA changes between primary and recurrent hepatocellular carcinomas.
The primary tumour had allele losses on chromosome 5 shown by Lambda MS8 and chromosome 17 shown by p144-D6, while the second tumour did not have allele loss on chromosome 5, but had additional allele losses on chromosomes 12 and 17 and rearrangement on chromosome 1.
One of the possible explanations for the differences could be that a small subclone was not present initially in the sample of the first tumour and eventually grew up to form the recurrence, but as there were so many genetic changes present in the recurrence which were not initially there and the Lambda MS8 did not show allele loss, a balance of probabilities seemed that the latter tumour was not a progression from the first.
More likely, both neoplasms were of different clonality.
Tumour recurrence can be the result of incomplete resection of the primary lesion, presence of satellite nodules at the time of primary resection, tumour seeding along needle biopsy track or genuine de novo tumour recurrence.
DNA analysis in this patient allowed us to exclude the possibility of tumour seeding along the needle biopsy track of the original tumour.
It also indicates that the first resection was indeed complete.
It is of interest that this patient developed three independent primary neoplasms, which may indicate genetic predisposition.
It is imperative to study the clonal origin of the recurrent tumours, as strategies for preventing recurrence are dependent on causation.
By detecting the integrated hepatitis B virus DNA in hepatocellular carcinoma genome, Chen et al reported five pairs of primary and recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma; two showing the same clonal origin, while the other three were of different clonalities.
For the first group, more careful diagnostic and treatment procedures, especially extent of surgical resection, are essential in preventing recurrence, while for the second group, one has to identify means of blocking the function of or deleting the effects of persisting carcinogenetic factors, such as hepatitis B virus infection.
Although the techniques for these are not available at present, recent continuing advances in the field of molecular biology and tumour suppressor gene research might lead to some benefit with gene therapy in the future.
Metronidazole reduces intestinal inflammation and blood loss in non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug induced enteropathy
Abstract
This study assessed the effect of metronidazole on the gastroduodenal mucosa, intestinal permeability, blood loss, and inflammation in patients on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Thirteen patients were studied before and after 2–12 weeks' treatment with metronidazole 800 mg/day, while maintaining an unchanged NSAID intake.
Intestinal inflammation, as assessed by the faecal excretion of indium-111 labelled neutrophils, and blood loss, assessed with chromium-51 labelled red cells, was significantly reduced after treatment (mean (SD)1 1 1 In excretion 4.7 (4.7) % v 1.5 (1.3) % (N), p,5 1 Cr red cells loss 2.6 (1.6) ml/day v 0.9 (0.5) ml/day (Nml/day), p).
Intestinal permeability assessed as the 5 four urinary excretion ratio of 5 1 CrEDTA/L-rhamnose did not change significantly (0.133 (0.046)v 0.154 (0.064), p) and there were no significant changes in the endoscopic or microscopic appearances of the gastroduodenal mucosa.
These results suggest that the neurtophil is the main damaging effector cell in NSAID induced enteropathy.
The main neutrophil chemoattractant in this enteropathy may be a metronidazole sensitive microbe.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are among the most successful group of drugs ever developed, with annual prescription rates in excess of 300000 per million subjects in the western world.
While this attests to their efficacy in reducing inflammation and pain, the treatment is not without side effects.
The gastroduodenal mucosa is undoubtedly the main site of life threatening complications of NSAID treatment, manifesting as massive haemorrhage or perforation, and indeed NSAIDs may be an important cause of seemingly unexplained sudden deaths in the elderly.
In the past few years it has become clear that the small intestine is also damaged by NSAIDs.
In fact long term treatment causes small intestinal inflammation in 70% of patients.
The clinical importance of NSAID enteropathy lies in the associated complications of blood loss, protein loss, and occasional strictures that may require surgery.
Although these complications are not usually life threatening, the consequent iron deficiency anaemia and hypoalbuminaemia (affecting 50% and 5–10% respectively of patients with rheumatoid arthritis) are major contributory factors to the morbidity of these patients.
The pathogenesis of NSAID enteropathy is unknown.
It is suggested that NSAIDs cause immediate cellular damage during drug absorption perhaps by uncoupling oxidative phosphorylation.
This may result in loss of the integrity of the intercellular junctions which is evident as increased intestinal permeability to paracellular probe markers within 12 hours of NSAID ingestion in man.
After six months of NSAID treatment inflammation is evident.
It is suggested that the permeability changes allow mucosal exposure of luminal toxins (bile acids, pancreatic juices etc) and this paves the way for a bacterial invasion of the mucosa and hence the neutrophil chemotaxis.
The participation of bacteria is further inferred from studies showing that pretreating animals with broad spectrum antibiotics before NSAID administration reduces the damage in the small intestine, and some studies show minimal damage in germ free animals.
During phagocytosis the neutrophils may cause tissue damage by oxygen free radical generation and lysosomal enzyme release and hence produce bleeding and protein loss.
The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of metronidazole on NSAID enteropathy in man.
Intestinal permeability, inflammation, blood loss, and gastroduodenal morphology were assessed before and after metronidazole treatment in patients with established NSAID enteropathy.
Subjects and methods
Twenty patients who had been taking NSAIDs for more than six months underwent a screening phase and all 13 with NSAID enteropathy were recruited to the study.
The clinical details of these patients are shown in Table I. Each subject was admitted to a metabolic research ward during these studies.
On admission blood was taken for haematology and biochemistry and for leukocyte and red cell labelling.
Intestinal permeability was assessed on day 6 and endoscopy was done on day 7.
Patients were placed on metronidazole (200 mg, four times daily) while maintaining an unchanged intake of NSAIDs and were then restudied after 2–12 weeks.
Metronidazole was chosen because of its wide use in gastroenterology (diverticulitis, small bowel bacterial overgrowth syndromes, sepsis, etc) and because it has a well defined antimicrobial spectrum.
Sixteen patients with the irritable bowel syndrome acted as controls for the 1 1 1 In leukocyte and 5 1 Cr red cell studies.
Twenty healthy white volunteers acted as controls for the intestinal permeability studies.
These studies were approved by Harrow Health Authority Ethical Committee and all patients gave informed consent.
LEUKOCYTE LABELLING
At 10 am on the day of admission an indwelling cannula was placed into an antecubital vein.
Sixty ml of blood were drawn into a syringe containing 11 ml of acid citrate dextrose (National Institutes of Health, formula A), dispensed into two sterile polythene tubes, and allowed to sediment for 1 hour at room temperature.
The supernatant was removed and centrifuged at 100 g for 5 minutes.
The supernatant was removed immediately and respun at 300 g for 10 minutes to yield cell free plasma.
The pellet from the 100 g centrifugation was resuspended and incubated for 10 minutes at room temperature in 0.1 ml HEPES saline buffer (pH 7.4) containing 20 mM HEPES in 0.8% (vol/vol) sodium chloride, 4.4 mM tropolone, and 400 µCi (15 MBq)1 1 1 InCl 3 (Amersham International, Amersham, Buckinghamshire, UK).
Five ml of cell free plasma were then added to the cell suspension and centrifuged at 100 g for 5 minutes.
The supernatant containing unlabelled 1 1 1 In was poured off and the labelled cells were resuspended in 6.0 ml of cell free plasma.
Five ml (9–12 MBq) were injected and the rest was used for standards.
The labelling efficiency averaged 86% (range 79%-95%).
The leukocytes maintain their integrity and function during the isolation and labelling procedure.
Assuming a 300 µCi (11 MBq) dose of 1 1 1 In is injected, the estimated radiation dose received by the patient during this procedure is 8.5 milliSieverts (mSv)(effective dose equivalent).
1 1 1 In LEUKOCYTE IMAGING AND FAECAL EXCRETION
Abdominal scintigrams were obtained 1–4 hours (early) and 20 hours (late) after injection of the labelled cells, using an IGE 400 AT γ camera with a Star computer at the appropriate channel settings.
Individual faecal excretions were collected over a 4 day period after injection of the labelled cells, with particular care being taken not to contaminate the faecal samples with urine.
Samples were counted in a high resolution bulk sample counter as previously described.
Standards (2% of the injected dose) were made up to 200 ml with water and distributed over a fixed amount of filter paper in a plastic container.
Each sample was counted for 20 seconds, which enabled the measurement of 0.01% of the injected dose with a counting statistical accuracy of 4%.
RED BLOOD CELL LABELLING
When blood was obtained for labelling leukocytes, 10 ml were also placed in 20 ml sterile citrate/phosphate/dextrose solution.
This suspension was centrifuged at 1500 g for 10 minutes.
Sodium chromate (5 1 Cr)(Amersham International) was added dropwise to the pellet, with continuous mixing, to a final activity of 55.5 kBq/kg body weight.
This mixture was allowed to stand at room temperature for 15 minutes.
The labelled cells were washed twice in isotonic saline which leaves less than 1% of the 5 1 Cr unbound.
Ten ml labelled cells were injected into the patient.
Daily blood samples were collected and 4 ml of every sample were used as counting standards.
Faeces was collected for 5 days and the faecal 5 1 Cr activity was correlated with that of the blood standards from the previous day (which enables the calculation of blood loss into the intestine).
The results are expressed as mean daily blood loss.
The upper limit of normal for gastrointestinal blood loss is less than 1.0 ml/day.
The estimated radiation dose from 55.5 kBq/kg body weight 5 1 Cr-red cells is 1.2 mSv.
Because of the high initial 1 1 1 In activity in the stools, it is necessary to delay counting of 5 1 Cr activity for 3 to 4 weeks to allow the 1 1 1 In to decay.
INTESTINAL PERMEABILITY
The test solution consisted of 200 µCi (7.4 MBq) chromium-51-ethylene-diaminetetra-acetate (5 1 CrEDTA)(Amersham International, Amersham, Buckinghamshire, UK) and 0.5 g L-rhamnose (Sigma Chemical Co, Poole, Dorset, UK) in 100 ml water.
At 8 am, after an overnight fast, subjects drank the test solution.
They fasted for a further 2 hours, after which they were allowed normal food and fluid intake.
Complete urine collections were made for 5 hours (8 am-1 pm) into a bottle containing 1 ml thiomersal (10% w/v) as a preservative for L-rhamnose.
On completion, urine values were measured and 5 ml samples counted in an LKB Wallac 1280 γ counter along with a 1:500 dilution of the test solution.
Each sample was counted for 5 minutes at appropriate channel settings giving a minimum detectable 5 1 Cr activity of less than 0.01% of the administered dose per litre of urine.
Counting was done 2 weeks after completion of studies to avoid interference from urine 1 1 1 In.
The activity of 5 1 Cr from red cells in urine is trivial in comparison with the 5 1 CrEDTA.
The normal upper limit of the 5 1 CrEDTA/L-rhamnose urine excretion ratio (% dose) is 0.09 (N:40).
The estimated radiation dose received during the test is 0.24 mSv.
Thin layer chromatography was used for estimating L-rhamnose.
This involved measurement of peak heights by scanning densitometry incorporating an arabinose internal standard to overcome errors of application.
Sugar separation was achieved by multiple development on half plates (10 cm×20cm) of plastic backed silica gel 60 (Merk, 5748, Dassel, Germany) using three consecutive ascending runs (8.5 cm each) with ethyl acetate/pyridine/ acetic acid/water (75:15:10:10, by volume).
The layers were dried for at least 30 minutes between each run, and then for 4 hours (preferably overnight) to remove pyridine before performing a 4-aminobenzoic/phosphoric acid colour reaction at 120–130°C for 10 minutes.
After location, chromatograms were kept refrigerated in polythene envelopes, and exposure was minimised during scanning.
Peak heights were measured and corrected to a constant internal standard value.
Test concentrations were then derived by interpolation from a standard rhamnose concentration curve from the same chromatogram.
This chromatographic procedure is accurate and sensitive, recovery being above 90% and the minimum level of detection below 0.1 mmol/l for L-rhamnose.
The precision lies between 3 and 8% (coefficient of variation without replication) over the test range of sugar concentration.
From the above the percentages of dose excretion of 5 1 CrEDTA and L-rhamnose in urine were calculated.
The results are expressed as a urine excretion ratio of 5 1 CrEDTA/L-rhamnose which is a specific index of intestinal permeability, largely unaffected by other non-permeability variables of marker permeation rates.
ENDOSCOPY AND HISTOLOGY
The day after the permeability test, patients on NSAIDs underwent gastroduodenoscopy (Olympus XQ20) with biopsy.
Endoscopic damage was assessed by a modified Lanza score system.
For the stomach, grades 0–3 had 0–2, 3–5, 6–10, and >erosions or submucosal haemorrhages respectively, and grade 4 had erosions or submucosal haemorrhages too numerous to be counted or an ulcer with clear disruption of the mucosal epithelium and a diameter greater than 0.5 cm.
In the duodenum grade 0–3 had 0–1, 2–5, 6–10, >erosions, and grade 4 a duodenal ulcer.
Endoscopic biopsies (N:2) were taken from each of the following sites; the mid-greater curve of the body, the greater curve in the antrum at least 2 cm from the pylorus and from the duodenal bulb.
They were routinely formalin fixed and paraffin processed.
Sections (3 µm) were cut and stained with haematoxylin and eosin, periodic — acid Schiff reagent/Alcian blue and Cresyl-fast violet, the latter to aid detection of Helicobacter pylori like organisms.
Gastritis was assessed according to the Sydney system.
In relation to this study, the key features are the grading (mild, moderate, or severe) of inflammation (lymphocytes and plasma cells), activity (neutrophil polymorphs), atrophy, intestinal metaplasic, and numbers of H pylori like organisms.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The paired Student's t test was used to assess sequential changes.
Results
Metronidazole did not cause any adverse reaction during these studies.
There was no significant change (p) in clinical disease activity, the haemoglobin concentration (11.5 (1.8)v 11.6 (1.8) g/dl (mean (SD)), or the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (33 (30)v 30 (29) mm hour).
1 1 1 In LEUKOCYTES
The scintigrams confirmed NSAID enteropathy, and although subjective improvement was evident after treatment this cannot be quantitated accurately and hence the need for faecal analysis.
Figure 1 shows that treatment with metronidazole caused a significant reduction (p) in the 4 day faecal excretion of 1 1 1 In leukocytes from 4.7 (4.7) % to 1.5 (1.3) %.
Each patient responded and after treatment five of the 13 were within the normal range (N, 0.51 (0.16) % (mean (SD)).
RED BLOOD CELL LOSS
Ten of 13 patients underwent 5 1 Cr red blood cell loss studies.
Treatment with metronidazole caused a significant reduction in the mean daily blood loss from 2.6 (1.6) ml/day to 0.9 (0.5) ml/ day (p),(Nml/day, mean (SD) 0.2 (0.1) ml/day).
INTESTINAL PERMEABILITY
Figure 2 shows that there were no significant changes in the 5 1 CrEDTA/L-rhamnose urine excretion ratios during metronidazole treatment.
Ratios before and after treatment were 0.133 (0.046) and 0.154 (0.064) respectively (p),(N).
ENDOSCOPY AND HISTOLOGY
Ten patients underwent endoscopy with biopsy.
Table II shows that endoscopic appearances did not change significantly during treatment.
Of the 10 pairs of biopsy specimens taken from the body, antrum, and duodenum, the main abnormalities were found in the antrum.
The antral specimens were normal in two, and three sets showed features typical of reactive (reflux) gastritis — a pattern associated with NSIAD administration — before and after treatment.
In the remaining patients of the severity of the chronic inflammatory infiltrate and activity was reduced by one grade between biopsies in three patients.
There was an increase of one grade in two patients.
H pylori like organisms were detected in two patients and persisted despite metronidazole.
Discussion
This study shows that treatment with metronidazole selectively reduces intestinal inflammation and blood loss in patients with NSAID enteropathy.
The results seem to conform to the proposed pathogenic mechanism of NSAID enteropathy, namely that intestinal permeability changes predominantly reflect the direct cellular toxicity of NSAID and the consequential inflammation may be a result of a bacterial invasion of the mucosa.
The endoscopy results further suggest that it is the small bowel and not the stomach or duodenum that is the main site of chronic low grade blood loss in patients on long ter, NSAIDs.
This contrasts sharply with the life threatening bleeding in NSAID users that almost invariably originates in the stomach or duodenum.
Metronidazole is a narrow spectrum antibiotic with activity against primarily anaerobic organisms, particularly bacteria and protozoa.
It is in the anaerobic environment alone that the drug is reduced to its active metabolite, which is thought to bind to microbial DNA and inhibit nucleic acid synthesis.
The drug is used extensively in gastroenterological practice: in small bowel bacterial overgrowth and blind loop syndromes, in colonic Crohn's disease, and as part of combination antibiotic cover during large bowel surgery.
Metronidazole is also known to have other actions.
It may suppress cellular immunity, it sensitises hypoxic cells to radiation damage, and it may be mutagenic; but there is no evidence that metronidazole affects neutrophil function directly.
It therefore seems that there is a metronidazole sensitive micro-organism which is the main neutrophil chemoattractant in NSAID enteropathy.
The precise characterisation of this agent awaits further study but it is clear that most patients with NSAID enteropathy have normal 1 4 C glyocholate breath tests, urinary indicans, and vitamin B 1 2 absorption, all of which may be affected in non-specific intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndromes.
Bacteriological studies in NSAID induced small intestinal damage in experimental animals have not, however, identified a single organism.
Rather, the involvement of bacteria has been inferred from studies showing that pretreatment with broad spectrum antibiotics may prevent small intestinal ulceration caused by indomethacin and that germ free animals do not seem to develop the lesions.
Treating the animals with antibiotics has, however, been uniformally unsuccessful in promoting healing of indomethacin induced lesions.
This contrasts with the current results and suggests that the pathogenesis of NSAID induced small intestinal inflammation differs in man and rats.
The concomitant reduction in intestinal blood loss after metronidazole treatment suggests that most of the complications of the inflammation (blood and protein loss, ileal dysfunction) are a consequence of neutrophil activation.
It is thus possible that most of the tissue damage is caused by neutrophils generating free oxygen radicals and releasing lysosomal enzymes when in contact with a chemoattractant within the lumina propria.
That metronidazole has its effect at this late stage of NSAID enteropathy is further supported by the findings that small intestinal permeability is not significantly affected by the treatment.
Collectively these data also suggest that the main site of NSAID induced blood loss in patients on long term NSAID treatment is the small intestine.
Previous studies in man have shown a significant correlation between inflammatory activity (faecal excretion of 1 1 1 In leukocytes) and 5 1 Cr red cell loss.
This is, however, the first study that also assesses gastroduodenal damage.
The changes occurring in this limited biopsy series, in particular the inflammatory infiltrate, were on a minor scale and of no consistent pattern.
They are unlikely to be the origin of the abnormalities shown by the labelling techniques.
As the histological damage did not change in harmony with the inflammation and blood loss, it suggests that most of the chronic intestinal blood loss is from the small intestine.
This is in keeping with large endoscopy studies showing that only rarely is there a gastroduodenal cause for positive faecal blood in patients on NSAIDs.
Furthermore, small bowel enteroscopy in patients taking NSAIDs has confirmed the abnormalities in the mid small bowel, which range from erythematous blebs and villus atrophy to frank ulceration, all of which may bleed.
Combined with reduced food intake and a high gastric pH, mild blood loss (1–8 ml/day) may be an important factor in the development of iron deficiency in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
NSAID enteropathy and its complications contribute significantly to the overall morbidity of patients receiving these drugs.
Metronidazole reduces intestinal inflammation and blood loss in NSAID enteropathy but the precise mechanism has not bee established.
Short courses of metronidazole may be indicated in patients with problematic iron deficiency anaemia or hypoalbuminaemia but long term treatment is clearly hampered by the possibility of peripheral neuropathy and other serious side effects of metronidazole.
Chemotherapy for gastric cancer
In the United Kingdom, gastric carcinoma is the sixth most common malignancy; recent reports showed that there were 12750 cases and 10740 deaths in 19??.
There is a considerable worldwide variation in the incidence, with age standardised rates varying from 75:100000 per year in men in Osaka, Japan to 11:100000 per year in Connecticut, USA.
In economically developed countries the incidence of gastric cancer has declined over the past 20 years.
The reasons for this demographic trend are unclear but important factors include changing diet, improved methods of food preservation, the food preservatives themselves, and decreased exposure to environmental carcinogens.
Recent studies have shown that the risk of developing gastric cancer can be reduced by eating green and yellow vegetables frequently, perhaps because vitamins A and C may give potential protection from carcinogens.
Because the early course of the disaese is often silent, most patients present with advanced unresectable disease.
Two thirds of patients are more than 60 years of age.
Both these factors contribute to the extremely poor prognosis at presentation.
The median survival of the untreated patient with gastric cancer at presentation is four months and this increases to six months for those undergoing palliative resection.
Although surgery is cited as the main hope for cure, only 7% of patients treated by radical surgery survive five years and the median survival of these patients is only eight months.
Radiotherapy is an ineffective local treatment for gastric cancer because of poor tissue tolerance to potentially curative radiation dosage regimens.
Gastric carcinoma is a chemosensitive tumour and early reports showed response rates of over 20% for adriamycin, cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and mitomycin C given as single agents.
This led to their inclusion in numerous combination chemotherapy programmes.
Interpretation of the relative benefits of these combinations is difficult because of the publication bias for positive reporting, the limited numbers of patients treated, and the inherent difficulty of accurately assessing response.
In 1977, radically improved response rates were reported for the 5-fluorouracil, adriamycin, and mitomycin-C (FAM) regimen with remission of 42% in a group of 62 patients.
The Gastrointestinal Cancer Study Group carried out a number of randomised trials comparing FAM with other combination chemotherapy regimens.
Although in these studies the level of activity was not as high as originally reported, subsequent work by the eastern Cooperative Oncology Group established FAM as the regimen of first choice and showed a relatively low toxicity profile.
An overview of over 500 patients treated subsequently shows an overall response rate with FAM of 33% with a complete response rate of <.
Unfortunately, this initial response did not translate into an appreciable survival advantage and prompted the organisation of randomised trials in patients treated with FAM compared with 5-flourouracil alone which have shown no survival difference and greater toxicity for FAM.
There are modifications of the FAM programme.
In FAP, cisplatin is substituted for mitomycin-C, and a response rate of 50% was shown in a small study of 26 patients.
Confirmatory studies are in progress.
In 1979, Cadman showed that prior treatment with methotrexate improved the efficacy of 5-flourouracil by causing increased intracellular levels of 5-fluouracil nucleotides, enhancing the inhibition of thymidylate synthetase.
The results of this ‘biochemical modulation’ were reported in 1986 in a study of 100 patients — 59 of whom responded and 12 of whom had complete remissions.
These results have recently been confirmed in a prospective study and show the superiority of the methotrexate containing regimen, leading to its recommendation as the gold standard for all future gastric carcinoma trials.
A regimen combining etoposide, adriamycin, and cisplatinum ‘EAP’ has been developed in Germany and applied to 145 patients with locally advanced disease.
Altogether 57% responded and there were 20% complete remissions that extended to three years.
The toxicity of EAP is considerable with grade 3–4 myelosuppression occurring in an unacceptably high proportion of patients.
Because of the side effects, this treatment programme has been used only in young, fit individuals with locally advanced disease.
The treatment is unlikely to venefit most gastric cancer patients, who are elderly and frail.
The same group are investigating a similar combination designed specifically for use in patients with poor performance status, using etoposide, folinic acid, and 5-flourouracil.
Data are currently available for 51 patients showing a 51% response rate that included six complete responses.
Attempts to improve the prospect of cure have been made by investigation of the advantages of adjuvant chemotherapy.
EAP has been evaluated in a small series of patients with locally advanced unresectable tumours.
In 20 patients who underwent ‘second look’ laparotomy there was significant downstaging of disease in 10 (50%) after two cycles of chemotherapy.
These patients underwent complete resection of their tumours and had a median disease free interval of 16 months.
In summary, chemotherapy is effective in a small proportion of patients with gastric cancer, but does not provide substantial improvements in the length or quality of life in most.
Clinical trials continue with the aim of improving the prognosis for selected groups of medically fit individuals.
Plasma polyunsaturated fatty acid pattern in active inflammatory bowel disease
Abstract
Plasma fatty acid patterns were assessed by gas liquid chromatography in 73 patients with active inflammatory bowel disease and 107 healthy controls.
The influence of the disease activity on fatty acid profile was also investigated.
Plasma fatty acid patterns in patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease were similar.
Plasma C18:3n3 and C22:6n3 were significantly higher in active ulcerative colitis (p=0.0143 and prespectively) and in Crohn's disease (pfor both) than in controls, whereas C20:3n6 was significantly lower in patients than in controls, both in ulcerative colitis (p=0.0001) and in Crohn's disease (p=0.0041).
In more severe disease, plasma polyunsaturated fatty acid concentration fell with a significant stepwise decrease in the desaturation index (p=0.0031 in ulcerative colitis and p=0.0355 in Crohn's disease).
Even in patients with severe disease, however, plasma n3 fatty acids (C18:3n3 and C22:6n3) never fell below those of healthy controls.
These findings suggest that in active inflammatory bowel disease, an increased biosynthesis might coexist with an increased consumption of polyunsaturated fatty acids.
These observations may be of relevance in the pathogenesis of the disease as polyunsaturated fatty acids are involved in tissue eicosanoid synthesis and cellular membrane function, including that of immunocompetent cells.
These results also question the rationale of using n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.
Polyunsaturated fatty acids have essential biological functions.
As part of the structure of cell membrane, they exert control on its intrinsic proteins — for example, enzymes, receptors, by inducing changes in membrane fluidity.
In addition, the long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, dihomo-t-linolenic (C20:3n6), arachidonic (C20:4n6), and eicosapentaenoic (C20: 5n3) acids are the precursors of eicosanoids.
Some of the arachidonic acid derived eicosanoids (prostaglandin E 2 , leukotriene B 4 , and thromboxane A 2 ) have been incriminated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease, because their concentrations increase in the inflammed intestinal mucosa in the acute phase of the disease.
There are four different polyunsaturated fatty acids series which share the same desaturases and elongases for their synthesis.
Their affinity for these enzymatic systems are different, however.
In addition, the components of the different fatty acid series are not interconvertible in vivo.
These properties have allowed modification of the eicosanoid synthesis by producing changes in dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Dietary supplementation with eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids rish fish oil induces the appearance of triene prostalandins and thromboxanes and pentaene leukotrienes with attenuated inflammatory effects.
The therapeutic efficiency of eicosapentaenoic acid (C20:5n3) as an antiinflammatory agent in experimental models of inflammation and therapeutic trials in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease is, however, at least, controversial
Plsama polyunsaturated fatty acids patterns have not been previously assessed in ulcerative volitis whereas information in Crohn's disease is limited.
It would be of scientific interest to know of plasma polyunsaturated fatty acids profile in inflammatory bowel disease as it might have both pathophysiological and therapeutic implications.
The aim of this study was to prospectively assess the plasma fatty acid pattern in patients with active inflammatory bowel disease compared with healthy controls and to ascertain whether the activity of the disease has any influence upon plasma concentrations of fatty acids.
Methods
PATIENTS
Seven three consecutive patients (40 men, 33 women) with active inflammatory bowel disease (median age 32.5 years; ranges 14–81) were included in the study at admission or when first seen in the outpatient clinic.
Forty one had ulcerative colitis and 32 had Crohn's disease.
The diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease was based upon clinical, endoscopic and radiological findings and was supported by biochemical, scintigraphic and pathological features.
Exhaustive microbiological analysis were performed in order to exclude patients with gastrointestinal infection.
These included in all cases stool culture, special stool culture and serologic tests for Yersinia enterocolitica , repeated fresh stool examination (three to six) for parasites and chlamydia direct immunofluorescent test.
Clostridium difficile toxin assays, biopsy examination and culture for mycobacteria and immunohistochemical detection of herpes virus and cytomegalovirus in biopsy specimens were carried out in particular cases.
The activity of the disease was assessed by means of the Truelove's index for ulcerative colitis and the Van Hees's index for Crohn's disease.
According to the activity index, the attack was classified as mild, moderate, or severe.
Twelve patients with ulcerative colitis had mild, 19 moderate, and 10 severe attacks.
In Crohn's disease, the activity was mild in 15, moderate in 11, and severe in six patients.
Data regarding diet, nutritional status, and drugs were also carefully recorded.
CONTROLS
One hundred and seven healthy individuals (46 men, 61 women; median age 32.5 years; ranges 18–76) living in an urban area in the outskirts of Barcelona (Catalunya, Spain) acted as a control group.
All subjects were well nourished according to previously described criteria.
The existence of both acute and chronic illnesses was ruled out on the basis of a complete anamnesis and full clinical and biological examination including routine haematological counts, serum glycaemia, total cholesterol, triglycerides, and renal and liver functions tests (Technicon SMA-20 Autoanalyzer).
Those with previous history of diseases or surgical procedures capable of influencing the absorption of macro or micronutrients were also excluded from the study.
All subjects, including elderly people, lived at their family home and were on a balanced western diet.
Intake of monotonous, deficient, vegetarian or lacto ovo vegatarian diets was ruled out.
Alcohol intake was lower than 40 g/day for men and 20 g/day for women.
Habitual drug intake in the previous three months of sample extraction was carefully ruled out, especially for hypolipemiant drugs, non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs or oral contraceptives.
Individuals taking trace elements or vitamin supplements in the previous six months were not included.
Relatives of patients with inflammatory bowel disease were also excluded.
Informed consent was otained from each patient.
The study was performed in accordance with the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki ethical guidelines and was approved by the Research and Ethical Committees of the Hospital.
PLASMA FATTY ACID ASSAY
In all patients and healthy controls, a 5 ml venous blood sample for plasma fatty acid measurement was drawn after a 14 hour overnight fast at the same time that full clinical assessment was performed.
Plasma was separated by centrifugation at 3000× g during five minutes and immediately frozen and stored at -50°C under nitrogen atmosphere.
The plasma obtained was treated with 5 ml of a chloroform:methanol (2:1 v/v) mixture containing 50 mg/l butylhydroxy-toluene, 1.5 ml 0.01 N HCl, and 50 µl MgCl 2 in water.
The mixture was stirred for one minute in a tube mixer and then centrifugated at 3000× g for 10 minutes.
The chloroform phase was separated by aspiration with a Pasteur pipette, and the aqueous phase was reextracted with 3 ml chloroform:methanol mixture.
After centrifugation, chloroform phases were mixed and evaporated to dryness under nitrogen atmosphere.
Saponification and methylation of fatty acids were immediately carried out, using 14% BF 3 in methanol according to the Morrison and Smith procedure.
Fatty acid methyl esters were quantified by gas liquid chromatography in a 5890A Hewlett-Packard chromatograph using a 30-m, wide bore column, 0.32 mm internal diameter, impregnated with SP-2330 as stationary phase.
Initial oven temperature was 150° which was maintained for eight minutes; afterwards, it was increased at a rate of 3 °/minute; up to 210°C.
The identification and quantification of fatty acid methyl esters was possible by using an external standard (Sigma Co, St Louis, Mo, USA).
Individual response factors were calculated for each fatty acid.
Fatty acids from C14:0 to C22:6n3 were measured.
Unidentified peaks accounted for less than 0.5% of total fatty acids.
The desaturation index was calculated as previously described according to the formula: UNID=S(fatty acid percentage×number of double bonds).
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
For statistical analysis the Statistical Package for Social Sciences SPSS/PC+ (SPSS Inc, Chicago, Illinois, USA, 1985) was used.
Variables with normal distribution and homogeneous variance were compared by means of parametric tests, otherwise their non-parametric counterparts were used.
To assess differences in plasma fatty acid percentages between patients and controls, the Student's t test or Mann-Whitney U test were used, when necessary.
One way analysis of variance with ‘a posteriori’ Scheffé test or Kruskall-Wallisone way analysis of variance by ranks were used, when necessary, to assess the influence of the severity of the disease upon fatty acid profile in these patients.
When the Kruskall-Wallis test disclosed a significant p value, the Mann-Whitney U test was carried out in order to detect where the differences occur.
Results are expressed as mean (SEM) or median and its 95% confidence interval for parametric and non-parametric variables respectively.
Results
The clinical features of the 73 patients included in the study are detailed in Table I. Ulcerative colitis involved the entire colon in 21 patients, the left colon in 12, and was confined to the rectum in eight.
Crohn's disease was ileocolic in 10 cases, involved only the small bowel in nine patients, and 13 patients had colonic disease.
Four patients with Crohn's disease who had previous operations (three colectomies and one ileocolectomy), were included because of relapsing disease.
PLASMA FATTY ACIDS
Plasma percentages of the different fatty acids in patients with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease are shown in Tables II and III.
ULCERATIVE COLITIS (TABLE II)
The most striking finding in plasma fatty acid profile in ulcerative colitis patients was the marked increase in n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, both the essential precursor (α-linolenic acid (C18:3n3)) and the end product (docosahexaenoic acid (C22:6n3)).
In the n6 series, patients with ulcerative colitis showed low values of dihomo-t-linolenic acid (C20:3n6), whereas values of the essential precursor (linoleic acid (C18:2n6)) and the main product (arachidonic acid (C20:4n6)) showed no differences when compared with controls.
Palmitic acid (C16:0) levels were significantly higher in ulcerative colitis patients than in healthy individuals.
Stearic acid (C18:0) was significantly lower in ulcerative colitis than in controls.
There were no differences in monoenoic fatty acids between patients and controls.
The unsaturation index did not show differences between patients with ulcerative colitis and controls.
CROHN'S DISEASE
The plasma fatty acid profile in Crohn's disease was similar to that found in ulcerative colitis (Table III).
As in ulcerative colitis, a significant increase in n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (α-linolenic acid (C18:3n3) and docosahexaenoic acid (C22:6n3)) and a decrease in plasma dihomo-t-linolenic acid (C20:3n6), a long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids of the n6 series, was also observed.
When compared with healthy individuals, plasma concentrations of stearic acid (C18:0) was significantly decreased.
EFFECT OF THE ACTIVITY OF THE DISEASE
Fatty acid profile was related to the activity of the disease, both in ulcerative colitis (Table IV) and Crohn's disease patients (Table V).
The plasma values of stearic acid (C18:0) and long chain n3 and n6 polyunsaturated fatty acids decreased stepwise as the disease became more severe.
This only reached statistical significance for stearic acid (C18:0) and long chain n6 polyunsaturated fatty acids in ulcerative colitis and for arachidonic acid (C20:4n6) in Crohn's disease.
The decrease in plasma long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids associated to the increase of disease activity, was more marked int he n6 series (arachidonic and dihomo-t-linolenic acid), especially in ulcerative colitis.
It is remarkable that, in spite of the progressive fall in plasma docosahexaenoic acid values as inflammatory bowel disease became more severe, its mean value always remained above the mean value of this n3 polyunsaturated fatty acid in healthy individuals.
It is also noteworthy that in mild disease, concentrations of long n6 polyunsaturated fatty acids, especially arachidonic acid, also remained above those in healthy controls.
The decrease in plasma long chain and highly unsaturated fatty acids in those patients with more severe disease, which resulted in a significant reduction of the unsaturation index, was partly counterbalanced by a significant increase in the perventage of oleic acid (C18:1).
Discussion
The most striking result of this study is the increased plasma concentrations of the precursor (α-linolenic acid) and the end product (docosahexaenoic acid) of the n3 polyunsaturated fatty acid series in active ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
In addition, low concentrations of dihomo-t-linolenic (C20:3n6) acid were also found.
When patients were grouped according to the severity of the attack, however, a stepwise fall in polyunsaturated fatty acids was observed as the disease became more severe.
This was especially marked for long chain n6 polyunsaturated fatty acids in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
It is remarkable that although concentrations of docosahexaenoic acid (C22: 6n3) also tend to decrease stepwise as disease activity increased, their mean concentrations never reach values below that of healthy controls.
This pattern of plasma fatty acids suggests that, in active inflammatory bowel disease, increased polyunsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis might coexist with increased fatty acid consumption.
The finding of high plasma n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids concentrations would support the first part of this hypothesis; that is, the increase in polyunsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis.
This phenomenon would be particularly evident in this fatty acid series because n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids are preferential substrates for desaturases.
The fact that high concentrations of n6 fatty acids were also observed in patients with mild disease further supports the concept of an enhanced polyunsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis in inflammatory bowel disease.
The second part of the hypothesis — that is, the excessive consumption of fatty acids, might be supported by the stepwise fall of stearic acid (C18:0) and long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, particularly those of the n6 series, observed as disease activity became more severe.
Polyunsaturated fatty acid hypermetabolism may take place to meet the needs for cellular repair and to obtain energy as in other hypercatabolic states.
Another possible explanation for the more marked decrease in plasma n6, as compared with n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, might be an increased synthesis of arachidonic acid derived eicosanoids in the intestinal mucosa in active disease.
It may be argued that low essential fatty acid intake could account for the diminished long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids in severe disease.
Plasma concentrations of both essential fatty acids, linoleic (C18:2n6), and α-linolenic (C18:3n3), however, were not decreased even when disease was severe.
To reinforce the suggestion of an enhanced polyunsaturated fatty acid synthesis, counterbalanced by hyperconsumption in active inflammatory bowel disease, studies have to be carried out in non-active patients.
A high intake of n3 fatty acids, especially of the essential α-linolenic acid, could be postulated as an explanation for the increased n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in inflammatory bowel disease.
This was not the case in our patients, however, as they were eating a standard western diet.
This type of diet contains negligible amounts of long chain n3 fatty acids (less than 1% of the total fatty acids consumed).
In addition, these patients usually reduce their food intake when disease flares up.
It could then be speculated that the high concentrations of α-linolenic acid (which is exclusively from dietary origin), might be the result of a negative feed back effect upon delta-6 desaturase activity, mediated by an excess of docosahexaenoic acid (C22:6n3), the final product of this series.
The high concentrations of palmitic acid (C16:0) in ulcerative colitis suggest an enhanced lipolysis caused by increased energy requirements, as occur in other hypercatabolic states.
In this setting, it is difficult to explain the low plasma concentrations of stearic acid (C18:0).
It might be speculated that this results in a diminished synthesis of stearic acid from palmitic acid (which would be preferentially oxidated) and/or an increased activity of delta-9-desaturase to produce oleic acid.
Two previous reports have assessed plasma polyunsaturated fatty acid pattern in patients with Crohn's disease.
Both studies represent selected populatiosn of patients with Crohn's disease as they included patients with either ileal resection or malabsorption.
In contrast with our results, these studies describe a pattern of essential fatty acid deficiency, probably related to malabsorption.
Severe malabsorption seldom occurs in Crohn's disease.
Two studies have shown that in inflammatory bowel disease the concentrations of arachidonic acid (C20:4n6) in the inflamed colonic mucosa were increased.
Moreover, in one increased concentrations of docosahexaenoic acid (C22:6n3) were also found.
These data are in agreement with our findings, and with the fact that plasma fatty acid pattern reflects the fatty acid composition of the tissues.
The changes in n3 and n6 polyunsaturated fatty acid profile found in inflammatory bowel disease may be of relevance in the pathogenesis of the disease because they influence either tissue eicosanoid synthesis and the membrane lipid composition of the immunocompetent cells.
It has been demonstrated that in vitro manipulation of fatty acid composition of lymphocytes can alter immune functions, such as cytotoxicity, antibody response, or cell to cell recognition.
In this context, the similar polyunsaturated fatty acids pattern found in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease suggests that both diseases might share a common pathogenic mechanism.
It would be of interest to know whether this plasma fatty acid pattern, not previously reported in other disease states, is exclusive to inflammatory bowel disease or also occurs in other autoimmune conditions.
Based on the fact that eicosapentaenoate derived eicosanoids have attenuated proinflammatory activity as compared with arachidonate derived compounds, dietary n3 polyunsaturated fatty acid supplements (fish oil) have been successfully used in experimental animal models of inflammation and in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
According to this hypothesis, they have been administered in inflammatory bowel disease patients, but the results of various clinical trials are controversial.
Our finding of high plasma n3 polyunsaturated fatty acid concentrations in active inflammatory bowel disease raises some doubts on the use of high doses of n3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.
Gastric antral dysrhythmias in children with chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction
Abstract
Chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction is a serious disorder of intestinal neuromuscular function resulting in recurrent episodes of intestinal obstruction, and is caused by primary disease of the enteric nerves or enteric smooth muscle.
Gastric electrical control activity detected by the non-invasive technique of surface electrogastrography was investigated in 11 children (0.1–16 years) with proven chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction (four with known disease of the enteric nerves, three with disease of smooth muscle cells, and four without defined pathology), to determine whether abnormalities were present and whether these were useful in detecting the underlying pathology.
Abnormalities were present in eight of 11 patients.
Persistent tachygastria (electrical control activity frequency >cycles/minute) was found in three patients, all with a proven neuropathy.
A continuously irregular frequency was found in five patients, three with a proven myopathy and two with undefined pathology.
A normal electrical control activity frequency was present in three patients, one with a proven neuropathy and two with undefined pathology.
It is suggested that this non-invasive techniquemay provide a useful screening test of the pathophysiological basis of the functional obstruction in children with chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction.
Chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction is an uncommon but serious disorder of intestinal neuromuscular function which results in recurrent episodes of intestinal obstruction without a mechanical cause, in vomiting, and in an inability to tolerate oral feeds.
Chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction is usually caused by disease of the enteric nerves or smooth muscle.
This is most often a primary disorder in children but in adults is more commonly secondary to diseases such as diabetes mellitus or scleroderma.
Contractile activity of the muscle coats of the gut is regulated by myogenic, neural, and humoral factors.
Myogenic control is related to the intrinsic excitability of gastrointestinal smooth muscle cells, and particularly to the constant rhythmic polarisation and depolarisation of the plasmalemmal membranes which gives rise to the electrical slow wave or electrical control activity.
Neural and humoral factors modulate these processes to produce patterns of activity appropriate to the circumstances of the gastrointestinal tract at a given time.
Abnormalities of electrical control activity have been associated with dysmotility of the gastric antrum, paroxysmally with nausea and vomiting and persistently with chronic intractable vomiting.
At the present time the diagnosis of chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction is based upon invasive investigations, including the demonstration of characteristic patterns of small intestinal motor activity by intraluminal manometry, and the histological examination of full thickness intestinal biopsies.
As children with diffuse chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction frequently vomit, we have investigated gastric electrical control activity as detected by the non-invasive technique of surface electrogastrography in the fasting state in such children to determine if persistently abnormal electrical control activity was present, and if it was related to the underlying pathology of enteric nerves and muscle coats.
Methods
PATIENTS
Eleven children with a presumptive diagnosis of chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction were investigated.
Clinical details of the patients are given in Table I. All had severe symptoms of intestinal pseudoobstruction, including episodic vominting, abdominal distension, and intolerance of food.
None of the patients had evidence of a central nervous system or an autonomic nervous system disorder.
The diagnosis was confirmed in all 11 patients by contrast radiography and by antroduodenal manometry performed in a manner previously described.
All had markedly abnormal manometric recordings.
In eight of the 11 patients, full thickness intestinal biopsy specimens were available for histological examination.
Fifteen control children (age 0.2–17 years, median 11 years) without symptoms of gastrointestinal motor dysfunction formed a control group for surface electrogastrography recordings.
Fasting gastric electrical control activity was recorded and analysed using a modification of the method described by Van der Schee et al .
The potential differences across three pairs of Ag/AgCl electrodes matched for impedance and placed as shown in Figure 1 were measured for a one hour period after an overnight fast (or a fast of at least four hours in the smallest infants).
Skin impedance was reduced to less than 5 kOhms by light skin abrasion.
After amplification and passage through an analogue low pass filter (Gould Electronics, time constant 3.2 seconds, cut off slope 6 dB/octave) to remove high frequencies originating from cardiac electrical activity, the signal was digitalised at a frequency of 1 Hz using an analogue to digital convertor (Data Translation 2801A) and recorded on the hard disk of a desktop personal computer (Zenith Data Systems Z248) for later off line analysis.
A running spectal analysis of the real time signal captured on disk was performed.
Modular computerised algorithms for data capture, digital conditioning of the captured signal, division into subsections, and frequency analysis (PC-Dats, Prosig Computer Consultants) were used.
These modules were ordered and invoked by a Fortran code routine written by the authors (RM-Fortran, Ryan McFarland).
Each one hour recording was subdivided into 53 overlapping segments of 256 seconds (75% overlap), each segment was digitally filtered (band-pass Butterworth filter, 0.015–0.25 Hz, slope 24 dB/octave) and the frequencies present were determined by Fast Fourier Transformation.
The peak frequency present in each segment was extracted and the dominant frequency of the one hour recording (that present in the greatest number of segments) was obtained.
Full thickness intestinal biopsy specimens were obtained in eight of the children.
In one patient (patient 4) only routine sections were available for analysis.
Biopsy specimens from the remaining seven subjects were divided for routine microscopy (fixation in buffered formalin), for silver staining (fixation in formol saline) and for histochemistry (snap frozen in hexane at -80°C); a portion was taken for electron microscopy (fixation in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer containing 2.5 mM CaCl 2 at pH 7.4, postfixation in 1% osmium tetroxide and processed into araldite by conventional methods).
General morphology was assessed in routine sections.
Connective tissue was demonstrated in routine and cryostat sections stained with trichrome and picrosirius methods.
Acid phosphatase activity was used to detect lysosomal degradation in smooth muscle, and acetylcholinesterase staining was used to identify nerve fibre distribution in cryostat sections.
The ultrastructure of the intestine was examined in seven patients.
The analysis of the electrogastrogram and the histology was conducted by independent observers in a blind manner.
Results
ELECTROGASTROGRAPHIC FINDINGS
The dominant frequencies and the histological abnormalities found in the 11 patients are shown in Table II.
A persistently and abnormally fast electrical control activity frequency (>cycles/ minute), a tachygastria, was found in three of the subjects with chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction and in none of the control subjects.
A clear dominant electrical control frequency close to 3 cycles per minute was found in three of the subjects with chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction and in all of the control subjects.
In five of the subjects with chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction, a continuously irregular frequency was present such that no clear dominant frequency could be found in the recording (Fig 2).
HISTOPATHOLOGICAL FINDINGS
In the one subject (patient 4) from whom routine sections only of large bowel and ileum were available, histological examination showed an inflammatory process predominantly affecting the myenteric plexus particularly in the appendix but extending to the small intestine.
Neurones in the myenteric plexus were not identified in the colon and were sparse and appeared degenerate in the appendix and ileum.
Pathological changes either in the neural plexus or in the smooth muscle coats were not evident in routine or cryostat sections, or on histochemical staining, in the seven subjects from whom full thickness bowel samples were available for further analysis.
In three of these patients (patients 5, 6, and 7), ultrastructural examination, however, showed abnormalities of smooth muscle fibres whilst normal argyrophilic neurones were seen in the silver preparations.
In one patient (patient 8) there was no conclusive ultrastructural evidence of a myopathic change, and the neurones appeared ultrastructurally normal.
No material was available for silver staining from this patient.
In the remaining three subjects (patients 1, 2, and 3) silver staining revealed a neuropathic abnormality with absent or severely depleted and ill defined argyrophilic neurones in the myenteric plexus.
Electron microscopy of the bowel from one of these patients (patient 1) also showed atrophic and shrunken neurones in the myenteric plexus.
Intestinal smooth muscle from these patients was ultrastructurally unremarkable.
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ELECTROGASTROGRAPHIC, HISTOPATHOLOGICAL, AND MANOMETRIC FINDINGS
The four patients with proven neuropathy had severely disturbed propagation and organisation of antroduodenal motor activity.
All three patients with proven myopathy had abnormal conformation of phase III of the migrating motor complex with a low amplitude of contraction.
Two of the four patients without a proven histological diagnosis had low amplitude poorly formed phase III complexes.
Of the remaining two patients, one had both low amplitude of contractions and severe disorganisation of activity, and one (patient 8) has no motor activity detected.
All three subjects with a tachygastria (patients 1, 2, and 3) had a proven neuropathy of the myenteric plexus whereas three of the five patients with a continuously irregular frequency of the electrical control activity had clear evidence of a myopathy of the muscle coats on ultrastructural studies.
In the remaining two patients the ultrastructural changes in the muscle coats were inconclusive in one case (patient 8) and the histological material was inadequate for diagnosis in the other case (patient 9).
Discussion
Chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction is a disorder of motor function of the gastrointestinal tract as a result of disease of enteric nerves or smooth muscle cells.
We and others have described the histological characteristics of full thickness intestinal biopsies in patients with visceral myopathy and neuropathy.
A variety of abnormalities including inflammatory cell infiltration and Schwann cell proliferation, hypoganglionosis, and hyperganglionosis have been described in those with disease of the enteric nervous system.
In muscle disease degeneration of muscle fibres and replacement with fibrous tissue have been seen.
In our patients, four had evidence of a neuropathy (one with associated inflammatory changes) and three had evidence of a myopathy.
Manometric and electrophysiological studies of intestinal myoelectrical and motor activity in patients with pseudoobstruction have shown clearly different patterns of activity in those with disorders of the enteric nervous system compared with those with muscle disease.
In the former, disturbed conformation and propagation of phase III of the migrating motor complex together with bizarre waveforms of normal or increased amplitude are usually seen, whereas in the latter very low amplitude or absent contractions are the rule.
In our patients, those with proven neural and muscular pathology conformed to these patterns of motor activity.
In addition, two others without a histologically proven diagnosis had a pattern suggestive of a myopathic process.
Smooth muscle cells of the gastric body and antrum exhibit inherent rhythmic polarisation and depolarisation of the electrical potential across the cell membrane.
The frequency of this rhythmic activity is determined by a group of cells on the greater curvature which have been called the gastric pacemaker.
This slow wave or electrical control activity is entrained throughout the stomach because of electrical coupling between adjacent muscle cells and a differential in excitability of the muscle cells between the gastric corpus and the antrum.
In the human antrum, the frequency of the electrical control activity is close of 0.05 Hz (3 cycles/minute).
This electrical control activity can be detected by electrodes placed surgically in the bowel wall or by electrodes placed against the mucosal surface by intubation techniques.
The former has provided useful information in cases requiring laparotomy.
The latter suffers from unstable mucosal contact, although the use of improved fixation techniques such as magnetic stabilisation has reduced this problem.
The invasive nature of intubation techniques, however, restricts its usefulness in pediatric practice.
Recordings of gastric electrical control activity made from surface electrodes have been shown to correlate well with mucosal recordings, and this together with improvements in detection methods and their wider availability has led to increased use of surface electrogastrography in the investigation of gastrointestinal symptoms.
The advent of powerful desktop computers and the introduction of the technique of running spectal analysis by Van der Schee has allowed objective analysis of the recorded signals, superceding the use of visual analysis techniques.
Abnormality of the electrical control activity has been shown to occur in association with motion sickness, in patients with idiopathic gastroparesis, unexplained nausea and vomiting, and anorexia nervosa, and in response to vagotomy and to administration of glucagon.
One case report has been published describing a gastric electrical control activity close to 0.05 Hz (3 cycles/minute) with normal histology in a child with an idiopathic mortility disorder.
Tachygastria has been reported in a child with gastric atony, who later developed the full clinical picture of CIIP.
To our knowledge, this is the first report of persistent antral dysrhythmias in a series of patients with chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction and known disease of enteric nerves or smooth muscle.
Three of the four patients with a known neuropathy but none of the control group and none of the patients with a known myopathy had a persistent tachygastria in the fasting state.
Thus detection of a persistent tachygastria in the fasting state is highly suggestive of a neuropathic basis for the pseudoobstruction.
The mechanism whereby a neuropathy may produce a tachygastria is uncertain.
The neural abnormalities that could induce a tachygastria include loss of intrinsic inhibitory innervation or lack of extrinsic autonomic inhibition.
We have no evidence in any of our patients, after investigation of the central and autonomic nervous systems, that extrinsic neural control was disordered.
It is clear, however, that a variety of conditions affecting the extrinsic nerves and the central nervous system may result in tachygastria, ranging from children with cerebral palsy, to motion sickness, anorexia nervosa, and vatotomy.
In these conditions, with the exception of cerebral palsy, the tachygastria is usually paroxysmal, and the increased frequency is somewhat variable.
We were impressed that the tachygastria in our patients with neuropathic pseudoobstruction was both persistent and raised consistently in the fasting state.
We were unable to explore systematically the electrical control activity in the postprandial state because of the patients intolerance to food.
We would suggest that in neuropathic pseudoobstruction it is more likely that the tachygastria is induced by loss of intrinsic inhibitory innervation which may normally modify the frequency of polarisation of the plasmalemmal membrane of the gastric smooth muscle cells.
The presence of a continuously irregular frequency such that no dominant frequency could be shown was found in the three patients with a proven myopathy and in two patients with a manometric pattern suggestive of muscle disease.
Electrical control activity is caused by the entrainment of the fluctuations of the transmembrane potentials of individual smooth muscle cells.
The apparent continuously irregular frequency recorded, which contains high and low frequency components, may have several explanations.
It may be the result of inability to maintain a constant frequency of electrical control activity and this may be due to the effects of muscle disease on groups of muscle cells producing populations with altered frequencies.
Alternatively, it is possible that the abnormal recordings are the result of poor summation of the electrical signal in the abnormal muscle syncytium and poor projection onto the body surface.
A reduced ampitude of the electrical control activity may result in a marked diminution of the signal to noise ratio making it difficult to extract the true dominant frequency.
In addition, it may be considered that the frequency pattern results from a technically unsatisfactory recording.
We think the last explanation is unlikely as unsatisfactory recordings produced on our equipment result in a signal with an overwhelming predominance of low frequencies of <Hz (unpublished observations).
At the present time, it is not possible to distinguish between the other alternative explanations, though it may be that both factors operate to modulate the pattern of frequencies recorded at the body surface.
In the future, computerised spatial mapping of the distribution of frequencies in the manner now being used for electroencephalographic mapping of epileptic foci may provide a non-invasive alternative to multiple implanted electrodes to help distinguish between the above explanations.
In conclusion we have found a persistent tachygastria in the fasting state in three of four patients with chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction with a known neuropathic basis for their condition, and in none of 15 control patients, none of three patients with chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction as a result of muscle disease, and none of four with chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction with an unknown basis.
In the three patients with muscle disease there was absence of a dominant frequency.
We suggest that surface electrogastrography may offer a non-invasive means of screening patients with suspected neuromuscular disease of the gut causing persistent vomiting and episodes of functional obstruction.
Use of the conjugate of disulphated ursodeoxycholic acid with p -aminobenzoic acid for the detection of intestinal bacteria
Abstract
The disulphate ester of ursodeoxycholyl-β-aminobenzoic acid (PABA-UDCA) was synthesised and compated with PABA-UDCA for its use in detection of intestinal bacteria.
This compound, PABA-UDCA disulphate, had characters in common with PABA-UDCA in that it was deconjugated by cholylglycine hydrolase to release free PABA and bacteria that split glycocholic acid deconjugated PABA-UDCA disulphate.
Further, in rat experiments urinary exrcretions of PABA were measured for six hours after oral administration of 15 mg PABA-UDCA disulphate.
Ten control rats excreted (mean (SE) 188.2 (13.6) µg of PABA; 10 rats with an intestinal stagnant loop excreted more (530.1 (30.1) µg; p): whereas 10 rats in each of three groups pretreated by oral administration of various antibiotics excreted less (polymix B+ tinidazole, 4.9 (1.6) µg; kanamycin, 31.0 (4.7) µg; clindamycin 40.9 (5.5) µg; p).
By contrast with PABA-UDCA, PABA-UDCA disulphate was not actively absorbed from any part of the small intestine in everted gut sac experiments, and showed poor recovery from bile after its intraileal instillation in rats.
This indicated that PABA-UDCA disulphate is a single pass type substance in the gut and its oral administration test reflects the sum of the activities of bacteria in the small intestine and colon.
The disulphate was easily soluble in water and this allowed its application in an in vitro test involving PABA-UDCA disulphate incubation with intraperitoneal pus (PABA-UDCA disulphate incubation test) from patients with peritonitis.
This test was carried out on six patients with peritonitis, and the severity of bacterial peritonitis was expressed quantitatively.
From the results obtained PABA-UDCA disulphate was considered a good material to detect intestinal bacteria.
To evaluate intestinal bacteria, clinical application of breath tests with 1 4 C labelled glycocholate,1 4 C-D-xylose, glucose-H 2 , or lactulose H 2 has been proposed.
These tests have flaws, however, because they need a radioisotopic material or special, expensive equipment for measurement.
To solve these problems, we reported the use of a conjugate of ursodeoxycholic acid with p -aminobenzoic acid (PABA-UDCA) for the evaluation of intestinal microflora.
In this article we report studies on the use of a disulphated derivative of PABA-UDCA for the detection of intestinal bacteria.
Materials and methods
SYNTHESIS OF THE PABA CONJUGATE OF UDCA DISULPHATE
Synthesis of PABA-UDCA was by the method described previously.
The disulphate ester of PABA-UDCA was prepared by a modification of the method of Goto and associates.
To a solution of PABA-UDCA (1.0 g) in anhydrous pyridine (10 ml) was added chlorosulphonic acid (1.0 ml) in anhydrous pyridine (10 ml) with ice cooling and the solution was then heated overnight at 50°C.
The resulting solution was poured into ice water, acidifiedwith concentrated HCl, and extracted with n-butanol.
The organic layer was washed with H 2 O, dried over anhydrous Na 2 SO 4 , mixed with a few drops of concentratd NH 4 OH, and evaporated in vacuo.
The residue was chromatographed on a silica gel column with ethanol:ammonium hydroxide (9:1 v/v).
The appropriate fractions were collected and evaporated, and the residue was crystalised from methanol-ethyl acetate to give 460 mg of the ammonium salt of PABA-UDCA disulphate (melting point 177–183°C); IRncm -1 : 2920, 2860, 1660, 1605, 1525; NMR (d 6 DMSO, ta;): 0.61 (3 H, s), 0.89 (3 H, s), 0.94 (3 H, d, J=6), 3.93 (2 H, m), 7.70 (2 H, d, J=9), 7.87 (2 H, d, J=9), 10.18 (1 H, s)).
The ammonium salt was dissolved in H 2 O, adjusted to pH 9.5 with NaOH, and passed through a column of ion exchange resin (Diaion HP 20, Mitsubishi Chemical Industries, Japan) to give the sodium salt of PABA-UDCA disulphate, which was used in the reported experiments.
Figure 1 shows the chemical structures of PABA-UDCA disulphate and PABA-UDCA.
The flow rates of PABA-UDCA disulphate and its related compounds on thin layer chromatography (Kieselgel 60 F 2 5 4 plates, Merck) with a solvent system of benzene: dioxane:methanol:acetic acid (15:5:3:2, v/v) were: UDCA, 0.91; PABA-UDCA, 0.87; PABA-UDCA disulphate, 0.52.
IN VITRO HYDROLYSIS OF PABA-UDCA DISULPHATE WITH CHOLYLGLYCINE HYDROLASE
Incubation of PABA-UDCA disulphate with cholyglycine hydrolase were carried out in accordance with the method described by Nair.
Solutions with six different concentrations of PABA-UDCA disulphate were studied (A, B, C, D, E, and F respectively containing 2.2 mg, 1.1 mg, 0.55 mg, 0.27 mg, 0.14 mg, and 0.07 mg of PABA-UDCA disulphate in each 2 ml of reaction mixture (1.489 mM, 0.744 mM, 0.372 mM, 0.186 mM, 0.093 mM, and 0.047 mM)).
The amount of PABA released was estimated with an assay system for urinary PABA (Eisai Co, Tokyo, Japan).
INCUBATION OF PABA-UDCA DISULPHATE WITH PANCREATIC ENZYMES AND HOMOGENATES OF INTESTINAL MUCOSA FROM RATS
These experiments were carried out by the method reported by Huijghebaert and Hofmann.
CULTURE OF PABA-UDCA DISULPHATE WITH AEROBIC AND ANAEROBIC INTESTINAL BACTERIA
This study was carried out as we desctibed previously.
ADMINISTRATION OF PABA-UDCA DISULPHATE TO RATS WITH DIFFERENT INTESTINAL BACTERIA
An in vivo experiment was carried out with male Sprague-Dawley rats (weight range 200–300 g) as we previously reported.
Rats were divided into a control group (group A), an antibiotic pretreated group (group B), and a bacterial overgrowth group (group C).
Group B was further divided into three subgroups in accordance with the prescription and dose of antibiotics, as: group B1, 30000 units polymixin B+ 20 mg tinidazole; group B2, 50 mg kanamycin; group B3, 10 mg clindamycin.
Each group and subgroup consisted ot 10 rats.
Bacterial overgrowth rats were prepared in the same way as described previously.
After oral administration of 15.0 mg PABA-UDCA disulphate to each rat, the amounts of PABA excreted in a six-hour urine sample were determiend.
EVERTED GUT SAC EXPERIMENTS
Whether PABA-UDCA disulphate or PABA-UDCA wasactively absorbed from the small intestine was studied with an everted rat gut sac.
Male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing about 250 g were fasted for 24 hours and killed by decapitation.
Laparotomy was performed, and the intestine was flushed with 100 ml of ice cold 0.9% NaCl solution.
The entire small intestine was removed, and divided equally into four segments,(segments of jejunum I, jejunum II, ileum I, and ileum II from proximal to distal).
The everted gut sac was prepared with 10 cm of small intestine from each segment in accordance with the method of Wilson and Wiseman.
The sacs were filled with a modified Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate solution (pH 7.4) containing 0.1 mM PABA-UDCA disulphate or PABA-UDCA.
The composition of the Krebs-Ringer solution was: 128 mM NaCl, 1.2 mM CaCl 2 , 0.7 mM MgSO 4 , 5.1 mM KCl, 1.3 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 25.6 mM NaHCO 3 , and 9 mM glucose.
The gut sacs were placed in incubation flasks containing 30 ml of a similar solution to that of the serosal compartment.
Under gentle oxygenation (95% O 2 -5% CO 2 ), all flasks were incubated at 37°C for one hour.
At the end of the incubation period, PABA-UDCA disulphate or PABA-UDCA concentration in the serosal and mucosal compartments was measured by the method of Bratton and Marshall after hydrolysis of PABA-UDCA disulphate or PABA-UDCA with HCl.
BILIARY RECOVERY OF PABA-UDCA AND ITS DUSULPHATE IN RATES
Male Sprague-Dawley rats (weight range 200–300 g) were fasted overnight before operation.
Laparotomy was carried out under ether anesthesia and cannulation of the bile duct was performed for continuous bile collection.
At the midpoint of the ileum, 0.020 mmol of PABA-UDCA disulphate (15.0 mg) or PABA-UDCA (10.0 mg) in a slightly basic (pH 7.5) aqueous solution was injected into the lumen, and bile was collected for three hours.
Biliary recovery of the compounds was calculated by subtracting the amounts of biliary PABA measured without HCl hydrolysis from those with hydrolysis.
INSTILLATION OF PABA INTO THE COLON IN HUMANS
To investigate whether PABA was absorbed from the colon, an instillation was carried out in three patients.
One of the patients (patient 1) had an obstructing tumour in the transverse colon with a loop colostomy in the caecum and two (patients 2 and 3) in the sigmoid colon within the transverse colon.
PABA (100 mg) dissolved in 20 ml of saline solution was administered to the anal side of the colon through the colostomy, and urinary excretion of PABA was mreasured for six hours after instillation.
Each one hour excretion of PABA after instillation was obtained by subtracting background PABA from a one hour urine sample before instillation.
INCUBATION OF PABA-UDCA DISULPHATE WITH INTRAPERITONEAL PUS OR FLUID FROM PATIENTS WITH PERITONITIS
To examine the magnitude of contamination of the peritoneal cavity by intestinal bacteria, an incubation of PABA-UDCA disulphate with intraperitoneal pus or fluid was carried out in six patients with localised or diffuse peritonitis (table 1).
Intraperitoneal pus or fluid was obtained for bacterial culture examination and PABA-UDCA disulphate incubation test soon after laparotomy.
The incubation test was done as follows: 0.4 ml of 0.75% 2-mercaptoethanol and 0.4 ml of 1.86% EDTA solutions in 1.0 ml of 0.025 M sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.6) were mixed with 2.0 mg of PABA-UDCA disulphate.
Then 0.6 ml of intraperitoneal pus or fluid was added, and incubation was started at 37°C in a water bath.
After 30 minutes the amount of PABA was determined with an assay system for urinary PABA.
The amount of PABA was calculated by the subtraction of the amount of PABA obtained in the sample without incubation from that after a 30 minute incubation.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Results are expressed as mean (SE).
Statistical comparisons were made with Student's t test for unpaired samples.
A p value <was considered significant.
Results
HYDROLYSIS OF PABA-UDCA DISULPHATE BY CHOLYLGLYCINE HYDROLASE
Figure 2 shows the time course of enzymatic hydrolysis of PABA-UDCA disulphate at six different concentrations of substrate.
The compound was efficiently hydrolysed by cholylglycine hydrolase.
The Km value determined from the Lineweaver-Burk plot was 0.23 mM.
HYDROLYSIS OF PABA-UDCA DISULPHATE BY PANCREATIC ENZYMES AND RODENT INTESTINALMUCOSAL HOMOGENATES
PABA-UDCA disulphate was completely resistant to pancreatic enzymes such as pancreatin, carboxypeptidases A and B, α-chymotrypsin, and trypsin.
Similarly it was not hydrolysed by mucosal homogenates from the small intestine of the rat.
BACTERIAL DECONJUGATION
Tables II and III show bacterial deconjugation data.
Of the aerobic bacteria, only Enterococcus faecalis ,Lactobacillus aciodophilus ,Proteu mirabilis , and Staphylococcus epidermidis deconjugated PABA-UDCA disulphate.
By contrast, many anaerobic intestinal bacteria deconjugated this compound.
These included Bacteroides fragilis ,Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron ,Bacteroides vulgatus ,Bifidobacterium adolescentis ,Bacterium longum ,Clostridium perfringens ,Eubacterium aerofaciens , and Fusobacterium varium .
ADMINISTRATION OF PABA-UDCA DISULPHATE IN RATS
Figure 3 shows the results of the urinary excretion of PABA for six hours after dosing for all groups of rats.
No adverse effects were noted in the rats and no deaths occurred.
The control group of rats excreted (mean (SE)) 188.2 (13.6) µg of PABA into urine.
Significant (p) suppressions of urinary PABA excretion were found in rats pretreated with antibiotics compared with the control group (B1, 4.9 (1.6) µg; B2, 31.0 (4.7) µg; B3, 40.9 (5.5) µg).
By contrast, rats with intestinal bacterial overgrowth had significantly greater excretion of PABA than the controls (: 530.1 (30.1) µg (p)).
INTESTINAL ABSORPTION OF PABA-UDCA AND ITS DISULPHATE
Figure 4 shows the results of the active transport experiment, indicating that PABA-UDCA was actively absorbed from the distal side of the ileum whereas its disulphate was not absorbed from any part of the small intestine.
In vivo, considerable PABA-UDCA was recovered from ble (32.6 (1.3) % (n=3)), whereas recovery of PABA-UDCA disulphate was poor (1.8 (0.2) % (n=3)), after intraileal instillation.
ABSORPTION OF PABA FROM THE COLON IN HUMANS
Figure 5 shows urinary recovery of PABA after intracolonic instillation of PABA in human subjects.
The maximal urinary excretion of PABA was found three or four hours after PABA instillation.
Total recoveries of PABA during six hours after instillation were 37.7%, 49.5%, and 38.5% in patients 1, 2, and 3 respectively.
PABA-UDCA DISULPHATE INCUBATION TEST IN PATIENTS WITH PERITONITIS
PABA-UDCA disulphate was easily soluble in assay solution with pH 5.6 sodium acetate buffer, whereas the maximal solubility of PABA-UDCA in that solution was 1.2 µg/ml.
The incubation data were obtained within 90 minutes after starting the test.
Table I shows the results.
The amounts of PABA that were released by 30-minute incubation with 1 ml of the sample were 0 µg, 2.45 µg, 3.57 µg, 1.83 µg, 11.1 µg, and 20.37 µg for Patients A, B, C, D, E, and F respectively.
Therefore the abilities of the whole intraperitoneal fluids to deconjugate PABA-UDCA disulphate were calculated as 0 mg, 0.02 mg, 3.57 mg, 0.04 mg, 10.44 mg, and 16.30 mg in the respective patients.
Patients B and E were positive in the test but were negative in bacterial culture examination of the sample.
In patients C, E, and F with high values in the test it was difficult to control the infection and they died on the second, 134th, and 95th day after operation respectively.
Discussion
For a simple evaluation of intestinal bacteria we previously reported reliable results in animals with a PABA-UDCA test involving oral administration of PABA-UDCA which contains p -aminobenzoic acid (PABA) as a tracer group.
The principle behind the test is as follows: the compound, a condensation product of UDCA with PABA, releases PABA when bacterial cholyglycine hydrolase is present in the gut.
Free PABA is rapidly absorbed and excreted in the urine, so that the urinary excretion of PABA reflects the activity of intestinal bactria.
In our present study, a disulphated derivative of PABA-UDCA was synthesised and its basic characters were investigated.
This compound, PABA-UDCA disulphate, features in common with PABA-UDCA: Firstly, it was efficient hydrolysed by cholyglycine hydrolase.
Secondly, all the microorganisms that deconjugate PABA-UDCA or glycocholic acid split PABA-UDCA disulphate resulting in the release of free PABA.
Thirdly, the amounts of PABA excreted in urine during six hours after dosing were significantly lower in rats pretreated with antibiotics and higher in bacterial overgrowth rats compared with controls, as found in the PABA-UDCA administration test.
There were, however, some differences between PABA-UDCA and its disulphate.
Firstly, Km values were different.
PABA-UDCA disulphate had a lower Km value (0.23 mM) compared with PABA-UDCA (3.71 mM).
Therefore, the sulphated compound might be more sensitive to cholyglycine hydrolase than PABA-UDCA.
The second difference was in intestinal absorption.
PABA-UDCA, similar bile acids conjugated to glycine or taurine, was actively absorbed from the distal ileum and recovered efficiently from bile.
This means that PABA-UDCA that is not hydrolysed by bacterial enzymes in the small intestine is efficiently absorbed from the terminal ileum by active transport.
Therefore it is possible to speculate that the PABA-UDCA administration test reflects the activity of bacteria in the small intestine when it is given orally in lower doses than the maximal amount absorbed from the terminal ileum.
Sulphated bile acids are excreted in urine in large amounts under cholestatic conditions.
These sulphate esters of bile acids are usually less toxic than their unesterified parent substances and are eliminated more rapidly through faeces and urine so that the organism can be efficiently detoxified in the case of cholestasis.
Lack et al and Walker et al reported that bile acid sulphates were absorbed from the intestine to a lesser extent than their unesterified parent substances.
Likewise the disulphate ester of PABA-UDCA was not actively absorbed from any part of the small intestine, and was recovered from bile in only small amounts in our experiment.
Eyssen et al , Huijghebaert et al , and Pacini et al previously confirmed the absence of bacterial desulphating activity on 7-monosulphate esters of bile acids but the presence of such desulphatng activity on 3-monosulphate esters in cultures of faeces from humans, rats, and mice.
Consequently, even if the desulphate ester of PABA-UDCA is disulphated at the 3α position by bacterial action after oral administration the 7 β-monosulphate ester of PABA-UDCA formed can be resistant to bacterial transformation resulting in no absorption from the gut and rapid excretion into faeces.
Therefore PABA-UDCA disulphate can be a single pass type of substance in the gut.
Contrary to our expectations, PABA that was instilled into the human colon was recovered well from urine.
This means that there is a good absorption of PABA from the colon.
For these reasons, we can deduce that PABA-UDCA disulphate is a single pass type of compound in the gut for the evaluation of intestinal microflora, and the administration test results reflect the sum of activities of bacteria in the small intestine and colonic.
Practically, the oral administration test with PABA-UDCA disulphate makes possible the evaluation of colonic bacteria because most intestinal bacteria is present in the colon.
Also, the test may be useful for monitoring the effects of antibiotics on the gastrointestinal bacteria.
The third difference is in the solubility of the compounds in water.
PABA-UDCA was practically insoluble in the assay solution containing 2-mercaptoethanl.
EDTA, and pH 5.6 sodium acetate buffer.
It was rendered easily soluble in it, however, by the introduction of sulphate groups on the 3a and 7 β hydroxyl groups of PABA-UDCA.
This increase in water solubility made possible an in vitro incubation test with intraperitoneal pus or fluid from patients with peritonitis.
Positive results in this incubation test indicate the intraperitoneal presence of cholyglycine hydrolase, namely intraperitoneal leakage of intestinal bacteria.
Data obtained from the test reflect the magnitude of intraperitoneal contamination by intestinal bacteria.
Considered from the standpoints of bacterial peritonitis and prediction of prognosis, it is important to know how much the patients with peritonitis are contaminated by intestinal bacteria.
We consider that this PABA-UDCA disulphate incubation test makes it possible to express the severity of bacterial peritonitis quantitatively within 90 minutes.
Does the somatostatin analogue octreotide protect against ERCP induced pancreatitis?
Abstract
This study evaluates the effect of the long acting somatostatin analogue octreotide on biochemical and clinical parameters of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) induced pancreatitis.
Altogether 245 patients were randomised to receive either octreotide or isotonic saline.
Octerotide (100 µg) was administered intravenously five minutes before ERCP and subcutaneously 45 minutes after ERCP.
There were no significant differences in the median serum amylase and lipase activities at baseline, eight, and 24 hours after ERCP.
Five patients (2%) developed clinical pancreatitis — three in the octreotide and two in the placebo groups.
Excluding patients who developed pancreatitis, 43 (18%) developed abdominal pain after ERCP — 21 in the octreotide and 23 in the placebo groups.
There were no significant differences in the median serum amylase and lipase values between the treatment groups.
None of the 52 patients who had therapeutic interventions developed pancreatitis.
This study suggests that octerotide may not protect against ERCP induced pancreatitis.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is now well established in the diagnosis and treatment of biliary and pancreatic disorders.
Although the procedure is generally considered to be safe, complications related to cannulation, contrast injection, and sphincterotomy may occur, and include cholangitis, haemorrhage, perforation, and pancreatitis.
Pancreatitis is the most common of these complications.
Clinically severe pancreatitis is reported to occur in 1–7% of patients, while an asymptomatic increase in pancreatic enzyme activities may occur in up to 70%.
Various gastrointestinal hormones such as glucagon and calcitonin have been investigated in studies on the prevention of ERCP induced pancreatitis.
Somatostatin and a long acting analogue, octreotide, have received particular attention recently.
Both are potent known inhibitors of pancreatic secretion.
Several studies of healthy volumteers have shown inhibition of baseline and stimulated exocrine pancreatic secretion.
Four animal studies of experimentally induced acute pancreatitis have shown an improvement in the pancreatic enzyme response after the infusion of cyclic somatostatin or octreotide.
Three of the four studies showed a concomitant improvement in histology.
In three studies, pancreatitis was induced chamically, and in one by ligature of the pancreatic duct — a model that is probably more analogous to ERCP induced pancreatitis.
In the latter study, somatostatin and octreotide improved the enzyme response, histology, and survival.
Several clinical studies evaluating the effect of somatostatin or octreotide on ERCP induced pancreatic reactions have been published but their results have been conflicting.
We undertook a randomised, controlled study in 245 patients to evaluate the effect of the somatostatin analogue octreotide on biochemical and clinical parameters of ERCP induced pancreatitis.
Methods
This study was designed as a controlled clinical trial, incorporating a double blind placebo control.
Exclusion criteria were as follows:(1) age under 18 or above 85 years;(2) pregnancy;(3) albuminuria greater than 500 mg per 24 hours;(4) acute myocardial infarction in the three months before the study;(5) a history of asthma or allergy to drugs.
Informed consent was obtained from all the patients.
Patients were randmly allocated to receive either the long acting somatostatin analogue octreotide (n=121) or isotonic saline intravenously as a placebo (n= 124).
Octreotide was given five minutes before ERCP as an intravenous bolus injectio of 100 µg and immediately after ERCP as a subcutaneous injection of 100 µg.
Before ERCP, all patients received premedication consisting of hyoscin-n-butyl bromide (Buscopan) with pethidine (meperidine) and/or diazepam (Valium) intravenously titrated to age and tolerance.
Antibiotics (cefotetan and metronidazol) were given before and after ERCP in patients with cholangitis.
All patients were in hospital and confined to bed for at least 24 hours after ERCP.
Fasting was maintained for a minimum of six hours.
ERCP was performed with the Olympus JFIT10 or TJF10 endoscopes.
Contrast medium (65% angiografine in normal saline) was injected manually in a controlled, titrated fashion under fluorscopic control.
When indicated, sphincterotomy was performed using a standard Erlangen type sphincterotome.
Endoprosthesis placement was performed in the conventional manner using a plastic prosthesis for the bile and pancreatic ducts.
Selective cannulation of the biliary and/or pancreatic duct was attempted in all patients.
Ductal cannulation was rated as ‘easy’ if cannulation could be achieved immediately, and as ‘difficult’if it required repeated attempts leading to obvious trauma to the papilla.
Assessment of the following clinical parameters was performed before ERCP, immediately after ERCP, and eight and 24 hours after ERCP:(1) presence and character of abdominal pain;(2) requirement for analgesics; and (3) body temperature.
Serum amylase and lipase activities were determined in serial blood samples taken before (baseline) and eight and 24 hours after ERCP.
Hyperamylasaemia and hyperlipasaemia were defined as increases above the upper limits of normal, which were 52 IU/l and 200 IU/l respectively, before January 11, 1989, and 10 IU/l and 208 IU/l, respectively, after January 11, 1989.
ERCP associated pancreatitis was defined by clinical features consistent with acute pancreatitis beginning after ERCP and lasting for at least 24 hours, associated with an increase in serum amylase and/or lipase greater than three tiems the upper limit of normal.
The white blood cell count was determined immediately before and at the end of the study; leukocytosis was defined as a white cell count greater than 10000 cells/mm.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Comparison of quantitative data between the tw groups was performed by Student's t test when normal distribution of the data could be assumed, and by Mann-Whitney U test when distrubiton could not be assumed to be normal (serum and amylase values).
Comparison of categorical data between the two groups was performed with the χ 2 test (with Yates's correction when necessary) or with Fischer's exact test.
A p value less than 0.05 was the accepted level of significance.
Results
Comparison of age, sex, and indication for ERCP showed no significant differences between the octreotide and placebo groups (Table I).
ERCP results are shown in Table II.
Cannulation of the papilla failed in nine patients.
The pancreatic duct was filled in 199 patients (84%).
The octreotide and placebo groups were similar in terms of pancreatic duct filling, number of pancreatic duct injections, volume of contrast media injected, and pancreatic duct overfilling producing acinar opacification.
Therapeutic ERCP procedures (39 sphincterotomies and 13 endoprostheses placement) were performed in 18% of patients.
The numbers of patients in the octreotide and placebo groups with ‘easy’ and ‘difficult’cannulations of the bile and pancreatic ducts is given in Figure 1.
The diagnostic findings at ERCP are detailed in Table III.
Five patients (2%) developed ERCP associated pancreatitis — three in the octreotide and two in the placebo groups.
Table IV details the ERCP and clinical data for these patients.
All had undergone injection of the pancreatic duct, three had repeat injections, and two had overfilling resulting in acinar opacification.
Two patients had duct pathology seen on pancreatography.
None had a therapeutic intervention.
The clinical course was uncomplicated in all patients.
Comparison of the median serum amylase and lipase activities at baseline and at eight and 24 hours after ERCP in the octreotide and placebo groups showed no significant differences between the two treatment groups (Fig 2).
Excluding those patients who developed pancreatitis, 43 (18%) developed non-specific post ERCP abdominal pain — in the octreotide and 23 in the placebo group.
Comparing the two treatment groups, there were no significant differences in the median serum amylase and lipase activities at baseline and at eight and 24 hours (Fig 2).
However, comparing the subgroup of patients that developed abdominal pain with the subgroup that did not, the former had significantly higher median serum amylase and lipase values at both eight and 24 hours (Fig 3).
No significant side effects attributable to octreotide were observed during the study.
Discussion
Our study of 245 patients randomised to receive octreotide or placebo failed to show an effect of octreotide on the biochemical and clinical parameters of ERCP induced pancreatitis.
There was no significant difference in median serum amylas or lipase activities, and the occurrence of abdominal pain and clinical pancreatitis was similarly represented in the two treatment groups.
Previous controlled studies evaluating the effect of somatostatin or octreotide on biochemical, clinical, and morphological markers of pancreatitis have shown mixed results.
All studies were small in sample size.
Comparison is difficult because of variability of drug administration (route, dosage, and schedule), patient composition, and type of ERCP procedures performed.
Two studies by Tulassay et al showed that prophylactic administration of somatostatin or octreotide reduced high pancreatic enzyme activities after ERCP.
In a non-randomised study, 20 patients who received cyclic somatostatin had a fourfold reduction in serum amylase values compared with 35 controls.
A total of 875 µg of somatostatin were administered before and after ERCP over a 150 minute period.
In a randomised double blind study, 29 patients who received octreotide in a dose of 0.1 mg subcutaneously given 45 minutes before ERCP had a significantly smaller increase in pancreatic enzyme activities compared with 34 control subjects.
An analysis of clinical parameters was not performed in either study.
A randomised double blind study of 38 patients by Cicero et al showed a significant reduction in pain intensity and maximum increase in pancreatic enzymes in patients that received 1000 µg of cyclic somatostatin before and four hours after ERCP compared with control subjects.
Morphological evaluation of the pancreas with echography in 33 patients showed that those treated with somatostatin had a significantly greater increase in the anteroposterior diameter of the pancreas after injection.
In a similarly designed study of 33 patients, Bordas et al showed a significant reduction in abdominal pain and pancreatic enzyme increase in patients who received a bolus injection of natural somatostatin (4 µg/kg body weight) before ERCP.
In a randomised study of 16 patients with idiopathic recurrent pancreatitis who were undergoing hydrostatic balloon dilation of the pancreatic duct sphincter, somatostatin given intravenously at a dose of 250 µg/hour one hour before and 12 hours after dilatation reduced the incidence and severity of acute pancreatitis compared with placebo.
In this study, 43% of patients developed acute pancreatitis.
In contrast, several controlled studies have failed to show a protective effect of somatostatin or octreotide in ERCP induced pancreatitis.
In a study of 56 patients randomised to somatostatin or placebo, somatostatin, administered in a dose of 250 µg/hour after contrast media emptying of the pancreatic duct, did not reduce hyperamylasaemia or pancreatitis like pain.
A smaller study of 20 patients showed no difference between the median rise in serum amylase values between the somatostatin (250 µg/hour given before ERCP and continued for 24 hours) and placebo groups.
In a study of 54 patients undergoing endoscopic sphincterotomy, the continuous infusion of cyclic somatostatin in a dose of 250 µg/hour over 26 hours beginning two hours before ERCP did not significantly reduce pancreatic enzyme rise compared with placebo.
A study of 26 patients who received somatostatin in a dose of 250 µg/hour over 24 hours did not show significant reduction in amylase activities compared with historical controls.
The preliminary results of a multicentre study suggest that octreotide may increase the incidence of ERCP induced pancreatitis.
In a randomised study of 84 patients, octreotide, given in a dose of 100 µg intravenously immediately before ERCP and subcutaneously 45 minutes later, significantly increased the incidence of pancreatitis from 11% (control group) to 35% (octreotide group).
Controlled clinical studies evaluating somatostatin in acute pancreatitis have not shown statistically significant advantages in terms of complications and mortality, although trends toward fewer complications and better pain relief were observed.
Because of the low incidence of clinical pancreatitis after ERCP, investigators have studied the effect of somatostatin or octreotide on ERCP associated abdominal pain as a surrogate marker of pancreatitis.
The incidence of abdominal pain after ERCP, excluding cases of diagnoses pancreatitis, was 18% in our study.
We found that patients who developed abdominal pain had significantly higher median serum amylase and lipase values than asymptomatic patients, a finding that tends to validate abdominal pain as a marker of ‘subclinical’ pancreatitis.
Comparison of the median serum amylase and lipase activities at baseline and eight and 24 hours after ERCP between the octreotide and placebo groups showed no significant differences.
Risk factors for ERCP induced pancreatitis have been identified and include repeated pancreatic duct injections, overfilling of the pancreatic duct, and the presence of a diseased ductal system.
In our study, all patients who developed pancreatitis had injection of the pancreatic duct, three had repeat injections, two had overfilling resulting in acinar opacification, and two had ductal pathology on pancreatography.
La Farla et al , found that endoscopic sphincterotomy significantly increased the incidence of pancreatitis after ERCP, however, none of the patients who underwent sphincterotomy in our study developed pancreatitis.
Eight of nine cases of failed papillary cannulation were in the octreotide group, and patients in the octreotide group tended to have fewer ‘easy’ as well as more ‘difficult’cannulations of the bile and pancreatic ducts (Fig 1).
This raises the question of whether octreotide increases sphincter of Oddi pressure, rendering ductal cannulation more difficult.
The effect of somatostatin on the human sphincter of Oddi has not been established.
We studied the effect of octreotide administered in a dose of 50 µg on the sphincter of Oddi using endoscopic manometry in seven patients and found that this hormone increase basal pressure and the frequency of phasic wave contractions appreciably (submitted for publication).
In the prairie dog and rabbit, somatostatin has been shown to inhibit sphincter of Oddi motility, but this effect may be species specific.
The gastrointestinal hormone cholecystokinine has been shown to have an opposite effect on the human sphincter of Oddi compared with that of the rabbit and prairie dog.
Excitatory effects of somatostatin or octreotide on the sphincter of Oddi may impair biliary and pancreatic duct outflow.
Such a mechanism is indirectly supported by human studies showing that cholecystokinin, a hormone with antagonistic properties to somatostatin on the sphincter of Oddi, increases bile flow into the duodenum.
One study of experimental pancreatography in anaesthesised piglets showed that somatostatin significantly delayed ductal emptying of contrast media compared with control animals.
Mucosal peptic activity during Helicobacter pylori infection in pediatric patients
Abstract
Intramucosal peptic activity may participate in the genesis of acute and chronic superficial gastritis.
The proteolytic activity of homogenates of gastric mucosa (antrum and body) and duodenum were measured at pH 2.0 (total peptic activity) after exposure to pH 8.0 (pepsinogen) and the activated pepsinogen (pepsin) was calculated in pediatric patients investigated for the presence of Helicobacter pylori (H pylori ), 122 antral, 77 stomach body, and 74 duodenal biopsies were examined in 43 H pylori positive patients, 51 controls, and 28 H pylori negative gastritis patients.
Activated pepsinogen was significantly reduced in the stomach of H pylori positive patients only.
Pepsinogen values were similar in all the anatomical areas tested in all patients.
In 13 H pylori positive patients reinvestigated three months after antibiotic therapy, antral mucosal activated pepsinogen activity increased significantly (mean pretreatment 1.56 (1.0) U/mg protein versus mean posttreatment 2.72 (1.7) U/mg protein) and reached values comparable with controls.
The decreased activated pepsinogen activity in association with normal pepsinogen content observed in the antrum of H pylori positive gastritis patients indicate local pepsin inactivation or alternately enhanced removal into the gastric lumen or backflow into the circulation.
Accumulating evidence supports the concent that Helicobacter pylori infection plays a causative role in gastric inflammation in children.
On the grounds of epidemiologic studies, based on specific serum antibodies,H pylori was considered to be uncommon in childhood and to increase progressively with age.
The reduced colonisation rate of children compared with adults disappears when patients with primary antral gastritis are considered specifically.
Although studies have shown a striking correlation between the presence of H pylori and classic inflammation of the antral mucosa, the exact mechanism of tissue injury remains obscure.
In this study the peptic activity was determined in gastric mucosa obtained from children with H pylori infection compared with non-infected patients with evidence of gastritis and with those with normal gastric histology.
Methods
PATIENTS
During the period June 1989 to June 1990 children undergoing endoscopy for various reasons in both medical centres (Tel Hasomer and Torino) were prospectively tested for the presence of H pylori infection.
Endoscopy was carried out after sedation, using an Olympus GIF-10 fibreoptic endscope.
Biopsies were obtained from the gastric body, antrum, and duodenum for the following procedures: routine histology,H pylori culture (antral only), urease test (antral only), and peptic activity determination.
Not all procedures were done in every patient.
Biopsies for histological preparation were fixed in Bouin's solution, sectioned, stained with haematoxylin and eosin, Giemsa and Gram stain and examined for the presence of H pylori and signs of inflammation.
Mucosal inflammation was identified by the presence of increased numbers of acute or chronic inflammatory cells.
The classification of gastritis was made without knowing the results of the Giemsa staining, urease test or pepsinogen determination.
Antral biopsies cultured for H pylori were inoculated onto blood agar and Skirrow's medium and incubated at 37°C in an anaerobic environment for seven days.
Urease test used the Christensen formulation without agar.
Change of medium colour was tested after 24 hours.
The criteria for H pylori infection were based on the presence of histopathological evidence of gastritis and of typical bacilli on staining, a positive urease test and or culture.
Biopsy specimens for peptic activity determination were immediately homogenised in 1 ml H 2 O using Ultra Turax T25 homogeniser (Ianke and Kunkel).
Homogenates were stored at -20°C in 10% glycerol solution.
The peptic activity of mucosal homogenates was determined in an assay at pH 2.0 by the method of Anson and Mirsky and expressed as specific activity (IU/mg protein); aliquots of mucosal homogenates assayed by this method were considered as representing total peptic activity.
Separate aliquots of the same mucosal homogenates were assayed for peptic activity after being exposed to pH 8.0 by alkalinisation using 1N NaOH.
The peptic activity obtained in these aliquots was considered to represent pepsinogen concentration.
Activated pepsinogen (pepsin) was calculated by subtracting pepsinogen from total peptic activity values.
Protein was determined according to Lowry.
Patients were treated with antibiotics (three weeks of amoxycillin 50 mg/kg/24 hours tid followed by two weeks of metronidazole 20 mg/ kg/24 hours tid).
At least three months post treatment endoscopy was performed and biopsies were obtained for the same procedures as above.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All results are expressed as mean (SD).
The difference between means of two groups was evaluated by unpaired Student's t test with pconsidered as significant.
Results
One hundred and twenty two patients were included in this study.
The mean age of patients was 11.5 (3.8) year range (two to 18 years).
There were 72 males and 50 females (M:F ratio 1.4:1.0).
Patients were divided into three groups according to the presence of histological gastritis and evidence of H pylori infection by at least one criterion.
GROUP I
H pylori positive gastritis was found in 43 patients.
Their mean age was 12.5 years and M:F ratio=1.6:1.0 H pylori infection was diagnosed by histology in 40/41, by a positive urease test in 23/25 and by culture in 19/27.
GROUP II
H pylori negative gastritis was present in 28 patients.
The histology indicated chronic active antral gastritis in all patients.
Mean age of this group was 12.6 years and the M:F ratio 1.5:1.0.
This group included 12 patients who have previously been treated with oral antibiotics for various reasons, six patients with chronic inflammatory bowel disease, six patients with associated inflammatory disease of the oesophagous and/or stomach and/or duodenum.
GROUP III
Controls, had no evidence of gastritis or H pylori infection.
This group included 51 patients, with a mean age of 10 years significantly lower than the previous two groups (p), the M:F ratio was 1.2:1.0.
The peptic activity of antral biopsies was determined in all 122 patients.
Results are shown in Table I.
Significantly decreased antral total peptic activity was found in patients with H pylori positive gastritis compared with control, and H pylori negative gastritis.
This was mainly the result of diminished activated pepsinogen (pepsin) activity, while pepsinogen concentrations were normal.
Activated pepsinogen was slightly decreased in gastritis H pylori negative patients compared with controls.
The peptic activity of biopsies obtained from the stomach body region was determined in 77 patients (Table II).
Decreased concentrations of activated pepsinogen were found in H pylori positive patients only.
Duodenal biopsies were tested in 76 patients.
No significant difference among the three groups was observed (Table III).
EFFECT OF TREATMENT ON MUCOSAL PEPTIC ACTIVITY
Thirteen patients (seven famels and six males) positive for H pylori were reinvestigated three months after the completion of antibiotic therapy.
No evidence of H pylori infection or mucosal inflammation were present at the time of reinvestigation.
We found a significant difference in the antral mucosal peptic activity before and after treatment.
Total peptic activity and activated pepsinogen of the antral mucosa increased after eradication of H pylori infection but remained lower than controls (Table IV).
Duodenal and stomach body biopsies showed no significant changes compared with pretreatment biopsies (date not shown).
Individual values of activated pepsinogen showed significant increased activity in 10 of the 13 patients tested (Figure).
Discussion
This study shows a close association between H pylori induced gastritis and diminished peptic activity of the gastric mucosa, both in the active stage of the disease as well as after eradication of infection when values returned to normal.
Decreased peptic activity was present not only in the antral mucosa but also in the less affected mucosa of the gastric body.
H pylori is classically associated with inflammation of the antrum but not exclusively so.
Significant degrees of colonisation were found in gastritis located in the body of the stomach when this was specifically sought after, especially in the early stage of the disease.
The dynamics and importance of H pylori reduced altered mucosal peptic activity is far from being clarified.
The only report investigating and supporting our finding of reduced gastric peptic activity in H pylori infection comes from an unusual case report which followed the natural history of H pylori infection in a volunteer.
The peptic activity of H pylori infected mucosa was significantly reduced in comparison with normal mucosa as well as that of patients with gastritis not associated with H pylori infection.
We were unable to determine the aetiology of the gastritis in every patient of this latter group; histology failed to detect features of secondary gastritis, but additional sites of inflammation of the gastrointestinal mucosa were found in most of these patients.
Twelve of these children received previous antibiotic therapy for various reasons, with possible inadvertent effects on the diagnosis of H pylori .
The results of other studies in children confirm the existence of H pylori negative antral gastritis in 30% of children, especially of a younger age group.
The decreased peptic activity observed in our patients with H pylori infection was the result of decreased activated pepsinogen (pepsin) activity, while pepsinogen, determined after alkalinisation of mucosal homogenates, remained comparable with control.
The gastric peptic activity derives from a diversity of intracellular enzymes whose activity depends on the rate of secretion and the ambient pH.
Peptic activity is pH dependent and pepsin is irreversibly denaturated at alkaline pH.
By exposing mucosal homogenates to pH 8.0 pepsinogen remains stable but inactive and will regain full activity when reexposed to pH 2.0, the pH conventionally used in pepsin assays in vitro.
The relation between total gastric pepsinogen secretion in vitro and the peptic activity in vivo is not fully understood.
An effort to correlate mucosal pepsinogen accumulation with total peptic activity and peptic cell mass shows good correlation between these parameters in normal and inflamed gastric mucosa.
In this study, patients with superficial gastritis showed significant reduced pepsinogen content and secretion in the presence of a reduced chief cell mass.
No clinical data regarding the aetiology of superficial gastritis in these patients are given.
The fact that H pylori infected gastric mucosa has normal pepsinogen activity indicates adequate zymogen production and storage.
Pepsinogen synthesis has been found closely linked to secretion and depletion of stores by a well regulated feedback mechanism under in vitro conditions.
The decreased activated pepsinogen activity is possibly the result of local inactivation of secreted pepsin by bacteria or their metabolites or alternately, backflow into the circulation through an epithelium with altered permeability.
Supporting this concept is the fact that serum pepsinogen I activity has consequentially found to be raised in both adults and children with H pylori associated antral gastritis and these concentrations return to normal in most patients after successful therapy.
An alternative possibility for reduced total peptic activity and activated pepsinogen in the antral musoca of H pylori gastritis may be the utilisation of these proteins as energy substrate by the bacteria colonising the stomach.
The mechanism by which H pylori causes reduced peptic activity is unknown.
The organism induces decreased acid secretion, at least in the early phase of the disease but this may persist for weeks or even months.
Suppression of acid secretion seems to be directly associated with the presence of the organism overlying the gastric mucosa and to be reversed by antibiotic therapy in the course of the disease.
Similarly, our data confirm the direct relationship between active disease and decreased peptic activity as well as normalisation of the activity after antibiotic therapy and eradication of the infection.
The efficacy of metronidazole and amoxicillin has recently been assessed in a group of 32 children with non-specific abdominal pain and H pylori gastritis.
Thirty of 32 (93%) children were cleared of H pylori after a six week treatment and nine of 12 (75%) of these still remained free of H pylori after six months.
These results support the 100% eradication in the 13 patients reinvestigated in this study.
Glupczynski and Burette in their recent review article also suggest that combination therapy of a bismuth salt and an antiobiotic, or two different antibiotics alone, will improve the eradiation rate of H pylori and reduce the risk of resistance development.
Experimental inhibition of 1 4 C aminopyrine accumulation of rabbit parietal cells in vitro by whole organisms or sonicated bacteria isolated from patients with H pylori infection suggest the existence of an inhibitory protein.
The protein was further shown to inhibit cAMP release of gastric fundic biopsies and to prevent its stimulation by histamine.
In this regard the adrenergic stimulated pepsinogen secretion mediated by cAMP, may become an alternate pathway of bacteria induced decrease of peptic activity.
Reduced peptic activity in consonance with achlorhydria may favour opportunistic infection located in or in transit through the upper gastrointestinal tract of these patients.
The relationship between these alterations, hypergastrinaemia and chronic ulcer disease has also been suggested.
Low grade B cell mucosa associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma of the stomach: clinical and endoscopic features, treatment, and outcome
Abstract
A retrospective study of the clinical and endoscopic features of low grade gastric lymphomas of mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) in 16 patients together with treatment and outcome was undertaken.
Immunohistochemical studies of fresh tissue easily distinguished MALT lymphoma from benign reactive lymphoid hyperplasia (pseudolymphoma) and showed that tumour cells had the characteristic phenotype indicative of their origin from MALT.
Persistant epigastric pain was the main presenting complaint, and was often associated with acute bleeding, anaemia, or weight loss.
Eight patients had a past history of recurrent peptic ulcers or gastritis.
The endoscopic appearance suggested malignancy in only half the cases and was compatible with gastritis or a benign peptic ulcer in the remaineder.
There was extragastric involvement of other mucosal sites in eight patients (mainly the lung, but also the parotid gland and small bowel), but rarely was bone marrow and never the spleen or peripheral lymph nodes affected.
Conservative treatment with long term cyclophosphamide was effective in both stage I and stage IV disease, and all the patents are alive after a median follow up of 4.5 years.
These findings comfirm that low grade gastric MALT lymphomas are usually indolent tumours with non-specific endoscopic aspects and that dissemination to other mucosal sites was more frequent than previously reported.
Monochemotherapy could be an effective alternative treatment to surgery.
The gastrointestinal tract, particularly the stomach, is the most common primary site of extranodal lymphomas.
Most gastric lymphomas are large cell lymphomas of B cell lineage.
Primary small cell gastric lymphomas are less frequent and are usually localised, solitary lesions that can be completely excised.
Because of their favourable prognosis, they were long known as pseudolymphomas, however, immunohistochemical methods have now shown that most of these tumours are monoclongla B cell proliferations.
A number of recent pathological studies have emphasised the specificity of these B cells, suggesting that they originate from mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).
Indeed, they have the same cytological and immunophenotypic characteristics as the B cells that are normally found around the mantle zone of Pyer's patches.
These properties are now commonly used by pathologists in the diagnosis of MALT lymphomas.
A large clinicopathological study based on the review of surgical specimens has recently confirmed results from previous shorter series.
by showing the good prognosis of small cell gastric lymphomas from MALT origin.
Details of symptoms and endoscopic aspects of the stomach in this type of lymphoma, however, remain scarce in the published reports, and the best treatment has not yet been established.
This prompted us to report 16 consecutive cases of low grade gastric MALT lymphomas diagnosed in our institution.
In this series, the histological diagnosis was based on biopsy specimens, staging procedures systematically included abdominal and chest computed tomography and bone marrow biopsy, and most patients were not operated on but were successfully treated with monochemotherapy.
Patients and methods
PATIENTS
Sixteen patients with low grade gastric MALT lymphoma diagnosed in our institution between 1980 and 1990 were reviewed.
The patients, nine men and seven women, ranged in age from 25 to 70 years, with a mean of 54 years.
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
Fifteen patients were referred to our endoscopic unit for the investigation of epigastric pain, sometimes associated with acute bleeding or anaemia.
Several biopsy specimens (>) were taken, with forceps in every case.
One patient with an established diagnosis was referred for additional treatment after partial gastrectomy.
The diagnosis of lymphoma was based on histological and immunophenotypic criteria.
Tissue specimen preparation
Tissue specimens were processed for routine histology and immunohistology.
In each case, several tissue specimens were fixed with aqueous Bouin's solution.
Paraffin embedded sections were stained for conventional study with haematoxylin-eosin-safran (HES) and periodic acid Schiff (PAS).
In 12 of the 16 cases, fresh tissue specimens were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen after 30 minutes' incubation in gum sucrose for immunohistological studies.
Immunophenotypic studies
Deparaffinised and cryostat sections of the gastric biopsy specimens were evaluated for the presence of various antigens using the immunoalkaline phosphatase method (APAAP).
The monoclonal antibodies used, their specific immunoreactivities and commercial sources are shown in Table I. Rabbit antimouse immunoglobulins and alkaline phosphatase-antiphosphatase complexes were purchased from DAKO (Dakopatts A/S, Glostrup, Denmark).
Alkaline phosphatase activity was determined after incubation in fast-red TR (1 mg/ml, Sigma Chemical Company, St Louis, MO, USA) and naphthol AS-TR phospate (0.2 mg/ml, Sigma) solution, which contained levamisole (0.2 g/ml) to block endogenous alkaline phosphatase activity.
STAGING PROCEDURES
Staging systematically included a bone marrow biopsy, chest and abdominal computed tomography, oropharyngolarynx examination, and liver function tests.
A small bowel barium meal and colonoscopy were performed in eight cases and gastric endosonography was performed in one patient.
The patients were staged using the Ann Arbor system.
TREATMENT
In 14 of the 16 patients, initial treatment was an alkylating agent alone (cyclophosphamide 100 mg/day).
This monochemotherapy was continued until complete remission was obtained (normal appearance of the gastric mucosa, negative biopsy specimens, and absence of extragastric localisation).
One patient with a severe form of the disease (large tumour, poor general condition, and a rapid course) was treated with an anthracin-containing regimen (cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, vincristine, prednisone) combined with radiotherapy (25 Grays).
Another had been operated on (partial gastrectomy) before referral to our institution and received additional radiation therapy (30 Grays).
FOLLOW UP
Endoscopy with biopsies was repeated every three months in every case.
Chest and abdominal computed tomography was performed every six months when lymph node or lung involvement was present at the initial staging.
Patients who achieved complete remission underwent endoscopy with biopsies every six months.
Complete remission was defined as resolution of clinical evidence of disease and of endoscopic lesions, with negative biopsy specimens and absence of extragastric localisation.
Partial remission was defined as improvement of clinical symptoms and endoscopic lesions with a decrease in tumoral infiltration.
Analysis was performed in November 1991 providing minimum and median follow up of 1 and 4.5 years respectively.
Results
CLINICAL FEATURES
The main characteristics of the patients are given in Table II.
Persistant epigastric pain lasting from 6 months to 5 years was the predominant complaint, associated with acute gastric bleeding in three patients, anaemia in two (haemoglobin <g/dl), and weight loss (>kg) in five at the time of diagnosis.
Eight patients had a past history of recurrent gastric ulcer (n=5), endoscopic gastritis (n=3), or gastrointestinal bleeding (n=4) from 2 to 10 years before diagnosis.
One patient had been operated on (partial gastrectomy) for a bleeding ulcer seven years previously.
Two patients had a past history of small cell lung lymphoma treated surgically (n=1) or with chemotherapy (n=1).
One of the latter patients had previously presented with a parotid gland localisation.
ENDOSCOPIC ASPECTS
Endoscopic lesions affected the body of the stomach in seven cases, the autumn in five, and both the body and the antrum in four.
In eight cases, the lesion consisted of an irregular and large ulcer with raised edges and was highly suggestive of malignancy.
In the other eight cases endoscopy showed only lesions of a benign nature (erythematous gastritis, erosions, small nodules, localised or diffuse thickening of gastric folds).
PATHOLOGICAL STUDY
Biopsy specimens
In 16 of 16 patients the diagnosis was based on multiple endoscopic biopsies (>) showing invasion of the gastric mucosa by lymphoid tissue.
The infiltrate consisted of small lymphoid cells mixed with medium and occasionally large cells.
Small cells were lymphocytes with either a small round nucleus or an irregular nucleus giving a centrocyte like appearance.
Large cells with a centroblastic aspect were rare.
Superficial plasma cells infiltrated underlying lymphoid cells.
Residual crypts were rate or absent.
Characteristic lymphoepithelial lesions (lymphoid cells invading gastric glands) were found in every case.
In half the specimens studied these lesions were found only after careful examination of numerous sections and staining with an anti-cytokeratin antibody.
A lymphoid follicle was seen in two cases.
Erosions and ulcerations were generally present.
Surgical specimens
Two surgical specimens were examined.
In patient 4, who had been operated on before being referred to our institution, neoplastic cells including centrocyte like appearance infiltrated the mucosa, submucosa, and stomach muscles, with sparse extensions into the perigastric conjunctive tissue.
Characteristic lymphoepithelial lesions and rare lymphoid follicles were present.
In patient 10, who had been operated on for a bleeding ulcer seven years previously, a gastric lymphoma was diagnosed on the basis of biopsy specimens.
A review of the surgical specimen showed that the gastric mucosa contained very numerous lymphoid follicles with follicular centres suggestive of benign lymphoid infiltration.
The follicles were surrounded by a population of small round lymphocytes, intermingled with a few small cleaved cells and centrocyte like appearance.
A small number of gastric glands exhibited characteristic lympho-epithelial lesions.
Proliferation was limited to the mucosa and submucosa.
These features led to the retrospective diagnosis of low grade MALT lymphoma.
Immunohistochemical findings
Immunohistochemical findings are given in Table III.
Lymphoepithelial lesions were shown on deparaffinised sections using anticytokeratin and antiepithelial membrane antibodies.
In the 12 cases in which crystat sections were studied, tumour cells expressed CD 19 and CD 22 B cell antigens, indicating a B cell origin.
Kappa light chain restriction was present in eight cases and lambda light chain restriction in four cases.
Tumour cells exhibited the IgM +ve, IgD -ve, CD 5 -ve phenotype.
These histopathological results were consistent with the diagnosis of MALT lymphoma.
STAGING
The lymphoma was localised within the gastric wall with no evidence of regional lymph node involvement (stage I) in eight patients.
Eight patients had stage IV disease, because of bone marrow involvement in two patients and/or lung involvement in seven.
Lung involvement was suspected on the basis of x ray abnormalities and was confirmed histologically in a surgical biopsy specimen in three cases and in a transbronchial biopsy specimen in one.
No biopsy was performed in the other cases but the lung opacity on the chest x ray or computed tomogram had the same macroscopic aspect as in the cases of proved lung lymphoma and responded to chemotherapy as well as the gastric lesion.
The macroscopic aspect of the lung involvement is described in Table IV.
Gastric endosonography, performed in patient 9, who had thickening of gastric folds in the body and the antrum at endoscopy (Table II), showed massive infiltration of the gastric wall together with perigastric lymph node enlargement.
TREATMENT AND OUTCOME
Fourteen patients were initially treated with cyclophosphamide, one with polychemotherapy, and one with surgery and irradiation.
Treatment efficacy could be evaluated in 14 of the 16 patients.
Two patients (nos 3 and 5) were lost to follow up.
the mean duration of follow up in the 14 remaining patients was 4.5 years (range: 1–7.5 years).
Four of the six evaluable stage I patients were treated with cyclophosphamide.
Patient 4 who had been operated on before referral received additional radiation therapy.
Another patient (no 7), who presented with a bulky tumour of the gastric body was treated with a polychemotherapy CHOP regimen (cyclophosphamide, hydroxyldaunomycin, oncovin, and prednisone) +radiation therapy.
Complete remission was obtained in six patients including four treated with cyclophosphamide, with a follow up ranging from 1.5–7 years.
The eight patients with stage IV disease received cyclophosphamide.
All these patients are alive after a follow up ranging from 1 to 7.5 years.
Four are in a first complete remission and one in partial remission.
Three relapsed at 6 years (n=2) and 7 years (n=1).
One of these latter patients (no 13) was operated on for an obstructive small bowel relapse and in this patient, as in the two others, gastroscopy and chest computed tomography showed both lung and gastric recurrences.
All three patients who relapsed responded again to cyclophosphamide.
Repeated gastric biopsies did not show progression to a higher grade lymphoma in any of the patients.
Chemotherapy was well tolerated and no cases of myelodyspastic syndromes were observed despite follow up exceeding two years in seven patients treated with alkylating agents.
Discussion
All the patients we studied fulfilled the histological and immunocytological criteria established by Isaacson et al for the diagnosis of low grade B cell lymphoma of MALT.
Histological examination showed small and medium sized lymphoid cells (centrocyte like cells) invading gastric glands to form characteristic lymphoepithelial lesions.
In some cases, the proliferation surrounded and sometimes invaded reactive B cell follicles.
Immunohistochemical studies showed a B cell origin of the lymphoma, as well as the IgM +ve, IgD -ve, CD 5 -ve phenotype.
The clinical presentation of our patients confirmed previous reports of the non-specific nature of digestive symptoms, clinical indolence, and the slow course in low grade gastric MALT lymphoma.
All the patients had complained of chronic epigastric pain for years before diagnosis and eight had a past history of recurrent gastric ulcer, gastrointestinal bleeding, or gastritis.
The endoscopic aspect of the gastric lesions was clearly suggestive of malignancy in only half the patients.
In the remaining cases, the endoscopist described erythematous gastritis, small nodules or thickening and erosions of gastric folds suggestive of a benign condition.
This explains how the disease can be misdiagnosed over a long period and stresses the need for biopsy specimens whatever the type of gastric lesion.
In patient 9, endosonography showed that there was no relationship between the endoscopic aspect and the locoregional extension of the lymphoma.
Although the endoscopic changes were mininal (only mild thickening of gastric folds), endosconography disclosed massive infiltration of the gastric wall associated with an enlargement of regional lymph nodes.
This observation illustrates the usefulness of endosonography in the staging of low grade gastric lymphoma.
The chronic nature of the symptoms, the benign appearance of the gastric lesions on endoscopy, and the equivocal histological aspect of the lesions account for the fact that numerous MALT lymphomas were considered ‘pseudolymphomas’ until the monoclonal nature of the proliferation could be routinely shown by immunochemistry.
In our series, two patients (nos 3 and 9) were diagnosed as having pseudolymphomas 3 and 10 years respectively before the diagnosis of MALT lymphoma.
In both cases a review of previous biopsy specimens showed the presence of lympho-epithelial lesions clearly indicative of malignancy.
This typical lesion was also present on the surgical specimen from patient 10 who had undergone surgery for a ‘bleeding ulcer’ seven years before the definitive diagnosis.
Our results show that low grade gastric MALT lymphoma can be readily diagnosed on the basis of biopsy specimens.
Lympho-epithelial lesions are observed on fixed tissues and immunohistochemical studies of fixed tissues can help to show these lesions with the aid of anti-cytokeratin or -epithelial membrane antibodies.
Finally, immunohistochemical analysis of frozen tissue sections clearly shows the monoclonal nature and B cell phenotype of the proliferation, together with the peculiar IgM +ve, IgD -ve, CD 5 -ve phenotype of the tumoural cells, indicative of the MALT origin of the proliferation.
One of the most important findings in our study was the high frequency of extragastric locations of MALT lymphomas, present in half the patients (8 of 16).
Interestingly, then generally affected other mucosal sites (lung, n=7; parotid, n=1; small bowel, n=1) and usually spared the peripheral lymph nodes, spleen, and bone marrow.
Involvement of other mucosal sites preceded, coincided with, or followed the manifestations of the gastric lymphoma.
These findings were unexpected, as most of previously published clinicopathological studies have shown that low grade B cell gastric lymphoma is a disease process confined to the stomach for years.
However, recent studies showed that malt lymphomas, whatever the organ involved, were susceptible to spread to or to recur in other mucosal sites.1 Although the exact frequency of extragastric localisation remains to be determined prospectively in a larger series, our observations suggest that this possibility has to be taken into account in the choice of the staging procedure and therapeutic strategy.
In previously published studies, most authors recommendedsurgery, arguing that low grade gastric MALT lymphomas were localised, solitary lesions that could be excised completely and that endoscopic biopsy specimens could miss small foci of high grade, B cell lymphomas.
However, in our series half the patients had a stage IV lymphoma.
Among the eight with stage I disease, five had tumoural involvement of the stomach which would have required total gastrectomy, a procedure with a high morbidity rate and one that is not justified with a well tolerated, slowly progressing disease.
Moreover, in one patient (no 10), the lymphoma relapsed after partial gastrectomy.
We therefore favoured conservative treatment with cyclophosphamide monochemotherapy.
All the patients with stage I disease responded to therapy, and a complete remission was obtained in those (n=4) treated for at least one year.
In the eight stage IV patients in whom the follow up was of specially long duration (median 6 years), a complete remission was initially obtained with cyclophosphamide in every case and patients whose disease recurred several years after the initial treatment remained sensitive to monochemotherapy.
Moreover, in contrast with a recent report, no cases of conversion to a high grade lymphoma were observed.
Although cyclophosphamide was well tolerated in our patients, the risk of developing a myelodysplastic syndrome cannot be excluded.
However, this long term toxicity of alkylating agents has been shown to be related to the intensity of therapy given and is very unlikely to occur with the low dose needed to treat our patients.
Thus, in our experience, monochemotherapy is appropriate for low grade, gastric MALT lymphomas.
In conclusion, our findings show that low grade, gastric MALT lymphoma can always be diagnosed on the basis of both fixed and fresh endoscopic biopsy specimens.
Extragastric involvement seems to be frequent, usually affecting other mucosal sites and particularly the lung.
Cyclophosphamide monochemotherapy procures complete remission, with only slight morbidity, and remains effective against relapses.
