CHAIRMAN'S REPORT TO THE BAR
This report was delivered at the Annual General Meeting of the Bar Council on 31st October 1992.
I had hoped to begin my short review of this year with happy news about discrimination, whether on grounds of race, gender or any other such irrelevance.
I am afraid that I cannot.
The Society of Black Lawyers, and others, have raised troubling questions about possible discrimination, whether at the CLE, or in the treatment of non-UK intending practitioners.
I repeat what I have said publicly many times before.
Discrimination of any sort is abhorrent.
I intend to do all I can, with the Bar Council, to stamp it out.
As soon as I had complaints, I asked for detailed statistical material to be provided.
That is now being done.
Second, I promised that the accurate figures will be published.
That will be done, whatever they say.
Third, QC, as Chairman of the Race Relations Committee, is channelling all requests for reconsideration back to the CLE.
There will be time to debate these questions later.
I simply start by re-affirming that absolute commitment.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
We engaged  to review our practices and to give advice.
She did so.
We followed it.
We have two women Equal Opportunities Officers who took up post in early September.
Everyone who has taken the trouble to contact them and to work with them speaks of their high qualities and commitment.
It is a very long journey that we are beginning.
It is only if we work together, with goodwill, that we shall come anywhere near that journey's end.
THE APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES
Much remains to be done.
There is much more effective consultation between the Lord Chancellor and the Bar.
For the first time the Lord Chancellor has now agreed to have representations from the Bar about membership of the Court of Appeal, Heads of Divisions and Lords of Appeal in Ordinary.
I have to thank him for that.
SILK
This remains unsatisfactory to many applicants.
We shall therefore this year have two sets of consultation about applications, as opposed to only one last year.
The Lord Chancellor has invited  and me to put forward positive recommendations, which we have undertaken to do, after the fullest consultation.
The recommendations will, of course, be ours, not in any sense official Bar Council names.
THE SECRET FILES
As is now notoriously well known, an application for preferment of almost any sort means the opening of a secret file.
You do not know what is in it.
You cannot know.
You cannot see it.
I suggested, as a very moderate compromise, that any aggrieved applicant could ask for a review of his or her file by the incumbent Chairman of the Bar.
That was refused.
THE INNS
There has, I believe, been a significant improvement in liaison between the Bar and the Inns.
To a large extent this is due to the work of the Under and Sub Treasurers in cooperation with our Chief Executive,.
Whilst disagreements remain, I believe and trust that the underlying spirit is one of amity.
On election of Benchers, my proposal of direct election by Inn members of even a minimum of new Benchers per year has been unanimously rejected by all Inns.
ABROAD
Abroad is not bloody.
and I have made many contacts with foreign lawyers, judges, students and journalists.
In particular we had a week together in Argentina in September organised by the Foreign Office and the Argentine Ministry of Justice.
They admire our systems, in particular the obligation to prosecute and defend independently and fearlessly, the obligation to do Legal Aid work, and the obligation to act for any client needing our services.
Despite all our complaints we were proud of the achievements of this country.
CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE
One of the sourest ironies was to describe the system of independent prosecutors, to have the approval of our colleagues abroad for it, and then have to say that the system was under threat.
This is nothing to do with a Bar monopoly or restrictive practices.
By 1994 or so, solicitors in independent practice will have rights of audience in the higher courts.
This will mean they can be briefed by the CPS.
But they will still be independent of a powerful state monopoly and monolith.
Lord Griffiths' Committee is against CPS rights of audience.
So is the Lord Chief Justice.
Their objections are on the same basis as ours — it is dangerous to have no independent screen between the state and the defendant in the Crown Courts.
The overwhelming bulk of  MPs to whom the Vice-Chairman and I have spoken support us.
Once lost this safeguard will never be recovered.
HUMAN RIGHTS
We have now set up a Human Rights Committee, properly structured and managed, with a defined budget.
None of that existed before this year.
There have been useful specific contact with El Salvador, Guatemala and Malawi.
A small group saw the late Orton Chirwa and his wife shortly before Mr Chirwa's death.
The Chirwas had not seen each other for eight years before our delegation saw them together.
Within days Mr Chirwa was dead.
We provide Free Representation to those awaiting execution in the West Indies in conjunction with our friends at the Law Society.
in particular has encouraged the Free Representation Unit here in London.
There are now two further Units on circuits outside London.
THE FUTURE
There is no prospect of fusion.
There will always be the need for and demand for independent specialist advocacy and advisory services.
The Law Society believes this as strongly as I do.
The quality in terms of commitment energy and intellect of those coming to join us in our work has never been so high.
I could not have had more loyal service from the staff at the Bar Council nor a more supportive Vice-Chairman and Bar Council.
Thank you all.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S STATEMENT
This report was delivered at the Annual General Meeting of the Bar Council on 31st October 1992.
When I addressed the General Meeting last year I was heavily involved in preparing for the move from Gray's Inn to Bedford Row.
The move took place in early December and we settled in so quickly that it is difficult to believe we have been in our new offices for less than a year.
We now have premises which are both smart and functional and in keeping with our image as a modern forward looking profession.
Equally important the Chairman's office is colocated with the Secretariat and this has led to increased efficiency in the conduct of the profession's affairs.
As part of the ongoing process of developing our corporate identity we have recently introduced a new logo, new mastheads and letterheads and improved the quality and presentation of our publications and documentation.
Earlier in the year the Pupillage and Awards handbook was published in an improved format.
Individually these are small matters but collectively they are important in the way we present ourselves to the outside world, or in modern jargon the way we market the profession.
The way forward for the Bar is not by the retention of monopolistic practices but by competing on quality cost and marketing — not my words but those of , the Chairman of the Legal Services Committee .
The Secretariat is totally committed to providing an efficient and professional service for the Bar and others that we come in contact with.
I include in that the staff of Westminster Strategy who are part of our team.
This year's annual report will be distributed with the January edition of COUNSEL magazine.
It will contain details of the work of the standing committees of the Bar Council together with other financial and statistical data.
I will therefore restrict myself this morning to highlighting a few of the issues that will be covered in more detail in that report.
THE BAR IN 1992
By the first of October this year the size of the Bar had risen to 7,271 an increase of 370. 1,340 were called to the Bar during the last legal year of which 785 were men and 555 women.
Of those 351 were overseas students.
Budgeted expenditure for the current financial year stands at £2.5 million against £2.2 million in 1991/92.
This is all attributable, directly or indirectly, to administrative costs and the work of the Bar Council and its committees.
A summary of the cost accounts, which attribute costs to particular functions and committees, is set out on page 4.
The Bar Council's equal opportunities programme will account for some 10% of total expenditure this year.
This includes consultancy fees for the development and implementation of the equal opportunities programme and for the sex discrimination survey.
The Equal Opportunities Officer is now in post and it is anticipated that costs will reduce next year.
CASE WORK
The level of case work we deal with continues to rise.
Fees collection work has continued at a high level since the acceptable age of a fee note in a complaint was reduced from  five years to two in November last year.
Complaints received during 1991 totalled 2,040 against a normal annual total of 600 — more than a three-fold increase.
Extra staff have been engaged to deal with the additional work and the backlog has been significantly reduced.
A new computerised system is currently being installed.
We anticipate that complaints will level off at approximately 950 a year.
This is a significant service that we provide tor the profession.
I have had four staff working on fees collection throughout the year and two more spend part of their time dealing with related tribunals.
The steady increase in the number of complaints against members of the Bar mentioned in last year's report has continued; 262 complaints having been received up to the end of September.
At this rate, the total for the full year is likely to amount to 349 compared with 308 last year an increase of 13%.
After a period of stable numbers between 1985 and 1989, the PCC will have seen its workload increase by 66% in 3 years.
It has been necessary to provide additional staff support for the Committee during the course of the year.
A NEW COMMITTEE
The Sex Discrimination Committee was established in January 1992 following Bar Council endorsement of last year's General Meeting resolution calling for an investigation into the position of women at the Bar.
An executive,, was engaged on a short term contract to help get the committee established and to assist in the coordination of a survey jointly commissioned by the Bar Council and the Lord Chancellor's Department to determine objectively whether discrimination exists against women at the Bar and, if so, the extent of such discrimination.
The results of the survey will be published shortly.
is currently servicing the committee on a part time basis.
VIDEO CONFERENCING
The Bar is a leader in the field of video conferencing applications within the courts and the legal profession and its endeavours have brought us a good deal of favourable publicity.
However usage of the Bar's Studio in King's Bench Walk has been disappointing and insufficient to make the project financially viable.
After careful consideration of the options it has been decided to move the studio to the Bar Council's Warwick Court annex and transfer responsibility for managing and marketing the facilities to the Secretariat.
A review of the project will be made in twelve months' time.
The facility is currently being actively promoted both within the Bar and locally with potential professional clients.
If you have not seen our new brochure and are interested, we have some copies available.
I am also pleased to be able to report that the Home Office has recently agreed to run a technical field trial with links to two prisons to evaluate the feasibility of conducting video conferences with remand prisoners.
If this is a success it will give Video Conferencing a considerable boost.
FREE REPRESENTATION UNIT
The position and problems of the Free Representation Unit have recently come under consideration by the committees of the Bar Council.
In summary the Unit is the victim of its own success and badly needs increased working space and more staff to meet its steadily increasing workload.
The Inns have kindly agreed to provide additional accommodation at no cost to the Unit and the Vice Chairman and I are currently reviewing the situation to determine what additional management and other support they need.
1992 BAR CONFERENCE
This year's Bar conference was judged to have been a resounding success in terms of overall numbers, the quality of the speakers and the workshops, media coverage, organisation and stage management.
In spite of this the event failed to break even financially.
The deficit is accounted for by a shortfall of barrister registrants, particularly in the QC and senior junior categories, and a reduction in sponsorship and exhibition income caused by the recession.
The Conference remains our flagship event of the year and generates considerable media coverage.
The conference management board is actively considering the format and promotion of next year's event and how we can attract more support from the profession.
It has already been agreed to reduce the conference to one day and to abandon the Sunday morning sessions.
ELECTRONIC LIST NOTIFICATION
The Bar Council is committed to the introduction of electronic list notification.
I am currently chairing a small committee which is supervising a field trial of LIX.
If this is successful it should be possible for chambers to receive court lists on a PC in chambers.
The system is being developed so that it will be possible for individual chambers to identify particular court cases.
EFFECTIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Finally I would like to touch on a familiar theme of mine, the efficient management of the profession's resources.
I have been closely involved in the work of two committees involved in this issue:
The Way Ahead Committee which is a joint Bar Council/Inns Council committee established ‘to examine means of ensuring that the resources of the Bar and Inns are managed as effectively as possible for the benefit of the profession’; and
The Bowley Committee — set up to review the constitution and the committee structure of the Bar Council.
It is a matter of history that the profession has six separate organisations responsible for managing differing aspects of its affairs.
If we started with a clean sheet of paper we would not plan it that way.
However we do not have that luxury.
The Way Ahead Committee has made significant progress and I believe most strongly that the future lies in cooperation between the Bar Council and the Inns, built on mutual respect and trust, rather than confrontation.
Economic necessity will necessarily draw us closer together.
The thrust of the Bowley Committee Report is that budgetary pressures indicate that the Bar Council should seek more effective ways of controlling expenditure.
This involves:
Being more selective in the areas of work the Council undertakes; and
in the interests of efficiency slimming down the Bar Council and the Committee structure.
The Treasurer will I am sure have more to say on this subject.
SUMMARY OF COST ACCOUNTS
TREASURER'S REPORT
At the outset I should point out that the accounts which are before this meeting are for the year ending 5th April 1992.
I do so to ensure that the credit for these accounts, which I would suggest give rise to cautious satisfaction though not for over-optimism, should go to my predecessor as Treasurer — QC.
I only took over the financial reins three weeks before the end of the financial year!
One thing I am sure of is that  would agree that the job of Treasurer of the Bar Council would be quite impossible without the daily support and guidance of the Chief Executive and of his Finance Officer,, and his deputy,.
I deliberately used the phrase ‘cautious satisfaction’ because as appears from page 2 of the accounts we achieved a surplus (before exceptional items) of £12,004.
This is of course very much smaller than the comparative figure for the previous year of £321,715, but it should also be looked at in the context of the budget for 1991–92 which had predicted a loss of £117,000.
Much of this turnround is accounted for by the decision to close the Bar Practising Library at the end of 1991 and by the disposal of its assets.
Inevitably members of the Bar will be looking to a large extent to those areas of expenditure detailed on pages 7 and 8 of the accounts which show substantial increases over the previous year.
Salaries and associated costs have risen because of a 9% salary increase on 1st April 1991, and because of increases in staff of one executive to service the PCC and the Sex Discrimination Committee, two additional supporting staff in the Chairman's Office and the Fees Collection Department, and by the employment of temporary staff.
The figure of £15,778 under survey fees is part payment for the Race Relations Consultancy.
The very substantial increase under the heading of Public Relations is more apparent than real.
The 1990–91 figure did not include expenditure attributed to the ‘Fighting Fund’.
Nonetheless the 1991–92 figure clearly needed to be brought back to a more affordable level, and during the ‘star chamber’ exercise in the spring to which  referred last year, the contract with Westminster Strategy (our PR consultants) was renegotiated, and the budgeted figure for the current year has been reduced to £170,000.
The List Room figure has virtually doubled because accommodation is no longer available in the RCJ.
I should perhaps add that the LCD still pays 50 per cent of the costs.
The Bar Conference is a matter of some concern.
The numbers attending are still disappointing but I believe that it is fully justified if for no other reason than that it provides us with the best — and most cost effective — corporate publicity we are likely to obtain.
Just compare the broadsheet coverage of our conference at the end of September with that for the Law Society's conference last weekend!
The figures for the 1991 conference were not improved by the failure of one of our sponsors to honour their commitment — our sponsor was in fact The European newspaper.
Nonetheless the format for the 1993 Conference is under active consideration with a view to reducing the deficit.
Professional Fees have risen from £10,000 to nearly £42,000 largely because of the need to employ solicitors, surveyors and agents for the move of the Council's offices to Bedford Row.
The 1990–91 figure of £50,000 under Continuing Education was set aside for a pupillage sinking fund.
The £10,120 in the 1991–92 accounts is the Council's share of the expenses incurred by the CLE for coordinating the pupils continuing education programme.
The increase in Committee Expenses is a matter for concern.
Every committee, sub-committee and working party which we set up has a resource implication.
Some of our work such as the PCC and the Fees Collection service is demand-led.
Some indication of the pressures which these place on our finances can be seen from the fact that only two years ago the direct costs of these two areas were £175,000 and £70,000 respectively.
Now they cost us £210,000 and £100,000.
We are not proposing any subscription increase at this stage, but if we are to continue to balance our books in a rapidly changing world we will need to take some tough decisions.
On the expenditure side of the accounts I can say that, certainly up to the half way stage of the financial year, the budget is holding.
We are now starting the budget process for 1993–4 and I have no doubt that we will need to reconvene the ‘star chamber’ to consider the bids from individual committees.
On the income side something like 80 per cent of our income comes from subscriptions.
The balance comes from the Inns' contributions.
Both of these sources are under threat.
Changes in rights of audience may well result in a slimming down of the practising Bar.
We certainly cannot bank on the 49 per cent increase in the size of the Bar which has occurred in the last 10 years.
In a declining property market the Inns' rent rolls may also fall, at a time when the demands on their resources — especially in the area of legal education — are rising rapidly.
Action is already being taken in a number of areas.
QC has agreed to chair a working party to consider how best we can provide for effective sanctions for the nonpayment of subscriptions.
We just cannot afford any significant shortfall in our subscription income.
We will certainly need very soon to reconsider the levels of subscriptions paid by the employed Bar in comparison with those paid by those in private practice.
On the expenditure  side of the account, as the Chief Executive has already indicated, I have spent much of this year chairing a working party reviewing the constitution and committee structure of the Council.
Our report will come before the Council for the first time a week today.
In that report we have proposed a Council slimmed down in terms both of numbers and committees.
Currently there are 110 members of the Council for a practising profession of 7,271, and there are 5 committees with over 25 members!
We have also attempted to set down priorities for the Council.
Some of these — such as professional discipline — are inescapable.
Others may well fall into the category of being desirable but not essential.
All have resource implications.
If we do face a period of declining income then the Council must be prepared to cut its coat according to the cloth available.
There is no future in raising subscriptions to a point where we are faced with a genuine reluctance, and in some cases a real inability, to pay.
The old days of taking on board every issue and then establishing a committee to handle it cannot continue.
Finally I would like to say this.
Two and a half million pounds may sound a lot to run a profession of just over 7,000 practising barristers — but we are only able to hold that figure by reason of the hard work from our small but totally dedicated Secretariat, and by the voluntary work of many members of the profession.
When we are required to respond to Green Papers, White Papers or Royal Commissions, whether we are negotiating over the Courts and Legal Services Bill or standard fees in the magistrates' courts, the quality of our response must at the very least match that of other interested parties and groupings.
It is now widely accepted that the Chairmanship of the Bar is virtually a full time job, and the profession has been fortunate indeed in the people who have been prepared to take on that responsibility and make that commitment.
What is less widely known is the level of commitment required from every one else who accepts the chairmanship of a major committee of the Council.
I know that it can often amount to half the working week.
The papers they prepare for and on behalf of the Council are of the highest quality.
We certainly couldn't afford to pay for them!
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF THE BAR
Saturday 31 October 1992, in the Great Hall Lincoln's Inn at 10.30am
In the Chair: the Rt Hon  QC MP Attorney General.
The meeting proceeded immediately to business, there being at least 60 subscribers present fulfilling the necessary quorum.
Chairman's Address: published in full in this report.
Chief Executive's Statement: published in full in this report.
Treasurer's Report: published in full in this report.
The Treasurer proposed, and  QC seconded, the motion ‘To approve the Bar Council's accounts for 1991/92 distributed with the notice of the date of the AGM.’
There being no questions or opposers, the motion was carried unanimously.
COSTS AND EXPENSES ARISING OUT OF DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS
reported on the steps taken in consequence of resolution 4.4 carried last year.
Discussions with the Bar Mutual Indemnity Fund (BMIF) had taken place, as a result of which insurance in a limited form would be available for the benefit of those subject to disciplinary proceedings, with effect from April 1993.
The cover would amount to a maximum of £15,000 in total, with a limit of £1,000 per day of the proceedings.
It would extend not only to appeals to the Visitors but also to any other court proceedings reasonably incurred.
The premium level needed for this purpose was not yet known.
So far as wasted costs orders were concerned, cover was already provided by the BMIF for the benefit of those who had been made subject to such orders; but that cover did not extend to related costs.
He was continuing discussions with the BMIF on this point.
There were on each circuit panels of barristers prepared to advise and act on behalf of any barrister threatened with a wasted costs order.
Anybody in this position should contact the Bar Council in the first instance.
It was not possible to indicate what the premium would be if cover were to be provided automatically, because the BMIF was a separate body and was not prepared to consider this.
RESOLUTION PROPOSED BY THE BAR COUNCIL
proposed the following resolution:
‘The Bar:
notes the stated intention of Government that small businessmen including those rendering services to Government should be paid promptly;
views with dismay the failure of the Lord Chancellor's Department to make any improvements in the payment on account of civil legal aid fees;
notes with alarm the increasing delays in the taxation of criminal legal aid fees on the South Eastern Circuit by the Central Taxing Teams (CTTs) caused by the failure of the Lord Chancellor's Department to provide adequate staff; and
requests the Attorney General as leader of the Bar to press the Lord Chancellor
to introduce immediately speedier and better arrangements for the payment of outstanding legal aid fees; and
as a matter of urgency to take all necessary steps to improve the performance of the South Eastern Circuit CTTs.’
He came before the meeting as Chairman of the Legal Aid and Fees Committee, and moved the resolution in sadness and anger — sadness because it soured relations with the Lord Chancellor and the LCD and because time that he would rather have spent constructively had to be wasted on futile bickering, and anger because of the way that barristers and solicitors had been treated by the Government, especially a Government that spoke of the need for the business community to make prompt payment.
He asked members to support the motion so that the Attorney General as a member of the Government and as leader of this profession could convey to the Government our sense of disgust at the way we had been treated for so long (sustained applause).
The Attorney General said he was grateful to  QC and that there was more to this matter than  QC had suggested.
The legal aid review dealt with two issues: the payment on account scheme and the CTTs.
Both caused him concern.
He was very happy to accept the words and spirit of the resolution.
Four years ago there had been no payment on account scheme.
Its introduction, at very considerable cost, was a step forward.
Much effort had gone into improving it.
An offer had been made previously, whereby the waiting period would have been reduced from 18 to 12 months but the initial payment held at 54 per cent for a year.
For reasons which had seemed wise at the time, the Bar had not accepted that offer at that stage.
He had had the benefit of meetings with  QC and  QC, and had made a personal approach to the Lord Chancellor seeking possible improvements in the payment on account scheme, especially a reduction of the waiting period.
The Lord Chancellor had been in a position to negotiate this with the Treasury.
He wished to see an improvement in the payment on account scheme.
There was an opportunity now of reducing the waiting time to 12 months, on the basis of holding the percentage payment at 62 per cent.
Members should consider that seriously.
He had done everything he could to obtain it.
He did not know whether it was to be part of this year's pay round, but it was in itself a ‘cost-neutral’ proposal.
He knew which option he would himself prefer.
Secondly, regarding the CTTs, there had been negotiations which he hoped would prove constructive.
The Lord Chancellor wanted to get the CTTs working speedily and efficiently.
The LCD had been doing its best for the South Eastern Circuit.
After a number of further comments from members, the resolution was put to the vote and carried unanimously.
The Attorney General said he would do his best to work on behalf of members.
No doubt members would calculate whether it was to their advantage to have the waiting period reduced to 12 months.
He believed it would be advantageous.
Members should look at the proposals extremely carefully.
RESOLUTIONS PASSED BY MEMBERS OF THE BAR
proposed the following motion:
(a)
The Bar notes with concern the reduction in number of those eligible for legal aid and finds the proposals for the introduction of a system of standard fees in the magistrates' courts to be contrary to the interests of the public and to justice and to be offensive and unfair to the profession.
The Bar requests that the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice consider the whole issue of the funding of legal aid defence work and urges the Lord Chancellor not to introduce standard fees for magistrates' courts work at least until a report of the Royal Commission has been received and considered.
(b)
This meeting notes with concern the potential for exploitation of junior members of the Bar with the introduction of standard fees in the magistrates' courts and calls on the Legal Aid and Fees Committee to liaise with the Law Society, the Legal Aid Board and the Lord Chancellor's Department with a view to agreeing a fair approach to fixing Counsel's fees and making such practical arrangements as are necessary.’
The motion, he said, was not concerned with whether all standard fees were wrong in principle.
He was opposed to certain particular proposals only.
Solicitors calculated the core cost of a case, using hourly rates and itemising other costs.
Counsel's fees were included if Counsel were instructed.
A standard fee was then imposed.
To the core cost, the solicitor's waiting and travelling time was to be added, but not Counsel's.
He suggested that these proposals were contrary to the public interest and to justice.
The object was clearly to cut the amount of money paid to lawyers.
It was quite clear from a briefing paper from the LCD that controlling costs meant cutting them.
This was not in the public interest.
seconded the motion.
Exploitation of pupils and junior barristers was a real danger.
wished to amend para (b) so that it would read as follows:
‘This meeting notes with concern the potential for exploitation of junior members of the Bar with the introduction of standard fees in the magistrates’ courts and
i)
calls on the Legal Aid and Fees Committee to liaise with the Law Society, the Legal Aid Board and the Lord Chancellor's Department with a view to agreeing a fair approach to fixing Counsel's fees and making such practical arrangements as are necessary
ii)
recognises that such exploitation of the young by chambers would be a breach of the obligations of the head of chambers under the Code of Conduct to manage  chambers fairly.
The meeting supports the Young Barristers Committee's view that all chambers should resolve not to permit such exploitation, and put in place a mechanism to ensure that it does not take place, with the support and involvement of heads of chambers, senior members and Clerks.’
QC spoke against the motion.
It was his wish to act with the Lord Chancellor in order to achieve reform.
He could not support the motion in its entirety.
He could not believe that the attitude expressed in para (a) was helpful, although he agreed that there was great concern about the reduction in eligibility for legal aid.
On the other hand he supported para (b)(ii)(of the resolution as amended) entirely.
He wished to amend para (a) to read as follows: ‘The Bar notes with concern the reduction in number of those eligible for legal aid.
The Bar requests that the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice consider the whole issue of funding legal aid defence work.’
QC seconded  QC's proposed amendment.
A vote was then taken on the resolution with  's addition and as amended by  QC with the following result: in favour 29; against 50.
The resolution in that form was therefore defeated.
Another vote was then taken on the resolution, with  's addition, but otherwise retaining the original wording ie. not as amended by  QC with the following result: in favour 65; against 17.
The resolution in that form was therefore carried.
was due to propose the following motion:
‘This meeting condemns:
1)
The rise in racism and anti-semitism evidenced by the appalling level of racial attacks.
In particular the racial murders of:
2)
The failure of the Director of Public Prosecutions, QC, to instigate any criminal charges against the six police officers found responsible for the unlawful killing of , by the inquest jury on November 29th 1991 at Middlesborough Coroners’ Court.
This meeting therefore calls upon the Bar Council to
i)
campaign for the introduction of a Racial Harassment Bill;
ii)
support the work of the Anti-Racist Alliance;
iii)
implement a strategy whereby support can be offered to the victims' families; and
iv)
campaign for the prosecution of those responsible for the unlawful killing of .’
He said, however, that he wished the meeting to debate and vote on a revised resolution, as follows:
‘This meeting
1)
condemns the rise in racism and anti-semitism in all its forms and in particular the prevalence of racial murders;
2)
expresses concern at the racial discrimination and anti-semitism present in some areas of the administration of criminal justice;
3)
invites the Bar Council to support as a matter of urgency the need for the strengthening of the statutory remedies and sanctions in relation to racial discrimination and for the adoption of specific legislation to combat racial harassment;
4)
invites the Bar Council to consider as a matter of urgency the legal assistance it can provide to the families of the victims of racial murders; and
5)
invites the Bar Council to investigate the decision by the DPP not to prosecute the six police officers found responsible for the unlawful killing of .
On behalf of members, the Attorney General accepted this revised resolution, which was seconded by .
QC then proposed, and  seconded, an alternative resolution:
This meeting:
1)
condemns racism and anti-semitism in all its forms;
2)
views with concern the suggestions that there remains racial discrimination and anti-semitism in some areas of the administration of criminal justice; and
3)
invites the Bar Council to investigate as a matter of urgency whether there is a need for the strengthening of the statutory remedies and sanctions in relation to racial discrimination and for the widening of the scope of the legislation.
A vote was taken on  's revised version, with the following result: in favour 38; against 33.
The resolution in that form was therefore carried.
QC s resolution was (with his consent) not put to the vote.
was then due to propose the following motion:
This meeting condemns the failure of the Council of Legal Education (CLE) and where applicable the Bar Council to:
a)
implement a fair and non-discriminatory admissions policy for 1992;
b)
administer a fair and equitable system for the marking of the 1991 resit exams and the 1992 course;
c)
treat foreign students in a fair and non-discriminatory manner; and
d)
to appoint a suitably qualified equal opportunities officer from amongst the ethnic minorities.
We therefore call upon the Bar Council to:
1)
advocate the abolition of the CLE s monopoly with respect to the teaching and marking of the Bar course for both domestic and foreign students;
2)
work to persuade the CLE to end the racial discrimination practised against students of African and Asian descent;
3)
urge the CLE to have all the exam papers of failed black Bar students for 1991/1992 independently assessed in consultation with the Commission for Racial Equality (CRE); and
4)
to appoint at least one suitably qualified black equal opportunities officer to replace one or both of the present appointees.
He wished, however, to propose a completely different text.
At first, the Attorney General did not intend to permit this, but as members indicated on a vote that they preferred to debate the new text, the Attorney General allowed  to propose it as follows:
This meeting views with grave concern
a)
the evidence set out by the Society of Black Lawyers and the statistics released by the CLE which give reasonable cause to believe that the CLE has unlawfully discriminated against black students on racial grounds in:
(i)
the arrangements it makes for the admission of  students on to the Bar Vocational Course;
(ii)
disproportionally failing black students in the vocational course and resit examinations, as well as the non-intending practitioners’ course;
(iii)
failing to adopt a comprehensive equal opportunities policy in relation to its activities both as a provider of educational/vocational services and an employer of staff (in particular the failure to properly consider the need to employ an equal opportunities officer derived from the ethnic minorities using the GOQ provision of the Race Relations Act 1976);
(b)
the disproportionally high failure rate of ethnic minorities students in the Bar Finals Course and the non-intending practitioners' exams.
This meeting welcomes the decision of the CLE to conduct a comprehensive review of its admissions and assessments procedures.
We furthermore urge the Commission for Racial Equality to conduct a formal investigation of the CLE in accordance with its powers under the Race Relations Act.
This meeting urges the CLE to accept an independent review of all its relevant decisions and procedures in consultation with the CRE, and to award all CLE students who believe they have been discriminated against on racial grounds or otherwise treated unfairly, a deemed pass, after consultation with the independent review body.
This meeting agrees to provide a reasonable level of financial and logistical and other support to those students who wish to pursue legal action against the CLE, who are not eligible for legal aid.
This meeting recognises the need for urgency and therefore invites the CLE to make a full report of the result of the independent review in consultation with the CRE by 31st December 1992, such report to be made public and put before the Bar Council meeting in January 1993.
This meeting urges the Bar Council and CLE to reconsider the segregation of foreign Bar students from domestic students.
This meeting urges the Bar Council and CLE to urgently consider the desirability of administering the Bar Vocational Course through a number of regionally based Universities/Polytechnics in an integral four-year degree course structure.’
seconded it.
QC then proposed, and  QC seconded, an alternative resolution, as follows:
This meeting views with grave concern
(a)
the allegations made by the Society of Black Lawyers that the CLE had unlawfully discriminated against students on racial grounds in:
(i)
the arrangements it makes for the admission of students onto the Bar Vocational Course;.
(ii)
disproportionately failing ethnic minority students in the vocational course and resit examinations;
(iii)
failing to adopt a comprehensive equal opportunities policy in relation to its activities both as a provider of educational/vocational services and an employer of staff;
(b)
the disproportionately high failure rate of ethnic minorities students in the Bar Finals Course.
This meeting welcomes the decision of the CLE to conduct a comprehensive review of its admission and assessments procedures with the involvement of the CRE.
Furthermore the meeting urges the CLE, in the course of its review, to reconsider the position of individual students who believe that they have been discriminated against or otherwise unfairly treated.
This meeting invites the CLE to make a full report on the outcome of the review to the Bar Council at its meeting in January 1993.’
With the consent of the Attorney General,, the Chairman of the CLE addressed the meeting.
He accepted that the Society of Black Lawyers had legitimate cause for concern.
But the CLE had not been practising racial discrimination.
In effect the Society of Black Lawyers was inviting members to pass summary justice on the CLE.
He had sought help from the CRE which had agreed to cooperate.
Racial discrimination was abhorrent to all at the CLE.
We took the allegations very seriously.
A vote was taken with the following results:
in favour of 's substituted resolution 26;
in favour of QC's resolution 17.
QC's resolution was therefore carried.
The meeting closed at l4.25.
BAR COMMITTEE
The first meeting of the new committee took place on 16th January 1992.
The list of members shows the eclectic representation to this Committee by all sections of the Bar.
This point was particularly underlined by the Chairman, QC, when he stressed the importance of the role and profile of this Committee, as the most representative of Committees within the Bar Council.
In the past it had been very much relied upon to provide a representative and authoritative comment upon the affairs of the Bar.
The Committee got off to a brisk start at its first meeting.
It dealt with four major matters during the year.
THE SEABROOK REPORT
A special meeting was held on 4th June 1992 to consider the Report.
Particular points concerned the Committal Process, Timely and Realistic Pleas, Plea Bargaining, Staged Brief Fees, Notice Of Alibi and Access to Prisoners, Pre-Trial Case Management, Pre-Trial Disclosure of Issues, Computerised Case Management and Publicly Funded Remuneration for Counsel.
Subsequently, meetings have been arranged with the CPS, the Home Office and the Judiciary and a similar request made to the LCD to discuss the implementation of the Report.
The Chairman met  MP Minister of State at the Home Office, to take forward an initiative by the Bar Council for a field trial of video linking to prisoners held on remand.
THE CONSULTATION AND CONSIDERATION ON FAR-REACHING LEGAL AID PROPOSALS RAISED BY  QC
The proposals included the far-sighted proposals to amend the Legal Aid Regulations, so as to show the Bar's determination that public funds should be efficiently used; also to counter any suggestion of abuse of public funds by the Bar.
THE EXTENSION OF STANDARD FEES
Allied to the recommendations contained in the Seabrook Report extensive work was carried out by the Legal Aid and Fees Committee for the substantial extension of standard fees.
As part of this work the Committee subsequently considered two papers from the Efficiency Commission.
The first concerned QCs appearing alone in Court; the second related to the unnecessary attendance of solicitors on Counsel in some Crown Court cases.
Again, to counter the allegation by the LCD of excessive claims  QC put forward a proposal that Paragraph 9 of the Regulations should be altered, so as to place an obligation on the Court to report to the Bar Council any case where fees are reduced by more than 50 per cent.
THE ROBERTS WORKING PARTY ON LONG FRAUD TRIALS
The Committee set up the Roberts Working Party on Long Fraud Trials.
The aim was to report back with bold proposals for the more efficient and effective trial of long fraud cases.
They considered, inter alia, the arguments in favour of a trial by jury in these cases; whether there are types of cases which could be dealt with effectively or justly outside the criminal justice system; and also whether there should be a properly structured system of plea bargaining with proper safeguards.
THE HEILBRON COMMITTEE
The setting up of the Working Party on Civil Procedures (The Heilbron Committee) was an important development during the year.
This Committee, under the Chairmanship of  QC, considered the future of the Civil Courts.
Membership was subsequently extended to include nominated solicitors from the Law Society.
There are high hopes for a powerful and radical approach to the current problems encountered in matters of civil procedure.
An examination of the Minutes will convey a picture of the wide range of other issues and problems which have been dealt with during the year by the Committee.
These included the cancellation of Recordership sittings on the South Eastern Circuit, correspondence from the School of Law at the University of Warwick upon a research proposal into procedures for challenging confession evidence and reviews of the annual report to the Supreme Court Procedure Committee 1990/91 and the report of the Legal Aid Board to the Lord Chancellor relating to legal aid aspects of multi-party actions.
A significant contribution to the work of the Committee was made by  QC and his team of , and  on matters relating to the Civil Justice Review Working Party.
The Committee approved a field trial of the Electronic Listing of Crown Court trials using the LIX system.
This is now being managed by the Chief Executive.
LEGAL AID AND FEES COMMITTEE
The year's activities have been dominated by the poor economic climate and in particular by the crisis in legal aid.
Recession has added urgency to the Committee's efforts to force the LCD to reduce the serious delays in payment of fees.
Continued pressure to improve the terms of the civil payment on account scheme has so far yielded nothing at all.
On the criminal side, establishment of the Central Taxing Units should have offered much quicker payment in those cases over £4,000.
However, the South-Eastern Unit in particular has consistently worked far below expectations, mainly due to the LCD's inability to recruit sufficient experienced staff.
Despite constant complaints and pressure from the LAFC, the SE Unit situation is if anything worsening rather than improving.
Interim payments are currently being negotiated.
On a broader canvas, the Lord Chancellor's difficulties in controlling ever increasing legal aid expenditure have brought a need to examine new and radical measures.
The first of these, standard fees in the magistrates' courts, is to be introduced in January 1993.
The IAFC is currently considering what payment arrangements might best be made with solicitors where non-assigned Counsel is used.
To improve cost reduction and speed of payment further, the LCD contemplates extending existing standard fee arrangements in the Crown Court.
However, following publication of the Seabrook Report in June, the Bar Council has instead proposed the graduated fee concept.
Identifiably objective elements of a case would be assessed against fixed criteria to decide the fee.
This would apply, with but a few exceptions, to all cases under four weeks' duration.
Greater emphasis would be placed on payment for pre-trial work.
Discussions are continuing with LCD regarding long term proposals to improve the legal aid system and the best methods of remuneration for the Bar.
Nearer home, the LAFC has undertaken some self-examination regarding the unnecessary use of two Counsel and excessive claims for legal aid fees.
In both cases the Bar Council approved and submitted proposals to amend the Regulations.
In March the annual review of CPS and LCD fees resulted in a three per cent increase, slightly more in the CPS case.
However, the biennial consideration of High Court Interlocutory fees produced an uprating of just under ten per cent over two years.
There exists the hope of a parallel Practice Direction in the County Court.
Fees collection work has continued at a high level since the acceptable age of a fee note in a complaint was reduced from five to two years in November 1991.
Complaints received during 1991 totalled 2,040 against a normal annual total of 600.
The figure for 1992 is expected to be about 950.
ACCOMMODATION COMMITTEE
Since the 1991 report four meetings took place, the last one in May 1992, when the Committee was wound up.
The major topic in this period was Inns rents.
Following the November 1991 AGM, a resolution was passed by a ballot of the Bar that the Bar Council, in the interest of keeping down fees and avoiding unjust rental distortions, should require the Inns not to charge a rental exceeding the open market rent (see AGM Minutes para 4 for the full text).
During January the Committee considered the meaning of the Resolution and its possible implications.
A working party concluded that the Resolution was unworkable if strictly construed and in any event so likely to lead to problems as to be impracticable.
However, fresh proposals to amend the existing rent policy were put to the Bar Council in March.
After further refinement a revised policy.
statement was approved in April.
(The Bar Council Agenda and Minutes of 4 April 1992 refer).
Arising from the work of the Way Ahead Committee, proposals were made in March to establish an Estates Management Advisory Committee, which would subsume much of the Accommodation Committee's work.
After some debate, it was considered that there were insufficient residual functions remaining to justify continuation of the Committee.
It was accordingly wound up at the end of May.
The Committee learnt with great sadness of the death of its Chairman  QC on 27 March.
Tribute was paid to his admirable approach and remarkable achievements during his short time in office.
THE BAR SERVICES AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEES
The Bar Services Committee commenced the New Year under the Chairmanship of , who took over from  QC.
The Committee, in conjunction with the Information Technology Sub-Committee under the Chairmanship of , set a list of aims and objectives for the forthcoming year most of which are (as appears below) coming to fruition.
In January the committee arranged that each individual member of the practising Bar should receive a copy of the new edition of Action Pack.
This has been generally well received and is thought to be helpful and informative on matters of chambers administration.
The Information Technology Sub-Committee ensured continued thinking and participation in matters of technology including representation on ITAC (a high-level Court users committee under  LJ's chairmanship on information Technology and the Courts).
A matter which has taken a great deal of time was the proposal before ITAC in relation to future arrangements for the Electronic Distribution of the Crown Court List.
It appeared at one stage that the delivery of List information to barristers would be interrupted.
Strong representations were successfully made to the ITAC Committee both to preempt this and to ensure that a monopoly situation did not arise.
Currently, Phase I of a new field trial has commenced using the LIX system for the transmission of the Lists.
This is being closely monitored by a committee convened by the Chief Executive.
Also, on the technology side an offshoot of the ITAC Committee is the Civil Litigation Working Party under .
This has considered various innovatory ideas for the better dispatch of civil business.
The Information Technology Sub-Committee has sought to make a contribution, and  successfully put forward a reasoned scheme for the amendment of pleadings by non-coloured laserprinter which was subsequently adopted for a trial period within the Commercial Division under .
During the spring and summer of this year the Chairman and members of the committee have invited presentations from a wide range of suppliers of financial services products and it is hoped in due course to publish both recommendations as to the type of financial services products members of the Bar should consider taking up and details of advantageous group insurance schemes.
A welcome innovation has been the inauguration of quarterly meetings with the Administrator of the RCJ and his staff.
The aim is to discuss matters of common interest and concern affecting members of the Bar in the RCJ.
Of particular concern has been exploring ways and means of reconciling the requirements of security with the practical need for easier access generally and especially for the unhindered trolley routes for books and papers.
Progress has been made in providing clearer signposting in the RCJ and also the provision of meeting rooms and additional telephone points within the building.
The maintenance and provision of robing room facilities within the RCJ is the responsibility of this committee.
During  the year encouragement was given to the enhancement of the facilities.
The year has also seen an advance by the Bar's Video Conferencing Studio in the range of work undertaken.
During the summer  QC, the immediate past Chairman of the Bar Services Committee, attended the ABA Conference in San Francisco and was in daily contact by video conference from the PictureTel stand in the Expo.
He later arranged the link for the expert evidence from London to the Mock Trial at the Fairmount Hotel in San Francisco.
The Bar is increasingly recognised as a world leader in the use of video conferencing as a practice tool, and it is hoped that practitioners will make more general use of the facility in its new home at Warwick Court ().
The committee has also been concerned during 1992 to enquire further into the terms upon which banks and finance houses offer services to members of the Bar.
A working party established under  will publish its report shortly.
A working party under  has produced a report reviewing the ACE fee collection system, as a result of which ACE is being encouraged to extend and deepen the support service which it offers to chambers.
The IT Committee has taken further the cooperation with the Centre Du Reidij in France.
The aim is to establish cooperation on a pan-European basis for the exchange of legal information between European countries.
There is now a formula for members of the English Bar to gain access to foreign texts (with or without commentaries) which are not otherwise easily available.
The current programme of the IT Committee includes the investigation and evaluation of a telecommunications network for the Bar as a whole.
The Bar Services Committee and its Information Technology Sub-Committee aims to be responsive to the needs of the profession, and members of the Bar who have suggestions for its future work are encouraged to write to the Secretary with particular proposals.
YOUNG BARRISTERS' COMMITTEE
The YBC's members are all elected members of the Bar Council under seven years' call, together with a small number of coopted members.
As always, the Chairman and other members have represented the Young Bar at various overseas events, and it is always striking to note in other countries the extent to which the Young Bar forms a highly influential and powerful part of the Bar organisation.
However, we are well represented on other Bar Council Committees, and the YBC provides a forum for matters which concern the Young Bar.
A prime example this year has been the committee's extensive concern with the prospect of standard fees being introduced in the magistrates' courts, with the risks which that will bring to the most junior members of the profession.
We have made strong representations about the way chambers need to manage the new regime, and their responsibilities towards their pupils, squatters and junior tenants.
On a more positive note we have supported the efforts to rationalise and sustain the Free Representation Unit which it is hoped are coming to fruition and we have been able to help in a small way with the organisation of the national schools Mock Trial Competition.
Every year we and the national Young Solicitors Group jointly arrange the visit by the chairmen of various overseas young bars for the Opening of the Legal Year, which is our chance to repay the hospitality offered to us by them.
This year we have also had more contact with the London Young Solicitors Group.
The biennial Anglo-Dutch young lawyers exchange was held in Holland this year, and involved about 90 young barristers and solicitors spending four days in Amsterdam, The Hague and Rotterdam, being wonderfully entertained by our Dutch hosts.
It will be hard to match its success for the return visit in 1994.
In July the YBC and the LYSG organised a joint Garden Party in the Inner Temple which was successful (and to a small extent profitable) despite the ‘Garden’ having to be Inner Temple Hall owing to rain, and it may be possible for the two groups to cooperate further in the future.
As ever, the whole committee, but particularly the Chairman, depends enormously on  's experience and wise advice, and we are very grateful to him.
PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE
The Professional Standards Committee continues to deal with all issues relating to the maintenance and promotion of high standards within the profession.
Several of these issues have raised serious problems during the year, primarily arising out of the present economic climate.
SELECTION
Over the year considerable cooperative effort has been made by members of the PSC, the Inns and the CLE which has resulted in the development of a fair and equitable selection scheme.
Necessarily, the scheme has had to be approved through the procedure set out in the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
Pending the finalisation of the selection scheme additional applications have had to be made for approval of an interim scheme for entry in 1992/93 and a developed scheme for 1993/94.
It is hoped that the remaining obstacles can be overcome to enable the final selection process to be operational for the 1994/95 intake into the ICSL.
PUPILLAGE
An appeal by the Chairman to chambers for extra pupillage places was undertaken during May after a questionnaire had been completed by all students of the Inns of Court School of Law regarding their pupillage position.
The extra places offered were matched, as far as possible, with the requirements of those seeking pupillage and has resulted in many pupils obtaining pupillage who would not otherwise have done so.
The exercise involved a tremendous amount of effort by the Secretariat and the Pupillage Working Party.
CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
A pilot scheme was undertaken during 1991/92 whereby 200 pupils, 50 from each Inn, were involved in a programme of continuing professional development and attended courses in Accountancy, EC and HR Law and Advocacy in addition to attending a day's course entitled Advice to Counsel.
, a principal lecturer at the Inns of Court School of Law, dealt with the coordination of this continuing professional development scheme and each of the Inns cooperated by putting on an advocacy course for their own 50 pupils.
The pilot scheme proved to be a great success and has now been developed into a continuing professional development programme for all pupils in the year 1992/93.  is now wholly involved in coordinating this scheme for the Bar.
The Inns have further developed their advocacy training and are organising and funding the scheme for all the pupils in their Inn.
As yet only two parts of the continuing education programme are compulsory, those being: ‘Advice to Counsel’ and Advocacy.
Courses in Accountancy and European and Human Rights Law are being set up and it is hoped that as many pupils as possible will attend them, but for economic reasons it has been decided not to make them compulsory this year.
FINANCING YOUNG ENTRANTS
During the year a working party was set up under the Chairmanship of  QC to look into every possible way in which the financial burden of young entrants to the Bar can be eased.
The Inns now contribute £1.5 million per year by way of scholarships to new entrants.
The CLE subsidises fees of students at the ICSL to the tune of £700,000 and chambers are now offering in the region of £200,000 by way of pupillage awards.
Considerable though these sums are, they are still insufficient.
An exhaustive investigation into better methods of financing young entrants is continuing.
CHAMBERS ADMINISTRATION
The new edition of Action Pack has now been produced.
It is proving invaluable in helping chambers set in place a proper system of administration in chambers.
It is also most helpful in providing a yardstick for proper administration against which the resolution of problems can be measured.
An increasing amount of work is still being undertaken in this area by the Secretariat.
The difficulties which most frequently arise concern the financial problems which arise when individual barristers move from one chambers to another or leave the Bar.
They are largely caused by a lack of knowledge or understanding in chambers where no ground rules are laid down.
Thanks are due, in no small measure, to those on the list of arbitrators appointed by the Chairman, who spend a great deal of their time dealing with these disputes.
PUBLIC RELATIONS
Law Fair: A double stand was taken at the Law Fair in February which was manned by representatives from the Young Barristers' Association, the Circuits and most of the Specialist Bar Associations.
Additional help and cooperation came from the staff of the ICSL and the Student Officers.
AGCAS/Law Faculty Conference: Invitations to the usual biennial Conference for Careers Officers this year were extended also to representatives of Law Faculties.
The Conference was well attended by 120 delegates and proved to be a most useful exercise for the mutual exchange of information and ideas.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT COMMITTEE
The steady increase in complaints against members of the Bar mentioned in last year's Report has continued, 262 complaints having been received up to the end of September.
If this rate continues, the total for the full year is likely to amount to 349 complaints compared with 308 last year — ie. an increase of 13 per cent.
After a period of very stable numbers between 1985–89, the PCC will thus have seen its workload increase by 66 per cent in only three years, a trend which shows little sign of ending.
Following Disciplinary Tribunals in 1990 and appeals to the Visitors during the following year, applications for leave to apply for Judicial Review of the Visitors' findings were submitted by two members of the Bar in summer and autumn 1991, leave being granted in June and December respectively.
Both applications were heard together, on the preliminary point of whether the Divisional Court had jurisdiction, on 13–14th February 1992, the Bar Council being represented by Counsel.
In its reserved judgement given on 12th March 1992, the Court concluded that the Visitors acted in their capacity as Judges of the High Court and not as visitors in the usual sense and were thus not reviewable.
A hitherto unrecognised right of appeal from their decisions to the Court of Appeal might, however, exist.
Both applicants have subsequently appealed to the Court of Appeal against the Divisional Court's finding and, in the alternative, against the Visitors' findings in their individual cases.
The former are due to be heard together at the beginning of December, a hearing at which the Bar Council will again be represented, and it is clearly too early to predict a result or to consider the implications in detail.
Suffice it to say that whatever the Court of Appeal's finding there are likely to be significant procedural and resource implications as far as the administration of the complaints system is concerned and these will have to be explored during the coming year.
RACE RELATIONS COMMITTEE
The Race Relations Committee has spent 1992 working to set in place its programme for implementation of the Race Equality Policy adopted by the Bar Council in 1991.
The Race Equality Policy sets out six objectives for equality of opportunity through all stages of a barrister's training and areas of practice and suggests means of achieving these objectives.
In December 1991 the Bar Council engaged  as the Bar's Equal Opportunities Consultant for a limited period to advise the Bar Council on strategy for implementation of the policy.
She was also asked to produce a Code of Practice to promote equality and ensure the elimination of discrimination on the grounds of race and gender.
In July the Bar Council appointed  and  on a job-share basis to the newly created position of Equal Opportunities Officer to the Bar.
Their role will be to provide specialist expertise in this area for the profession on a full-time basis.
The Equality Code of Practice is currently being produced in consultation with a wide range of practitioners.
It will set out recommended procedures for equal opportunities  practice in the selection of pupils and tenants for chambers.
For instance, there will be sections on good interview procedure, objective selection criteria, lines of questioning to avoid etc.
It will also give guidance on means of achieving fair distribution of work within chambers.
Advice on monitoring the effectiveness of the procedures will form part of the Code of Practice.
The Equality Code will be distributed to chambers in the New Year.
The Code of Practice will also set out guidelines for achieving equality of opportunity in legal education and another section will deal with the Inns of Court.
Apart from working on its ambitious equality programme, the Race Relations Committee has dealt with other issues as they have arisen throughout the year.
In June the Chairmen of the Inns' Scholarship Committees attended a meeting of the Race Relations Committee to explain the criteria and procedures used by the Inns to make scholarship awards.
A working party chaired by  has been examining the Non-Intending Practitioners' Course.
This course is largely taken by candidates from overseas and there has been a worryingly high failure rate.
The Race Relations Committee has worked closely with students and the CLE in trying to make recommendations as to how to improve the situation.
The Race Relations Committee is currently very concerned at the number of ethnic minority students who have passed the Vocational Course and who have been unable to find pupillage for 1992–3.
It is also examining both the admissions criteria and the examination results of the Vocational Course.
The Committee is very grateful to its Secretary,, not only for all the work she has done for the committee but also for her work for ethnic minority students seeking pupillage.
PUBLIC AFFAIRS COMMITTEE
PUBLIC AND MEDIA RELATIONS
Serious consideration was given at the beginning of the year to the present public, parliamentary and media relations.
Very few disputed the value of effective public relations, but it was recognised that the level of activity of 1989–91 could not be sustained nor justified.
A number of options were considered but it was decided that continuity and experience were important and the services provided by Westminster Strategy were highly regarded and ought to continue.
However, to reflect a reduced level of activity it was agreed to reduce the PR budget by 20 per cent.
As in previous years, the PAC in conjunction with Westminster Strategy continued its policy of contact building with Government Departments and consumer bodies.
The Chairman of the Bar was well to the fore in many issues continuing to practise a policy of openness with the press and media.
A number of matters which were implemented towards the end of 1991 and concluded at the beginning of 1992 were touched upon in last year's report.
The first of these was the establishment of the Legal Journalist of the Year award.
Two awards were made, the first to  BBC Television's correspondent, as Broadcaster Journalist of the Year; the second to , the Home Affairs Editor of The Guardian as the Newspaper Journalist of the Year.
In addition, a special award was made to Ludovic Kennedy for his outstanding contribution over many years in exposing miscarriages of justice.
The second was the final Bar Mock Trial Competition for schools which the then Lord Chief Justice,, very kindly chaired.
This year, the competition has been enlarged to cover 128 schools from throughout the United Kingdom, including Scotland and Northern Ireland.
NIGHT COURTS
The third initiative from last year concerned Night Courts.
The working party, chaired by  with  and , has produced a report which recognises this is an option which has a limited but valuable application possible in the magistrates and county courts.
The report proposes a pilot scheme in selected courts.
The working party is to be thanked for a tremendous amount of work covered in preparing the report.
CHARTER FOR THE COURTS
The Committee has continued to press for a sensible Charter for the Courts as an adjunct to the Citizen's Charter and meetings have been held with officials in the Home Office and the Lord Chancellor's Department.
A meeting has also been sought with  MP, the minister responsible for implementation of the Citizen's Charter.
Last  year, the initiative for an open day for justice in the Cour d'Appel in Paris was taken up with the Lord Chancellor's Department.
Whilst not on the same scale as in Paris, an open day was held earlier this year in the Crown Court at Teesside.
The one disappointing feature was that the legal profession had not been notified of this event despite the Bar's recorded interest.
TV IN THE COURTS
The Committee was disappointed at the lack of progress in pursuing the initiative on televising the courts following the defeat in the previous year of the Private Member's Bill to sponsor a pilot scheme.
The topic continues to be raised from time to time in the media including illustrations of how celebrity trials in America are reported on TV.
However, it was in Scotland that the initiative took off.
Following a report made to the President of the Court of Session, television is being introduced in a controlled way in the higher courts in Scotland.
The Public Affairs Committee will be seeking to persuade the authorities in England and Wales to follow suit, again, initially in the appellate courts.
Parliamentary Contracts
Since the General Election, a programme of meetings was drawn up with Westminster Strategy involving ministers and the new intake of MPs, special advisers, PPSs and opposition spokesmen.
Contact has also been made with the Home Affairs Select Committee which has taken on new responsibilities of interest to the Bar, including legal aid.
PRIVACY AND THE LAW
The Public Affairs Committee has had another look at privacy and the law.
A report had originally been produced and submitted to  QC's Committee when it was first set up two years ago.
When  was invited to conduct a review of the topic in the summer the Public Affairs Committee set up a working party (Chairman: QC), and the report has been submitted to .
DISABILITY PANEL
Finally, the Disability Panel has conducted a survey of London chambers to establish what facilities exist for the disabled.
An analysis of the responses will be made and published.
The Panel has also raised the issue with the Inns and the CLE.
It is recognised that one of the areas where immediate progress can be made is in assisting disabled students.
A bank of information is also being set up by the Panel with a view to helping those with disabilities at the Bar.
THE COMMITTEE
Much of the work of the committee is unseen and unsung.
The Chairman is grateful to those members and to Westminster Strategy for their help and support in 1992.
LAW REFORM COMMITTEE
The Law Reform Committee is regularly consulted by a number of bodies for its views on proposed law reform projects.
We try to give constructive and detailed responses to the proposals and engage the assistance of specialists in the field where necessary.
We believe that we are often able to bring to bear the advantage of practical experience as well as academic learning.
This year, amongst our more substantial projects have been the Law Commission's papers on Rape within Marriage, Privity of Contract and Offences against the Person; the Home Office's proposals on Squatting; the EC Package Travel Directive, the City's Legal Risk Review Committee paper ‘Reducing Uncertainty’, and the Consumer Association's paper on professional negligence.
We do not see our role as merely responding to proposals produced by others for reform of the law, although this is inevitably a major part of our work.
The Bar seeks to take a positive view on law reform and we try to fulfil this requirement by considering each year a number of particular issues.
This year we are engaged in projects as diverse as the Bill of Rights, delays caused by the interaction between domestic and European law, exemplified by the Sunday Trading cases; and Long Fraud Trials.
We are always willing to consider proposals put forward by members of the Bar.
Finally, subscribers will be relieved to know that this work is done at minimal cost to the Bar — all the work is done pro bono by individual members of the Bar in their own time.
INTERNATIONAL PRACTICE COMMITTEE
The whole map of Europe has been changed.
The position of countries has been violently altered.
The modes of thought of men, the whole outlook on affairs, the grouping of parties all have encountered violent and tremendous changes in the challenge of the world.'
Contrary to what our readers may believe the above is not a description of Europe after the arrival of solicitors' rights of audience.
It nevertheless remains, in our view, singularly apt to describe the state of the legal community worldwide today and at the beginning of 1992.
Many members of the Bar still believe that the European Community is, as one Tory MP put it very recently, airy-fairy.
Unfortunately, as the best drafted instructions always say, as from 1st January 1993, EC lawyers are going to have the right to come and practice in the UK.
This terrifies them as much as it terrified your committee on your behalf.
It has nevertheless been quite comforting to discover, that, in general terms, most European lawyers make common cause with the Bar rather than the Law Society.
Next year sees the first English Bar President of the Council of the Bars of Europe (CCBE),.
The CCBE has done a great deal behind the scenes to fend off some of the battier ideas emanating from the European Commission.
There is nevertheless still floating around an idea for a kind of multidisciplinary partnership, called the Bangemann proposal.
All those who would like to be in partnership with two loss adjusters, a cost and works accountant, and a marine architect are asked to contact your CCBE representative,, who will make your views known.
Meanwhile in Central and Eastern Europe, countries newly freed from communism have been trying, and continue to try, to set up a legal system and corps of independent lawyers.
We have received visits from the Russian Minister of Justice, the Estonian Cabinet, the chief legal advisor to the President of the Ukraine and many others.
In turn under the leadership of  QC and  QC we have sent delegations to the Baltic States, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania (at their request, we hasten to add), and have assisted in the setting up of a new bilateral organisation called BELLA (British Law Association for Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania).
We have also sent delegations to Russia, Ukraine, Czechoslovakia, and Roumania.
The reason for these visits is that they have asked for our help in drafting new laws and constitutions, as well as advising on legal procedures and the training of advocates.
On the other side of the world, the largest number of members of the Bar ever attended the American Bar Association Conference in San Francisco in August.
We took a stand at the ABA Expo, as Rumpole would say, alone without a leader — in this instance the Law Society which took a discreet hospitality suite on the 38th Floor of the Hilton Hotel.
So great was their discretion that the Bar had to send would-be enquirers on their way with an ordinance survey map, a dog and a bottle of brandy.
For the third year running the Bar put on a mock trial, at the request of the Litigation Section of the ABA, which was well received.
The Litigation Section came to a conference in England in May, which was mostly organised by , Vice-Chairman of the IPC and , Secretary to the IPC.
Both these gallant gentlemen have been mentioned in dispatches in recognition of their services to the American Bar.
We also received a visit from a number of members of the Australian Bar, one of the highlights of which was a debate on the retention or abolition of wigs and gowns, which was conducted by videolink with Australia.
This debate seemed to be marked by a remarkably high standard of studied insult.
These are some of the many exchanges we have had this year with lawyers from overseas.
Last but by no means least, the Human Rights Sub-Committee under the chairmanship of  has done an enormous amount of work on behalf of lawyers in countries where the rule of law remains somewhere over the rainbow.
It has been the IPC's policy this year to try and raise the Bar's profile abroad and enhance its influence.
It has been very gratifying to see the extent to which the Bar's presence is welcomed and the Bar's help and advice sought in international circles.
It was also very noticeable in the United States how many American lawyers asked for assistance because they wished to refer work to an English barrister.
Nevertheless, we think there is still a great deal to be done before the Bar is adequately recognised abroad, and gains the full benefit of such recognition in the now hugely enlarged international legal markets.
Roll on 1993!
LEGAL SERVICES COMMITTEE
THE LORD CHANCELLOR'S ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON LEGAL EDUCATION AND CONDUCT (LCAC)
The Legal Services Committee continued in 1992 where it left off in 1991 and in January 1992 representatives of the committee appeared for the third time before the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct.
On that occasion it set out its views the impact wider rights of audience for solicitors and lawyers employed by the Crown Prosecution Service and Government Legal Service (GIS) would have on the Bar and particularly the Young Bar.
This was the last opportunity the Legal Services Committee had to make oral submissions to the Advisory Committee before the latter produced its advice on both the Law Society's application for extended rights of audience for solicitors and the CPS/GLS submission seeking to remove the restrictions under para 402(1) (c) in the Bar's Code of Conduct on rights of audience for employed lawyers.
ADVICE OF THE LCAC ON THE APPLICATION OF THE LAW SOCIETY AND CPS/GLS
The LCAC advice was produced in April, the effect of which was to reject any extension for rights of audience for the CPS and other employed lawyers and the Advisory Committee concluded that the Law Society's application was inadequate in certain respects.
It concluded no further rights of audience would be granted to solicitors until applicants for higher courts advocacy had gained the necessary experience, passed a test in evidence and procedure and passed a course in higher court advocacy skills.
The Legal Services Committee was unhappy with the LCAC's views on the cab rank not to make the obligation to do legal aid work a professional obligation.
The Law Society was invited to consider revision of its application in the light of the LCAC advice.
It was also left with a dilemma on how to proceed with employed solicitors.
On the one hand it could concentrate on setting out in greater detail the education and training requirements for solicitors seeking higher courts advocacy as suggested by LCAC and leave until later the question of employed solicitors.
On the other hand there was a powerful body of opinion in the Law Society that employed solicitors should not be left out of the main application.
In the end the Law Society adopted the latter course.
EDUCATION AND TRAINING REQUIREMENTS OF THE SOLICITORS' APPLICATION
In considering the solicitors' application the Legal Services Committee prepared a submission based on what it considered was the inadequacy of the advocacy and training proposals.
To that end, a working party was set up consisting of members of the Legal Services Committee and representatives of the CLE including the Dean, to work on the detailed proposals of the Law Society once they were made available and to put forward the Bar's view.
The proposals were received in September.
The working party prepared written submissions drawing comparisons between the Bar's training and that proposed by the Law Society but taking account of the experience solicitors would be likely to have had in the lower courts.
The Legal Services Committee was particularly concerned as to the inadequacy of the Law Society's weekend advocacy training course.
The Committee has made its written submissions and will be making oral representations on this topic.
CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE
On the CPS front, the CPS/GLS continued with their application under section 31 notwithstanding the advice given by the Advisory Committee and made a submission to the Lord Chancellor and the four designated judges seeking disapproval of paragraph 402(1) (c) of the Bar's Code of Conduct.
In October, the Lord Chancellor and the four judges issued a joint statement which rejected the application of the CPS/GLS for any immediate increase in rights of audience but rather than approve the Bar's rule indefinitely invited the Bar to consider time limiting the rule restricting rights of audience of employed barristers against a deadline of November 1994.
This was considered by the Legal Services Committee which advised the Chairman of the Bar that the way out of the dilemma was to invite the CPS/GLS to withdraw their application.
OTHER BUSINESS
Throughout the year the Committee has continued to meet on a fortnightly basis to consider not just those issues referred to above but many others.
These include multidisciplinary practices in Scotland, an application by patent agents for litigation rights in the higher courts, an application by the Institute of Licensed Debt Practitioners for recognition as an authorised body under the Courts and Legal Services Act, the proposal issued by EC Commissioner  for a new legal entity for the association of liberal professions and the long term selection procedure on entry to the Bar.
In addition to the Education and Training Working Party mentioned above, a working party (Chairman: QC) has been set up to look at the way ahead.
As a result of working on these matters, the Legal Services Committee has prepared a series of papers and has been preparing advice on the steps the profession needs to consider taking in the future in relation to such issues as direct access, partnerships, split fees, cab rank rule and how to compete with solicitors in a brave new world.
It is anticipated that a series of meetings will be held in London and on circuit to explain future developments.
This has been a very busy year and the committee has been lucky with the commitment of its Vice Chairmen and members who of necessity reflect a microcosm of the Bar from the young criminal practitioner to the experienced commercial silk.
JOINT REGULATIONS COMMITTEE
If you are a solicitor or an overseas lawyer wanting to be admitted to the English Bar; if you are seeking some reduction of the normal pupillage requirements or certain other exemptions from the regulations; if you are applying to become an employed pupil-master — you must apply to the Joint Regulations Committee (JRC).
It has always been a busy committee but especially so in the last year or two, not least because it has taken on more responsibility.
Also, for whatever reason, the number of applicants has significantly increased.
Because its business involves the Inns as well as the Bar, the JRC is a joint committee whose members are nominated by the Bar Council, the Inns' Council and the individual Inns.
It is administered entirely by the Bar Council and meets once a month (except August).
Predominantly its work is case work, considering whether individual applicants should receive exemptions from examinations and pupillage.
It has delegated authority under the Consolidated Regulations to grant such exemptions.
In addition, it is responsible for formulating the policy for dealing with the various kinds of applications (subject to the directions of the Bar Council and the Inns' Council) and for revising the Consolidated Regulations as and when necessary.
During the last year (September 1991 to September 1992) the committee has dealt with the following applications:
Solicitors seeking transfer to the Bar
73
Scottish advocates seeking Call to the Bar
5
Northern Ireland barristers seeking Call to the Bar
7
EC lawyers seeking Call to the Bar (this includes Irish barristers)
12
Common law practitioners (ie. persons qualified in a common law jurisdiction anywhere in the world) seeking Call to the Bar
56
Applications for reduction of pupillage
121
Applications for approval of employed pupil-masters
17
Applications for ‘special admission’ to the Inns of Court School of Law
10
Applications for permission to change intention
39
A word of explanation may be needed in regard to the last two categories.
‘Special admission’ applicants are persons from overseas who would not normally be entitled to join the vocational course at the Inns of Court School of Law (ICSL), but can be permitted to do so in exceptional circumstances.
They have to be outstanding academically, and must show that having served pupillage and completed a limited period of practice in this country they intend subsequently to return to their country of origin, and that the experience of English pupillage and practice will be of significant benefit in establishing a practice in their home country.
As for change of intention, this happens when a person has done the Non-Intending Practitioners' Course but subsequently wishes to be eligible to practise here.
In these cases the committee has to be satisfied that there has been a bona fide change of intention, or that there are other exceptional circumstances, and if satisfied can permit the applicant to complete additional training as a preparation for entering pupillage.
In addition to the case work, the committee has continued to keep the regulations under review and has considered a variety of amendments.
One area that has received special  attention is the text of the Admission and Call Declarations: these have been redrafted, although the final draft has yet to be approved.
Currently a study of the workings of the committee is being conducted by the Chief Executive.
This is likely to lead to radical changes in the committee's procedures, which could be implemented next year.
The Legal Academics Committee was set up under the chairmanship of  QC, by the Professional Standards Committee and the JRC in November 1991.
Its function is to receive applications from teachers of law for exemption (full or partial) from the requirements of the Consolidated Regulations in respect of 
(i)
the vocational course at the ICSL;
(ii)
dining terms; and
(iii)
pupillage,
and to make recommendations for exemptions in appropriate cases to the competent authorities, the Council of Legal Education, the JRC and the Inns through the JRC.
Recommendations for exemptions are made only for experienced and distinguished teachers of law who have established links with the profession.
Since November 1991, 73 enquiries have been received from legal academics.
Twenty-six full applications have been considered.
Recommendation for exemption have been made in response to 16 applications.
SEX DISCRIMINATION COMMITTEE
The Sex Discrimination Committee first met on 30th January 1992.
It was established in response to a resolution passed by the 1992 AGM calling for the Bar Council to investigate the position of women at the Bar.
The Lord Chancellor was also concerned at the small numbers of women becoming eligible for appointments.
SURVEY OF WOMEN AT THE BAR
The committee's first task was to ascertain objectively whether discrimination exists against women at the Bar and, if so, the extent of such discrimination.
A survey was commissioned to cover both raw data such as the proportion of women barristers at each stage of their career at the Bar, and also qualitative data such as attitudes towards careers for women barristers.
Tenders were invited from companies of equal opportunities specialists, and TMS Consultants was finally selected to conduct the survey, which was sponsored jointly by the Bar Council and by the Lord Chancellor's Department.
Questionnaires were first designed with the assistance of the Equal Opportunities Commission and sent to samples of women and men barristers and Heads of Chambers at the Independent Bar.
A survey was then conducted of the Employed Bar, and of non-practising barristers, although the latter could not be systematically canvassed.
As part of the survey, open diagnostic workshops were held for women to share their experiences and ideas for a better future for women at the Bar.
The survey results were analysed and a full report is due in the autumn, which will include the committee's recommendations.
MATERNITY GUIDELINES
In response to requests, a working party was formed in March to produce guidelines on maternity leave.
These were formally approved by the Bar Council in July.
The Guidelines recommend arrangements in Chambers for women who need leave of absence by reason of maternity.
The Guidelines offer the profession a standard of good practice within the law, and were distributed to all Heads of Chambers.
Although the Guidelines are not enforceable, it is hoped that Chambers will adopt them, in order that talented women are not lost from independent practice.
EQUALITY CODE OF PRACTICE
The Equality Code of Practice, originally recommended by the Bar Race Equality Policy, is now to include gender as well as race discrimination.
The Equal Opportunities Officers will work with both the Race Relations and Sex Discrimination Committee to develop equal opportunities for all at the Bar.
FUTURE PROJECTS
The subjects soon to be considered by the committee include sexual harassment, Inns' scholarships, pupillage complaints and court dress.
It is hoped that the committee's work will enable the Bar to set an example of good practice among the professions.
BAR COUNCIL 1992
SECRETARIAT
CALLED TO THE BAR IN 1992
