Financial Highlights
In 1992 the Group had record sales of £204 million (up 17%) and profit on ordinary activities before taxation of £18.5 million (up 10%).
After taking account of taxation and minority interests the profit attributable to shareholders has increased to £10.7 million (up 11%).
During 1992 the Group completed a number of acquisitions and invested further on additions to tangible fixed assets.
The total investment in acquisitions and additions to fixed assets was £17.3 million (up 50%).
Even with these significant investments the Group has no net borrowing and finished 1992 with £3.6 million of net cash balances.
During 1992 shareholders' funds increased to £49.8 million (up 22%).
The Group continues to have a strong balance sheet and is ideally placed to exploit market opportunities in 1993 and beyond.
Chairman's Statement
Summary
I am pleased to report that, despite more difficult trading conditions in 1992, we achieved good increases in both turnover and profit.
Group sales were £204 million (1991- £174 million) and profits on ordinary activities before tax were £18.5 million (1991 — £16.9 million).
Shareholders' funds were almost £50 million at the year end (1991 £41 million).
A detailed report on our divisional activities is contained in the Review of Operations and I will therefore concentrate on a general review of some of the more important developments and issues affecting both the Group and industry.
North Sea Oil &Gas
As predicted last year, 1992 has been a year of change in the North Sea.
We are now clearly in a mature market and the challenge is to both optimise recovery from existing fields and maximise the development of new marginal fields.
There has been considerable progress during the year on a number of aspects related to the cost competitiveness of the UK's oil industry, progress in which the Wood Group has played a leading role in national discussions and, more importantly, in a wide range of initiatives and developments directly with our customers.
Our expertise in Engineering Contracting and Design has given us a strong position in long term partnering contracts.
We continue to work closely with Shell Expro towards achieving the partnering objectives for their Brent Charlie and Delta platforms.
We were also very pleased to be awarded, at the end of last year, a long term contract from BP Exploration for the provision of integrated engineering services on their Magnus, Thistle and Miller platforms.
Onshore, our Logistics division has a number of partnering contracts both in Great Yarmouth and Aberdeen, whilst our Gas Turbines division is pioneering the concept of total maintenance (health care) contracts for critical power pack units, both offshore and onshore.
The concepts of ‘one-stop-shop’ and ‘lead contractor’have benefited our Fire Protection and Engineering Services companies.
Our commitment towards meeting the exciting professional challenge of these new business relationships, together with our experience in project management and cost effective engineering and maintenance, has enabled us to increase our market share in most of our North Sea related businesses.
In terms of activity, North Sea exploration slowed down in 1992 and unless we see some adjustment to the Petroleum Revenue Tax changes announced by the Chancellor in the March 1993 Budget, exploration will inevitably decrease further this year.
Marginal field development will not be helped by the withdrawal of Cross Field Allowances.
However, reducing Petroleum Revenue Tax on existing fields will encourage investment in platform refurbishment and secondary recovery projects which provide the most significant part of our North Sea business.
On balance, I believe we will see somewhat reduced North Sea activity levels over the next few years.
On the positive side, BP's announced major oil discovery West of Shetland is certainly encouraging and the transfer of the Department of Trade  &Industry oil and gas jobs to Aberdeen is also an important step in establishing a significant critical mass of oil related activity and technology in the North East of Scotland, which will enhance the industry's potential for international development.
We have continued to extend our range of specialist services.
The acquisition of Aberdeen-based Marioff Engineering Services (renamed Wood-Way Hydraulic Services) provides us with significant hydraulics capability and the acquisition of 65% of Thistle Engineering, also in Aberdeen, gives us important dimensional control technology which will help to reduce the amount of welding work which is currently carried out offshore.
International Oil &Gas
The past year has seen a significant increase in our successful penetration of overseas oil and gas markets.
In the Middle East, we are working with our local partner on two major contracts for the refurbishment of Kuwait Oil Company's facilities.
We have also invested £1.5 million in two new high quality mechanical engineering workshops — one in the Jebel Ali Free Zone in Dubai and the other in Abu Dhabi.
These facilities now enable us to provide a comprehensive oil support service throughout the region.
In the United States, Wood Group ESP acquired Trico Submersible Systems (renamed ESP Products) and are now embarked on an ambitious programme of growth to develop the products and services of our electric submersible pump business worldwide.
We also acquired 47% of ERC Industries which remanufactures and services valves and wellhead equipment in the United States.
It is our intention to help ERC develop this business internationally.
During the year, we have worked in almost all major offshore oil provinces worldwide.
We continue to devote resources and incur costs in developing our international presence, as we believe this is essential for the realisation of our medium term business potential.
Non-Oil Activities
Our Gas Turbines division has now firmly established a world centre of excellence in the repair and overhaul of gas generators in Aberdeen.
We invested £3 million during the year to provide a 32,000 square foot gas turbine component repair facility for Rolls Wood Group and a 15,000 square foot workshop for Lincoln Turbine Service to further develop their expertise in GEC, Ruston and Solar turbines.
We have also extended our gas turbine testing facilities in Aberdeen and our two specialist companies, Turbine Engineering Services and Gas Turbine Fuel Systems, have both significantly increased their market penetration.
Two of our most challenging contracts during the year were a five year contract won by Lincoln Turbine Service to maintain National Power's fleet of gas turbine driven alternators throughout England and Wales and a contract for Turbine Engine Services to provide a power pack generating station in Malaysia.
Our Fire Protection and Engineering Services companies have also made good progress in increasing their sales in non-oil related markets.
General
Prospects for the current year are difficult to predict at this early stage.
We believe we will continue to gain market share in the North Sea, but the overall level of activity there will probably decrease.
Sustaining the improvement in our performance will therefore depend on expanding our international and non-oil markets, although the profits of the former will be affected by start-up losses as we move into new territories.
Our balance sheet is strong and we are looking carefully at further acquisitions in both the oil and non-oil sectors.
I am pleased to welcome , who is leading our development work in the non-oil sector, to the Main Board.
Another Board colleague,, has taken full time responsibility for quality, safety, health and the environment.
Our Total Quality Management programmes are now beginning to show considerable benefits and the Group's Vision and Mission Statement was presented to all our employees at a series of meetings held in early 1993.
Their positive response and interest underlines the fact that our real strength lies in the expertise, skills, commitment and enthusiasm of all our personnel.
The strong customer focus of the Total Quality Management programmes, allied to the relevance of our quality, training and safety programmes, provides the foundation for our continued growth and success.
Can I therefore finish by thanking all our employees, worldwide, most sincerely for helping us write a further chapter in what continues to be a major UK success story.
Directors and Officers
CBE BSC LLD Chairman (1982) and Managing Director (1967).
Pioneered the Group's development into oil industry related markets in the 1970s.
Also Chairman of I W Holdings, chairman of Grampian enterprise, director of the Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc, member of both the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council and the Scottish Economic Council.
Age 50.
FCIS FCT Vice Chairman,(1982).
Joined the Group in 1968.
A Chartered Secretary and a Fellow of the Association of Corporate Treasurers.
Previously Group finance director and company secretary.
Managing director of J W Holdings Limited.
Age 60.
MA LLB CA Non-executive director.
An executive director of Noble Grossart Limited and also a non-executive director of Amicable Smaller Enterprises Trust PLC, Stagecoach Holdings PLC, Pict Petroleum plc and a number of other companies.
Age 50.
Group director responsible for Engineering Contracting, Engineering Design and Fire Protection.
Joined the Group in 1975 and played a major role in developing the Group's significant offshore engineering activities.
Age 59.
BSc MBA
Joined the Group in 1985 and played a major role in developing the Group's gas turbine division.
Group director responsible for the Gas Turbine and Engineering Services Divisions.
A chartered engineer with an MBA from the London Business School.
Age 48.
BSc
Group director.
Joined the Group in 1965.
Responsible for the Oilfields Logistics and Supplies Division since its inception in 1973 which includes property and oil distribution interests.
Age 55.
BSc
Associated with Wood Group's US development since 1985 and joined the Group as a director in 1986.
Group director responsible for Drilling and Production Services.
A petroleum engineer with 3 5 years of international experience.
Age 57.
OBE BSc
A mechanical engineer with many years experience in design, production and general management.
Joined the Group in 1982 and is now Group director responsible for Safety, Health and Environmental matters.
Age 60.
MA CA
Group financial director.
Joined the Group in 1991.
Previously a partner with Coopers &Lybrand Deloitte and prior to that worked with Deloitte Haskins &Sells in London and Edinburgh, specialising in corporate finance.
Age 35.
Joined the Group in 1992.
Group director responsible for Business Development.
Has extensive general management and business development experience in Europe and North America.
Age 49.
Divisional Structure
John Wood Group PLC is recognised as the UK's largest indigenous oil service company.
With over 20 years' experience in servicing the oil and gas sector, we employ approximately 2,800 personnel worldwide providing engineering and high technology services and products to offshore oil, power generation and general industrial markets.
The Group's competitive strengths in oilfield markets in the North Sea, Europe, North America and the Middle East are complemented by our fast growing reputation as one of the world's foremost gas turbine overhaul and repair companies, giving the Group a strong non-oil activity base.
Oilfield Logistics and Supplies
One of the UK's leading offshore base support companies providing services, equipment, marine chartering and storage for offshore operators.
Other services include general cargo handling, marine fuel product storage and wholesale electrical supplies.
Engineering
Contracting
A leading North Sea contractor with expertise in the planning and execution of construction, modification, maintenance and inspection contracts for offshore and onshore installations.
Engineering
Design
One of the largest engineering design contractors in Aberdeen providing a wide range of North Sea engineering services, particularly related to modifying existing offshore platforms.
Fire and Safety
Provides fire protection and safety equipment and systems to offshore and industrial customers.
Manufactures fire protection products for public utilities and industrial markets both in the UK and overseas.
Gas Turbines
A world market leader in the repair and overhaul of industrial gas turbines, specialising in Rolls-Royce, GEC, Pratt &whitney , Ruston and Solar engines, together with the repair and calibration of flight fuel nozzles.
Engineering
Services
Covers general engineering services, including repair and overhaul of high speed pumps, valves, compressors, subsea and hydraulic equipment, with fabrication workshop facilities and manufacture of electronic control units.
Drilling and Production Services
New unit manufacture, repair and proprietary services for electro submersible pumps; products and services for downhole data acquisition; remanufacture and repair of valves and wellheads; and manufacture of tubular inspection equipment.
Review of Operations.
Oilfield Logistics and Supplies
‘Wood Group is now the UK's leading offshore support company with extensive shore base facilities in Aberdeen and Great Yarmouth.’
Our supply base activities continue to evolve as offshore operators increasingly contract out non-core activities and delegate more responsibility to service companies.
Despite a downturn in exploration drilling levels, even lower than those experienced in 1987 and particularly affecting Great Yarmouth operations, Wood Group Offshore continued to trade successfully.
A substantial investment programme to increase its capabilities, together with disposal of surplus property, focussed the deployment of capital on quayside assets.
This development programme included the acquisition of the former Texaco fuel terminal in Aberdeen.
This is being upgraded to provide a drive-through road loading gantry facility to cater for marine and inland products, and a pipeline network to supply marine fuel to three Wood Group and two Shell Expro quays.
Premises at East Tullos in Aberdeen are being extended and upgraded at a cost of £0 5 million in support of a long term logistics partnering contract awarded by Enterprise Oil during the year.
A further £1.2 million was committed to 15,000 square feet of offices and 12,000 square feet of warehousing accommodation at the Wood Marine Base in Aberdeen, a third of which has been let prior to completion to Deminex.
The company continues to look for expansion opportunities, especially in Great Yarmouth, where the scale of production support operations enhances the benefits of resource sharing, an area in which the company has a proven record.
Finaserve continued to enjoy good levels of product volume in a competitive market and our two joint venture cargo handling companies also made good progress, particularly in Aberdeen where a good level of general cargo business was secured.
As a result of reduced exploration activity, Moray Firth Service Company achieved a disappointing 173 rig days during the year.
The level of other support activities to the oil industry, however, was maintained and sales of gas oil reached their highest levels since the formation of the company in 1984.
Woodacon Oils continued to be a steady performer, increasing its product storage capacity.
The company is a major supplier of marine fuels in the port of Aberdeen.
Wholesale suppliers of electrical equipment,, had another successful year providing speciality products to both traditional and offshore markets.
Pictured right:
The division's storage capabilities have been significantly extended during the year.
Pictured opposite:
Wood Group Offshore's Maitland Quay in Aberdeen offers a comprehensive range of quayside facilities for offshore customers.
Principal Companies:
Engineering Contracting
‘Our expertise and innovative approach to engineering contracting has given us a strong position in long term partnering contracts.’
Wood Group Engineering Contractors had a good year, maintaining its previous year's levels of sales and profit.
The maintenance, modifications and services contract (MMSC) for Shell UK Exploration and Production continued to make good progress in driving down costs and a strategy is in place to accelerate this process in 1993 and beyond.
A major redevelopment programme is planned to extend the life of the Brent field and the company has targeted to participate significantly in this programme.
We were pleased to be awarded a long term contract from BP for integrated engineering services on their Magnus, Thistle and Miller platforms.
The contract covers design and construction services, utilising the combined resources of Wood Group Engineering Contractors and Foster Wheeler Wood Group.
Major contracts for Total, Amoco.
Marathon and other operators were also undertaken during the year.
Onshore, the company's plant change engineering (PCE) contract for Shell Northern Plants at St. Fergus continued to make good progress and the company was successful in extending this contract to Shell's gas terminal at Mossmorran.
Our success in securing long term contracts during 1992 allowed the company to increase staff training programmes and a new training centre was opened to facilitate these initiatives.
The company's safety policy, procedures and programmes are well advanced in line with HSE guidelines and overall safety performance improved significantly during the year.
The company was also selected to undertake the Group's Total Quality Management initiative and good progress has been recorded both in improved cost efficiency and service to customers.
Overseas, the Kuwait operation has made significant progress in managing its contract commitments, whilst seeking new business and extensions to its existing contracts.
Scottish Rig Repairers had a difficult year due to the low level of rig conversion and modification activities.
AHT Surveys had a satisfactory year with the Aberdeen operation moving into new premises and the Great Yarmouth operation extending its facilities.
Towards the end of 1992, the company was successful in securing a four year inspection services contract for the Shell Southern North Sea MMSC representing a major break through for the company in this area.
Pictured right:
BP's Miller platform; one of three included in a long term contract awarded to the division during 1992.
Pictured opposite:
Engineering services extend to onshore sites, such as the Shell PCE contract at St. Fergus.
Principal Companies:
Engineering Design
‘The Group's engineering design expertise is playing a vital role in securing the long term profitability and safety of the North Sea.’
1992 was Foster Wheeler Wood Group's most successful year since its formation six years ago.
Specialising in engineering design relating to existing offshore installations, the company's manpower levels reached over 500 personnel on a number of design projects.
The company's most important contract during 1992 continued to be the Chevron Third Party Entrants project, the largest of its kind to be completed in Aberdeen.
Detailed design for major modifications on the Ninian Southern and Central platforms was nearly complete at the year end.
Two fluid processing modules for the Southern platform were installed during the second quarter and a 2,000 tonnes gas compression module for Ninian Central is well on the way for completion in 1993.
A long term engineering services project is in progress for Total, involving modifications to Alwyn North and the St. Fergus gas terminal.
The company also provided multi-discipline engineering and design services to convert the MCP-01 gas compression platform into a ‘not normally manned’ installation and undertook detailed engineering for modifications to Alwyn North to accept produced fluids from the Dunbar field.
The Control and Safety Systems Upgrade (CSU) project for Shell's Cormorant Alpha and Dunlin Alpha platforms continues, including design services to facilitate the changeout of control systems on the two platforms.
In conjunction with Wood Group Engineering Contractors, the company secured a long term integrated engineering contract with BP covering the Miller, Magnus and Thistle platforms.
Detailed planning has commenced to identify the scope of work.
In June 1992, Wood Group acquired the assets of Thistle Engineering Services Limited.
Specialists in dimensional control, the company has developed a proprietary electronic surveying system (MERCAD) which closes the loop between surveying, electronic draughting and measurement control.
The MERCAD system has been particularly successful in reducing the need for hot work offshore and the company has secured contracts with a number of major North Sea oil operators.
Work opportunities for Mech-Tool Wood Group continue to move slowly since many of the oil companies have only recently completed offshore Safety Risk Assessments.
A delay of some 12 months is therefore anticipated before the hoped for work opportunities appear.
Pictured right:
Thistle Engineering's proprietary MERCAD system has significantly reduced the need for hot work offshore.
Pictured opposite:
Water injection and gas compression modules designed by Foster Wheeler Wood Group being loaded out ready for installation on Ninian Southern.
Principal Companies:
Fire and Safety
‘Fire &Safety's marketing focus on major industrial clients has increased our market share in both the UK and overseas.’
The division had a successful year with good growth and increased profits in both the servicing and manufacture of fire protection and safety products.
Wood Group Fire Protection continued to make good progress, achieving a greater balance between supplies to offshore and industrial based clients.
Of particular note was the award of a contract to supply, install, test and commission C0 2 fixed extinguishing systems for Rolls-Royce's new Trent 800 engine test cell.
The systems were designed specifically to protect critical pit areas beneath the engines during test.
Offshore contracts remained buoyant including growth in the hire of portable H 2 S workshops for a number of operators.
Provision of a range of safety equipment for Marathon and new Solas standard life jackets for Chevron also made a significant contribution to the company's business.
Exports to overseas markets, particularly in the Middle East and Norway, increased substantially through third party contracts with project engineering companies.
Wood Group Fire Protection's Great Yarmouth branch performed well across its whole product range and was successful in being awarded a long term maintenance contract with Shell Expro.
The Falkirk and Milford Haven branches also made steady progress, increasing their market share in the onshore petrochemical industry.
The division's manufacturing company, Fireater, experienced its most successful year to date, increasing sales to both overseas and UK markets.
Export sales exceeded 50% of the company's turnover, with the Middle East being a particularly successful market.
In the UK, Fireater's clients include a large number of major public utilities and many of the district fire brigades.
Innovative product lines continue to be introduced to meet growing customer demand.
For example, environmental considerations have prompted the company to embark upon a halon replacement programme resulting in a range of alternative systems.
Contracts already gained include major upgrades for both the London Underground and London Transport.
An innovative solution to protect key facilities within the Channel Tunnel was developed and successfully installed against tight deadlines, resulting in further orders for 1993.
It is expected that this halon replacement programme will continue to generate new business for the foreseeable future.
Pictured right:
Wood Group Fire Protection products cover a wide range of fire protection and safety equipment.
Pictured opposite:
Fire hoses are one of the many items of equipment manufactured by Fireater.
Principal Companies:
Gas Turbines
‘Our gas turbine division is now a world market leader in the repair and overhaul of industrial gas turbines.’
Already a major exporter of UK goods and services, the division achieved significant growth in 1992.
This was due to both the 50/50 joint venture with Rolls-Royce developing its RB211 and Olympus business and a one-off sale of power generation equipment into Malaysia by Turbine Engine Services.
Rolls Wood Group continued to perform well.
A £2 million investment in new component repair facilities has enabled the company to handle greater volumes of work in-house and allowed space for the RB211 and Olympus workshops to double in size.
In addition, test bed facilities have been upgraded in order to handle RB211 and Olympus engines.
Rolls Wood Group is one of two Group companies undergoing a Total Quality Management programme.
This has proved to be a successful exercise with cost and efficiency improvements made in a number of areas.
In addition, the company has secured Rolls-Royce quality approval to CQC103, allowing it to compete for the maintenance of Rolls-Royce owned turbines on lease to other users.
The division secured a major five year contract from National Power in 1992 covering the repair and maintenance of their gas turbine driven alternators at sites throughout England and Wales.
Towards the end of 1992 Lincoln Turbine Service moved into a new workshop alongside the Ruston test bed commissioned in 1991, bringing their total investment in new plant and equipment to £1.5 million.
Whilst good prospects remain in its traditional areas of business, the company also secured a number of major overseas contracts during the year.
Gas Turbine Fuel Systems continued its success, thanks to growth in the company's traditional market, and further investment has been made in line with the increase in sales.
The company also expects to increase its sales in the aviation fuel nozzle servicing business.
Despite a recession in the US aerospace market, Turbine Engine Services recorded a good year in both its core business of fuel nozzle repair and calibration and its developing engine repair and overhaul market.
A particularly successful contract was the sale of a Pratt &Whitney 23 MW gas turbine generator to Malaysia.
The gas turbine division owns five additional gas turbine generator sets with a combined power output of 40 MW which are available for lease or resale.
Pictured right:
Close attention to quality has helped Gas Turbine Fuel Systems to increase its flight fuel nozzle servicing business.
Pictured opposite:
Investment in new facilities has more than doubled workshop capacity for repair and overhaul of RB211 gas turbines.
Principal Companies:
Engineering Services
‘Extending our pump test facilities and introducing hydraulic capabilities have provided an unparalleled range of engineering services for our customers.’
This division had a more difficult year with a downturn in activity in the drilling sector affecting all Aberdeen based companies.
Investment to both upgrade existing facilities and extend our range of services has therefore been made to strengthen our position.
In June, the Group acquired Marioff Services (renamed Wood-Way Hydraulic Services), specialists in hydraulic flushing and testing systems.
In parallel, Wood-Way made a significant investment in pump test facilities.
These investments played an important part in enabling the enlarged Wood-Way operation to continue its growth during the year, despite a downturn in offshore drilling.
In early 1993, the acquisition of Marioff Nortest was also concluded, allowing the Group to establish its first operating base in Norway.
Enterprise Engineering made a small operating profit in 1992, but did not meet expectations due to a reduced level of work from its major oil industry customers.
Despite this, further investment has been made in automating welding techniques, the benefits of which will be apparent when the company secures larger volumes of work.
Wood Group Engineering Services (Peterhead) more than doubled its profits in 1992 due to major contracts secured from Europe.
A downturn is expected in 1993 since activity is anticipated to be lower as the company does not expect these contracts to be repeated.
A new warehouse has been constructed to facilitate the management of valve stocks.
Wood Group Industrial Controls completed its Sizewell contract early in the year and resumed its previous lower manpower levels.
A policy decision was taken not to bid in the standard commercial power electronics market, but to concentrate in the more specialised nuclear and petrochemical sector where the company's strengths lie.
The acquisition of 49% of Arabian Oil Equipment Services in 1991 has allowed the Group to penetrate petroleum and petrochemical markets throughout the Middle East.
A total of £1.5 million has been invested in new premises, plant and equipment both in Abu Dhabi and Dubai to service valves, wellheads, high speed rotating equipment and heavy frame turbine components.
Pictured right:
Repair and overhaul of pumps remains an important part of Wood-Way's activities.
Pictured opposite:
Enterprise Engineering's facilities are well equipped to handle new generation exotic steels.
Principal Companies.
Drilling and Production Services
‘Further investment in drilling and production services has considerably strengthened the Group's capabilities in this market.’
The reduction in oil industry exploration, both in the UK and North America, affected all companies within the division.
Activity levels were less than in 1991 and could reduce further in 1993.
Submersible Pumps
Wood Group ESP added to its existing submersible pump testing and installation services by acquiring downhole pump manufacturer Trico Submersible Systems.
The enlarged company is entering a period of restructuring and product development which will adversely affect performance in 1993 and 1994.
However, we already have a comprehensive product and supply package for submersible pumps which should provide good medium term prospects within the principal oil field markets worldwide.
Downhole Date Acquisition
Wood Group Production Technology made considerable strides with its Permanent Downhole Readout gauge.
The proven capability of this technology, which includes the benefits of improved reservoir management and enhanced well safety, has now firmly established the company as a leader in this field.
Their Slickline Production Logging Tool achieved successful commercial tests during the year.
This instrument benefits from being highly portable and has considerable international potential.
To accommodate the ongoing growth, the company has now added a highly advanced environmentally controlled pressure sensor calibration laboratory.
Copgo Wood Group, with operations in France and Italy, had a profitable year with strong service sales to its oil company and public utility customers.
The Italian market, however, looks more difficult in 1993.
Wellhead Equipment
Further investment was made during the year with the acquisition of 47% of Houston-based ERC Industries Inc. which is involved in the remanufacture and repair of valves and wellhead equipment.
It is anticipated that this company will dovetail well with the division's existing areas of expertise in the oil field sector, allowing the development of new international markets.
Tubular Inspection
In the field of tubular inspection, NDT Systems and NDT Eagle are both incurring development costs as a result of increasing the quality and scope of their services.
51% of Tubular Ultrasound Limited was acquired during the year, adding advanced ultrasonic inspection services to the division's capabilities in the UK.
Pictured right:
ESP's cable spooling rig provides a complete service, including an innovative method of computerised cable testing.
Pictured opposite:
WGYT's highly advanced environmentally controlled pressure sensor calibration laboratory.
Principal Companies:
The Quality Culture
‘Our significant investment programme in quality, personnel development, health, safety and the environment is vital to our continuing success.’
The introduction in 1992 of the Group Vision and Mission statement took place alongside some significant developments in quality, safety and personnel policies.
Health, Safety and the Environment (HS)
‘We aim to attain the highest practically achievable standards of occupational health and safety and the highest levels of performance in protecting the environment’
The Group recognises that good HSmanagement can contribute significantly to its long term business success.
Conducting safe and efficient operations, whilst maintaining high standards of performance and protection of the environment, is an integral part of management and has equal standing with the Group's other major business objectives.
In recognition of the importance of these issues Group board director  was given overall responsibility for quality, health, safety and environmental matters.
During the year, the Health and Safety Executive's Accident Prevention Advisory Unit performed sample audits of selected Wood Group companies.
The resulting report was most constructive and has been of significant value in defining the Group's plan of action in relation to HSinitiatives.
A new policy and integrated management system has been defined, covering health, safety and environmental matters and will be progressively introduced into Group companies during 1993.
This initiative has been designed to encourage best practice, to be responsive to both recent and future legislation, and to interface cleanly with the systems adopted by the Group's customers.
A significant training programme is also underway to raise the professionalism at divisional and operating company level, to match the increasing sophistication of management required in this area.
Health and Safety performance in 1992 was most encouraging.
Lost time incidents and the associated frequency index were down substantially from the previous year, maintaining a progressively improving trend.
We were therefore very pleased to be notified of the RoSPA Gold Award for Occupational Safety relating to our 1992 safety record, which will be awarded in May of this year.
Pictured right:
TOM and safety awareness programmes are two examples of training courses now held on a regular basis at the Group's new training centre.
A number of Group companies completed reviews of their environmental performance and by the end of 1993, this will have been extended to all companies.
Of particular note are significant improvements to safety, health and welfare which have been incorporated in the new premises for Rolls Wood Group, Lincoln Turbine  Service and AHT Surveys.
Special attention has been paid to minimising noise levels and improving the extraction of fumes and dust, both at these premises and elsewhere within the Group.
Quality
‘We aim to understand and exceed our customers’ needs for high quality, value for money products and services.‘
Quality is at the forefront of all the Group's activities.
Most of our companies now have BS5750 recognition and in addition specific certification relevant to their specialist activities.
Two of the Group's largest companies, Wood Group Engineering Contractors and Rolls Wood Group, are now well underway with Total Quality Management programmes and further companies will participate in the current year.
These programmes require significant investment in both time and training in the new techniques, but are undoubtedly showing some real advances in some key areas of our business.
Personnel Development
‘We aim to develop the knowledge, skills, creativity and potential of all our people and to generate involvement, teamwork and pride in their work.’
We continue to extend our programmes to develop our skills, training and managerial performance.
We opened a new training centre at John Wood House during the year offering a wide range of courses for employees from all Group companies.
Particular emphasis has been placed on supervisory skills, multi-tasking and accreditation of competence, as well as safety and safety awareness training and graduate placement schemes.
The Group has also established programmes to alleviate the shortfall in particular disciplines by recruiting HNC trainees and sponsoring apprentices for training both on and offshore.
Community Activities
‘We aim to care for the local communities in which we operate.’
We have extended our programme of support to a variety of charitable organisations particularly those related to local community projects and where employees are directly involved.
Charities supported during the year covered the areas of health, children, youth, the arts, environment, education and the homeless.
Long term projects include support to the Aberdeen Cyrenians who help homeless young people, a Young Artists Competition run in conjunction with Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, and the DESK project which educates children in the use of desktop publishing and provides computer equipment to winning schools.
Above:
The 1992 DESK project resulted in a commendation by the Scottish Accident Prevention Council in recognition of the Group's contribution to raising child safety awareness in schools.
Above left:
Energy Minister, the Rt.
Hon. , presented Wood Group Engineering Services (Peterhead) with their BS5 750 certificate.
Left:
Linn Moor Residential School for mentally handicapped children received £1,000 when Wood Group employees recorded five years without a lost-time accident on Marathon's Brae platform.
Report of the Directors
The directors submit their report together with the audited financial statements of the Group for the year ended 31 December 1992.
RESULTS AND DIVIDENDS
No final dividends are proposed on the new preference shares or the ordinary shares.
The directors recommend that £9,239,000 be transferred to the profit and loss account as set out in note 19 on page 41.
An interim dividend of 6p per ordinary share was paid on 1 April 1993 in respect of the year ending 31 December 1993.
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES, REVIEW OF OPERATIONS AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
A review of the year's trading and an indication of likely future developments are contained within the Chairman's Statement and the Review of Operations on pages 2 to 21.
Details of the Company's principal subsidiary and associated undertakings are set out on page 47.
TANGIBLE FIXED ASSETS
Details of changes in tangible fixed assets during the year are set out in note 10 to the financial statements.
Expenditure incurred on tangible fixed assets is directed mainly towards enhancement of the range of services offered by the Group, improving communications and increasing emphasis on health and safety in the workplace.
The directors consider that the market value of land and buildings does not significantly differ from the net book value stated in note 10 to the financial statements.
ACQUISITIONS
In June 1992, the Group acquired the business and some of the assets of Thistle Engineering Services Limited.
In June 1992, Wood Group Engineering Limited acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Marioff Services Limited (now trading under the name of Wood-Way Hydraulic Services Limited).
In July 1992, Wood Group ESP Inc. acquired 100% of the issued share capital of ESP Products Inc. a newly formed Delaware corporation which owned the business and assets of the Trico Submersible Systems division of Trico Industries Inc.
. ESP Products Inc. is based in Oklahoma City.
In August 1992, NDT Systems Inc. acquired the business and assets of Visions Innovation Corporation (VICORP), a Texas corporation.
In December 1992, the Group acquired 47% of the issued share capital of ERC Industries Inc., a company based in Houston, Texas, whose shares are listed on the NASDAQ market in the US.
DIRECTORS AND DIRECTORS' INTERESTS
The names of persons presently in office are set out on page 4, all of whom were directors throughout the year, except for who was appointed a director on 17 February 1993.
The directors of the Company at 31 December 1992 had the following interests, including family interests, as defined in the Companies Act 1985, in the shares of the Company at 31 December 1992 and 31 December 1991.
In addition to the holdings listed above, had a non-beneficial interest in 866,335 Ordinary shares (1991 — 866,335 ordinary shares).
None of the directors had interests in either the existing or new convertible preference shares of the Company at 31 December 1992 or at 31 December 1991.
No director of the Company had, during the year, any material interest, either directly or indirectly, in any contract of significance with the Company or its subsidiary or associated undertakings in relation to the business of the Company.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Research and development activity which takes place within the individual companies concentrates upon improving the quality of the company's products and services in recognition or anticipation of customer demands.
EMPLOYMENT POLICY AND EMPLOYEE COMMUNICATIONS
The Group recognises the importance of employee communication and involvement.
In this respect, a quarterly in-house newspaper entitled ‘Wood News’ is published to disseminate news about the Group's business to all employees.
In addition, some of the larger Group companies produce individual newsletters to inform employees on events specific to their own companies.
On an annual basis the Group produces an employee report, being a distilled version of the main Group accounts, which is distributed to all personnel at their place of work or (in the case of offshore staff to their homes.
Staff meetings are held at the work place in order to update employees on the progress of the Group and their respective companies.
It is the policy of the Group to afford disabled persons full and fair consideration for employment and subsequent training, career development and promotion on the basis of their aptitudes and abilities.
Where the disability occurs during the period of employment every effort is made to continue to provide suitable employment with the provision of appropriate training.
The Group recognises that good health, safety and environmental management can contribute significantly to its long term business success.
Conducting safe and efficient operations, while maintaining high standards of performance and protection of the environment, is an integral part of management's duties and has equal standing with the Group's other major business objectives.
DONATION
During the year the Group made charitable donations amounting to £77,278.
It is the Group's policy to support modestly in this way charitable organisations with which employees or close relatives of employees are directly involved.
No donations of a political nature were made.
AUDITORS
A resolution to re-appoint Coopers &Lybrand as the Company's auditors will be proposed at the annual general meeting.
Until 1 June 1992 Coopers &Lybrand practised under the name of Coopers &Lybrand Deloitte.
By Order of the Board  
