THE GUINNESS GROUP
The Guinness Group Guinness PLC is one of the leading alcoholic drinks companies in the world.
Our strategy is to focus all our resources on the two core businesses of spirits and beers.
Our aim is to build the strength of an outstanding portfolio of brands with consumers around the world, and thereby provide superior long term financial returns for shareholders.
We provide opportunities and support to our people to help them perform to their fullest potential as the way to achieve our business goals.
Chairman's statement
This is my first statement to shareholders as Chairman of Guinness PLC.
It is a privilege to be leading one of the world's foremost marketing companies with its splendid portfolio of brands.
We take great pride in the rich heritage and tradition of our the brands, and I am determined that we will preserve and develop their strength with consumers all around the world.
Brands are not just part of our Company, they are our Company, and brand building is our business.
I am glad to report that Guinness PLC is in good shape.
This is, of course, testament to Sir Anthony Tennant who retired as Chairman at the end of 1992.
His wisdom and strategic vision laid the solid foundations on which we will continue to build.
We all owe him a great debt of gratitude, and we wish him well.
The proposed total dividend for the year of 11.85p, a rise of 10 per cent, is a measure of our financial strength and of the confidence we have in our long-term prospects.
Profit before tax was £795 million after an exceptional operating charge of£125 million due to the reorganisation of operations in Scotland and Spain.
Trading conditions in many countries were extremely difficult last year, but both spirits and beers increased their trading profits.
Excluding LVMH, these rose by 3 per cent to 1,023 million, which we consider an acceptable performance in the prevailing economic circumstances.
Higher interest charges and a lower contribution from LVMH have meant a small fall in pre-tax profits before exceptional items.
The cash performance in 1992 was strong.
Free cash flow after dividends amounted to 205 million.
Before exceptional items, interest cover was 5.5 times, and dividends are covered 2.8 times by diluted earnings.
Because of the devaluation of sterling, net borrowings — predominantly overseas — increased last year.
The value of our exports has increased by 15 per cent to 975 million, a further sign of your Company's importance to the UK economy and balance of payments.
Our joint ventures with LVMH continue to progress well thanks to strong personal and commercial relationships which have been developed over the last five years.
These bring substantial benefits to both parties.
The future for Guinness is good.
We have:
world leading premium brands
strong international sales, marketing and distribution networks
a broad geographical range of sales and profits
increasingly efficient and flexible production substantial cash generating ability.
We continue to invest in the future to make sure we continue to prosper.
Each year we invest more in marketing to support our brands.
We maintain a high level of capital expenditure to improve productivity and quality in production and packaging, exemplified by the investment of more than 200 million in Scotland and Spain over the next three years.
Most importantly we are investing in management for the future.
Brendan O'Neill is now Managing Director of Guinness Brewing Worldwide, and Philip Yea takes over as Finance Director of Guinness PLC with the retirement of Ian Duncan in November 1993.
These internal appointments show the depth of management in the Company.
Together with Crispin Davis, Managing Director of United Distillers, we have a young, well qualified management team.
I particularly value the support of Brian Baldock as my senior executive colleague and Chairman of Guinness Brewing Worldwide.
We are also exceptionally fortunate to have the collective strength of our non-executive Directors, all leading figures in business, and we continue to benefit greatly from their knowledge.
I believe that your Board is a formidable blend of skills and experience.
Ultimately the success of our business depends on the quality and effectiveness of everybody in the Company.
We will continue to provide development opportunities to  : help them perform to the best of their potential.
I am greatly encouraged by the quality, dedication and skill of our people around the world and they are the main source of my confidence in the future.
Our strategy is straightforward: we will continue to concentrate on our two core businesses of spirits and beers and to benefit from this clear focus.
Our future lies in further developing the appeal of our outstanding portfolio of brands with consumers all over the world.
We will do this by improving our marketing, sales and distribution activities, and by responding to changing market and consumer demands through a closer understanding of their needs.
This is a strategy of organic growth.
Additionally, we will continue to look for suitable opportunities to work with appropriate companies to expand and improve our business through partnership or acquisition.
Following the events of 1986 Guinness has been a leader in best practice in corporate governance.
The recommendations of the Cadbury Committee are already in place.
We say more about this later in the Annual Report.
An increasing number of medical experts now agree that moderate consumption of alcohol is beneficial to health.
We work with the appropriate authorities to combat the abuse of alcohol, and continue to play a leading role in promoting balanced debate and communicating the benefits of moderate drinking to a wide audience.
The environment is a subject of increasing importance to us all.
We rely on natural raw materials, and without these your Company simply could not exist.
As a result the protection of the environment is one of our major objectives.
We do not claim that our business is immune to economic conditions.
Much of Europe and Japan are in recession, with consumer confidence depressed.
Although there are some hopeful signs of recovery in the US market which should ultimately lead to improvements elsewhere, there seems little prospect that world market conditions will be easier in 1993 than in 1992.
Even in these circumstances we still expect to make steady progress in 1993.
However we are not simply waiting for an upturn in the world economy.
We are reducing costs and investing for more effective operations.
There are opportunities for growth in many developing markets.
More than 40 per cent of the world population lives in China, India, Eastern Europe and South America, which account for less than 10 per cent of our sales today.
And there are other more mature markets in which our business can be expanded further.
As the world economy recovers, we will capitalise on these opportunities.
Guinness is performing creditably through this recession, which is testimony to all those who work in the Company.
I thank them, and all our suppliers, customers and shareholders for their support.
We face the future with quiet confidence and great determination.
ANTHONY GREENER, Chairman 
United Distillers
This year United Distillers has demonstrated the resilience of a business founded on the quality of internationally renowned brand names, sound management strategy, and organisational strength.
Although clearly affected by the recessionary climate in many of its major markets, United Distillers' portfolio of leading brand names and broad geographical spread has enabled the company to make further progress in a difficult year.
Turnover increased by 6 per cent to 2,583 million, with trading profits up 3 per cent to 769 million.
Investment in brand building, marketing, distribution and productivity improvement has again been increased.
The all important contribution of our people has been underpinned by a continuing focus on development and training.
This is supported by a commitment to developing a culture which enables people working at all levels of the business to understand and commit to a central mission, and to share common values and principles.
During 1992 in the Asia/Pacific region, the slowdown in the Japanese economy has naturally had an effect upon business.
Johnnie Walker has however continued to demonstrate its resilience.
Over the last five years, sales of both Black and Red Label in Japan have effectively quadrupled.
Elsewhere in the Asia/Pacific region, depressed economic conditions have in the main continued, notably in Australasia.
United Distillers has however maintained or grown market share in a number of important areas, for example, Thailand.
New advertising and promotional activities have helped sales of Johnnie Walker to grow.
Duty Free performance in Asian markets has also been strong, with Singapore, Taiwan, Malaysia, the Philippines and India all achieving good growth this year.
In North America, the consolidation of Schenley Industries and Glenmore Distilleries was successfully completed.
United Distillers North America now comprises three clearly focused operating units: Schieffelin &somerset , United Distillers Glenmore, and United Distillers Canada.
All manufacturing units have been consolidated into United Distillers Production Inc., thus allowing for significant rationalisation and productivity enhancement.
The first new distillery to be built in Louisville, Kentucky, in almost three decades is now operational.
The new Bernheim plant represents United Distillers' continued commitment to investment in its Bourbon brands.
During this transitional year business momentum was maintained, with encouraging volume gains recorded by Dewar's and Johnnie Walker Red and Black Label.
United Distillers' International region acquired a majority shareholding in Union de Empresas — Mexico's largest imported spirits company — during the year, gaining control of distribution in this strategically important market.
Union de Empresas' portfolio includes Johnnie Walker Red and Black Label, Buchanan's and Old Parr, together with a range of popular and well-known agency brands such as Osborne Magno Spanish brandy.
Since the acquisition, a restructuring of the marketing and finance functions has provided increased focus for this business which is well placed to take full advantage of the developing Mexican economy.
The growth in popularity of Scotch whisky in Venezuela continues to exceed expectations.
United Distillers enjoys a commanding position in this market, with Dewar's the number one brand overall, Johnnie Walker Black Label the number one de luxe, and Usher's Green Stripe the number one locally-bottled Scotch.
Pampero Especial golden rum was relaunched during the year in an updated livery reinforcing the brand's distinctive qualities and traditional oak barrel ageing process.
The rum market in Venezuela is undergoing a difficult period of transition, but Pampero's performance has responded well to the relaunch.
The diversity of the International region, which sells 75 brands in 108 markets, is well illustrated by its performance in smaller markets such as Turkey, where the market for Scotch whisky has grown three-fold in the last ten years.Johnnie Walker Red Label has maintained its major market share and is well placed to capitalise on the growth of one of the fastest developing economies in the region.
In Europe, performance in France and Spain remains unsatisfactory, although it is now showing the first signs of improvement.
Elsewhere, Johnnie Walker Red Label performed well, with particularly strong results in Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands and Duty Free.
In Greece, Johnnie Walker Red Label remains the favourite Scotch and Dewar's enjoys a similar position in the on trade, with a strong following amongst younger and more extrovert consumers in the popular bouzouki music clubs.
Asbach's centenary year in 1992 was marked by the recruitment of its own dedicated 100-strong sales force, and the revitalising and relaunch of Asbach Uralt premium  brandy.
Other brands, such as Dimple, Black &white , VAT 69, the Classic Malts, Tanqueray gin and Pommery champagne, have now been successfully absorbed into the Asbach sales portfolio.
The popularity of single malt whiskies in Europe has continued, with the Classic Malts range, representing the six individual malt styles of Scotland, now widely available through Duty Free and specialist outlets.
An innovative programme of promotions, based on the themes of connoisseurship and discovery, has built a solid following.
Good progress has been made in Duty Free, the UK, France and Italy.
The repackaging and relaunch of Cardhu has been favourably received in Europe.
In France, the launch of Glen Ord has put United Distillers in an improved position to benefit from a market which is currently growing at around 8 per cent per annum.
United Distillers continues to strengthen its position in Eastern Europe, where Johnnie Walker is the most widely recognised alcoholic drinks brand.
In-market operations have now been established in Hungary, Poland and the Czech Republic.
A programme of successful promotions based around the theme of Scottish dance and culture took place in these countries during the year, providing a firm platform to consolidate and build on Johnnie Walker's leading position in these emerging markets.
In the UK the brands portfolio has been affected by exceptionally severe market conditions, aggravated by a further increase in excise duty on spirits in 1992.
We welcome the decision not to impose another increase in 1993.
Bell's maintained its leading position, and Pimm's sales grew, helped by the continuing success of ready-mixed Pimm's in a can — the number one convenience drink in its sector during the important summer months.
The introduction of the ‘Spaceman’ programme, which allows retailers to computer-plan the optimum use of available display space, is a good example of the trade support expertise for which United Distillers is rapidly becoming known.
Retailers in markets as diverse as Chile and Australia have now used the programme to plan re-merchandising projects to great effect.
Investment in upgrading the production process is driving a reorganisation of United Distillers' operations in Scotland, with more than 100 million capital investment planned over the next three years.
Reorganisation costs of 48 million are included in the Group's exceptional charge.
Customer service will be improved by consolidating packaging at three key sites — Leven, Glasgow and Kilmarnock.
Quality and efficiency in grain distilling will be secured by concentrating it in two locations, at Leven and Glasgow, and investment in malt whisky production will focus on 27 strategically important distilleries.
While employee numbers will be reduced, United Distillers will remain a major employer in the Scotch whisk I industry with around 4,500 employees in Scotland, and will continue to be by far the industry's largest producer.
The drive for continued efficiency improvements also resulted in an A$45 million investment in a new facility for United Distillers Australia, at Huntingwood near Sydney.
This plant, which commenced production in June, allows next day delivery to both Melbourne and Sydney.
United Distillers is totally committed to its central objective of delivering consistently superior performance and meeting worldwide consumer needs for high quality spirits beverages through its portfolio of outstanding brands.
Sustained and effective brand building, focused on core brands in major markets, is the key to improving volume and share performance.
Longer term, markets such as China, India, Eastern Europe and parts of South America offer important growth potential.
Demand for our brands already exists in these areas, and as their economies develop, so will the opportunities they offer.
Further portfolio development — through partnership, new product development, line extension and acquisition — will provide additional growth potential for United Distillers in the medium to long term.
United Distillers is uniquely positioned to take advantage of these opportunities, and remains confident of its ability to do so.
Without Black, it would all be flat
Johnnie Walker Black Label experienced strong volume and share growth in the USA.
The current campaign positioning for Johnnie Walker Black has remained true to itself for the last two and a half decades.
As such, the current ‘Timeless’ campaign presents the brand in a pre-eminent position within the de luxe Scotch category, underlining its premium image and traditional values.
‘Oasis’(Oase)
The re launch of Asbach Uralt in its centenary year was supported by new packaging and a new advertising campaign in Germany The brand has tremendous strength amongst more traditional consumers, but its long term growth is dependent upon extending its appeal amongst young adults.
‘Oase’, one of three posters to play on the signature initial of the brand name, was part of the first stage of the new campaign which significantly improved Asbach's performance in the second half of the year
Gordon Bennet
The Gordon's ‘Green’ campaign continues to be popular in the UK spirits market, using the famous green of the UK Gordon's livery with a series of witty one liners ‘Gordon Bennett’was a development of this theme in the important pre-Christmas period — the first multi-coloured version of the campaign This recent work gained the highest awareness of any UK spirits advertising in the past five years The ‘Green’campaign continues to appeal to all age groups, but most significantly has continued to improve the brand's attraction amongst young adults  
Guinness Brewing Worldwide
Against a background of continuing recession and economic and structural changes in many major markets, Guinness Brewing Worldwide (GBW) has made satisfactory progress in 1992.
Overall market share was marginally improved.
Turnover increased 10 per cent to 1,752 million, while trading profits increased 3 per cent to 252 million.
GBW's portfolio of quality brands, good international spread of business and continued investment in people and products have all contributed to sustaining business performance in difficult conditions.
The continuity of such investment is key to the generation of consistently improving operating results in increasingly competitive markets.
In line with its philosophy of getting close to the consumer, GBW has been reorganised into four operating regions: Ireland, rest of Europe, Africa &americas and Asia/Pacific.
This improved customer focus has aided the development of existing commercial opportunities and helped to identify and pursue new ones.
The reorganisation brought with it a number of management changes.
Providing opportunities and encouragement for employees at all levels to develop their full potential is one of GBW's key priorities; it is particularly pleasing therefore that all of the key positions generated by the reorganisation were filled from within the Group.
In Ireland, Guinness has achieved good progress despite economic factors which have depressed consumer spending, and a high level of competitor activity.
Strong, consistent growth for the lager portfolio was driven by Budweiser and Carlsberg, with Budweiser becoming lager brand leader in Dublin at the end of the year.
Brewing capacity in Kilkenny has been expanded to meet future anticipated demand.
Canned Draught Guinness, selected to represent Ireland at the SIAL (Salon International de l'Alimentation) exhibition in Paris, went on to be selected as the overall international winner in the alcoholic drinks category.
GBW's management in Ireland has continued to improve efficiency and productivity.
Exports from Ireland were at record levels.
In Great Britain, the market remained depressed.
Nevertheless, Draught Guinness has again outperformed the market, and Kaliber is the clear leader in the no and low alcohol sector with a market share of over 30 per cent.
Guinness Draught Bitter was launched nationally and early indications are encouraging.
In Spain, conditions have been extremely difficult with the beer market in significant decline due to economic circumstances; as a result volumes overall were lower than the previous year.
The integration of Cruzcampo and Unión Cervecera has progressed during 1992 with the closure of the Bilbao brewery, the establishment of central departments in Seville and the amalgamation of the sales operation into one national salesforce.
77 million of the Group's exceptional charge relates to the cost of reorganising the Cruzcampo group.
A 100 million investment programme over three years has illus; been announced, with a major programme of efficiency and productivity improvements at a time when the market has shown sharp and sudden decline.
These measures will include the creation of more efficient production facilities in Spain, the transformation of two breweries at ICCSA in Seville and Ciudad Real into distribution centres, and a programme of early retirement to reduce headcount by up to 15 per cent over three years.
Cruzcampo has enjoyed some important successes in 1992, with its pavilion at Expo being the most popular with over one million visitors.
A new advertising campaign for Cruzcampo beer is already producing results, and Kaliber Sin was launched in Spain in July, with initial sales exceeding expectations.
The outlook for the Spanish beer market and for the Cruzcampo group in the long term remains positive.
Elsewhere in continental Europe, our development plans are reaping dividends with total volumes up by 16 per cent.
Towards the end of 1992 Draught Guinness was launched in Sweden, representing a significant breakthrough for the import of foreign draught beers.
New markets for Draught Guinness have also opened in Hungary, Greece and the Canaries.
Canned Draught Guinness is showing good growth and capacity for development.
The Africa &americas region has had mixed success against a backdrop of financial and political unrest.
In Africa, Guinness has continued to make significant progress, and although Nigeria, the largest market for Guinness in Africa, has faced reduced demand as a result of very poor economic conditions, sales elsewhere have continued to grow.
Guinness is now produced in 22 countries in Africa and sold in 37, accounting for roughly 7 per cent of all beer sales in the continent (excluding South Africa).
During 1992 GBW established a joint venture agreement with South African Breweries to brew Guinness under licence there — the largest market in Africa and one of the top dozen in the world.
GBW has also acquired a shareholding in Kenya Breweries, underpinning existing agreements to produce Foreign Extra Stout under licence.
Foreign Extra Stout continues to do well: in Jamaica sales volume has doubled since 1990 to over one and a half million cases.
In the Dominican Republic, brewing of Guinness under licence commenced during the year, making the brand available in this market for the first time.
Guinness brands were also reintroduced into Argentina during 1992 after ten years' absence.
In the USA GBW's import company has achieved growth double that of the imported beer sector as a whole.
Canned Draught Guinness — known in North America as Pub Draught Guinness — has continued its growth record with a successful test market in the USA.
In Canada, Smithwick's had an outstanding year with volume up significantly.
Pub Draught Guinness is now the number three premium imported beer brand in Canada after a successful roll-out during the year.
The opening of an office in Florida has improved focus and performance in the Caribbean and South American markets.
In very difficult economic conditions, Guinness' brands have outperformed the market throughout the Caribbean.
New opportunities have been identified, and some of these have already been developed in South America.
Following the reorganisation, the Asia/Pacific region's headquarters are now established and fully operational in Singapore.
This brings increased focus to an important area which has excellent growth prospects.
During 1992, sales in Indonesia, Australia, Japan and Hong Kong all experienced significant growth and increased share as Guinness outperformed the market.
In Malaysia, where the beer market has been in decline following three substantial duty increases, GBW's overall market share has been maintained.
Several new initiatives have been undertaken during the year.
In Australia, a strategic focus on Draught Guinness, the successful launch of Canned Draught Guinness, and innovative advertising have produced excellent results.
In Vietnam and China, where Guinness has had little or no previous presence, test markets and research have indicated good potential and plans to realise this are in hand.
Despite the difficulties faced in many of its markets, GBW continues to invest in its people and its facilities.
The 53 million renewal programme at the Park Royal Brewery in West London is well underway, with the project due for completion in 1994.
A new canning line to package canned draught products is to be installed at Macardle Moore at Dundalk in the Republic of Ireland; new job opportunities will be created by this investment.
With its core product the eponymous black stout, Guinness has the flexibility to explore new markets and opportunities through partnerships with other brewers in joint ventures, and licensed or contract brewing agreements.
Skilful management of these relationships has enabled GBW to expand, increasing its worldwide presence and market share.
This process has been continued in 1992.
There are further substantial opportunities for Guinness stout throughout the world.
Each year new markets are added either by licensing arrangements or joint ventures.
South America, China and areas of south-east Asia have all been identified as key development regions.
There are many other markets where Guinness brands have yet to be introduced.
Growth will also come from continuing to build on the core brands.
The development of the in-can system that has led to the successful introduction of Canned Draught Guinness and Guinness Draught Bitter is a fine example of how the application of technology and innovation can produce outstanding results.
Guinness Brewing Worldwide is committed to achieving a consistently outstanding financial performance and a competitive edge on quality and customer service in all areas of the business.
The Taylor Campaign
Guinness Draught Bitter was tested in the UK during 1991 after extensive research revealed a clear opportunity for a premium bitter in a can.
Using the patented in-can system developed for Canned Draught Guinness, consumers were, for the first time, able to enjoy the taste and presentation of a quality draught bitter in their own homes.
Following the successful test, Guinness Draught Bitter was launched nationally in the UK in early 1992 and sales have outperformed all expectations.
‘Live it!’
(Vivela)
The Spanish low alcohol beer sector is currently growing at 5 per cent per annum and is clearly a key market for Guinness Brewing Worldwide.
In just three months, Kaliber was reformulated for the Spanish market and launched by Cruzcampo in July 1992 as Kaliber Sin, containing 1 per cent alcohol In the six months since its launch, sales of Kaliber Sin have been double original expectations.
The brand is strongly supported by advertising and is well positioned to continue its success in the Spanish market
‘Just say it…you'll know it's intelligent.’
Foreign Extra Stout (FES) retains its pre-eminent position within the Guinness beer portfolio Brewed in Dublin, the consistent quality and unique taste of FES ensures its success with consumers the world over In Jamaica, for example, sales volume has doubled since 1990 to over one and a half million cases.
LVMH In a particularly difficult economic climate, 1992 has been a year of mixed fortunes for LVMH.
The group has nevertheless resisted well and its brands have maintained or increased market share.
Perfumes and beauty products have performed exceptionally well throughout the year, due mainly to the success of Christian Dior's ‘Dune’ and Givenchy's ‘Amarige,’both launched in the Autumn of 1991.
Sales of luggage and leather goods have been affected by difficult market conditions, notably in Japan, but their overall profitability has been maintained.
Additionally, during the last few weeks of 1992, Louis Vuitton sales showed a significant improvement.
The LVMH champagne portfolio, which includes Dom Perignon, Moet &Chandon, Veuve Clicquot, Pommery, Mercier, Canard-Duchene and Ruinart, has continued to suffer from unfavourable economic conditions.
The fall in sales volume has been particularly severe in France, and to a lesser extent in certain neighbouring markets.
Sales of Hennessy and Hine cognac have also suffered, particularly in Japan where consumption dropped during the year.
Hennessy has, however, remained extremely profitable.
Compared to 1991, LVMH's turnover has remained fairly stable at FF21,658 million, with net profits of FF3,007 million.
Performance in the luggage and perfume sectors only partially compensated for the recession in the wines and spirits business, and LVMH's share of Guinness' exceptional charge has also affected its profits.
Net margins were 14% of turnover, a very good performance considering the very unfavourable worldwide economic climate.
Continuing to pursue its development strategy, LVMH has consolidated its presence in the potentially strong markets of south-east Asia and reinforced its distribution network, notably in Mexico (in association with United Distillers) for its wines and spirits portfolio, in Eastern Europe for its perfume business, and in Japan for the RoC cosmetics brand.
Numerous product initiatives were undertaken in 1992, notably the creation of new products in Louis Vuitton luggage, the launch of new cosmetics and the relaunch of the first perfume ever created by Christian Dior —‘Miss Dior.’
For 1993, LVMH's objective is to continue to improve its operational efficiency in conditions which are likely to continue to be difficult, and to pursue investment opportunities which will underpin its long-term development strategy.
Moet &chandon 's 250th anniversary
Moet &chandon has been making its distinctive mark on the heritage and tradition of champagne since 1743.
In honour of its 250th anniversary in 1993, the company has embarked upon its first ever multi-media advertising campaign, comprising a series of three cinema commercials and four press and poster advertisements.
This campaign reinforces Moet &chandon 's position as the undisputed leader among champagnes and as a lasting symbol of luxury, at once authentic and appealing.
Guinness in the community
Community responsibility has been an important part of Guinness' corporate philosophy since the eighteenth century.
In 1992 support activities have extended to encompass all areas of the voluntary sector from the Arts to Zoological research.
The Group has a Donations Committee which considers charitable appeals, and which oversaw donations of 2 million to registered charities in the UK during the year.
Additionally, the Group's international community projects include activities as different as conservation programmes in Italy, support to the Hong Kong Business School, and research into the habitat of the endangered black rhino in Africa.
Guinness is particularly pleased that its own employees can participate in these programmes through matched giving schemes.
1992 saw as many commendable, innovative and diverse applications for matched funding as in previous years.
Successful applications for matched funding included the efforts of Lois Mair, a telephonist at our Elgin office in Scotland who, blind herself, raised over 1,000 to train guide dogs for others.
Chris Gray, strategic development manager in United Distillers' Asia/Pacific region, raised over 12,000 for cancer research by running the Macau marathon.
This was a truly remarkable achievement for Chris, who was diagnosed two years ago as having medically untreatable tumours in his lungs.
Although an active sponsor itself for many years, Guinness also encourages others to use its sponsorship programmes to raise money for charity.
As sponsor of the Royal Academy's Summer Exhibition for the second year, Guinness donated a sponsor's evening to Marie Curie Cancer Care, whose efforts on the evening raised a total of over –25,000 towards its nursing and other services for cancer patients.
Guinness is dependent upon a healthy environment to provide the water, cereals and other natural ingredients essential to the production of the finest spirits and beers.
A joint environmental working group was set up in 1990, comprising representatives of all parts of the business, with the objective of overseeing the development of the Company's environmental programme.
Since then, the Group has embarked upon a structured programme of audits and surveys covering operations worldwide.
A team of specially trained auditors routinely examines all activities on site, assessing their environmental impact, compliance with relative legislation or guidelines, and identifying action plans and targets where appropriate.
In addition, specialist teams have been engaged over the last few years in the systematic examination of the wide range of packaging materials used within the Group.
The choice of materials is critical for product security, safety and presentation purposes, but it is the Group's policy to ensure that all packaging is as ‘environmentally friendly’ as possible, and meets the appropriate legislative standards wherever it is sold.
Guinness Enterprises
At the Gleneagles Hotel, work on the new Jack Nicklaus designed Monarch championship golf course is nearing completion, ready for the official tee off in May 1993.
The specially designed Gleneagles Suite conference facility has been completed — one of the most sophisticated hotel conference facilities in the United Kingdom.
At Guinness Publishing, the other Guinness Enterprises company, the ever-popular Guinness Book of Records has maintained its position as the world's best-selling copyright book.
Board of Directors
ANTHONY GREENER
Appointed a non-executive Director in September 1986, he became Managing Director of United Distillers in October 1987, Group Managing Director of Guinness in May 1989, Chief Executive in January 1992 and Chairman in January 1993.
He was formerly Managing Director of Dunhill Holdings.
He is a non-executive Director of Reed International.
Aged 52.
SIR DAVID PLASTOW
Appointed a non-executive Director in September 1986 and appointed Deputy Chairman in January 1987.
He is Chairman of Inchcape having previously been Chairman and Chief Executive of Vickers.
He is Deputy Chairman of TSB Group, Chairman of The Medical Research Council, a non-executive Director of Cable &wireless and a Governor and Deputy Chairman of BUPA.
Aged 60.
BRIAN BALDOCK
Joined Guinness in June 1986 to head the Development division.
Appointed Managing Director of Guinness Brewing Worldwide in April 1987 and Group Managing Director of Guinness in May 1989, he became joint Deputy Chairman in May 1992.
He was previously a main Board Director with Courage.
He is a nonexecutive Director of Dalgety, The Brewers' Society and The Portman Group, and Chairman of Lord's Taverners.
Aged 58.
BERNARD ARNAULT
Appointed to the Board in March 1989.
He is Chairman and Chief Executive of LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton, Christian Dior and Jacques Rober, and a non-executive Director of Financière Agache.
He is also a Member of the Supervisory Board of Guerlain, Paris.
Aged 44.
DOMINIC CADBURY
Appointed a non-executive Director in September 1991.
He has been Group Chief Executive of Cadbury Schweppes since 1984 and will shortly become Chairman.
He is also a non-executive Director of The Economist Newspaper.
Aged 52.
CRISPIN DAVIS
Joined Guinness in June 1990 as Managing Director of the European Region of United Distillers.
Appointed Deputy Managing Director of United Distillers in January 1992, he became Managing Director in July 1992.
He previously held a number of senior management posts at Procter &gamble in Europe and North America.
Aged 44.
IAN DUNCAN
Joined Guinness in April 1990 and is now Managing Director, Finance and Administration.
He was previously President and Chief Executive Officer of G.O.
Holdings Management in the USA.
Aged 61.
MICHAEL JULIEN
Joined Guinness in March 1987 as Managing Director, Finance and Administration, having previously been Deputy Chief Executive of Eurotunnel, and Finance Director of Midland Bank and of BICC.
He became a non-executive Director in June 1988 when he joined Storehouse as Group Chief Executive.
He retired from Storehouse in July 1992.
He is also a non-executive Director of Medeva and of Chiltern Financial Services.
Aged 55.
SIR IAN MACLAURIN
Appointed a non-executive Director in September 1986.
He has been Chairman of Tesco since 1985 and is also a non-executive Director of National Westminster Bank.
Aged 56.
BRENDAN O'NEILL (with effect from 1 April 1993)
Joined Guinness as Director of Financial Control in July 1987.
Appointed Finance Director of United Distillers in December 1987, and Managing Director of the International Region of United Distillers in January 1991, he became Managing Director of Guinness Brewing Worldwide in February 1993.
He was previously Group Financial Controller of Midland Bank.
Aged 44.
DR.
HELMUT SIHLER
Appointed a non-executive Director in July 1992.
He was President and Chief Executive Officer of Henkel from 1980 until his retirement in 1992.
He remains a member of Henkel's Shareholders' Committee and is Chairman of the Supervisory Board of Degussa.
He is also a non-executive Director of IBM Corporation and of Ciba-Geigy.
Aged 63.
PHILIP YEA (with effect from 1 April 1993)
Held various senior management posts at Guinness from 1984 until 1988, when he left to become Finance Director of Cope Allman.
He returned to Guinness in March 1991 as Director of Financial Control, and became Finance Director of Guinness Brewing Worldwide in April 1992.
He was appointed Finance Director (designate) of Guinness in January 1993.
Aged 38.
The workings of the Board and its committees
THE BOARD
The Board currently comprises four executive Directors (six from 1 April 1993) and six non-executive Directors (of whom one is an executive of a related company), and is responsible to shareholders for the proper management of the Group.
It meets at least every two months, setting and monitoring Group strategy, reviewing trading performance, ensuring adequate funding, examining major acquisition and joint venture possibilities, formulating policy on key issues and reporting to shareholders.
The Board has appointed the following committees to deal with specific aspects of the Group's affairs.
NON-EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
The Non-Executive Committee is established under the Articles of Association of the Company and comprises all the Directors of the Company except those who have been appointed as executive Directors and those who hold an executive office with a subsidiary or related company.
The Non-Executive Committee has the sole power to appoint and remove the Chairman and any Vice-Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Board, to determine their period of office, and to fix their remuneration and that of any executive Director of the Company.
The powers of the Non-Executive Committee can only be varied by a special resolution of the Company in general meeting.
Meetings of the Non-Executive Committee take place as required with Sir David Plastow in the Chair.
The Chairman of the Non-Executive Committee is also empowered to approve the obtaining at the Company's expense of independent professional advice by a Director in the furtherance of his duties as a Director.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
The Executive Committee comprises the executive Directors and certain senior executives of the Group.
The Executive Committee's role is to manage the Group on a day-to-day basis and it is the main forum for raising and resolving important business issues, developing strategies and plans for approval by the Board, allocating resources to achieving the Group's objectives and reviewing the performance of the Group.
The Executive Committee meets monthly, chaired by Tony Greener.
AUDIT COMMITTEE
The Audit Committee currently comprises four non-executive Directors.
Chaired by Michael Julien, it meets not less than three times annually to review the adequacy of the Group's systems of internal control including those concerning the Group's pension arrangements, the scope and findings of the external and internal auditors' work, the half and full year financial statements prior to their submission to the Board, and the application of the Group's accounting policies and any changes to financial reporting requirements.
The internal audit function reports to the Audit Committee.
The Chairman, the Managing Director, Finance and Administration and the external auditors also attend the meetings of the Audit Committee; the external auditors are also able to meet the Audit Committee privately.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE
The Nomination Committee comprises the Chairman of the Company and the members of the Non-Executive Committee.
The Committee is responsible for putting forward for approval candidates for appointment to the Board, having regard to the balance and structure of the Board.
The Committee has the power to employ the services of such advisers and to take such soundings within and outside the Company as it deems necessary to fulfil its responsibilities.
ROUTINE BUSINESS COMMITTEE
The Routine Business Committee was set up to attend to matters of a routine nature, or those which have already been approved in principle by the Board or the Executive Committee and require further detailed work to carry them into effect.
Any two Directors can form the Routine Business Committee.
The Group Secretary acts as Secretary to the Board and all its committees, and keeps appropriate records of their proceedings.
All committee minutes are circulated to the Board or tabled at its next meeting.
Report of the Directors
The Directors submit their Report and the audited financial statements for the year ended 31 December 1992.
GROUP RESULTS AND TRANSFER TO RESERVES
Profit before taxation amounted to 795 million.
The profit attributable to ordinary shareholders amounted to 524 million which, after dividends of 237 million, resulted in a transfer to reserves of 287 million.
DIVIDENDS
The Directors recommend a final dividend of 8.50p (1991 — 7.75p) net per 25p ordinary share to be paid on 1 June 1993 to those members on the register at the close of business on 30 April 1993.
An interim dividend of 3.35p was paid on 2 November 1992.
The total ordinary dividend for the year would amount to 11.85p net per share (1991 — 10.80p).
With related tax credits as set out in Note 9 to the Group Accounts, this represents a gross distribution of 15.09p (1991 — 14.40p).
BUSINESS AND PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES
The Group's principal activities are the distilling and marketing of Scotch whisky, gin and other spirits, and the brewing and marketing of beer.
The Board remains committed to the further development of the Group's core international beverage businesses.
These businesses are reviewed in detail on pages 2 to 15 of this Annual Report.
PURCHASE AND CANCELLATION OF: ORDINARY SHARES
At the 1992 Annual General Meeting, shareholders gave the Company renewed and extended authority to purchase a maximum of 195 million of its own 25p ordinary shares.
During the year under review, and between the year end and 17 March 1993, the Company has made no purchases of its own shares.
A resolution seeking renewal and extension of the authority will be put to the Annual General Meeting.
CONVERSIONS
In 1992, following opportunities for conversion of 5¾ per cent Convertible Cumulative Redeemable Preference Shares and 8¾ per cent Convertible Unsecured Loan Stock 1996/2001, the Company exercised its right to convert the outstanding convertible securities into ordinary shares.
A total of 33 million ordinary shares have been issued in respect of all the preference shares converted in the year and the register of preference shareholders finally closed on 1 July 1992.
In addition, there were nine million ordinary shares issued in respect of the loan stock converted in the year and the register of loan stockholders finally closed on 14 July 1992.
LVMH
Following the conversions of preference shares and loan stock referred to above, LVMH, in line with agreements between the Company and Financière Agache, purchased further ordinary shares to maintain its shareholding in the Company at approximately 24 per cent.
This balances the Company's interests in France's leading luxury goods group.
Financière Agache, which with the Company controls LVMH, has undertaken that the interests of it and its associates in the Company will not exceed the interests in LVMH attributable to the Company, which represents 24 per cent of the fully diluted share capital of LVMH.
The Company does not intend to increase its interests in LVMH above this level.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
The Company complies with The Code of Best Practice incorporated in the Report of the Cadbury Committee on The Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance except for the recommendation to include an ‘Operating Financial Review’ in the Annual Report, as insufficient guidance is available at present as to content.
The workings of the Board and its committees are more fully described on page 23.
The Directors have satisfied themselves that the Group has an effective system of internal control which includes a clearly documented and understood delegation of authority from the Board to the Executive Committee, and in turn to the operating companies.
This is subject to regular review.
Defined procedures for seeking and obtaining approval for major transactions and organisational changes are in place along with a system of planning, budgeting and performance monitoring that is designed to identify any significant deviation from approved plans.
The Group's accounts have been prepared on the basis that the Group is a going concern.
In forming this view the Directors have reviewed the Group's budget for 1993 and outline projections for the subsequent two years, including capital expenditure plans and cash flow forecasts.
The Directors have satisfied themselves that the Group is in a sound financial position and that sufficient borrowing facilities will be available to meet the Group's foreseeable cash requirements.
EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
The Group recognises that its competitive edge throughout the world depends on the quality and motivation of its employees.
Its employment policies, including the commitment to equal opportunity, are designed to attract, retain and motivate the very best staff regardless of sex, race, religion or disability.
Good and effective employee communications are particularly important, and throughout the businesses worldwide it is the Group's po! icy to promote the understanding and involvement of all its employees in the Group's business aims and performance.
Believing that employee share ownership is an important contributor to employee involvement in the business, the Group has continued to extend its sharesave scheme internationally.
An employee share trust has been established with a view to facilitating the recruitment and retention of employees (other than Directors).
The Trust will from time to time make market purchases of shares in the Company and make grants of the shares to such employees, funded by loans or grants from the Company.
RESEARCH AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
The Group recognises the importance of continuing to invest in research and development programmes bringing improvements to the Group both in products supplied to the consumer and in production techniques.
As well as supporting the Group's production units in optimising and controlling process activities, research teams also undertake investigations into the qualities and properties of raw materials, plant design, suitability of packaging materials, environmental issues and the development of new products, and research and planning for the operating units.
FIXED ASSETS
Changes in tangible fixed assets during the year are set out in Note 13 to the Group Accounts.
CONTRIBUTIONS FOR CHARITABLE AND POLITICAL PURPOSES
The Group's contribution for charitable purposes during 1992 was 2.3 million (1991 — 2.1 million) of which 1.8 million (1991 — 1.8 million) was in the UK.
A description of the range of the Group's activities can be found on page 19 of the Annual Report.
No payments were made for political purposes.
SUPPORT FOR THE ARTS
The Group extended its support for the arts during 1992, in particular sponsoring the revival of Xerxes at the English National Opera and the Royal Academy of Arts' Summer Exhibition in London, which is the premier event of its type in the UK.
The Royal Shakespeare Company's tour to Brussels with The Comedy of Errors was made possible by support from Guinness.
Financial support was also given to the Royal Academy of Music's ‘Communication through Music’ course on which students at the Academy perform in hospitals, hospices and homes for the elderly, thereby gaining a deeper awareness of the therapeutic and rehabilitative powers of music.
Guinness continued to encourage and support links with the communities in which it works.
This programme of activities during 1992 included the sponsorship of the Lyric Theatre in Hammersmith, the Scottish Ballet, and the Wexford Opera Festival in Ireland.
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICIES
The Company is dependent upon a healthy environment to provide the natural ingredients vital to the production of the finest spirits and beers.
Accordingly, the Company is committed to the protection and enhancement of the environment.
Overall responsibility for environmental performance is vested with Brian Baldock, joint Deputy Chairman.
A specialist environmental function has been established within the Company with operational responsibility for all environmental issues.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
The names of the Directors of the Company are shown on page 22.
Mr. C. H. L. Davis and Dr. H. Sihler were appointed Directors on 16 July 1992, and Mr. B. R. O'Neill and Mr. P. E. Yea have been appointed Directors with effect from 1 April 1993; each will seek election at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
The late Earl of Iveagh and Lord Macfarlane of Bearsden retired from the Board on 27 May 1992, and Sir Anthony Tennant on 31 December 1992.
Mr. B. F. Baldock and Mr. M. F. Julien retire by rotation at this year's Annual General Meeting, and each, being eligible, will offer himself for re-election.
Mr. Baldock, Mr. Davis, Mr. O'Neill and Mr. Yea have contracts of service with the Company which can be terminated by not more than three years' notice.
None of the Directors had a material interest in any significant contract with the Company, or any subsidiary, during the year.
