The Medau Society 1952–1992
BUCKINGHAM PALACE.
I delighted to know that the Medau Society is flourishing and going more strongly than ever in its fortieth year.
This success could not have been achieved without the dedication of all the Chairmen, voluntary Officers, Committee members and teachers who have worked so hard for the Society during those years.
The opportunities offered by the Medau system become daily more valuable as life for so many people demands less and less physical activity.
I know that all its fellow members of the Central Council of Physical Recreation join me in congratulating the Medau Society on its fortieth anniversary.
1992 Philip  
Hinrich Medau founded the Medau-Schule in Berlin in 1929, and, together with his wife Senta, continued to develop the unique Medau approach to both educational and artistic movement.
Molly Braithwaite, President 1952–1981, founded The Medau Society, resulting in official recognition as a Governing Body of Sport and the establishment of our teacher training programme.
Presidents of the Medau Society
1952–1981 MOLLY BRAITHWAITE, MA — Our Founder.
1981–1982 KAY EVANS, MBE — Our very good friend agreed to be Caretaker President for one year on Molly's death.
1982–1987 LADY ISABEL BRAITHWAITE — Molly's sister-in-law, who maintained the family links.
1987-date PEGGY SECORD — Taught the first Medau classes in England.
Presidents Past and Present Lady Isabel Braithwaite and Peggy Secord
A message from Peggy Secord
Dear Medau Friends,
Congratulations, it is with immense gratitude that I am saying this; I am fully aware of the dedication, the hard work ingenuity and imagination which has made it possible to celebrate a 40th Anniversary of the Medau Society.
First of all, of course, the Pillar of our Society Molly Braithwaite and her devoted team who gave their time, endless endeavours for it to take root.
And so it has continued, so much dedicated tireless support…until its 40th Anniversary.
Happy Birthday Medau Society.
I know for sure it will be a feast — it always is when we're together.
Thank you for letting me share the celebrations.
With love from Peggy 
Society Chairmen 1977 to Date
1977–1981 HILARY WEEDON.
Qualified as a Medau Teacher in 1967 and served on Training and Executive Committees.
Currently Chairman of the Central Council of Physical Recreation's Movement and Dance Division and a member of CCPR's Executive Committee.
Now Co-Director of the National Children's Play and Recreation Unit; still active as a Senior Medau Trainer and Executive Committee member.
1981–1985 JUNE BASCOMBE.
Early musical talent won June a scholarship at Stephen's College, Missouri.
She then gained a BSc.Econ. at London School of Economics.
Qualified as a Medau teacher in 1971, served as a trainer of teachers and on Training, Finance and Executive Committee.
Co-Author with Rata Quick of ‘Piano Improvisation’.
Greatly missed since her death in 1986.
1985–1987 HILA LODGE.
Joined the Sidcup Post-Natal class in 1950 and performed in many displays including CCPR Festivals at Wembley.
Qualified as a Medau teacher in 1961 and taught both recreational and specialised classes for 25 years.
Served on Executive Committee from 1977–89, edited Medau News, and also chaired the Publicity and Training Sub-Committees.
A current member of the Finance Committee although now retired from teaching.
Hila continues to enjoy a weekly class.
1987–1992 PAULINE KENWARD.
Trained, lives and teaches in Surrey.
Qualified in 1974.
As well as teaching, Pauline has been a very active fundraiser at local and national levels.
Served as Chairman of Finance Committee and has been a member of the Executive Committee since 1979.
During her five years in office Pauline has travelled extensively to personally support and encourage teachers and members.
BRITISH AMATEUR GYMNASTICS ASSOCIATION
The Board and Members of the British Amateur Gymnastics Association have pleasure in congratulating The Medau Society on reaching their 40th Anniversary.
We hope we will meet members of the Medau Society at our 1993 Gymnastics World Championships in April 1993 at the National Indoor Arena, Birmingham.
1993 WORLD GYMNASTICS CHAMPIONSHIPS 
MEDAU
gemeinnütz.
G.m.b.H.
Staatlich anerkannte Berufsfachschule für Gymnastik und Krankengymnastik
We congratulate the MEDAU SOCIETY on its 40th Anniversary!
Through its founder Molly Braithwaite, for who we held a heartfelt admiration, we feel an affectionate living bond with all those in positions of responsibility within the MEDAU SOCIETY.
The ties have always been close and have become stronger during the long years of friendship and co-operation.
We are greatly honoured to be allowed to participate in this celebration.
May the MEDAU SOCIETY continue to blossom, grow and stay alive — it is an example for us and at the same time an inspiration to continue our work for the benefit of people everyone.
SPORTS COUNCIL
The Sports Council 
I am delighted to be able to express my congratulations to the Society on the occasion of its 40th anniversary celebrations.
The Medau Society, together with many other organisations, contributes to the rich diversity and high standards of movement and dance we enjoy in this country.
The Sports Council is proud of its association with these organisations and is keen to see that movement and dance continues to thrive in the future.
I am well aware of the aware of the high standards that the Medau Society sets itself.
Its training is thorough and the success of the Medau display team at the 1991 Gymnaestrada can have surprised no one who is familiar with the dedication of its students.
It is encouraging to see that the Society is also moving with the times and its work with people with a disability, mothers and toddlers and its preparations for the arrival of National Vocational Qualifications are to be commended.
Across the spectrum of sport these are difficult times for many governing bodies.
Budgets are tight and growth is restricted.
I know that the Society has had to come to terms with the implications of a decline in the support of Local Authorities for Adult Education classes.
I am quite confident however that the Medau Society will continue to prosper.
I hope you enjoy this evening and feel proud of what you have achieved so far.
Peter Yarranton
Chairman
The Sports Council 
Medau Display Teams
There were just five performers in our first display team (circa 1949) including teachers Molly Braithwaite and Christa Haring.
This enthusiastic band augmented the famous blue tunics with a daring ‘bare midriff’ ensemble to lecture and show Medau Movement in all parts of the country to PE Colleges, Education Authorities, Social/Women's groups, and various public bodies.
Numbers grew and in 1955 an English group was integrated with the German team, during Hinrich and Senta Medau's successful national tour, to perform a hoop item at the CCPR Festival of Movement and Dance at Wembley.
Our English team of leaders and class members subsequently took part in similar Festivals in 1958, 1960 and 1963.
In 1972 Rata Quick formed an ‘Elite Team’ of 12 performers to represent Medau at the Women's League of Health and Beauty Anniversary Festival at the Royal Albert Hall.
This was followed in 1974 by auditioning a larger team to promote Medau throughout the country; when Rata retired Cicely Harris took over, and under her guidance a repertoire of items was produced in 1976.
Some noteworthy performances were given at ‘Sport For All’ in Hyde Park, the ‘Festival of Mind and Body’at Olympia, and the Scottish KFA celebrations at Kelvin Hall, Glasgow.
For our own 25th Anniversary celebrations at the Royal Albert Hall in 1978 Cicely produced a most imaginative programme using the National Display Team to link together a number of items depicting the history of Medau Rhythmic Movement.
The Youth Team and several of the regional display teams, formed especially for that event, have continued to develop their various talents over the years, and many will be represented today at our 40th Anniversary.
Since Cicely retired in 1981, Margaret Charlwood had trained the National Display Team with several guest choreographers (including Lucy Jackson, Pat Gaskell, and Betty Hartley) producing individual works with the team which has continued to represent the Society with great credit.
Performances of particular importance were at the Congress of the International Association of Physical Education and Sports for Girls and Women at Warwick University 1985, CCPR Golden Jubilee Celebrations (Royal Albert Hall 1985), City of London 800th Anniversary Celebrations (1989 at the Barbican).
Medau Schule 60th Anniversary celebrations (Coburg 1989) and IX World Gymnaestrada (Amsterdam 1991).
In 1987 we were invited to perform at the Royal Albert Hall in the ‘Celebrating Age’ programme, and auditions were held to form a 55+ Team under the direction of Jean Parmiter.
The impact of this trim and dynamic team who worked together so amicable, resulted in keeping the group together to produce further items, although after a subsequent audition in 1989 they became five years younger and are now our 50+ Team.
Gymnaestrada Team in Amsterdam 1991
THE MEDAU TREE
From the seed sown by Peggy Secord, our President, when she brought Medau to England in the early 1930s, the roots were established to feed a wide geographical spread and incorporate various branches of Medau work.
Peggy travelled extensively around the country introducing Medau, and a 5.30 a.m. start to journey from Sheffield to London (accompanied only by a large bag of balls) to teach just one class was not exceptional!
How we admire and give thanks for Peggy's intrepid spirit and abounding enthusiasm.
When Molly Braithwaite qualified from the Medau College in Germany, she joined forces with Peggy.
Their inspirational demonstrations and innovative classes were long remembered by all those privileged to have been there, and resulted in the first regular Medau Adult Education class being established in Dagenham ESSEX in 1935.
Popular demand increased this to 20 by 1938.
When Molly went to the Berlin Olympic Games in 1936 to translate for nuns from the college in Shanghai, recent graduates from the Medau Schule came to teach with Peggy, and plans were being made to establish a Medau Training College in England.
In 1939 all these rosy ideas for expansion were abruptly halted by the outbreak of war.
However, some of the classes survived — Molly travelled to Dagenham twice a week, air raids or no, and class members came in between part-time war work.
A Leaders' Training class was attended by Edith Harlow and Hermine Burg who helped to keep some classes going to LONDON and Dagenham throughout and after the war, while Molly was engaged on full time war work.
Edith well remembers cycling home from class down country lanes in the dark, long after midnight, precariously toting equipment.
FIRMLY ROOTED
Regular post natal classes were started by Kent County Council Health Department at Sidcup, KENT in 1943 on the recommendation of Dr. Anni Knoll; it was here that Molly was persuaded to teach again in 1947, starting the snowball which led eventually to nationwide representation.
In Molly's own words: ‘Thinking back to these early classes, I realise that it has always been the enthusiastic response of the class members that has made it seem supremely worth while to go on…
I think it was the wonderful sense of rhythm of the mothers of Sidcup and the intense pleasure which radiated from their eyes during the classes which finally captivated me’; subsequent generations of Medau teachers have shared these feelings about their own classes.
Sidcup Class circa 1950
A Medau Group was formed in Sidcup and met monthly in members' houses for discussions, as well as to enjoy social and fund-raising activities.
Travelling (usually on public transport), blue tunics and a great deal of fun were the hallmarks of those early days, as small groups of class members (and sometimes their children) went with Peggy or Molly to lecture, demonstrate and promote Medau.
A succession of recent graduates from the Medau Schule came to England ‘au pair’(backed up by English leaders until their work permits were valid), and joined Molly to teach and demonstrate — Christa, Usch, Elke, Ingrid, Maric, and Toxi are all fondly remembered.
Telegrams calling for a substitute teacher at very short notice in some far flung place were not unusual and had to receive prompt attention.
OUR SOCIETY was formed in 1952 and Andy (Eileen Anderson) takes up the story: ‘The very beginning was in the train returning from the 1950 Summer course held at the Medau Schule in Flensburg.
Molly, Edith (Harlow) and I were talking about the Medauring in Germany started by Sofie Trappe, and I said we ought to form a group in England — Molly's reaction was ‘that's fine Andy so long as I have nothing to do with the organisation’…so that year we formed the Studio Club.
Molly's mother, Lady Braithwaite, kept her eye on us all, I took over as Secretary/General Dogsbody, and Hila Hyam looked after our funds which (I am sure she won't mind me telling) she kept hidden in an old teapot!
‘As it became more difficult to find suitable premises for classes, Kay Evans advised us to become a national Society under the umbrella of the Central Council of Physical Recreation.
In 1952 the Studio Club officially handed over its funds, amounting to a grand total of £40 (quite a good sum in those days) and all its records to the new Medau Society of Great Britain and Northern Ireland with Hila Hyam as Treasurer, myself as Secretary and, of course, Molly as President’.
Subsequently Gladys Hart joined them as Membership Secretary.
Andy
So many people have been instrumental in helping us to reach this 40th Anniversary.
There is space to mention only a few in this account, but all the unsung heroines the current Society members say THANK YOU.
THE SPREAD
Eleanor Pitman led the way to expansion in KENT, qualifying as a teacher at the first exam in 1955, followed closely by Nellie Button and Cicely Harris.
Cicely headed many teacher training courses in Kent and throughout the country, with protégés Myrtle Mott, Joan Gatfield and Chris Ruffle all progressing to become trainers.
Cicely received a merit award for services to Medau in 1982 and is currently one of the Society's Examiners.
Cicely produced the 25th Anniversary Festival at the Royal Albert Hall in 1978 and is recreating a display for today's event.
Kent members have always been active on Society committees including Joan Daniels (Hon. Treasurer, Vice-Chair and Membership Chair), Cicely Harris (Executive and Publicity Chair), Hila Lodge (Chairman), Pat Palmer (National Development Officer/Administrator), Elsie Streek (Publicity Chair and Editor of Medau News), Stella Webb (the Society's current Hon. Treasurer) and Jenny Whitaker (Assistant Editor of Medau News and Teachers' Representative).
Charity fundraising has continued over the years, and many worthy projects have received Kent support.
Fun with Fundraising in Kent
The 1954 Open Day in LEEDS run by the CCPR, with Molly and Ursula Tinney teaching, made a great impact and was followed in 1955 by a visit from the Medaus.
The German Team gave a display which led to six introductory sessions for PE Teachers and Leaders.
Anne Talintyre, a PE teacher and later tutor at Leeds Athletic Institute, was captivated by Medau at the Wembley Festival.
She led the YORKSHIRE branch of the Medau Society when it was formed in 1956 and became a key figure in the area.
Molly's lecture/demonstration at the University of Leeds in 1956 led to another class and regular teacher training.
In 1965 and 1967 Medau was included in the Leeds Festival of Movement and Dance, and 1967 also saw the first Easter Course in Leeds, which for the next decade established the pattern of alternate years in the South and Leeds.
Who remembers night sorties to see Yorkshire glow-worms and Gypsy Hill badgers?
SURREY can boast producing more teachers and classes than any other county.
But chance played an important part in this, placing Norah Brunt in the right place at the right time — she was asked to take over a retiring teacher's movement class but refused to do so without a qualification.
Fortunately for Norah and Surrey the Centre Principal recommended the Medau training course at Kings Cross.
From her first class in Morden nine members went on to train as teachers, with Jean Parmiter eventually becoming a Senior Trainer.
In 1964 Norah and Jean started the first Surrey regional training course.
Jean is currently Hon. Membership Secretary, works frequently in the Epsom office, and still finds time to produce the 50+ team displays.
June Bascombe, past Society Chairman and Trainer and Ann McMillan, past Vice-Chairman (both sadly no longer with us) were a great inspiration and promoted Medau at all levels — do you remember those delightful children's classes at Letherhead?
Margaret Charlwood, our Producer today, is now Director of the Society's training programme for the Medau Society's Teachers' Award (with the City and Guilds 7307), further in-service training for qualified teachers and producer of the National Display Team.
Last but not least Surrey have given us a second fine Chairman in Pauline Kenward.
The beginnings of Medau in SCOTLAND were very much influenced and guided by Doris Robertson, Senior Technical Representative for the Scottish Council of Physical Recreation.
Doris has maintained close links with Medau ever since, at one point acting as our Examiner, and is one of our original Society members.
Surrey Sussex and Hants Teachers at Redhill Rally 1991
The Medau 1955 tour included a display in Glasgow and Molly taught on the Scottish CPR Medau/Keep Fit/Dance Summer Course a year later.
Our first Scottish training weekend was held in 1965 and collaboration with the SWKFA for an annual Medau weekend started in 1966.
Valerie Archibald has kept the West Coast moving the Medau way since taking up residence in the mid '80s.
The Scottish Teacher Training Course, 1977–1983 was run by Rata Quick, whose notable memories include Scottish hospitality, her first taste of malt whisky, the view from Inverclyde across to the snow covered by skyline of Arran, worn Georgian stone stairs (80 to the top flat), friends founds and kept right up to the present day, and years of wonderful companionship in shared enjoyment of music and movement the Medau way.
It was Rosalind Garton, the last student to qualify from Scotland, now with flourishing classes in St Andrews, who we say extolling the virtues of Medau on BBC television's ‘The Garden Party’ in 1990.
It is hard to believe that the success of a Medau Teacher Training Course (and therefore our regional development) should have to depend on the proceeds of a raffle, but that's just how it was in the late '60s in MANCHESTER.
The course was organised by Wynne Norris with some financial help from Manchester Education Committee, but the only way to afford visits from the London Trainers was to raise the fare themselves.
By the beginning of the '70s twelve teachers had qualified and classes were started as far afield as Walsall and Worcester.
But of course, Medau first appeared in the WEST MIDLANDS and NORTH WEST much earlier.
In 1957 Con Long started teaching in Stoke-on-Trent, followed in 1964 by Wynne's first classes in Cheshire and Merseyside.
It was about this time that Wynne made her first contact with Lars Carstensen and links were forged with Carita House, who have supplied so much of our equipment and clothing over the past 25 years.
Regular classes started in WALES at Rhyl in 1976 followed by the Prestatyn, Colwyn Bay and Powys areas.
Rehearsals Can Be Fun!
PRODUCER'S PROFILE
Margaret Charlwood started her movement career at the age of six following a serious road accident which it was feared would permanently limit the movement of her legs — eleven years later she won a scholarship to the Arts Educational School in London where she studied all forms of dance, specialising in ballet.
After qualifying Margaret opened her own school of dancing in Hove and continued to teach until the birth of her two children; music and dance have continued to play a major part throughout her life.
In 1964 she completed the Keep Fit Association's teacher training course, which led on the Medau teacher training.
Since qualifying in 1968 Margaret has run many classes in the Redhill area and become a Medau trainer in 1972.
In a training capacity she had the opportunity to travel to many parts of England, Ireland and Scotland and has the satisfaction of training the National Display Team.
Margaret feels privileged to have represented the Society to show our work on so many prestigious occasions.
Due to cutbacks in Adult Education last year, Margaret was made redundant from her part-time post as lecturer for Special Needs in Wandsworth Adult College; she is now Curriculum Manager for Basic Education, Special Needs, Physical Education and Complementary Health with Surrey Adult and Continuing Education Service and enjoys this work very much.
In addition to a full and hectic working life, Margaret devotes as much time as possible to being a very proud ‘grannie’ to six year old Richard and two-and-a-half year old twins Victoria and Christopher.
As the FEATURING FIFTIES gave way to the SWINGING SIXTIES Medau was getting a hold throughout the county of ESSEX.
With several newly qualified teachers and many more awaiting initiation, they literally ‘Swung’ all over the place — adult institutes, local church halls, fetes, in fact in or on anything that would give them a few square feet of space; one Essex teacher even did a two year S-T-R-E-T-C-H in H.M Prison, Holloway and got time off for good behaviour (a class of course!).
By the time we STEPPED boldly into the SEVENTIES classes were well established and gaining impetus.
Medau Display attracts large crowd circa 1950
The Medau Society's 40th Anniversary
FESTIVAL OF MOVEMENT
1.
FIRST ALERT
Choreographed by: ANNE HARRISON
2.
INTRODUCING THE BALL: KARIN DESVAUX
Pianist: Jean Parmiter
SPRING FEVER — Norfolk Team
Choreographed by RATA HORTON
A lively ball item performed to the tune of a well known film theme
Performers: Audrey Bowen, Gwen Cone, Jane Fisk, Mary Fox, Lesley Jordan, Marlene McGee, Lilian Meek, Jean Moss, Ruby Philpott, Betty Pollen, Dorothy Ralph, Sophie Roe, Molly Scrutton, Mavin Shulver
3.
INTRODUCING THE CLUB: CHRIS ARSCOTT and ENID OLDING
Pianist: Margaret Charlwood
TAKE THAT LOOK OFF YOUR FACE — Kent Team
Choreographed by: ELSIE STREEK
Portraying the longing, joy and sadness of love expressed in the song's words
Performers: Glenda Cheshire, Barbara Clarkson, Maureen Crowhurst, Margery Entwistle, Margaret Gadsden, Anne Gammon, Christine Harmer, Mara Hasenstrauch, Pam Hibbins, Pat Lomas, June Sullivan, Heather Smith, Pat Valentine, Carole Vernon, Josephine Williams, Beryl Wolstenholme, Linda Young.
4.
INTRODUCING THE HOOP: CHRISTINE MARKHAM and BARBARA NORTON
Pianist: Joan Gatfield
SEA CHANGE — Berkshire/Buckinghamshire Team
Choreographed by: CHRISTINE MARKHAM
The ever changing moods of the sea build to a spectacular storm then subside into peace and tranquillity 
Performers: Gill Bridgett, Sybil Fraser, Diana Merchant, Marian Mitchell, Barbara Norton, Jenny Rumsey, Sarah Simmons, Brenda Suiters, Denise Symes, Betty Toovey
5.
HOOKED ON BLUE — Essex Team
Choreographed by: ESSEX TEACHERS' WORKSHOP
A combination of different dance styles and changing moods all linked with the colour blue
Performers: Jenny Bailey, June Beale, Sylvia Brant, Doreen Coward, Pat Dean, Tina Denny, Rata Forde, Veronica Greenwood, Maureen Houghton, Doreen Hunt, Jennie Lupton, Gladys Malcolm, Steve Moody, Pam Nash, Sheila Rowley, Olive Roy, Jean Wallace, Jan Weisner
6.
MORNING BREEZE — Surrey/Sussex/Hampshire Team
Choreographed by: JANICE HEWITT, BRENDA MORGAN, CHRIS HUTCHINSON, PAT SHERE
Produced by: PAT SHERE
Haunting music and graceful flowing movements capture the atmosphere and colour of a summer morning
Performers: Betty Alborough, Liz Baldock, Gay Buckley, Alison Campbell, Lyn Chalcraft, Jean Colvin, Valerie Cornish, Karin Desvaux, Mary Edwards, Janice Golding, Marion Grainger, Pat Hall, Janice Hewitt, Chris Hutchinson, Wendy Middleton, Brenda Morgan, Julie Partridge, Pat Shere 
7.
MOVEMENT STUDY — Students from Medau Schule, Coburg
Choreographed by: GABRIELE CHRIST-SCHRÖDER, GISELA KLÖTZER (BEDU)
The use of apparatus encourages sensitivity and reaction in movement.
8.
MEMORIES FROM PAST PERFORMANCES:
Many Original and some New Performers
The teams today include: Audrey Archer, Chris Arscott, Phyl Banister, Phyl Bailey, Julie Bishop, Janet Brown, Alison Campbell, Joan Daniels, Karin Desvaux, Bridget Doughty, Joan French, Margaret Gadsden, Muriel Greenstead, Molly Hammond, Christine Harmer, Betty Hartley, Janice Hewitt, Tricia Hill, Rosemary Huberman, Doreen Hunt, Chris Jones, Ann Langford, Hila Lodge, Gladys Malcolm, Steve Moody, Marion Nalder, Enid Olding, Jackie Palmer, Jean Parmiter, Julie Partridge, Joanna Power, Barbara Rose, Chris Ruffle, Elsie Streek, Stella Webb, Jenny Whitaker.
(a) 1955 OLYMPIC HOOPS
Choreographed by: IRMELA DÖBNER Produced by: HILA LODGE
Originally performed at the CCPR Festival of Movement by a team from the Medau Schule joined by English members.
Music composed by Hinrich Medau and played by Molly Braithwaite and Margaret Charlwood.
(b) 1963, 1973 and 1978
Choreographed by: MOLLY BRAITHWAITE, CICELY HARRIS Produced by: CICELY HARRIS
As performed at the Wembley Festival of Movement in 1963, the KFA Festival in 1973 and the Medau 25th Anniversary at the Royal Albert Hall in 1978.
The music composed and played by Molly Braithwaite, Rata Horton, Cicely Harris and Margaret Charlwood incorporates themes by Hinrich Medau.
(c) 1978 FASCINATING RHYTHM
Choreographed by: CICELY HARRIS
Created for our 25th Anniversary at the Royal Albert Hall.
A simple rhythm is developed by percussion and translates into movement
(d) 1985 SPRING TIDE
Choreographed by: MARGARET CHARLWOOD
Performed at the CCPR Golden Jubilee Festival at the Royal Albert Hall and the Scottish Women's KFA Festival in Edinburgh
9.
ORGANGYMNASTIK — Students from Medau Schule, Coburg
Choreographed by: GISELA KLÖTZER (BEDU)
Breathing work teaches us about our own possibilities and limitations of movement and influences deep and intensive breathing
10.
A CLASSICAL CLEANUP!— The Moppets
Choreographed by: BRENDA MORGAN
Sweeps together some classical music, polishes up some (as yet) undiscovered Medau movements, adds extra power to the performance and sparkles with fun
Performed by: Betty Alborough, Julie Baker, Jean Colvin, Janice Hewitt, Brenda Morgan, Pat Palmer, Julie Partridge, Gill Shorter.
INTERVAL 30 minutes
Time to see the leotards and leisurewear on sale and visit THE MEDAU SOCIETY'S Information Table in Foyer 
11.
CONTRASTS — National Display Team
Choreographed by: MARGARET CHARLWOOD
This complete item showing the many qualities of Medau work was presented in Coburg to mark the 60th Anniversary of the Medau Schule in 1989
Performers: Chris Arscott, Phyl Banister, Janet Brown, Bridget Doughty, Anne Harrison, Tricia Hill, Chris Jones, Enid Olding, Jackie Palmer, Joanne Power, Barbara Rose, Chris Ruffle, Jill Thomas.
12.
PLAYING THE WAVES — South West Team
Choreographed by: THE TEAM
Produced by: ROSEMARY LITTLEWOOD Directed by: EVA VINCETT
An insight into the ocean world where a wind surfer experiences the beauty and motion of the sea with its challenge of wind and wave
Performers: Vicky Carpenter, Yvonne Cottam, Judith Guard, Moyra Hopley, Rosemary Littlewood.
13.
IN A FLAP — Thoroughly Modern Medau Team
Choreographed by: BARBARA NORTON
A lighthearted look at one of the pre-Medau ways of using loads of energy and having lots of fun.
Dance yourself fit 1920 style.
Performers: Betty Boyce, Roxana Champney, Sybil Fraser, Anne Inglis, Julie Gilbert, Betty Hartley, Barbara Jackson, Christine Markham, Janet Melhuish, Diana Merchant, Jenny Rumsey, Denise Symes, Liz Stanley
14 IX WORLD GYMNAESTRADA 1991 — Medau Gymnaestrada Team
Performers: Betty Albrough, Chris Arscott, Phyl Banister, Julie Bishop, Janet Brown Roxana Champney, Doreen Copas, Bridget Doughty, Joan French, Janice Golding, Muriel Greenstead, Anne Harrison, Betty Hartley, Tricia Hill, Chris Jones, Gladys Malcolm, Enid Olding, Jackie Palmer, Joanna Power, Jean Preston, Barbara Rose, Chris Ruffle, Liz Stanley, Jill Thomas, Jan Weisner, Jenny Whitaker.
(a) PATTERNS IN RHYTHM
Choreographed by: MARGARET CHARLWOOD
Lively opening ball item from our half hour educational demonstration
50+ GROUP
Choreographed by: JEAN PARMITER
The hoop is used to interpret the sustainment and quality of the music
(c) CASCADE
Choreographed by: MARGARET CHARLWOOD
The ribbon finale from Amsterdam
15 RHYTHMIC STUDY — Students from Medau Schule, Coburg
Choreographed by: GISELA KLÖTZER (BEDU)
Rhythm is the basis of our work 
16.
CLUB CLASSIQUE — 50+ TEAM
Choreographed by: JEAN PARMITER
Showing traditional use of the club with constant changes of rhythm to live piano music composed and played by Jean Parmiter
Performers: Pam Bushell, Doreen Copas, Monica Curran, Joan Daniels, Tina Denny, Jean Gunstone, Molly Hammond, Beryl Harding, Rosemary Huberman, Kath Johnson, Marian Mitchell, Marion Nalder, June Thomas, Betty Toovey, Stella Webb.
17.
AMERICAN PIE — The Pineapple Polls
Choreographed by: LALA MANNERS
Showing the high level of agility, strength and speed that can be achieved through the Medau method, and the enormous contribution we make to the fitness world
Performers: Judy Booth, Abigail Fry, Alison Gibbs, Clare Griffiths, Sue Harvey-Austin, Lala Manners, Charlotte Robson, Naomi Vera.
18.
FANTASY — National Display Team
Choreographed by: MARGARET CHARLWOOD
Imagine a glimpse into an enchanted garden, full of secrets and surprises
Performers: Chris Arscott, Phyl Banister, Julie Bishop, Janet Brown, Bridget Doughty, Janice Golding, Anne Harrison, Tricia Hill, Enid Olding, Jackie Palmer, Joanna Power, Barbara Rose, Chris Ruffle, Jill Thomas, Jan Weisner, Jenny Walker.
19 DANCE TEMPO — Students from Medau Schule, Coburg
Choreographed by: GABRIELE CHRIST-SCHRÖDER
Dance is the pinnacle of rhythmic expression
20 FINALE — THANK YOU FOR OUR 40 YEARS
Festival Producer: Margaret Charlwood
Announcer: Hilary Weedon
In accordance with the requirements of the Greater London Council:
(i) The public may leave at the end of the performance or exhibition by all exit doors and such doors must be at that time open.
(ii) All gangway corridors staircases and external passageways intended for exit shall be kept entirely free from obstruction whether permanent or temporary
(iii) Persons shall not be permitted to stand or sit in any of the gangways intersecting the seating or to sit in any of the other gangways.
MEDAU
gemeinnütz.
G. m. b.
H.
Staatlich anerkannte Berufsfachschule für Gymnastik und Krankengymnastik
TRANSLATION OF TEXT COMPILED BY DR. med H. JOCHEN MEDAU AND GISELA KLÖTZER FOR THIS PROGRAMME (translated by Karin Desvaux)
Founded in 1929 by Hinrich Medau, the Medau-Schule soon became known for its own particular form of movement.
To this day, its trade mark has been the concentration on the body and its movements.
These evolve from a perception into aesthetics via the development of special quality movements and expressional abilities.
Intuition and artistic sensitivity combine to create a rhythmic movement of special character.
This MEDAU teaching method has won many friends as well as International recognition.
The spread of this reputation was aided by invitations to teach in schools from teachers practising worldwide and by displays at major events.
This educational and artistic work was greatly furthered by Senta Medau with her development of Organgymnastik (breathing work).
Through this fundamental approach to movement and breathing, the first step towards corrective and therapeutic work was made.
By adding a Physiotherapy Training Course, Hinrich Medau's successor, his son Dr. med.
H. Jochen Medau, created a unique place of learning which combines rhythmic movement with physiotherapy.
Improvisation and expression as well as musical accompaniment of the exercises plays a central role in the training programme of the Medau-Schule.
The fundamental knowledge of medical subjects is not only valuable as a theoretical and practical background for the qualification in the Physiotherapy Training Course, but also helps the Rhythmic Movement Training to fulfil the objective of maintaining and improving health.
The training provided in the socio-educational as well as in methodology and didactic areas, enables qualified teachers to deal with individuals and groups in a sensible and up-to-date way.
Graduates from the college are in world-wide demand for their expertise in the MEDAU method of teaching movement as well as in physiotherapy and for their whole body approach to treatment.
Under the leadership of Frau Gisela Klötzer and Frau Gabi Christ-Schröder, we have put together a team of students in their third semester of training who are looking forward with excitement to their performances in England.
In 1989 international celebrations were held in Coburg to mark the 60th Anniversary of the Medau-Schule and the 10th Anniversary of the new Physiotherapy with Movement course.
The Medau Society's National Display Team were invited to perform, and Hilary Weedon, elected on to the Executive of the Medauring (the International Medau Teachers' Association), spoke on the development of Medau work in England.
NORFOLK was drawn into the Medau web in 1960 after Madge Segger and Phyllis Ratcliffe, County Physical Education Advisers, visited Wembley for the Festival of Movement and Dance.
They were delighted and impressed by the Medau demonstration, which inspired a visit to the Medau Summer School held at Cromer from which they returned full of praise for those bodies in blue tunics!
Training courses were subsequently arranged.
In 1963 Molly Braithwaite, a much-loved and frequent visitor to Norfolk, taught the first residential course at Wymondham with six London teachers.
Frances Almond and Rata Horton (who joined the staff of the Medau College in Germany for one year in 1966) both moved to Norfolk in 1963 and became involved in the Training programme.
Early to qualify from this course was Molly Scrutton, producer of the very successful Norfolk Festival of Movement in 1979.
Medau eventually stretched across the border to SUFFOLK when Rosemary High and Marlene McGee qualified in 1972/3.
Rosemary teaches people with learning difficulties at Oulton Broad while Marlene has taught many classes in Suffolk over the past 20 years (including 50+ groups), assisted with the Norfolk Training Course, and has brought several teams of class members to perform items at our Annual Reunions.
Highlights from the past include 400 class members (clad in blue tunics, what else?) taking part in the 1968 Norfolk Show in the presence of Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, who remarked later in the day to some class members how much she had enjoyed their display, and Norfolk's Jubilee Rally in 1977, when Molly Braithwaite was presented with a bouquet from Norfolk's oldest class member, 82 year old Mrs Grapes.
More recent events include the 1988 Easter course at Norwich City College and well supported annual rallies.
Sussex and Hampshire have strong links with Surrey, with many joint projects and ‘across the border’ teaching.
Marjorie Worgan ‘first footed’ in SUSSEX and organised a series of raffles in her classes to send Margaret Charlwood (our producer today) on her first trip to Coburg.
Margaret hasn't looked back since and Marjorie (as enthusiastic as ever at 80 years of age) still teaches two classes each week.
All the teachers in East and West Sussex are very active; regular rallies, multi-movement days, Come and Try Its etc. keep the Medau flag flying high, while Pat Shere has just relinquished the Chair of Finance Sub-Committee after five years active service.
Caroline Little's first recreational class in Rowlands Castle village hall led to many more in the surrounding area of HAMPSHIRE especially when she was joined by Anne Locke and Sarah Smith (both now living and teaching Medau in France) and Wendy Middleton.
Later Caroline specialised in Special Needs classes and introduced the first class to help stroke victims.
Although many of the teachers who qualified from the Bournemouth training course have since deserted the area, Audrey Archer (a founder member in the Sidcup group) and her daughter Sandra Williams keep our name to the fore in DORSET.
Norfolk Display Team
Has your Medau class ever taken place under a clear blue sky to music coming from an ice cream van?
Betty Hartley remembers the day when she and a group of her Earley class in BERKSHIRE were invited to show an item at the local fete.
As there was no piano in the field, Betty recorded her own music but, on the day, the only power to plug the recording machine into presented itself in the shape of an ice cream van.
All was going well until a passing lad with a sense of fun (?) pulled out the plug.
Undeterred, Betty rushed out la-la-ing the tune and the girls carried on as though nothing had happened until they were reconnected and finished the performance beautifully in true MEDAU spirit.
Berks/Bucks Team: Clowning Around
Betty was approached by the vicar's wife at Hurley to start a class in 1966, which because of her local influence, was held in the beautiful surroundings of Bisham Abbey.
This class has now moved over the Thames to Marlow BUCKINGHAMSHIRE — 80 year old Bar Thompson, one of the original members, still attends today.
In neighbouring HERTFORDSHIRE Wynne Norris was teaching classes as early as 1955.
Her St Albans class included two sets of identical twins — Pat and Gill Smith brought Medau into the news when they were interviewed for television's ‘Tonight’ programme in 1958.
Gill (now Hill) is still a teacher 37 years on and has Doreen Goodman (one of the other twins) as a student!
Rata Quick headed the 1970 Hertfordshire training course, and the county display team contributed to make our 25th Anniversary at the Royal Albert Hall such a memorable occasion.
The loyalty of Hertfordshire members is just as strong today.
That same loyalty to Medau can also be found in Melbourn (no, not the one in Australia — this one is in CAMBRIDGESHIRE!).
The Melbourn class started in 1960 by Jean Moss goes on today, now taken by Rosemary Smith, but keeping their memories of Medau tunics.
Those blue Medau tunics were worn with pride at Stopsley High School in Luton BEDFORDSHIRE in 1970.
Aldercine Hodson, Ruth Lawrence and Moya Hood taught in this area from the late sixties, but more recently Aldercine has been concentrating on classes with Active Retirement Clubs, as well as people with other special needs, and has organised several Sport/Fun Days for people with disabilities.
Medau work, with all its many aspects, is alive and thriving in the counties north and west of London.
We have come a long way since the days of the ice cream van and the Medau tunic.
‘Did I really have to take my exam in that tunic?’ writes Gill Hill.
Well Gill, looking at the photograph, it is really quite fetching.
We all know that fashion goes in cycles and who knows…that tunic may just reappear one of these days as ‘le dernier crie’ of haute couture in exercise gear.
Well, we are all concerned with recycling today — or are we…?
Which is Gill and which is Pat?
1965…
‘Have you ever done Medau?’ asked the PE Officer visiting Doreen Prescott's Keep Fit class in Saltford.
‘Medau, what's that?’ she replied.
‘That’ was the beginning of Medau in the BRISTOL area.
After the Easter Course at Southlands College with Hinrich and Senta Medau in attendance, Doreen was inspired to request a rally/demonstration at Keynsham to promote this marvellous movement — Molly played the piano for Beryl Smith's breathtaking display, and there was an immediate demand for a local class.
Initially this was staffed by Beryl, Cicely, Rata, Norah, Pam and Edith, but as a local teacher was obviously desperately needed, Doreen undertook the daunting task of training in London.
In her own words: ‘I left home on the 9.30 a.m. train to attend a Medau class in London, travelled across to Balham in time for music, followed by the evening of training, then still in track suit back to Paddington for the 10.30 p.m. train, arriving home at 1 or 2 a.m. the next day.
I loved it…
’ Doreen's weekly classes were quietly changed over to Medau, and continually to gather more members and new teachers, including Rosemary Littlewood (formerly Gould) who is now a trainer.
Funds to help Pauline Sparks become a teacher were raised from a sponsored walk undertaken by Hila Hyam.
Hila recently donned a tunic again to join in the Bristol class which celebrated her 90th birthday.
Doreen Prescott
When Medau teacher Moyra Hopley moved to Plymouth in 1963, no one had heard of Medau, but with the aid of the Evening Institute three classes were soon underway.
Two years later Moyra moved on to North DEVON where she attracted new members by giving displays, the most challenging (for performers) being at the village fete in a field of long grass which hid numerous rabbit holes (among other things)…still nothing ventured nothing gained!
A final move took Moyra to Dartmouth where Medau classes have grown through rallies and demonstrations including the Dartmouth Regatta — can Medau movers really walk on water?
South West training courses and regular training days with trainers from HQ kept everyone in touch, recently inspiring the qualification of new teachers, some of whom are performing today.
Pat Keen has spearheaded the growth of Medau in CORNWALL over the past few years as well as organising our display at the Cornwellian Exhibition.
Medau Teachers in South West
Branches of the Medau Tree
One of the great advantages of MEDAU which also sets this method of teaching movement apart from so many of today's exercise programmes is its adaptability to meet almost every specialised need in the community.
Enjoying their Medau Classes
A number of our teachers are particularly interested in the field of SPECIAL NEEDS, attending, organising and contributing to a wide range of in-service training to update their knowledge through lectures, seminars, workshops etc.
For many years enjoyable, invigorating classes catering for a wide range of ages and abilities have been organised in cooperation with local authority Education, Health or Social Services departments, many voluntary organisations and independent bodies; venues include day centres, adult and community education institutes/schools, residential homes and hospitals.
Teachers work with elderly people, people with learning difficulties, those who are partially sighted or have partial hearing, back pain sufferers, stroke victims and people with other movement limitations or restrictions.
Apart from the important physical and psychological benefits derived from preserving the mobility of joints, maintaining healthy, active muscles and improving the flow of blood through the heart to all parts of the body, there are other advantages.
These include the enjoyments of participating in happy social occasions.
Friendships formed here can continue long after the classes have finished.
It was Molly, of course, who introduced Medau work in the Special Needs sector and she has been followed by a number of our teachers who all deserve recognition for their work in this field.
However, this proves difficult in the space available when you consider that the total number of current classes stands at an impressive 170!
The 80s had arrived, and with it a new form of ‘exercise’ which caught on fast.
The young trendies had found what they wanted…
Loud pulsating music, strong rhythms, frantic gyrations before a mirror, glitzy gear, sweat, stamina.
Where on earth did Medau fit in?
What had we been doing all these years if not promoting fitness, well-being, stamina, strength, and mobility?
Lucy Jackson pioneered our answer after painstaking hours of study, blood, sweat and tears and disillusion — a FASTER FITNESS programme based on the ‘follow me’ principle, but maintaining the underlying basics of Medau movement, including a slower rate of floor work to balance the more active elements.
This aspect of Medau is taught by several teachers and through Lucy's video and book Medau: The Art of Energy, released in 1991, a wider section of the public has become aware of the benefits of Medau movement.
Lucy now teaches all over the world and received the ASSET Achievement Award.
Complementing our recreational work, this interpretation is particularly suited to dance and fitness studio/leisure centre facilities and plays a very important part in the promotion and furtherance of Medau movement.
Fitter Every Minute!
Beryl Smith, the first Coburg-trained teacher after Molly, had a great influence on the development of MEDAU BREATHING MOVEMENT in this country.
At first she used a more rigid approach, along the lines of her training in Coburg, then gradually adapted and developed this to suit the English students who were not quite so young and athletic as their German counterparts!
Our breathing work today is a direct outcome of this development and shift of emphasis.
The basic principle and benefits remain the same.
The stimulation of the breath and the improvement to the function of the body help in maintaining good health and, perhaps more importantly, a sense of well being.
These benefits seem even more relevant in our present climate of hurried and stressful life styles.
One of the student teachers trained by Beryl, Hilary Weedon, took a great interest in the work and attended many courses in Germany and Switzerland to widen her understanding.
And so the influence of teachers like Professor Isle Middendorf, Ursel Beck, Irene Wenger, Jutta Holler and Senta Medau filtered through to England.
Hilary particularly remembers ‘…the mesmeric Senta, whose teaching was so brilliant that Rata Quick and I both achieved the splits for the first and last time in our lives, with no untoward effects!’.
Medau Breathing Movement
Even the youngest CHILDREN take pleasure in music and rhythm.
Molly and Peggy introduced children's classes from the earliest days of Medau — how fascinating it would be to turn back the clock and take a look at those Hampstead and Sidcup children!
After all, in our adult classes we strive to regain the spontaneous, whole bodied, springy movement we performed so naturally when young.
In the 1970s Ann McMillan, later to be Vice-Chairman of the Society, began popular classes at Leatherhead Leisure Centre for TODDLERS and for children.
Some famous toddlers have progressed from this class to county and national display teams and now Alison Campbell and Joanna Power are qualified Medau teachers themselves.
When Medau was accepted as a subject for the Duke of Edinburgh's Award Scheme, the first success came from one of Ann's pupils.
Having given considerable thought to teaching movement to children and being very aware of fast changing social needs, Lucy Jackson developed MOTHER AND TODDLER classes in Hammersmith during the 1980s.
These classes use a variety of apparatus, from sponge balls and plastic hoops to bean bags, large cushions and even paper bags.
Focus is on SPACE for the warm-up, running in circles, lines or groups; building STRENGTH (perhaps by squeezing a ball or pulling away from mother); developing SKILLS (for example, throwing, chasing and balancing), then progressing to Bunny-hops, rolling and spinning.
Singing and performing the actions to nursery songs form an important part of the class.
Lucy's daughter, Lala Manners, has devised a ‘track’ for her classes over which the children climb, balance, roll on and over cushions and bounce on a small trampoline.
They also learn that important skill — queueing!
And the benefits of all this activity?
The children become responsive to rhythm, more creative, independent and sociable.
Lucy says ‘They always go home happier and friendlier — but most of all we must preserve their love of movement’.
Mother and daughter — Lala and Harriet Manners
MEDAU RHYTHMIC MOVEMENT
is a method of movement education which originated in Germany with the work of Hinrich and Senta Medau.
Medau classes aim to give a feeling of well-being, relaxation and enjoyment.
They are designed to keep the body supple, develop co-ordination and improve poise and general fitness.
Teachers are trained to develop the individual potential of their students and to teach through an improvised accompaniment which brings out the dynamic quality of the movement.
A variety of work with small apparatus and free movement, combines with ever-changing rhythms, ensure that the learning experience is stimulating and rewarding.
Medau Breathing Movement is an extension of the work consisting of certain positions and movements taught in a specific way to influence the flow of breathing.
Medau Classes
are held in many parts of Britain.
They are organised by:
The Medau Society
Local Education Authorities
Women's Institutes
Townswomen's Guilds
Young Wives' Groups
Industrial firms
Sports and Leisure Centres
Classes are also provided for those with special needs — children, the elderly and physically or mentally disabled people.
Teacher Training Courses
are held in London and other centres as the need arises.
Spread over two or more years, the courses are part-time and lead to a national examination for the Medau Society Teachers' Award.
The Medau Society (founded 1952)
links together the growing number of people in this country and abroad interested in the Medau Rhythmic Movement.
The Society organises the recruitment and training of its teachers as well as rallies, weekend and holiday courses, lecture demonstrations, displays, an Annual Reunion and other events.
Members of the Society receive regular copies of the Society newsletter with details of forthcoming activities and are entitled to reduced prices for most Medau events.
Medau Abroad
The Medau College (founded 1929)
in Coburg, West Germany is a state-recognised training college.
It provides a full-time course of study combining movement and music with physiotherapy.
Gymnastikschule Bern (founded 1974)
in Switzerland runs courses for teachers and other interested in this method.
Holiday courses are held in both countries during the summer to enable those interested to experience different aspects of Medau work.
Medau Society Publications
Medau Rhythmic Movement by Molly Braithwaite illustrated by 40 photographs £2.50 plus postage and packing
Introduction to Medau Breathing Movement by Jutta Holler-von der Trenck translated from the German by Hilary Weedon £1.00 plus postage and packing
Piano Improvisation by June Bascombe and Rata Quick £4.00 plus postage and packing
Medau Cook Book £2.00 plus postage and packing
Publications, details of all classes and further information may be obtained from the Secretary:.
MEDAU FITNESS
The MEDAU Way to FITNESS
A positive approach towards awareness of the need for a Healthy Life-Style and the coping with stress.
Our ‘tailor-made’ classes, planned to your needs, air to give you the most effective results.
FIT FOR FUN FIT FOR WORK FIT FOR LIFE
MEDAU
The safe, natural way to improve all-round fitness — including
STAMINA.
STRENGTH.
SUPPLENESS.
VITALITY.
CO-ORDINATION.
RELAXATION
Medau teachers qualify through a nationally recognised examination following the thorough part-time training
THE MEDAU SOCIETY
Patron: Dame Ninette de Valois
For details of all fitness and specialised classes contact:
The Secretary, The Medau Society,.
YOUR MEDAU CLASS
How it all began!
Hinrich Medau (1890–1974) was raised in the north German countryside before specialising in gymnastics, sport and music at teacher training college.
He then studied many contemporary movement systems in Europe and worked with Bode and Dalcroze teachers to provide rhythmic movement classes.
Time spent at Columbia University in New York in 1928 made a considerable impact on his teaching philosophy — there he became aware, during the sports training sessions, of the relationship between body and ball and the possibilities of its use in movement training; he also deplored the artificial hand and arm movements made by many students, which disturbed their natural expression and ended up in pose.
On returning to Germany further studies were undertaken in Munich and Berlin before being granted permission to open a movement school in his own name in 1929.
INTRODUCING APPARATUS
A group of teachers asked Hinrich Medau if he could find a use for some wooden clubs — gradually every possibility was explored, and today they are an indispensable part of the Medau movement equipment.
Work developed using a variety of apparatus, each with its own qualities, which was found to lead to freedom of movement, encouraging depth and breadth of swing, resilience and flow whilst stimulating enjoyment.
At the same time new horizons were explored in the training of footwork, posture, swing, spring, walking, running and free movement.
ESSENTIAL QUALITIES
The unique Medau teaching style evolved from his own essential observations.
Variety of rhythm, pace, form and pattern support basic training in the technique of movement, which should be effortless, natural, harmonious, skilled and controlled but at the same time retain the unique quality which expresses personality.
Instead of teaching exercises, the emphasis was on creating a class to suit the needs of the individuals, as it still is today.
INTRODUCTION TO ENGLAND
Medau Rhythmic Movement was introduced to England in 1931.
Originally it was taught privately, but in 1936 the first local education authority classes commenced in Essex.
A training class for teachers started in 1939 but further developments were curtailed by the war, and plans to open a Medau Training College in England had to be abandoned.
TEACHER TRAINING
The Medau Society was formed in 1952 to link together the growing number of people throughout Britain interested in Medau Rhythmic Movement, and to train part-time teachers to supplement the work of the few German trained teachers.
The Central Council of Physical Recreation helped to establish our first course in 1955 with an external examiner from the physical education profession joining internal adjudicators to ensure compatibility with nationally accepted standards at the qualifying examination.
Subsequent training courses have taken advantage of current opportunities, have been recognised in Adult Education and by the Sports Council, and most recently have joined forces with the City &Guilds working towards two national qualifications.
Application for Membership of THE MEDAU SOCIETY
WHAT THE MEDAU SOCIETY DOES
Links together all the participants, classes and teachers throughout the country
Organises courses to train new teachers
Runs in-service training courses to enable qualified teachers to keep in touch with contemporary ideas
Supports the development of Medau work with handicapped and less able people
Maintains good working relationships with the national and regional Sports Councils, CCPR, and regional Movement and Dance Liaison Groups
Promotes week-end and holiday residential courses
Organises area rallies, social events, etc.
Holds an Annual Reunion
Runs national and area display teams
WHAT WOULD YOU GAIN FROM JOINING THE MEDAU SOCIETY
Reduced fees and priority booking at events promoted by the Society
Three copies of ‘Medau News’ per year, giving news and views and details of current events plus an Annual Report and other relevant literature
The knowledge that you are personally helping to support the future development of Medau work and the training of our teachers
The satisfaction of belonging to such a worthwhile organisation
WHY NOT JOIN TODAY?
LINKS WITH PARENT COLLEGE
The Medauschule in Coburg, West Germany, now under the direction of Dr. Jochen Medau, offers full-time courses in Physiotherapy with Movement.
Medau Society Trainers attend biennial courses in Coburg, there is English representation on the Medauring (teachers' association), many Medau Society members join short courses in Coburg, and periodically teachers from the Medauschule take courses here.
More information is available in the publication: MEDAU RHYTHMIC MOVEMENT by Molly Braithwaite Price £2.50 (inc. p) from the Medau office:
THE MEDAU SOCIETY  
