Dear Father,
1.
‘PRESBYTERIUM FUND’
The Solidarity between priest and bishop and between priest and people saw a tangible expression at the Chrism Mass when I was quietly presented, during the procession of the oils and gifts, with a cheque for £12,000 as your individual response to the sacrifices being asked of the people of the diocese.
I am deeply grateful to each one of you for the care which this gesture signifies, a care for the diocese, for the people of the diocese, and a care for me personally.
I experience this loyalty in many ways and I thank each one of you for this.
2.
SPECIAL COLLECTION
The Finance Council has decided that the special collections should continue during the Easter Season, and the amounts donated continue to be applied to our current commitments and the reduction of the overdraft.
The sums contributed so far are as follows:
The total collected for Lenten Alms this year was, therefore £161,564.30, compared with £114,218.81 during 1992.
I would ask you to point out this dramatic increase to the people of your parish and to thank them on my behalf for their generous efforts.
In addition to increasing diocesan income, the very tight controls on expenditure are also showing positive a result too, and I can assure you of continued vigilance in this essential aspect of financial control.
I am very grateful to you for your continuing support of this special second collection, which is absolutely essential at present.
I ask you to convey, each week, my gratitude to the people of your parish for their continuing support in this collection.
The information about the total amount collected each week can assist people to see that many are responding to the diocesan needs at this time.
Fuller information is being prepared by the Finance Council and this will be issued in May when figures for the first three months of 1993 have been prepared by our financial auditors.
A more detailed statement will be provided for the first six months of 1993 sometime during August.
In this way I will keep you up to date with progress in the financial situation of the Archdiocese.
3. 4th SUNDAY OF EASTER — VOCATIONS SUNDAY
This Sunday is observed as World Day of Prayer for Vocations, I commend to your attention the materials from the National Vocations Office and ask that you bring out the theme of vocations in your celebration of the liturgy of this Sunday of Easter.
As we prepare to open the new national seminary, Scotus College, I would ask that you invite people to join in prayer for the new college, and in thanksgiving for the work of the colleges which are closing to create this new national centre for the formation of priests for tomorrow.
As in the past, a collection is to be taken up for the Ecclesiastical Students Fund, and this will take the place of the regular second collection.
Last year this sum amounted to £40,875.16.
Please encourage people to contribute to this fund as it consistently fails to cover the annual costs of the education of our students for the priesthood.
Please collect the people's offering for this purpose as a second Church collection.
The Holy Father's Message for Vocations Sunday was included with the Ad Clerum of the 18th February.
4.
THE SEVENTH SUNDAY OF EASTER — WORLD COMMUNICATIONS DAY
I enclose a copy of the Holy Father's Message for Communications Sunday, as well as some materials for use in the liturgy.
The usual collection is to be taken up for the Communications work of the Church.
Last year this sum amounted to £30,789.55.
Like the Ecclesiastical Students Fund, this income also assists the overall financial well-being of the Diocese.
As with the other second collections, please collect the people's offering for this purpose as a Church collection.
5.
FATHER BOB WOODS, R.I.P.
I will celebrate a Requiem Mass for Father Bob Woods, formerly Parish Priest of Saint Helen's, Langside, in Saint Helen's Church, at 7.30pm on Friday 30th April, 1993.
Priests wishing to concelebrate please bring alb and white stole.
I would be grateful were you to bring this Mass to the attention of the people through your parish bulletins.
I would like to remind you of my invitation to you to concelebrate at Mark Morris's Ordination to the Priesthood in St. Paul's, Shettleston on Sunday at 3.00pm.
Father Peter Clinton recently retired from his office as Chaplain to the Victoria Infirmary and Assistant Priest in Holy Cross Parish.
Father Edward Higgins retires this week from his Office as Parish Priest of St. Ronan's, Bonhill.
I should like to thank Edward and Peter for their years of service to the Diocese and to wish them a long and happy retirement.
As these retirements were taking effect around Easter, I felt it better to wait until after the Easter celebrations before making any appointments.
I should like you to remember Pat Gahagan in your prayers as he recovers from his recent operation.
Carlo Centra is also in need of our prayers after a painful bout of illness.
Great reports are going around about the celebration of the Easter Triduum.
To carry these out well entails a great deal of labour by the clergy and their devoted lay helpers.
You are due the grateful thanks of the entire Catholic Community which, as you know, is very appreciative of their priests.
With every good wish,
Yours sincerely,
27th WORLD COMMUNICATIONS DAY
‘Videocassettes and audiocassettes in the formation of culture and of conscience’
Dear Brothers and Sisters,
More than a year after the publication of the Pastoral Instruction Aetatis Novae on the communications media, I once again invite all of you to reflect on the vision of the modern world which the instruction presented and on the practical implications of the situations it described.
The Church cannot ignore the many unprecedented changes brought about by progress in this important and ubiquitous aspect of modern living.
Each of us should ask for the wisdom necessary to appreciate the opportunities which developments in modern communications technology offer for serving God and his people, while at the same time recognizing the challenges such progress inevitably poses.
As the Pastoral Instruction Aetatis Novae reminds us, ‘a vast expansion of human communications is profoundly influencing culture everywhere’(No. 1).
Indeed we may speak of a ‘new culture’ created by modern communications, which affects everyone, particularly the younger generation, and is itself largely the result of technological advances which have created ‘new ways of communicating, with new languages, new techniques and a new psychology’(cf.
Redemptoris Missio, 37).
Today, as the Church strives to carry out her perennial mission of proclaiming the Word of she the immense challenge of evangelizing this new culture and expressing the unchanging truth of the Gospel in its language.
Because all believers are affected by these developments, each of us is called to adapt to changing situations and to discover effective and responsible ways to use the communications media for God's glory and for the service of his creation.
In my message for World Communications Day last year, I mentioned that among the realities we celebrate on this annual occasion are the God-given gifts of speech, of hearing and of sight which make communication possible between us.
This year the theme of the Day focuses on two specific ‘new’ media which serve these very senses in a remarkable way, namely,audiocassettes and videocassettes .
The audiocassette and the videocassette have made it possible for us to have at hand and easily transport unlimited numbers of programmes in voice and vision, whether for instruction or entertainment, for a more complete understanding of news and information, or for the appreciation of beauty and artistry.
These new resources should be recognized as instruments which God, by means of human intelligence and ingenuity, has put at our disposal.
Like all of God's gifts, they are meant to be used for a good purpose and to assist individuals and communities to grow in knowledge and appreciation of the truth, as well as in sensitivity to the dignity and needs of others.
Audiocassettes and videocassettes therefore have a powerful potential for helping individuals to develop culturally, socially, and in the religious sphere.
They can be of great service in transmitting the Faith, even though they can never replace the personal witness which is essential to the proclamation of the full truth and value of the Christian message.
It is my hope that those engaged professionally in the production of audio or video programmes in cassette or other forms, will reflect on the need for the Christian message to find expression, explicitly or implicitly, in the new culture created by modern communications (cf.
Aetatis Novae, 11).
This should not only be expected to happen as a natural consequence of ‘the Church's active, sympathetic presence within the world of communications’(ibid.), but also as the result of a precise commitment on the part of communicators.
The professionals who rate at their true value the impact and influence of the media productions they create will take particular care to make them of such high moral quality that their effect upon the formation of culture will invariably be a positive one.
They will resist the ever-present lure of easy profit and will firmly refuse to take part in any production which exploits human weakness, offends consciences, or affronts human dignity.
It is likewise important that those who make use of media such as the audiocassette or videocassette should not see themselves as mere consumers.
Each individual, simply by making his or her reactions to media offerings known to those who produce and market them, can have a definite effect on the subject matter and moral tone of future offerings.
The family in particular, as the basic unit of society, is deeply affected by the media environment in which it lives.
Parents therefore have a grave duty to educate the family in a critical use of the means of social communication.
The importance of this task needs to be explained especially to young married couples.
Nor should catechetical programmes overlook the need to teach children and adolescents a proper and responsible use of the media.
On this World Communications Day, I extend my cordial best wishes to all the professional men and women striving to serve the human family through the communications media, to all the members of the International Catholic Media Organizations active throughout the world, and to the vast body of media consumers who are their audience and towards whom they bear a very weighty responsibility.
May Almighty God pour forth his gifts upon you all.
From the Vatican, January 24, 1993, Feast of Saint Francis de Sales, Patron of the Press.
INTENTIONS
(for inclusion in the Prayers of the Faithful during the Celebration of the Sunday Liturgy)
For the Church, that it may discover effective and responsible ways to use the communications media for the glory of God, the proclamation of the Gospel, and the service of his creation.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
For all those who work in the production of audio and video programmes, that the fruits of their creativity will promote sound moral values in the new civilization which is being created by modern communications.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
For parents, whose duty it is to educate the family in the proper and responsible use of the audiovisual media, that they may enlighten and guide their children in the appreciation of wholesome audio and video cassettes.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
PRAYERS OF THE FAITHFUL
(for Liturgies of the Word outside the Celebration of the Eucharist)
Celebrant:
The celebration of this World Communications Day underlines the need for the Church to respond to the many unprecedented changes brought about by the communications media and their effects on modern living.
Let us pray that we may be granted the wisdom necessary to discern the values of the new culture created by the mass media, and to use the opportunities offered by modern communications technology always for the service of God and the good of his people.
Lector:
For the Church, that it may discover effective and responsible ways to use the communications media for the glory of God, the proclamation of the Gospel, and the service of his creation.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
For all people, that they may give glory to God for the gifts of speech, hearing and sight which make communication possible, and for the audiovisual media which nourish these gifts in new and marvellous ways.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
For all Christians who are involved in the production, distribution and use of audio and video programmes, that they may appreciate the need for the Christian message to find expression, explicitly or implicitly, in the new culture created by modern communications.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
For all those who work in the production of audio and video programmes, that the fruits of their creativity will promote sound moral values in the audiovisual culture.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
For those who benefit financially from the audio and video industry, that they may resist the lure of easy profit and refuse to promote any production which exploits human weakness, offends consciences, or affronts human dignity.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
For parents, whose duty it is to educate the family in the proper and responsible use of the audiovisual media, that they may guide and enlighten their children in the appreciation of wholesome audio and video cassettes.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
For teenagers, that they may be blessed with wisdom and discernment, and choose those audio and video cassettes which enrich the spirit and bring true joy to the heart.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
For children, who need to grow in grace and maturity, that they will be helped by their use of audio and video cassettes to learn that which is useful and good.
We pray to the Lord.
R/.
Lord hear our prayer.
Celebrant:
Lord God, giver of all that is good, hear our prayer.
Grant that the audiovisual media which nourish your gifts of hearing, speech and sight, may serve for growth in wisdom and discernment in all your people.
May this promote a culture which is permeated with the transforming message of the Gospel.
We ask this through the Christ Our Lord.
Dear Father,
END OF YEAR OBLIGATIONS
I have been asked by Messrs Grant Thornton, our financial advisors, to write to Parish Priests to provide you with the information regarding Pay As You Earn regulations.
They have asked me to remind you that the end of year obligations imposed on employers are becoming ever more complex, and there are now serious penalties for not complying.
The deadlines are listed on the reverse of this page.
If you wish assistance in meeting any of these deadlines, please contact  at the Curial Offices.
Yours sincerely 
CERTIFICATE IN RELIGIOUS EDUCATION BY DISTANCE LEARNING
ARRANGEMENTS FOR 1993–94 AND ONWARDS
St Andrew's College is responsible for mounting a distance taught course leading to a Certificate in Religious Education for teachers who wish to teach Catholic children in Scotland.
This course is designed principally for those students in training, and teachers in schools, who wish to teach Religious Education, but who do not have a Teaching Qualification in Religious Education.
It is suitable for teachers in Primary Schools and Secondary Schools in Scotland.
Admission
Admission to this course will normally be open to the following groups of students:
a)
Those Catholic students who are undertaking their initial teacher education, and who for professional reasons cannot attend St Andrew's College (eg in Physical Education and Home Economics).
b)
Those Catholic students who are undertaking their initial teacher education, and who for personal reasons, which are accepted as reasonable by St Andrew's College, cannot attend St Andrew's College.
c)
Those Catholic teachers who are already qualified who wish to take this course, and are considered by St Andrew's College suitable candidates to be admitted to the course.
d)
Any other such applicant as deemed by St Andrew's College to be suitable for admission to the course.
Fees
The fees for this course will be set by St Andrew's College.
Normally, categories (a) and (b) above will not require to pay a fee.
This will be met by St Andrew's College.
The College, however, reserves the right to charge a fee and select students.
Normally, categories (c) and (d) will require to pay the economic fee for the course.
In 1993–94 this will be £300.
Further Details
Further details on this course can be obtained from Mr James Conroy, Director of Religious Education and Pastoral Care at the College.
Dear Colleagues,
Due to unavoidable commitments of Fr.
A. Connelly and Fr.
T.J. Chambers, the meeting of the Commission due to take place on 26 May 1993 has been postponed.
It will now take place one week later on 2 June 1993 at 5.00 p.m. for 5.15 p.m. in Our Lady of Good Counsel Presbytery, 6 Broompark Circus (see map).
Yours Sincerely,
Agenda
1.
Sederunt
2.
Apologies
3.
Minutes of meeting of 3 March 1993
4.
Matters arising
5.
Chaplains' reports
(a)
Fr.
A. Connelly
(b)
Fr.
T.J. Chambers
6.
Any other Competent Business
7.
Date of next meeting
CATHOLIC CHAPLAINCY COMMISSION FOR THE UNIVERSITIES OF STRATHCLYDE AND GLASGOW CALEDONIAN
The next meeting of the above Commission will take place on Wednesday, 3rd March, 1993 at 1700 hours for 1715 hours in the Library of the Chaplaincy Centre, University of Strathclyde.
Light refreshments will be available.
Agenda
1.
Sederunt
2.
Apologies
3.
Minutes of last meeting
4.
Matters arising from Minutes
5.
Chaplains' Reports
6.
Any other competent business
7.
Next meeting — 26th May, 1993 at Glasgow Caledonian University
Dear Father;
Review of Tax Compliance Procedures
As you may be aware the Inland Revenue is currently looking into the tax affairs of the Catholic Clergy in Scotland.
The major part of their enquiry is looking at the income to which a priest, be he active or retired, is entitled and whether when taken together with other sources there is a liability to tax arising on that income.
Normally, the Inland Revenue would require you to meet with them to discuss any potential tax liabilities on an individual basis, and could also possibly require the completion of annual tax returns.
The Scottish Bishops, on our behalf, have instructed a team from KPMG Peat Marwick, led by John Nisbet, to negotiate with the Inland Revenue in this exercise, and to minimise the impact of their enquiries.
John and his team have already extracted considerable concessions from the Inland Revenue, which means that the majority of us will be able to continue as before, i.e. we will be able to satisfy the Inland Revenue that the majority of priests do not have the liability to tax on their income from the Church, without the need for the Inland Revenue to meet us on an individual basis.
However, there will be some circumstances where representations may have to made on behalf of individuals who enjoy income other than that arising from the Church, and who may therefore have a tax liability or indeed who may have tax repayment due to them.
It is crucial that we all play our part in helping the Church in this exercise.
To consider these issues John will making presentations to us on Tuesday 25th May at 11.30 a.m., Wednesday 26th May at 11.30 a.m. and 7.30 p.m.
All of these meetings will take place in Eyre Hall.
During this presentation he will also outline:
— the nature of the discussions with the Inland Revenue to date.
— the proposals for dealing with their enquiries.
— the way in which he and his colleagues can assist us on an individual basis.
Solidarity with Africa
MYTHS OF FOOD
People are hungry because there is not enough food.
FACT 1:
There is enough food for every man, woman and child to have a proper diet.
Enough grain is produced to provide everyone with ample protein and more than 3,000 calories per day.
The real problem is one of distribution and accessibility for the poor.
In poor countries there may be enough food for the whole population but it is exported or hoarded because the people cannot pay for it.
FACT 2:
Only 44 per cent of the world's arable land is cultivated.
The rest is either used for grazing or is left fallow.
A large part of the cultivated land is used to grow export crops.
FACT 3.
Hunger depends more on the access rural peasants have to land and the small farmer's control of the land rather than the density of population.
FACT 4:
The use of new technology (fertilisers, pesticides, machines and new seeds — the Green Revolution) benefits those who already have money, land and political influence and can afford to buy them.
Those who most need the improvements cannot usually afford them.
In many cases the use of new technology has led to the numbers of unemployed and those without land increasing.
FACT 5:
A World Bank study of farming in 40 countries found that large farms were less efficient than small farms.
They produced less per hectare and employed fewer people per hectare than small farms.
FACT 6:
There are many efficient alternatives to industrial farming methods.
For example, crop rotation, hand weeding and hoeing.
Organic farms can be as productive as industrial farming and do not damage the environment.
FACT 7:
It is dangerous for a country to rely on one or two agricultural products to pay for its imports.
This brings dependence on those who fix the price on the international market.
FACT 8:
The eradication of hunger is not a threat to the well-being of people in the industrialised countries because there is more than enough food for everyone.
So the elimination of hunger throughout the world is a matter of justice which will benefit the majority of people in both North and South.
The world is becoming increasingly interdependent and an improvement in the standard of living of Southerners will be advantageous to the North.
There is not enough land to grow food on
Hunger is due to over-population
Growing more food by using the latest technology will solve the problem
Big farms are necessary to solve the food problem
Food production must be increased even at the risk of damaging the environment
Each country should grow what it can sell best on the international market.
Hunger is a contest between the rich world and the poor world
SUGGESTIONS FOR PARALITURGIES.
PARALITURGIES
These are informal liturgies organised for a special occasion or around a particular theme.
There are different kinds of paraliturgies, but Scripture forms a central part of each.
Here we have given a Penitential Service and a Prayer Service with a suggested format for each.
‘Where two or three are gathered in my name, I shall be there with them’(Matthew 18:20)
Group Liturgy
Group liturgy can refer to two or three people gathered to pray, to a larger group gathered for a house mass — or a parish group ending up their meeting with an agape.
It is always important that the liturgy reflects the nature of the group.
Groups come together for a specific reason and this reason should run like a thread through the liturgy as well as linking it to the whole community of the Church.
PLANNING A GROUP LITURGY.
Who is it for?
Is it for just the Group — or do you wish to share with others?
How many people will be involved?
Where will it take place?
In your home?— in the church?— in a hospital or prison?
What form will the liturgy take?
Meditative — petitionary — empowering — repentant — celebration — sharing?
Or a mixture?
Is there a theme for the liturgy — Justice — Peace — Third World?
How long will it be?
Having answered all these questions ask who will do what?
If you are using the Church who will liaise with the Parish priest?
Penitential Service
A Service of Reconciliation is an opportunity to remember and to respond to the fact that we are individually and as a body loved by God.
Having experienced this love of God, we confess it and examine ourselves to see how we have failed to respond to this call to love others as ourselves.
Some Penitential Services are based on the sacrament of penance and give people the opportunity to make an individual confession and receive absolution.
The service we have given here is one without individual confession.
The opening hymn and welcome should set the theme.
A visual focus might help.
Wall hangings/posters can be used.
Service of Reconciliation
OPENING HYMN
PSALM 85 —(This could be read by everybody)
Lord, you have been merciful to your land; you have made Israel prosperous again.
You have forgiven your people's sins and pardoned all their wrongs.
You stopped being angry with them and held back your furious rage.
Bring us back, O God our saviour! and stop being displeased with us!
Will you be angry with us for ever?
Will your anger never cease?
Make us strong again, and we, your people, will praise you.
Show us your constant love, O Lord, and give us your saving help.
I am listening to what the Lord God is saying; he promises peace to us, his own people, if we do not go back to our foolish ways.
Surely he is ready to save those who honour him, and his saving presence will remain in our land.
Love and faithfulness will meet; righteousness and peace will embrace.
The loyalty of women and men will reach up from the earth and God's righteousness will look down from heaven.
The Lord will make us prosper and our land will produce rich harvests.
Righteousness will go before the Lord and prepare the path for him.
READING: John 3:16–21
EXAMINATION OF CONSCIENCE
Pauses should not be too short.
It is good to have a focal point such as an icon, or cross on or near the altar; a lighted candle may be put by it during each pause.
As individuals do we readily forgive one another or do we harbour wounds and hate within our hearts?
Pause.
As a community do we seek out the poor and oppressed, endeavouring to help them in their struggle for dignity or do we put them in our litanies of prayer but refuse to act?
Pause.
As a church do we put ourselves with Jesus on the side of people in need or do we allow ourselves to be paralysed by fear or the temptations of wealth and forget what we would rather not know?
Pause.
Response: I am listening to what the Lord God is saying; he promises peace to us, his own people, if we do not go back to our foolish ways.
As individuals are we willing to answer Jesus's call to be disciples, to be bearers of the Good News or do we cling to our security and proclaim our poverty of spirit?
Pause.
As a community do we work for justice for oppressed people or do we prefer to think of them as lazy and stupid?
Pause.
As a church do we seek the crucified Christ in the poor and speak out with the prophet's tongue or do we prefer to limit our view to a plaster statue and speak quietly in platitudes?
Pause.
Response:
As individuals do we accept our responsibility to be peacemakers or do we passively allow aggression to be part of our lives?
Pause.
As a community are we willing to risk building a just peace rather than arming ourselves for war?
Pause.
As a church are we willing to accept the rule of the Prince of Peace and the power of the resurrection or do we prefer to shut our doors to the pains of the poor and pretend they are not there Pause 
Response.
ACT OF REPENTANCE
All:
Creator God, You have called us to serve the cause of right; you have chosen us to bring true justice to the nations and to be messengers of your freedom to those who are not treated as your children.
We confess together our failures in your service and ask forgiveness and healing for we are not worthy but your love makes us your children.
Have mercy on us as we make our prayer through your crucified Son, our Lord, Jesus Christ.
Our Father, who art in Heaven…
FINAL PRAYER OF ABSOLUTION
May Almighty God have mercy on us his children May he forgive as a loving parent does a contrite child.
May he bless us with new hope and determination to live according to His Word, our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen
FINAL PRAYER OF ABSOLUTION
FINAL HYMN
(Celebrating One World, CAFOD
Prayer Service
OPENING HYMN &introduction 
HOPE FOR A BETTER WORLD
It is time we stopped talking of despair and started living in hope.
It is time that we started reading and hearing more of the good people can do for themselves and for others.
There are far more good Samaritans in this world than there are destroyers.
We must not let the public pessimism of a few destroy the optimism of many.
It is this flame that will illuminate hope for all people .
It is this hope that will bring about a new and better world.
Easter is a protest against despair and dejection.
Faith in the resurrection means
— not resigning oneself to the ‘hard facts’
— refusing to put up with the status quo and what, humanly speaking, is feasible.
International Catholic Information May 1976.
READING:(Isaiah 42: 6–7)
‘1, Yahweh, have called you to serve the cause of right; I have taken you by the hand and formed you; I have appointed you as covenant of the people and light of the nations.
To open the eyes of the blind to free captives from prison and those who live in darkness from the dungeon’
REFLECTION
‘I have the audacity to believe that peoples everywhere can have three meals a day for their bodies, education and culture for their minds, and dignity, equality and freedom for their spirits.
I believe that what self-centred men have torn down, other-centred people can build up.
I still believe that one day humanity will bow down before the altars of God and be crowned triumphant over war and bloodshed, and non-violent redemptive goodwill will proclaim the rule of the land.
And the lion and the lamb shall lie down together and every man shall sit under his own vine and fig tree and none shall be afraid.
I still believe that we shall overcome.’
(Martin Luther King: Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech)
; u Silence:
PRAYER
Leader:
Come to us, God of peace.
Come with your healing, reconciling power, that fear and oppression may be cast out by love, prejudice be replaced by trust, hostility give way to gentleness.
All:Come to us, God of peace.
Leader:
Come to us, God of justice, that we may hear the cries of the dispossessed in every land, calling us, like Jesus the healer, to walk with them in the search for justice and mercy.
All:Come to us, God of justice.
Leader:
Come to us, God of love, that we may see you in the poor, the sick and the rejected.
Come that we might see you in the people of every race, and commit ourselves to the hope that we celebrate our life together in true community and justice.
All:Come to us, God of love.
(ACR)
A MASAI PRAYER
Creator God, we announce your goodness because it is clearly visible in the heavens where there is the light of the sun, the heat of the sun and the light of night There are rain clouds.
The land itself shows your goodness because it can be seen in the trees and their shade.
It is clearly seen in water and grass in the milking cows and in the cows that give us meat.
We say: ‘Thank you our God’ because you have given us everything we have.
You have given us our fathers and mothers, our brothers and sisters, our children and friends.
We say ‘Thank you’ today and tomorrow and all days.
We do not tire of giving thanks to you
(SA J &p Liturgy Manual)
Silence:
Lord our God, we thank you for these beautiful words from the Masai people.
They say to you,’ Thank you our God’for everything they have — for their land, their cattle, the grass, the water, for fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, children and friends.
This Lenten time we focus our thoughts on the people of Africa and especially on the women and children of that Continent.
We bring them before you now as we reflect on our Mother, Mary, who suffered as other mothers suffer, a mother faced with hardship, a refugee, a woman of sorrows.
Above all, let us reflect on the dignity of Mary and on the dignity of all women.
THE MAGNIFICAT
And Mary said:
‘My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord and my spirit exults in God my saviour because he has looked upon his lowly handmaid Yes, from this day forward all generations will call me blessed for the Almighty has done great things for me.
Holy is his name, and his mercy reaches from age to age for those who fear him.
He has shown the power of his arm, he has routed the proud of heart.
He has pulled down princes from their thrones and exalted the lowly The hungry he has filled with good things, the rich sent empty away.
(Luke I: 46–53)
REFLECTION
‘The modern woman will note with pleasant surprise that Mary of Nazareth, while completely devoted to the will of God, was far from being a timidly submissive woman, or one whose piety was repellent to others; on the contrary, she was a woman who did not hesitate to proclaim that God vindicates the humble and oppressed and removes powerful people from their privileged positions…a woman of strength who experienced poverty and suffering, flight and exile.
The stress on justice and the rights of the poor, brings us to see that the rights of women become a priority issue.
Women's rights are closely linked to the rights of the poor…because it is the poor women who especially bear the overwhelming burdens of providing for the survival of the family…
The involvement of concerned women in helping to confront this sad reality is not only valuable but is absolutely necessary.’
(Pope Paul VI)
; u Silence
PRAYER:
Leader:
We believe in these truths: that all women and men are created equal
All: Lord, help us to defend our beliefs.
Leader:
That the inequalities and injustices that oppress so many people are the product of society, not of God.
All: Lord, help us to defend the oppressed.
Leader:
That people everywhere are entitled to the blessings of life and freedom
All: Lord, help us to defend our freedom.
Leader:
That we have an obligation to ourselves and to others, to ensure everyone receives justice.
All: Lord, help us to work for justice.
Leader:
That, in order to achieve justice, all people should acknowledge their interdependence and dedicate their actions, thoughts and words to standing in solidarity with one another.
All: Lord, help us to express our solidarity.
(ACR)
In solidarity with all peoples, we pray:
I believe in a colour blind God, Maker of technicolour people, Who created the universe And provided abundant resources For equitable distribution among his people.
I believe in Jesus Christ, Born of a common woman, Who was ridiculed, disfigured and executed, Who on the third day rose and fought back; He storms the highest councils, Where he overturns the iron rule of injustice.
From henceforth he shall continue To judge hatred and arrogance.
I believe in the Spirit of Reconciliation, The united body of the dispossessed; The communion of the suffering masses, The power that overcomes the dehumanising forces of humankind.
The resurrection of personhood, justice and equality, And in the final triumph of brotherhood.
President Canaan Banana
The Gospel According to the Ghetto
FINAL BLESSING
Today we have prayed together in a spirit of solidarity with the people of Africa.
Now we take leave of one another and return to our homes.
Let us bow our heads and pray for God's Blessing.
The tables of the world are not equal.
Some are rich, yet others are poor.
May the Lord use us to ensure that everyone has enough to eat.
May the Lord bless the earth and may he bless our sharing and our work for justice.
May he bestow the riches of his peace upon us, bring us the good news of salvation and always fill us with love for all peoples.
May Almighty God bless us, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
Amen.
FUNDRAISING IDEAS FROM SCIAF
Organise a Third World quiz — in classroom, church hall, anywhere — charge an entry fee and send the proceeds to SCIAF
Organise a Sale of Work, bazaar.
jumble sale, ‘nearly new’ sale, ‘Bring &buy ’sale, car boot sale.
Rich/Poor meal — sell tickets for a meal, use your parish hall.
One-third of the people have a ‘rich’ meal — a good meal while two-thirds have a ‘poor’meal — rice and water!
For further details, contact SCIAF.
Organise a ‘car-wash’— perhaps in the Church car-park while parishioners are at Mass.
Run an ‘African Night’
Organise a concert, run a dance, twirl at a ceilidh.
Hold a sponsored-fast — you can do this either as an individual or as a group.
Send to SCIAF for more information.
Have a sponsored cycle-run round Cumbrae — hard work but fun!
Sponsored silence — it can be bliss!
Sponsored spell.
Gather together favourite recipes, make them into a booklet and sell for funds.
Five-a-side knockout football competition — charge an entry fee.
At Christmas time sell Traidcraft SCIAF Christmas cards.
Enter Fun Runs or Marathons for Africa-get your sponsor forms and free T-shirt from SCIAF.
For schools — have a non-uniform day and pay for the privilege.
Simply fill a jar with spare coins — it's amazing how quickly the pennies grow.
Contact SCIAF to have someone out to speak to the parish/group/school
REMEMBER!!
Try to relate events to the Third World.
If relevant let local press and media know what you are running.
Street collecting needs police authority.
Whatever you do — be safety conscious.
DO
Keep the fun in fundraising
Ask permission where necessary
Try to learn something about Africa while fundraising.
If you need help — ask SCIAF.
DON'T
Harass people.
Try to run anything too big tor your capabilities.
Ask the same people all the time for help or money.
If you need resources on a Sale or Return basis for events you are running, please contact SCIAF
Developing Issues
DEBT
‘Africa's debt problem is now intolerable.
We cannot pay.
You know it and all our other creditors know it.
It is not a rhetorical question when I ask — should we really let our people starve so that we can pay our debts’
(Julius Nyerere, London 1985)
Debt
Debt has meant that in some parts of Africa development has ground to a halt.
People have to choose whether to pay back their debts or feed their children.
The developing world in 1990 owed $1,340 billion to foreign creditors —THAT IS THE POOR OWE $327 FOR EVERY MAN, WOMAN AND CHILD.
Why did the Third World borrow in the first place?
In the 1970s, after a sharp rise in the price of oil, banks were eager to lend the enormous sums of money invested with them by oil-producing countries.
Third World countries were ACTIVELY ENCOURAGED to borrow at what, at that time, were low rates of interest.
What happened?
Interest rates shot up.
The price of goods such as food and raw materials which the Third World relied on for exports fell
There was an increase in the price of goods that the Third World imported, more exports, therefore, were needed to be able to afford the same amount of imports.
In 1982 after Mexico said it was unable to pay its debts, the IMF (International Monetary Fund) moved to prevent a crisis, and in return for giving debtor countries a longer time to pay, the IMF laid down austerity measures — with dire consequences for the poor.
Third World government's expenditure had to decrease and their exports increase.
Government cuts were in social services such as education and health.
Farmers were encouraged to produce 'cash crops’— less land became available for the poor.
Consequently there was a decrease in the food for the people themselves to eat.
What can be done?
As debt is a major obstacle to economic growth, debtor countries can not develop to their full potential while keeping paying such massive foreign debts.
If Banks could be persuaded to cancel debts, it would make a great difference to the countries concerned.
One argument is that if Banks cancelled debts, Third World countries would only borrow more.
The general opinion is that Third World countries have suffered so dreadfully under the debt burden, they would not make the same mistake again.
If writing off paying debts is not an option, then the Banks could reduce the payments in order that debtor countries could concentrate on their development which would give their people food, shelter, education, health services and employment.
‘The debt burden which resulted in a net transfer of over US$30 billion in 1986 to the industrialised countries from the developing where well over 800 million people live in poverty and misery (beyond any rational definition of human decency), in which over 40,000 children die every day from malnutrition and disease, in which 2/3 of the world's people live — is a scandal’
(Episcopal Conference of the United States)
What can I do?
Inform yourself — and others:Learn more about the situation in Africa, and urge others to do something.
Pray and reflect on the issues:Organise a special liturgy in your church
Write to the government:Ask for more official development assistance — ask that the banks write off Third World debts
Support SCIAF's work in Africa:Learn more about SCIAF and its projects in Africa.
Ask to be put on SCIAF's mailing list.
Join a SCIAF group — or if there isn't one in your parish/area, why not form one?
Details from SCIAF
Developing Issues
AIDS
AIDS over recent years has become part of the daily experience of many of our partners working in Africa.
Initially people, including health professionals, were slow in recognising the broad spectrum of ways in which AIDS can affect individuals, families and societies.
The implications are only very gradually dawning on us.
Daily we are becoming more aware that AIDS is as much a development issue as it is a health issue.
AIDS can alter the course of many social and economic developments in countries where the majority of people are already disadvantaged and vulnerable through poverty.
The people most affected by AIDS are those in the highly productive years of life.
Their loss to the community will have grave and far reaching consequences.
‘AIDS links, in a grim way, the most advanced technological societies and the poorest nations in Africa.
In the face of the social catastrophe now making itself felt, it will be critical to confront a stark question: What do the rich nations of the world owe the poor as the latter confront the issues of prevention and treatment?
The philosophical literature on the ethics of the responsibility of the rich nations to the poor is in a state of profound underdevelopment.’
(‘AIDS and the Ethics of Public Health, Challenges Posed by a Maturing Epidemic’ by Ronald Bayer)
The potential social and economic costs of AIDS to countries already ravaged by poverty are enormous.
Where information is adequate from the poorest nations it points to a close relationship between poverty, underdevelopment and the spread of AIDS.
‘The pandemic (of AIDS) can alter the course of many societies’ social and economic developments, force difficult trade-off decisions in both the industrialised and developed nations, kindle other disease epidemics, change national and international politics, threaten the welfare of families and uninfected children, change the nature of employment relationships, and create new underclasses and new excuses for discrimination against minorities.’
(Social Impacts of the HIV Epidemic — Richard C. Rockwell.)
The implications for development are serious.
Such large numbers of the would-be most productive members of society rendered severely disabled or ill could have catastrophic effects on the national economy and development.
Infected rates are high among urban elites as well as among the poor and underprivileged.
There may be serious lack of qualified or trained personnel, and a reduced capacity to educate their successors or replacements.
Of the conservatively estimated 6 million with HIV worldwide, 2 million are women of child bearing age; and they are mainly in poorer countries depriving these countries of the resources of some of their most productive citizens.
The long term consequences of this are chilling.
Projected mortality rates are also alarming, affecting mainly women and children, as well as young adults.
Where 10% of pregnant women are HIV positive, the under five mortality rate for AIDS alone will be equal to the under five child mortality rate from all causes in industrialised countries.
In Zaire a single hospitalisation of a child with AIDS and his/her eventual death can cost a family the equivalent of 14 months salary.
At a national level one can only imagine what the development consequences might be for countries with already declining or collapsing economies.
In 1991, 50,000 people died through AIDS in Uganda — 14, 000 of them were children.
Just as AIDS can affect not only people's health but the whole social and economic infrastructure of a country, so too it requires a holistic response when trying to deal with it.
SCIAF has been supporting income-generation schemes for AIDS sufferers in Uganda as well as training and counselling, and it is expected that demands for assistance with AlDS-related projects will increase substantially in the next few years.
SCIAF is a member of the CARITAS Working Group on AIDS which is the major international grouping of agencies on this issue in the Catholic Church
PARISH CHECKLIST
Please read out/distribute Bishop Mone's letter at Masses on 20th/21st February (the Sunday before Ash Wednesday)
Please ask SCIAF/Justice &&or other parish groups to organise the distribution of Lenten boxes on Ash Wednesday or the first Sunday in Lent.
These should be returned on Holy Thursday and a cheque sent direct to SCIAF.
Please ensure that the SCIAF leaflet is also given out.
There should be enough for one per family.
If necessary more are available by contacting SCIAF.
Please display the SCIAF poster on the church notice board or other prominent place.
Please encourage parishioners to organise a special event: prayer service, rich/poor lunch, 24-hour fast (especially for young people) during the Lenten Campaign.
Contact SCIAF for more information about speakers or our Lenten Visitors from Kenya.
Invite members from other churches to any event you organise.
Please use the information and bulletin inserts contained in this dossier.
Please include SCIAF partners in Africa, Asia and Latin America in the prayers of intercession throughout Lent.
On ‘SCIAF Sunday’ March 21st a special collection should be taken up to support development projects in 23 Third World countries.
Proceeds should be sent to the Diocesan Chancellor for forwarding to SCIAF.
(NB.
Some dioceses have their own arrangements and now send the total amount rather than 75%.)
Please thank parishioners for their generosity and please accept SCIAF's thanks for your cooperation in expressing the Gospel preferential option for the poor, through prayer and practical support over many years.
WHAT WE CAN DO THIS LENT
All of us can play our own part in the struggle for justice and development worldwide.
Each of us is called to defend the rights of all.
Here are some ideas on how you can help.
Encourage families to observe Lent by making conscious sacrifices in their lives.
Use SCIAF's Lenten materials to learn more about the issues and our responsibilities.
See the order form for additional resources.
Organise a prayer service and/or information event for your parish or deanery.
Join a SCIAF or Justice and Peace group in your parish or area: If there isn't already one try to start one.
SCIAF can provide advice and information.
Join with others, especially with other churches, in bringing issues of development and justice to the attention of our government.
Make your commitment effective and practical by supporting SCIAF's Lenten Campaign
May 6th Social Committee Meeting
Father Joe.
has cancelled Sing-alongs and Dances for the present.
Numbers have not been too good and although last sing-a-long was not a total washout financially speaking, he feels a good attendance and atmosphere are more important.
We will have to think on how we can build up numbers.
He has also asked if we can organise a rota of about 14 people to help take some of the burden from Alex with regards to looking after the hall.
Discussion on bar prices.
May feels prices of soft drinks are too high, also Nicky was under the impression we sell ⅕ gill in spirits.
The bar sells ¼ gill with mixer for £1 and a half pint soft drink will remain at 50p.
Tote.
Nicky now has 138 members and hoping to increase this.
Father asked for some volunteers to help Nicky collect at the back of the Church, he has already arranged this himself.
May 23rd First Holy Communion.
Liz and May to arrange food.
May 30th Karaoke and disco.
May booking this.
Liz doing buffet.
Tickets £2.50, hoping to be on sale shortly.
June 13th First Holy Communion (St. Denis's).
Isabel responsible for food and refreshments.
Liz and May will help out.
June 16th Bus runs to Prestwick Isabel booking this week.
Will book a 51 seater bus at first.
If demand is greater we can either book another bus or use the mini bus which will seat another 15.
June 19th Family fun day cancelled.
Hope to put more effort to arranging same for next year.
We will have to start organising the grand raffle and Christmas dance.
Nicky looking into some suitable venue.
Next meeting June 3rd.
MINUTES of the GROUPNET Programme Group of The Scottish Agency for Christian Adult Education held in St Colm's College on 7 December 1992
PRESENT:
The meeting opened with prayer, led by Bro.
Fillan, who then welcomed the new members of the group, Crawford Calder and Leah Buchanan.
Apologies were received from Terry Harkin, Dick O'Doherty, Sheila Steven and Helen Waugh (the third new member of the group).
The Minutes of the last meeting, held on 12 October were agreed.
Report from Management Committee
The report from the most recent meeting of the Management Committee was summarised as follows:
(a)
The weekend at Carberry had been well received, though the Saturday had perhaps been a little heavy for the participants.
The Committee was prepared to support a similar event in 1993 if this was agreed.
(b)
The weekend had produced three new members for the Programme Group: Crawford, Leah and Helen.
(c)
The question of a new editor for the Bulletin was discussed.
None of the new group members felt able to take on the job at present and it was agreed that David should write to the Management Committee to ask for further suggestions.
2.
Update on 1993 Lent Studies
(a)
Since typing had taken longer than anticipated the booklet would not appear until the end of December.
Minor changes had been made following criticism by Archbishop Mario Conti, that some of the language was difficult.
It was noted that a revised layout, using 10point Helvetica, meant that the booklet was 4pp longer than originally estimated, which would add to printing and postage costs.
(b)
Christine produced a new order form for the Lent Studies booklet and fliers for the Preparation Day on 30th January to be held in Dunblane Cathedral Hall, for which she would arrange tea, coffee, and a bookstall where it was hoped to have copies of the books mentioned as background reading for the Lent study.
(c)
David agreed to liaise with Liz Templeton and to organise the programme for the day.
(d)
Christine mentioned that the CCBI were producing a pamphlet listing recommended books for Lent, including the one by Liz.
3.
Mission Studies
The drafts produced earlier had been piloted in two groups during the summer and autumn of 1992.
The difference between the types of studies written by David and by Peter Bell had created six studies, each in two formats.
David hoped to circulate a final version for comment before the end of January.
The aim was to launch these after Easter, stressing their potential usefulness for Advent 1993, and it was noted that a specific demand for Advent Studies had been expressed by several groups.
4.
Review of Carberry Event
(a)
The event had incurred a fairly substantial loss (£444.68).
The reasons for this included
(i)
4 people backing out
(ii)
ineffectual publicity
(iii)
delay in production of the leaflets which had involved extra postage
(iv)
the comparatively large number of workshop leaders to be paid for
(v)
the fact that Carberry itself is expensive.
(b)
The Church of Scotland had agreed to make up a proportion of the shortfall equal to the proportion of its members present.
This would amount to c. £200 (=45%).
(c)
It was agreed that there should be further investigation into optimum methods of publicising such an event in the future, and it was noted that setting up a central diary of events might help to reduce the chances of conflicting or uncomfortably close dates for similar events being chosen.
E.g. The annual conference of local Councils of Churches had been held in Dunblane the week before Carberry, at the same time as a Church of Scotland Readers' Conference at St Ninian's Perth.
(d)
The question of subsidising such events (as happened with the abovementioned Readers' Conference) was discussed.
David agreed to relay the feelings of the Programme Group that subsidy should be considered to the group set up by the Open College to negotiate with the denominations and with suitable trusts concerning the setting up of financial support for courses, training, etc.
It was noted that a subsidy of c. £1000 would probably be needed for a similar event in the future, but that a venue which operated a more lenient cancellation policy would make things easier for the organisers.
(e)
Despite the small numbers attending (and consequent loss) the gathering was felt to have been a successful occasion, judging by the comments of participants and workshop leaders.
The range of speakers, sizes of groups and value of Richard Holloway as a keynote speaker were all praised, and two out of three participants said that they would attend a similar event again.
(f)
After further discussion a small group consisting initially of Eileen, Maureen, Crawford and Leah, was set up to plan the next such gathering.
This was provisionally arranged for early May 1994, after Easter but before the ACTS gathering on 25 June.
It would be held if possible at St Ninian's Crieff, which would mean that, if the Warden, Peter, could be involved, the event would be zero-rated for V.A.T. (as had been the case at Carberry with the involvement of Jock Stein).
5.
GROUPNET Bulletin
(a)
It was agreed that Eileen and Maureen would write a report on Carberry.
(b)
There was discussion on the need for articles encouraging people to set up new groups: Fillan produced some useful material on this, and Eileen referred to studies developed by her group which had subsequently been used by six others.
(c)
It was suggested that Ken Lawson might be asked to write an article on Group Relations and that a report might be given of a course in Grangemouth on ‘Creative Listening’.
(d)
Maureen produced a flier about the CPAS Open House Magazine for House Group leaders, published 3 times per annum, subscription £5.
(e)
Christine produced an updated list of subscribers and labels, but it was agreed that there was no means of ensuring that names were transferred safely and accurately from Edinburgh to Dunblane (and vice versa).
5 (f)
It was agreed that the key strategy for the next 18 months — two years was to produce a network of interested people who would be valuable both as a resource and as a means of disseminating ideas and information.
In this connection it was agreed that Christine should add the names and addresses of those who had been at Carberry to her database.
6.
GROUPNET Teams Day — 13 February 1993
(a)
It was emphasised that this event was not only intended for those interested in ecumenical groups.
(b)
It was noted that although there would be no official charge for the day, those attending would be asked for voluntary contributions in the region of 15.
(c)
Concern was expressed about the role of various denominational Education committees with regard to promoting house groups, both ecumenical and denominational.
David agreed to talk both to Sheilah about the role of Church of Scotland Education Committees in this regard, and to Celia Matthews about the Scottish Episcopal Church's Diocesan Education Committees.
Fillan agreed to talk to  and  (Secretary to the Catholic Bishop's Conference) with a view to encouraging them to do more.
It was noted that linking with the Roman Catholic Education Commission had causes problems of communication since the latter was mainly concerned with schools, and that it was to be hoped that putting the promotion of house groups on to the agenda of the Bishops' Conference would prove more fruitful.
7.
Date of Next Meeting
This will be on Wednesday 10 March at 7.00pm in St. Colm's.
8.
The meeting closed with the Grace at 9.25pm.
Appended: A full list of the names and addresses of members of the GROUPNET Programme Group
MINUTES of a meeting of the Catholic Chaplaincy Commission for the University of Strathclyde and the Glasgow Caledonian University held in the Chaplaincy Centre, University of Strathclyde on Wednesday 3 March 1993 at 5:15 p.m.
1.
PRESENT
Fr.
G. Marshall, Fr.
A. Connelly, Lady Anderson, Mrs. B. Markus, Mr. T. Burnett, Mr. C. Crosier, Mr. J. McGhee 
2.
APOLOGIES
Bishop Devine, Mgr.
M.J. Conway, Fr.
T.J. Chambers, Mr. D. Cassidy 
3.
CHAIRMAN
Mr. T. Burnett was requested to occupy the Chair.
4.
MINUTES OF LAST MEETING
The minutes of the meeting of the 4th November 1992 were proposed by Fr.
Aelred and seconded by Mr. C. Crosier subject to the misspelling of Commission at line 1.
5.
CHAPLAINS REPORTS
No report was available from Fr.
Chambers
(i) Fr.
A. Connelly
Retiral of Rev. A. MacLean to Parish service
The Rev. A. MacLean, Chaplain to the Students' Association, has taken charge of a Parish in Greenock.
His replacement will probably not take up office until 1 September 193.
The day-to-day running of the Chaplaincy is being handled by the other Chaplains.
New Chaplains
A New Chaplain to Methodist Students has been appointed.
It was agreed that thanks are due to all retiring Chaplains for their service, mutual help and fellowship.
In particular Fr.
Aelred suggested that the Commission write to the Rev. MacLean expressing their gratitude for all the help he has given.
Merger Congregation
To celebrate the Merger of the University with Jordanhill College of Education a Merger Congregation will take place in the Barony Hall on 1 April 1993.
The Chaplains, who have been invited to participate in the Congregation, are to present a report to the University Court on the activities and services of the various Chaplains.
Chaplaincy Services
The Christmas Vigil Service was a great success.
About 70 participated in the service, including two Commission members.
Archbishop Winning celebrated the Ash Wednesday Mass attended by about 200 students.
A sum of about £204 was collected for the Social Care Commission of the Archdiocese.
The Holy Week Services are as follow:—
On Tuesday a Seder meal accommodating about 25 will take place.
On Maundy Thursday Mass of the Lord's Supper will be celebrated at 7.00 p.m.
On Friday the Passion will be celebrated at 3.00 p.m.
The Vigil of the Lord's Resurrection will commence at 10.00 p.m.
Refreshments will be available after all Holy Week services.
Monday Evening Activities
The Faith and Reason group meet as usual every Monday.
This term they are considering Christology.
Next term they will consider the Sacraments.
Fr.
Gordian is conducting a class in Hebrew each Monday evening at Blackfriars.
Catholic Society Activities
On the second Tuesday of each month Dinner takes place at 6.00 p.m. in the Ark Cafe.
On the fourth Tuesday of each month Speakers are invited to meetings of the Society.
Miscellaneous Activities
A very successful overnight retreat was attended by 12 people on Saturday 27 February 1993.
A parish retreat for 10 people is to take place on 13 March 1993 to donate to SCIAF Solidarity with Africa campaign.
A trip to Keswick is being planned to occur during 14–19 June 1993.
6.
OTHER BUSINESS
Appointment of Mgr Conway as Rector Designate
Mgr.
Conway is to be congratulated in his appointment as Rector Designate of Scotus College.
The congratulatory letter should be addressed to him at Turnbull Hall.
Representative of Catholic Headteachers
Mr. Burnett raised the issue of sending a letter to Headteachers re.
pupils with conditional offers of University places.
In expressing the view that he felt he wasn't making a large contribution to the activities of the Commission, he also requested some guidance on what his role should be or what view the Commission had about his role.
A brief discussion pointed out that his principal role was that of liaison between the Commission and the Association of Catholic Headteachers.
At the same time, by virtue of his experience in the Secondary School sector of education he had a valuable contribution to make in how we can effectively communicate with young secondary school adults as potential members of the Catholic University parish.
In addition his role as a member of the Commission gave him the personal opportunity to support the chaplains in their Ministry in the University parish.
Role of Chaplains
A general discussion led by Fr.
Aelred on the status of Chaplains vis-à-vis the Students' Association and the University took place.
The implications for the Chaplaincy re the merger with Jordanhill College and Strathclyde were discussed.
7.
DATE OF NEXT MEETING
The next meeting will take place on 2 June 1993 at 5.00 p.m. for 5.15 p.m. at Our Lady of Good Counsel Presbytery, 6 Broompark Circus.
Advance apologies were given by Fr.
G. Marshall and Lady Anderson.
Catholic Chaplaincy Commission for the University of Strathclyde and the Glasgow Polytechnic.
Minutes of a meeting held in the Glasgow Polytechnic on Wednesday 4 November 1992 at 5.15 pm.
Present:
Mgr M J Conway (Chair), Fr T J Chambers, Fr A J Connelly, C Croser and T Burnett.
Apologies:
Bishop Devine, Fr G Marshall, Lady Anderson, Mr R Davis.
Minutes of last meeting
The minutes of the meeting of 10 June 1992 were approved having been proposed by Fr Chambers and seconded by Fr Connelly.
Matters arising
No agreement had yet been reached on the name of the Polytechnic when it assumes University status in 1993.
Chaplains' Reports
Fr J Chambers
There had been a successful introduction for freshers at the Polytechnic.
The new Chaplain had done a lot of good work and was given back up by the other Chaplains.
The Polytechnic Chaplaincy was discussed at some length.
It was hoped to get accommodation for a new Chaplaincy base in one of the vacated areas once the new building was completed.
Fr A Connelly
The beginning of term trip to Keswick had been successful despite few numbers.
Accommodation had been booked for the September weekend in 1993.
Prayer Services at the Chaplaincy had been arranged for Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays.
200 to 300 students had visited the Chaplaincy on the open day for prospective students and a ‘welcome night’ by the Catholic Chaplaincy attracted about 50 students.
A barbecue had been held in October and a pilgrimage to the Schoenstadt Community.
Second Tuesday suppers had been organised and 15 to 20 students were going to Birnam.
Remembrance Services had been arranged.
Two Parish days had been scheduled — one for Advent (12 December) and one for Lent (13 March).
A Carol Service had been arranged and the Christmas party would take place on 15 December.
The Archbishop would visit the Chaplaincy on Ash Wednesday.
Overall numbers of those using the Chaplaincy seemed to have increased and the University Registry had forwarded the names of those students who had volunteered their religion on their enrolment form.
Membership
Discussion on membership took place.
It was agreed returning members be invited to continue.
It was further agreed that Joe McGhee be asked to write to the association of Chaplains to invite them to send a representative.
Caring Fellowship
Information on tragic or adverse circumstances affecting students to be channelled through the Principal's office to be cascaded to others.
The next meeting will take place on Wednesday 3 March 1993 at 5 for 5.15 pm in the University of Strathclyde.
The May meeting will be on Wednesday 26 May 1993 at the same time in Glasgow Polytechnic.
Before the close of the meeting Mgr Conway and the members present congratulated Fr Chambers on his recent appointment as Parish Priest of Our Lady of Good Counsel Parish in Dennistoun.
COUNSELLOR
The Newsletter for the Church of Our Lady of Good Counsel
No. 1
Easter 1993
FROM THE PASTOR'S DESK
In the early days of our Church all communication was through the written or spoken word.
If you could imagine yourself being without the radio, T. V., or telephone then you just might come close to imagining how difficult it must have been to spread or hand on the message of Christianity.
Today technology has made the world very small.
It is possible to travel to almost any country within a day's journey, yet when the mother of Jesus travelled a day's journey to visit her cousin Elizabeth she probably managed only a dozen or so miles.
At this very moment in time we are on the verge of having video telephones through which users will be able to see as well as talk to the person at the other end.
Maybe one will not want to be seen!
All of this helps us to realise that a great miracle lies in the very handing on of faith.
Here we are celebrating Easter almost 2000 years since the day of the Resurrection.
Faith is a very special gift.
It doesn't just appear, one cannot go out and simply obtain it.
Some of those who have it take it very much for granted, others cherish it as a priceless possession, and still others search for it and never find it.
When the apostles wrote letters to their friends and colleagues they were always trying to pass on words of encouragement and the people who received these letters regarded them as precious sources of information, that is why many of the letters of Paul or John or Peter have been carefully guarded and handed down to ourselves.
All of this leaves us asking what we will hand on to our children, to our neighbours and to our friends.
Will our Christian message be worth leaving for others who come after us?
Or will our message be so weak and insipid that it is not worth having .
For our Christian message to grow and spread we have to learn to know and share ourselves with each other.
Sadly, there are many within our community who do not know each other.
There are some who share their Sunday Mass each week but never speak to each other, don' t even know each other 's names.
There are some who never come to our House of Prayer for various reasons — prayer is not important in their lives, work or social life is more important, people who feel that they can go it alone with no need for God, others who feel that life is too full to have time for God, some who think that religion is a waste of time, and there are people, both young and old, who are intimidated by their friends.
And there are many who are deeply committed to a faith which is alive and obvious to everyone with whom they come into contact.
There are all kinds and levels of faith but only one God who will accept or reject us for the lives we live today.
The father of one of the young children who is about to receive First Holy Communion told me that he didn't practise any faith because it bored him but still wanted his child to receive Holy Communion.
More likely he didn't have much faith but a great deal of superstition.
The faith he received from his parents probably needed greater nourishment.
Pity the faith he will hand on to his child.
Pity the way that he has been touched by faith within our local community.
Everyone has to work to change this.
May this Easter be a beginning.
NEWSLETTER
This letter has been brought to you by:
Tel.
No.
PARISH ORGANISATIONS
SOCIAL COMMITTEE
This committee meets approximately once per month.
Its function is to offer a series of social activities which might appeal to all or various groups within our community.
In the months that lie ahead there will be a series of Dances usually once per month on a Friday night from 8 p.m. until midnight dancing to big band music with bar and refreshments.
The next dance will be our Easter Dance on Friday 16th April with bar and refreshments.
Music will be by the Jimmy Hutton Trio.
Tickets are £3 and will be available at the church on Sunday.
Admission is by ticket only.
Alternating with monthly dances there will be a monthly Sing-a-long — singing, dancing, bingo and bar refreshments.
The next Sing-a-long evening will be on Sunday 2nd May from 7.30 until 11.30 p.m.
Admission is £1.50 at the door.
This should be an excellent opportunity for being with and joining friends for a relaxing evening.
These evenings are organised by Isabel McCarron.
There are also plans for an Evening Bus Run with High Tea and Dance at a west coast venue on a date to be arranged in June.
And in the autumn a Race Night is planned as well as a Dinner Dance.
Men's Smokers are also on the future agenda.
The Convenor for the Social Committee is Peter Murphy.
CARE GROUP
This is a small group of eight people who have been trained to give help and care for families who have suffered bereavement.
This group will be especially helpful to those who are left alone and need care and support.
The Convenor is Mrs. Joey McDonald.
ST.VINCENT DE PAUL SOCIETY
This group of volunteers meet in the Presbytery each Sunday after 12 noon Mass.
They are members of a most valuable organisation which has two main tasks — to care for the poor and visit the lonely.
They do an immense amount of work which is frequently unsung or unnoticed.
There are eight people in the group and there is much good work to be done.
New volunteers will always be welcome.
The Convenor is Miss Mary Gallagher.
COVENANT COMMITTEE
This group has been set up within the past few months and had the task of re-organising the Covenant.
Their success speaks for itself with over 190 new members on Covenant.
This is an excellent way for Church to raise funds without asking our people to contribute more.
All those who pay income tax are eligible to sign a Covenant and at the end of each year the Church is able to recover some of the tax.
It is essential, however, that all donations are placed in a special envelope or paid by cheque or by Standing Order.
Truthfully, every person who pays tax should have a covenant.
A member of the Covenant Committee will be available at each Mass on the last Sunday of the month.
Convenor is Mr. Jim Reilly.
ALTAR SOCIETY
We are anxious to have a small group of people who would be willing to look after the altar in the church, prepare it for special occasions and generally take a personal interest in its care.
If you would like to help please speak to one of the priests or Cathy McGinty.
RCIA GROUP
The letters stand for Rite of Christian Initiation of Adults.
The group helps people to find out about our faith and meets usually about once per fortnight in the Presbytery.
Three adults who have been prepared by this group will be received into the Church at the Easter Vigil.
They are Gordon Murdoch, Betty Forbes and Glen Milliken.
They can be sure of a very genuine welcome and also a special place in our prayers.
The Convenor of this group is Roseann Reddy.
WOMEN'S GUILD
The Guild meets fortnightly and is for the social and spiritual life of ladies within our local community.
There are plans to expand the scope and activity of the Guild from September onwards with Keep-Fit, Step Reebok, Embroidery and Sewing, Music and Entertainment and various social activities.
The Convenor is Jean McKay.
CHURCH CLEANERS
This is not seen as a very attractive chore but is probably the most important of all and really depends on the goodwill of a few people under the guidance of Annie Hanlon.
Our church is a very special place, a place to pray and a place to meet with other people.
It is important that it has a prayerful atmosphere and to achieve this it has to be clean and well kept.
The cleaning group usually meet after Mass on a Tuesday and Thursday and a few more volunteers would be greatly appreciated — even for one hour!
HANDICAPPED CLUB
This meets in the parish hall on Monday evenings from 7 until 9 p.m. and is guided by Mrs. Anne McLean.
SENIOR CITIZENS CLUB
Meets in the parish hall each Thursday at 1 p.m. for a light lunch and a game of bingo.
The organiser is Annie Hanlon.
FOOTBALL POOL
This is organised by Nicky Hughes and is run on a monthly basis.
Each person is allocated a number of a football team.
The list of teams appears in the Sunday Mail or Sunday Post.
The goals scored over four weeks are totalled and the highest number of goals wins a prize of £50.
This pool is being run to raise funds to buy a new carpet for the church sanctuary.
The first month of the pool starts on April 4th and thereafter someone will be at each Mass to collect subscriptions.
PARISH HALL
The hall, kitchen and bar area have now been refurbished and are most attractive and functional.
Other parts of the hall complex will be developed over the next few months and should provide us with additional facilities.
In a few months time we are hoping to start a lunch club in the hall on 2 or 3 days per week, providing a three course lunch for a very small cost.
Negotiations are also under way to set up a Stroke Sufferers Group and a support group for Dementia patients.
The local social work department is being most helpful in these matters.
Plans are under way to have a Fun Day around about mid-summers day — based in the hall there will be day-time attractions and a Bar-B-Que and dance in the evening.
Of course, all of these things only become possible when we can depend on the help and support of all our people.
So what would you like to help with?
FIRST HOLY COMMUNION
Twenty children from St. Denis' Primary School will receive First Holy Communion on Sunday, 13th June, the Feast of Corpus Christi (The Body and Blood of Christ), a memorable day to receive First Holy Communion.
The Mass will be followed by a reception in the hall for the children and their parents.
Helpers will be greatly appreciated.
SUNDAY MASSES
Vigil at 5.30 p.m.
10 a.m., 12 noon, 6 p.m.
Confessions after the Vigil Mass and on request.
FORTY HOURS ADORATION
This will commence after the 12 noon Mass on Sunday, 25th April and continue until the evening of Tuesday 27th April at 7p.m.
This is an opportunity for personal and private prayer, a time for worship of the Holy Eucharist, and an opportunity to recharge your spiritual battery.
You will have an opportunity to provide candles and flowers for this very prayerful occasion.
HOLY WEEK SERVICES
Wednesday —
Reconciliation Service at 7 p.m.
Holy Thursday —
Mass of the Lord's Supper at 7 p.m.
Good Friday
The Solemn Passion at 3 p.m. and Veneration of the Holy Cross at 7 p.m.
Holy Saturday
Easter Vigil commences with the lighting of the Easter Fire at 9 pm
STALL
There is a small repository at the back of the church.
In it you will find various gifts including some that are suitable for First Holy Communion.
There are also cards for all occasions and very reasonably priced.
The organisers are Florence Cocozza and Margaret Hamilton.
ARCHDIOCESAN APPEAL
To date we have sent the Archbishop the sum of £1978 towards his appeal for help with the massive debt in which the Archdiocese finds itself.
COLLECTING BOXES
There are three donation boxes at the back of the church, just at the top of the steps.
One is for Flowers for the Altar, one for St. Anthony which is given to the poor who come looking for help at various times of the day and night, and the third is for Sending a Sick Child to Lourdes, the cost of which is approximately £350.
The boxes are emptied daily.
GOOD IDEAS
Your suggestions for improvements in the church or development within the parish will always be most welcome.
This Newsletter will be produced about six times per year.
If you have any information which might be of special interest to our readers please send it to the Presbytery.
This edition of the Newsletter carries the name ‘Counsellor’ but may you have a better one.
Please let us hear about it.
My suggestion for a name is:—
The distribution of the Newsletter can be quite a time-consuming task.
It is made easier if we have lots of messengers.
Would you be willing to deliver about 10 newsletters to houses nearby?
If you would, contact Mrs. Pat Reilly on 554 6911 who is the Messenger Organiser.
A WORD OF ENCOURAGEMENT
Maybe you have fallen away from the regular practice of your faith; perhaps, you have a feeling of hurt or of being let down or ignored — well, it's easy to come back again.
Just simple forgiveness.
There is room for everyone and you will be made very welcome.
CONTACT
The Presbytery is at 6 Broompark Circus, which is directly behind the church.
Tel. 554 1558.
Callers will always be welcome.
Issue No. 8
DIOCESE OF MOTHERWELL NEWSLETTER
March 1993
Diocesan Information Service
CARE SUNDAY
BY MR JAMES QUINN
At the invitation of Bishop Devine Sunday December 6th was marked by the Parishes of the Diocese as CARE SUNDAY.
Why a ‘Care Sunday?’
The two main aims of this venture were:
1.
To highlight the importance of giving practical help to people who are in any kind of need.
2.
To recruit more parishioners to this work of helping people in need, an area we now call Social Concerns.
THE MAIN FOCUS
The promoting and organizing of Care Sunday was undertaken by the Diocesan Social Concerns Agency.
They suggested that the focus for the day should be: ‘Care of the Elderly’.
Our feedback suggests that generally, the Bishop's clarion call was answered and the ‘Care Sunday’ was a big success.
A happy ‘Sharing’ group
Parish Representatives discuss the impact of ‘Care Sunday’
The vast majority of Parishes did mark the 6th December as Care Sunday.
The two main aims were achieved across the board.
Many enduring results could be noted and a number of unforeseen benefits were derived.
The Proof
A few snippets from the Feedback Sheets on Care Sunday give us some flavour of what has happened in different parishes across the Diocese e.g:
‘A Christmas-shopping outing to East Kilbride was arranged for the elderly of the parish, with transport, tea and coffee laid on’.
‘Care Sunday was dedicated to the spiritual and moral care of children’.
‘57 people volunteered to visit an elderly person on Christmas day, 47 wished to visit on a regular basis’.
‘The Women's Group provided a special lunch for the elderly and established a club for the elderly and the unemployed in the church hall.’
‘We spoke at each Mass outlining the need for parish visiting teams.
The response was heart-warming.
We now have 24 volunteers.
This really surprised us.’
‘21 people offered assistance and, in conjunction with the St. Vincent de Paul, a plan for parochial visitation was implemented.
‘At the open meeting 24 people volunteered to join our team of 5 to visit the elderly and the housebound.’
‘We approached the local minister to ascertain if they had a visiting committee.
3 members of the Kirk Session have attended our meeting.
They see no problem in joining us to visit the elderly of the village’.
These examples show that Care Sunday provided an opportunity to foster collaboration for the sake of the Kingdom of God.
Certainly it will not only be a gift for the elderly to receive a visit, but also we visitors will be able to benefit from the wisdom and life experience of the elderly members of the Church and society.
The Diocesan Assembly
Over the weekend of 9th — 12th June 1993, we will be honoured by a Pastoral Visit from the Pope's representative in Britain, Archbishop Luigi Barbarito.
Every 10 years or so, the Apostolic Nuncio makes such a visit to each Diocese.
It is hard to imagine him coming at a better time as we plan to make our first Diocesan Assembly the centrepiece of his visit, on Saturday 10th June.
A Diocesan Assembly is the coming together of the whole Diocesan family to take stock of where we are and to plan our next step.
It will be held in the theatre hall of Cardinal Newman High School and will involve 3 representatives of the planning or pastoral teams recently established in each parish.
In addition, there will be the members of our Diocesan Agencies on Mission, Liturgy, Social Concerns, Community Building, Youth, Family Life, Christian Unity and Adult Education.
All in all, 250 people, many of them being lay people, will gather to assess the effectiveness of our pastoral plan.
Each Agency will make a brief presentation of its work to date and its plans for the future.
The parish representatives will have the opportunity to discuss with the Agencies of their choice the forms of support which they need to have in their task of bringing alive the mission statement of each parish.
The morning will be given over to those two sessions.
In the afternoon there will be an open discussion on the theme which we want to adopt next year.
The front runner at the moment is Family Life, not simply since 1994 is ‘The International Year of the Family’, but because the family is increasingly at risk in the very secularised society of today.
It is my hope that the representatives from the parishes will offer the Diocese and its Agencies the needs which are to be met by the parishes, with support from the Diocese, in the theme for 1994.
In effect, then, a Diocesan Assembly has two functions.
The first is to give a clear statement of where we are, our successes and failures.
That is its information role.
But the second function is no less important — to consult all the representatives of the parishes on the way ahead, both in regard to the theme for next year as well as the needs to be met.
I look forward to our first Diocesan Assembly in its own right, as well as being a major step towards forming a Diocesan Pastoral Council.
+Joseph Devine.
THRIFT WAS ALWAYS A SCOTTISH VIRTUE
by Father John Breslin
What do you do when you retire?
Charlie and May Docherty of St. Bride's Parish in Cambuslang did what many elderly folk do.
They took the opportunity to share in the daily 10 o'clock Mass, a privilege denied them during their working life.
And that's how their involvement with the Thrift Shop started.
A JOINT VENTURE
Running a parish hall can be a costly exercise.
Running a parish complex such as the Ogilvie Centre in Cambuslang is a very expensive enterprise even when such costs are shared with the neighbouring parish of St. Cadoc, Halfway, joint owners of the Centre.
WHAT YOU MAY HAVE I DO NEED
Revenue from the Thrift Shop (which shares the same premises as St. Bride's Stall) helps to offset some of that expenditure for both parishes.
At the weekend the Stall offers for sale the usual selection of Catholic newspapers and Catholic Truth Society publications, rosary beads and medals, prayer cards and candles.
For the rest of the week it is given over to a different selection: good second-hand clothes, useful but redundant household articles, outgrown children's toys plus almost anything that someone no longer needs and someone else might use.
A ‘WEE’ SHOP WITH INTERNATIONAL DIMENSION
The Thrift Shop is open only on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays from after the 10 o'clock Mass until midday.
Customers come mainly from the more socially deprived homes within the area.
Since all goods are donated, most of them of high quality coming from the more affluent within and outwith the parish, charges for them can be minimal so providing a social service as well as a subsidy towards the hall expenses.
For a time it even had an international dimension.
A Polish couple who lived in Cambuslang at that time regularly frequented the Shop in search of children's clothes.
Whatever bargains they could find made their way to Poland in its dark Communist days.
A ‘FAMILY BUSINESS’
May and Charlie have worked there now for nearly ten years.
They just happened to be around after Mass when volunteers were needed.
Sunday evenings see them busily transforming the Stall into ‘their’ Thrift Shop.
They used to be alone among the plastic bags, sorting and grading whatever had been donated.
With the passing of years they now have the help of their daughter Anne and son-in-law Hugh.
It's become a ‘family’ business.
It's also the business of the family of both parishes.
TO THE BENEFIT OF MANY
For in the main it is our own parishioners who donate the goods; it is residents within the area who benefit from the high quality and the low prices; and it is Charlie and May who have found a vocation in later life serving both community and parish with their gifts of energy and time.
R.C.I.A.
A Journey in Faith
by Sister Kathleen Delany C.S.A.
‘I now declare you to be members of the Elect to be initiated into the Sacred Ministries at the next Easter Vigil’
These are the words spoken by the Bishop to those catechumens who, after the long period of formal preparation express their desire to be received into full communion with the Catholic Church.
Their names are inscribed in the Book of Enrolment and the season of Lent provides the perfect setting for the deep spiritual preparation they now journey on.
The focus of this period is twofold:
PREPARATION OF THE ELECT
1.
The preparation of the Elect (formally called Catechumens) for the Easter Sacraments through prayer and penance.
This is practically achieved through on-going catechises, though different from the Catechumenate period.
a)
a time set apart for reflection on the Gospel way of life, e.g. a Retreat 
b)
a time of Prayer , time to meet God inwardly
c)
a time to focus on God's Presence 
d)
a time to discover in ourselves attitudes and lifestyles , which may be contrary to a deep relationship with God.
PREPARATION OF THE COMMUNITY
2.
The local community is challenged to enter more deeply into the Paschal mystery.
This challenge can take many different forms, e.g.
The community presents to the Elect their most treasured gifts: the Creed and the Our Father:
The Creed is the ‘Blue Print’ of all that we as Catholics believe and try to live.
The Our Father is the prayer which Christ himself taught us and it is the best means by which we can communicate with God.
The community shares with the Elect the Scrutinies: each one is invited to take a careful look at his/her life in preparation for Easter.
The focus of these scrutinies are Life (the Life-giving water offered to the Samaritan woman);Freedom (the Light of the World as recorded in the miracle of man born blind); and Salvation (the New Life after Baptism).
By praying with and sharing in the enthusiasm of the Elect there is an opportunity for all to turn to God and find the Holy Spirit anew.
The Enlightenment period is very much a Prayer and Liturgy centred time.
It is an excellent preparation for both the Elect and the community for the great Easter Sacraments.
Eucharistic Congress
How it came to be
by Fr.
Brian Logue
A VISION OF THE 19TH CENTURY
St. P. J. Eymard, founder of the Blessed Sacrament Congregation, regarded the Eucharist as the fire which would set the whole world alight.
He said: ‘A love of God which no longer centres its life in the Eucharist, is soon extinguished.
It rapidly becomes merely a human love.
We must allow Jesus in the Eucharist to come out of isolation so that he may once again lead and save Christian society as its head’.
THE BEGINNINGS
It was Fr.
Emyard's influence on a young woman from Tours, Emilie Tamisier (1834–1910), that gave her the inspiration to dedicate herself to the salvation of society through the Eucharist.
She had been struck by the fact that in June 1873 two hundred Deputes of the French Parliament gathered before the Blessed Sacrament to consecrate their country to the Sacred Heart of Jesus.
Together with L. Dupont and A. Chevrier, Emilie worked to promote Adoration of the Eucharist.
Pilgrimages began to places noted for such devotion.
A Swiss Bishop had heard about the project and suggested a plan which is essentially still followed in international meetings: i.e. that representatives of all Eucharist-centred endeavours and activities throughout the world should come together at certain times.
This is how the name ‘Eucharistic Congress’ came to be employed.
THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUCHARISTIC CONGRESS
The first International Eucharistic Congress was to be held in Belgium at Liege — the city where the Feast of Corpus Christi originated.
However, because of political circumstances it was held in France, in Lille.
The industrialist Philibert Vrau, influenced this choice.
He was known for combining his talent for organisation with a burning faith in Jesus present in the Eucharist.
Continued on page 8
WEEK OF PRAYER FOR CHRISTIAN UNITY
‘Be Fruitful in the Spirit’(Gal 5:22–23
FROM SHOTTS
For many years combined social activities and the celebration of prayer services with other Churches have been a way of life to the parishioners in SHOTTS.
There have been ceilidhs, concerts, choral group plays — the list is long!
OUR ECUMENICAL GROUP
We have an Ecumenical Group in the parish which works under the direction of Fr.
Foley, the Vicar Episcopal for Ecumenism in the Diocese.
A PERSONAL APPROACH
For last year's service we drew up a plan and then wrote a personal letter from the laity group to all the Churches, emphasising how much we believed in the power of praying together for Unity.
The next step was a personal visit to all the ministers.
WHAT A SURPRISE!
‘At some point I was torn between two or three different possibilities of how to go ahead’ said Christina Gillespie, the secretary of the group, ‘when I got a phone-call from the Salvation Army, saying that they were praying for me.
They were there to help with whatever was needed.’
A COLD AND WET NIGHT, BUT 400 CAME!
Although it was very cold and wet, in collaboration with the groups in the parish it turned out to be a very successful evening.
The priests of St. Patrick's played host to 400 people with representatives from the 5 various Churches for the ecumenical service.
The Press commented afterwards, that the Christian Presence and Community Spirit were very much in evidence.
AND THIS YEAR?
Leading on from that, we fixed a meeting for this year aimed at getting to know each other better and looking at how to prepare together the ecumenical service.
Two representatives from the various Churches were invited.
A lively exchange took place.
We did not only speak about the service, but also about other aspects of ecumenism concerning our local community.
At the end of the evening it was agreed to hold another meeting!
PROGRESS
This time all the ministers of the various Churches came and the dialogue continued.
Since only two of the churches, apart from St. Patrick's, are big enough to hold 400 people, a proposal was put to the Congregational Church to host the service some time in 1993 and the Church of Scotland offered to consider it for 1994.
Although we could make no definite plans for this year, we all agreed that the meetings marked a step forward in getting to know each other in a Christian Spirit.
We agreed that much work is still to be done to help bring about a change of heart within our Churches.
FROM COATBRIDGE
For more than a decade now the Churches in Coatbridge have marked the Octave of Prayer for Christian Unity with Joint Services held in several venues.
PREPARATION
The times and places are decided well in advance, usually during the previous November, and invariably the Order of Service is that prepared and recommended by the Council of Churches for Britain and Ireland.
The local Press gives notice of the arrangements for all the parishes in the district.
THE FOUNDATION OF UNITY
This year the prayer service took place in Blairhill-Dundyvan Parish Church.
Rev. J. Black welcomed us warmly and Fr.
Paul Morton, who had been invited to preach, did so to good purpose.
He recalled his days growing up in Glasgow in the midst of many friendships, that knew no restrictions of race or creed and that enriched the lives of young and old alike.
Church unity would do well to build on a foundation such as this, just as grace builds on nature.
WITH RENEWED EFFORT
The readings, prayers, responses and especially the hymns generated a real sense of enthusiasm for renewed efforts towards better understanding between the Christian Churches in Coatbridge.
In keeping with an equally well-established tradition the hospitality which followed the service was lavish.
Once again many of us were conscious of the opportunities rather than the obstacles which stand along the path of Church Unity.
FROM AIRDRIE
As usual in Airdrie a series of events was planned for the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity.
AN ECUMENICAL PRAYER VIGIL
Among other events there was a Vigil on Saturday, 26th January.
It took place from 10.30am — 4pm in the Session Room of the West Parish Church.
Half-hour sessions were taken by Ministers and Laity throughout the day.
Mrs Ann Marie O'Donnell of St. Serf's Parish spoke of Self Control and Holiness and four of her five children spoke of the change of heart in his or her own life.
The vigil was well attended all day in spite of the blizzard conditions outside.
UNITED CALDERBANK SERVICE
Sunday 25th January, last year, for the first time — a United Calderbank Service took place in Calderbank Parish Church with Rev. Jim Nelson as preacher.
This year it was Canon Barry's turn to preach and despite the snow a huge Congregation turned up in Corpus Christi Church.
The combined choirs sustained the joyful mood with the aptly chosen hymns.
Afterwards we braved the blizzards and all met for tea and home baking in the parish hall.
Thanks to the Fraternal and all participants for a happy and satisfying week!
In Corpus Christi Parish Hall,
From the left, Rev Jim Nelson, Church of Scotland; Rev Mr Main, Congregational Church; Canon Barry, Roman Catholic Church; Rev George Towson, Congregational Church; Rev Margaret Currie, Church of Scotland.
Young People Reflect
On December 6th the second Diocesan gathering of our young people took place.
The Liturgy for that Sunday was the cornerstone of both prayer and reflection.
In the first session all those gathered were asked to identify a ‘John the Baptist’ in their own life (i.e. someone who had helped Prepare the Way of the Lord for them) and also to describe the characteristics of such a person.
WHO PREPARED THE WAY?
The responses were both illuminating and encouraging.
They identified:
Parents,
Teachers,
Family,
Friends and
Priests.
In many instances it was the influence of all of these taken together.
MAIN CHARACTERISTICS
On the main they described their ‘John the Baptist’ figures as open, friendly genuine human beings.
Other characteristics mentioned were:
not dominating
caring towards others
an example of goodness
happy and enthusiastic
good listeners
understanding
prayerful
open
humble
supportive
deep in faith
not flashy or flamboyant, just ordinary human beings.
HOW TO PREPARE THE WAY FOR OTHERS?
In the second session they reflected on how they could be a ‘John the Baptist’ for those of their own age group within the diocese and also in their parish.
Again, they were acutely aware of the need to be happy, genuine human beings i.e.
a)
to show enjoyment patience understanding concern for others
b)
to give people a sense of belonging of being supported
c)
to be involved in groups be persuasive be willing to give time…to be approachable be persevering
The common denominator was this very strong sense of a deep humanity.
The Diocesan Team were surprised and delighted at this uncovering of the working of God's grace.
We would like to make parents, teachers and priests aware that God is working through them, that they all are important for the life of faith in our young people even if it is not clearly evident at times.
Moral Corner
EUTHANASIA
Part I
MERCY KILLING?
REV.
GEORGE DONALDSON
Ph.L., S.T.L.
Chesters College, Bearsden
Over the next issues of New March, I would like to consider ‘EUTHANASIA’.
A recent court case involving ‘Mercy killing’ has brought two important factors to the fore:
1.
A ‘CLAUSE’ SUPPORTING EUTHANASIA
A clause supporting Euthanasia was introduced in a European Parliament motion in 1991.
The clause reads:
‘(The European Parliament)…considers that, in the absence of palliative care correctly provided at both psychological and medical level, each time a fully conscious patient insistently and repeatedly requests an end to an existence which has for him been robbed of all dignity, and each time a team of doctors created for that purpose, established the impossibility of providing further specific care, the request should be satisfied without thereby involving any breach of respect for human life.’
2.
GUIDELINES ADVISE DOCTORS TO CONSIDER REQUESTS OF INCURABLY ILL PATIENTS
After a conference in Appleton, Wisconsin, USA, guidelines dealing with Euthanasia were issued in Britain by the Institute of Medical Ethics.
This is an independent body of doctors, philosophers, lawyers and theologians which promotes the study of ethical issues.
The guidelines say that doctors should seriously consider requests from patients with incurable diseases who ask for their lives to be ended.
IS EUTHANASIA IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST NOW?
The guidelines replace previous advice that any relaxation of standards against active intervention by a doctor to end a patient's life is ‘not in the public interest’.
GUIDELINES DO INFLUENCE THE JUDGEMENT OF A DOCTOR
Although the guidelines do not have the force of law, they do influence the doctors' judgement.
They state that when terminally-ill patients who are still able to make decisions, request a doctor's help to die, such requests for active termination of life by a medical act, which directly and intentionally causes death, may be morally justifiable and should be given serious consideration.
WHAT DOCTORS ARE ASKED TO DO
The guidelines also state, doctors are obliged to try to provide treatment that will result in a peaceful, dignified and humane death with minimal suffering.
Doctors who are asked to end patients' lives are, however, urged to undertake a scrupulously careful inquiry into the circumstances of the request.
They should consider alternative courses of action which might remove the cause of the request, e.g:
1.
Physical distress or mental depression might be eased by better treatment.
2.
The patient's feeling of being a burden on his family might be helped by counselling or greater support.
NO UNANIMOUS CONSENSUS ABOUT EUTHANASIA
But the guidelines say that a doctor's response to patients depends on the cultural and societal norms in individual countries.
The International group of authors of the guidelines from Britain, U.S.A., Holland, India, Sweden, New Zealand, Israel, Denmark and Norway, were not, however, unanimous about Euthanasia.
Four of the 37 doctors at the conference indicated their dissent by saying that requests for Euthanasia, while understandable, were not morally justifiable.
The guidelines say that there should be no treatment given to cause death, at the request of a patient who is unable to make rational decisions for himself.
However, any treatment to relieve pain and suffering may well be justified even if this leads to an earlier death.
GREATER MORAL AUTHORITY — WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
A spokesman for the British Medical Association had said that doctors were bound by the law, which prohibits the deliberate taking of human life.
He said: ‘We do not think that there should be any change in the law but there is a definite shift in the way it is interpreted and these guidelines reflect that movement towards a more compassionate interpretation of the law.
However, they do not give doctors legal justification for a particular course of action but they may give them greater moral authority’.
I am not entirely clear in my own mind what that last sentence really means, but from what I have written so far you can readily see that the movement towards Euthanasia is to the fore.
SOCIETY OF ST.
VINCENT DE PAUL
By Pat Carr, Diocesan President
The Society of St. Vincent de Paul was founded in 1833, in France by a young 20 year old student, Frederick Ozanam, and 6 others.
He was challenged by his University Professors to put his faith into action and did so by ‘Going to the Poor’.
His actions have inspired the Society for 160 years and here in Scotland we have 3500 members (38% of which are ladies) in 385 parish conferences continuing this work.
NO WORK OF CHARITY IS FOREIGN TO THE SVP SOCIETY
Frederick Ozanam asked his companions to try to alleviate all forms of poverty and we also try to do this.
Many of the people visited do not receive financial help from the Society — their poverty takes other forms, e.g, bereavement, loneliness, hospitalisation, being housebound,— the list is endless.
Frederick Ozanam died in 1853, at the age of 40 years.
Members and friends of the Society continually pray for his beatification, that he will become a saint for the Society, a saint for the POOR!
Hospital Visitation
MOTHERWELL DIOCESE
Motherwell Diocese has SVDP conferences in 72 parishes with 604 men and 156 ladies totalling 960 members and increasing.
Members commit themselves to a weekly meeting and visitations.
The weekly meeting is held in a spirit of fraternity, simplicity and Christian joy.
Our conferences form into 8 Groups which meet 4 times per year, praying together, planning and exchanging ideas.
The Presidents of the Groups are members of the Diocesan Council which meets every 2 months.
The Diocesan Presidents are members of the National Council.
The SVDP have both Junior and Youth Conferences.
DIOCESAN SPECIAL WORKS
Motherwell Diocesan SVDP have furniture projects in Wishaw and Easterhouse helping families in desperate need of furniture and clothing.
We have 2 Clubs for the Handicapped , one in Viewpark and the other in Hamilton, each a source of joy and encouragement.
Members are involved in Cambuslang with a club for stroke victims .
Each conference is twinned with a conference in India, supporting it with our prayers and finance.
Many conferences organise transport of the Elderly to Mass .
At Christmas toys and food parcels are delivered to the deprived, Christmas concerts organised etc.
It is a very busy time.
Furniture Stores
OUR DIOCESAN CONFERENCES SUPPORT NATIONAL PROJECTS:
a)
The Langbank Centre for holidays and retreats
b)
a Hospice in Johnstone
c)
the Ozanam Centre which provides clothes and meals for the homeless
d)
Glengowan House — for homeless 16 — 21 year olds
e)
a holiday caravan in the East of Scotland.
TODAY, DO WE NEED A SVDP CONFERENCE IN OUR PARISHES?
Jesus said:
‘The Poor we will always have with us’.
With MOTHER THERESA we affirm:
‘We can do no great things, only little things with great love.
But you can do what I can't do, I can do what you can't do.
Together we can do something beautiful for God.’
Eucharistic Congress
Continued from Page 3
SPREAD AND DEVELOPMENT
The spread of the earlier Eucharistic Congresses must be attributed above all to the fervour of those involved in different Eucharist-centred activities (‘Eucharistic Works’), which in their turn benefited as well.
The congresses thrived by fostering a spirit of utmost loyalty to the Pope and the Bishops in whose dioceses they were celebrated.
From the very beginning Popes took a great interest in their development and encouraged them.
THE PRESENCE OF MARY
Our Lady was given an important place from the very first phases of the movement.
Marian pilgrimages, in fact, inspired the Eucharistic pilgrimages which later blossomed into the congresses.
On these occasions important figures in the Church affirmed that it is Mary, who leads us to Jesus.
‘Ad Jesum per Mariam’.
1993
This year, the 45th International Eucharistic Congress will be held in Seville, Spain.
At our diocesan celebration of Corpus Christi we will be joined by the Apostolic Pro-Nuncio, Archbishop Barbarito.
