Pillow Talk
As always, our lovemaking has been wonderful.
Wonderful?
Ecstatic, comfortable, sexy, abandoned, intimate.
Joyce sits up in the bed beside me.
I prop two pillows behind her back and she relaxes into them.
Her face breaks into a wide grin,
‘You're just so nice.’
I smile back and we hold eye contact for a few seconds.
I get that ‘happy injection’ when we do that.
‘You want a cigarette.’
I say.
‘Yes!’
I can't help thinking about a hundred films and plays, where the couple smoke afterwards.
I stretch over to the bedside table and pick up the packet and lighter, remove a cigarette and hand it to her.
She takes the lighter and passes a flame over the end charring the paper on the last half inch.
God she's short sighted.
Her lips pout around the filter and her cheeks collapse in as she draws deeply.
All the filter is in her mouth.
Her head sags back against the pillow.
A moment passes.
Something happens, I don't know what.
I don't smoke.
I place an ashtray on the bed in front of her then lean over for a kiss.
She obliges then I settle beside her on my own pillows.
‘How did the counselling go this week?’ she asks.
‘Pretty strange, I didn't know what to talk about to start with.’
I was reluctant to tell her.
‘Are you sure you want me to talk about this.
It might be quite upsetting.’
‘Look I told you even if you upset me it doesn't mean it's over.’
‘OK.’
I take a deep breath, ‘I said I could probably write a story about my own death.’
I watch for a reaction, knowing that this will hurt her.
‘It could be a mystery.’
Now I notice her hand, it's shaking, ‘At least two people could be suspects with motives.
My wife and Harry.’
I pause.
She draws from the cigarette, but says nothing.
‘Joyce I'm not frightened of Harry, I know I'm safe just now.’
‘You are safe, but you must feel quite vulnerable.’
‘I can't.
I'm not going to live in fear of him.’
‘What did the counsellor say?’
‘We talked about everything.
Don't worry.
It's all confidential.
She won't go to the police.
She asked me to think about what I could do to protect myself.
We talked about leaving a letter with a solicitor.’
‘I did that once.
I'd forgotten all about that.
When I worked in the prison I found out that one of the other teachers was having an affair with this prisoner.
He was a hit man.
But she didn't know and that wasn't why he was in.
I warned her off.
He hated me for that.
I knew he was getting out soon so I was very frightened.
Another prisoner gave me information about him.
I wrote it all down and gave it to a solicitor.
Then I told him what I'd done.
He left me alone after that.’
‘Is that what I should do?’
‘I told Harry that you went to the police with the tape from the answering machine.
I told him they said there wasn't enough to go on, but if anything else happened it would all count.’
‘You know I didn't.’
‘But he doesn't.’
‘He's not a threat just now.’
‘He isn't.
But if it came to the point where he thought he had nothing to lose, I don't know what he would do.’
‘Don't worry about that.
Things won't change for a while.’
‘I love you.
But every time I think about leaving Harry I just can't see myself doing it.’
‘We can do it, there's always a way.’
‘I was talking to Patricia.
She had to run away from her last husband.
That was three years ago.
He's still looking for her.’
‘Is she happy she did it.’
There was a pause,
‘Yes.’
‘I can make you happy.’
‘Things are peaceful just now.’
I feel a small jealous anger in my chest,
‘Peaceful and quiet.
Where does happy come into it?’
She goes quiet again and takes one last draw from the cigarette before stubbing it into the ashtray.
‘You're white single and over twenty-one.’
Her lips have drawn into a thin line.
It was getting too close to reality.
Too close to the real problem.
Time to back off,
‘What time have you got to get back for?’
‘Five thirty.’
‘It's only four.’
She lays the ashtray on the ground beside the bed then turns towards me,
‘Kiss me.’
I do.
Then later run her back to her house.
Dropping her off, she turns to close the door of my car,
‘I love you darling.’
The word darling makes my stomach melt.
‘Love you too.’
She's off, her long legs carrying her down the lane.
In minutes she'll be back in her house.
He'll be there.
What will he say?
Nothing?
Or will he find some reason to start.
I hate what she endures.
I hate that I cause her so much pain.
But she keeps coming back.
I need that.
Without her my life is empty.
Am I the same as him?
Can I bear to lose her?
The choice isn't mine.
I may long for her.
I may plea with her to spend more time with me, but finally she chooses.
That's the important thing.
She chooses to be with me.
I love her.
But I don't own her.
She wants to love me and it makes her happy.
I pray that never changes.
I pray I never become like him, needing to control her.
Motes
‘Motes float freely on the air.’
‘What?’ exclaimed Bridget, examining the serious face of the six year old.
‘Motes float freely on the air.’
Caroline repeated, then tilted her head.
Bridget looked at her grand-daughter wondering what she meant, or even where the phrase had come from.
‘What's a mote, darling?’ she asked.
‘A tiny spec of dust.’
‘Wherever did you hear that?’
‘It's one of daddy's stories.
The fairies sit on the motes and rest in the sunlight.’
‘That's such a pretty story.
What else happens?’
Caroline ignored her grandmother's question, asking another, as six year olds do.
‘Is daddy coming back soon?’
‘Yes dear.’
Bridget feared the next question, but it never came.
Instead the little girl stared into the beam of sunlight that fell across the kitchen table.
‘Mummy's here.’
Caroline said wistfully.
Bridget felt her eyes filling with tears.
‘Mummy's not here.’
she whispered softly.
‘She is!’ the little girl stated firmly, ‘Daddy told me.’
‘What did daddy say?’
‘Daddy said mummy will be dust, she's here.
See!’
The little girl pointed into the sunbeam.
Bridget looked at where the small pink finger was pointing, she could see nothing.
She pulled her glasses from her pocket and placed them on the end of her nose.
Now, she too saw the small bright specs of dust swirling in a complex dance over the table.
She leant over the child, kissing her gently on head.
‘Of course darling, she'll always be here.’
The Hit Man
Barnett steadied the heavy tumbler of neat whisky with both hands as he brought it to his lips.
He glanced nervously around the smoky bar.
No one noticed the dark stain of blood that spread from the tip of a razor sharp stiletto knife in his coat pocket.
He stared into his own reflection in the tarnished mirror at the back of the counter.
His face became that of his victim.
Terror stricken; the little pimp had pleaded with him, offered him money.
It was no good.
He had cheated the boss, sealed his own fate.
Barnett remembered the heat in the blood as it welled around the hilt of the knife and onto his hand.
The surprised look of horror.
Then the scrape of the blade against bone as he carved the letter ‘S’ into the dead mans' forehead.
A warning.
But, somehow it had been different, his normal feeling of elation and contempt had turned to panic.
The man had shouted out.
It had been too open, he could have been seen.
The police were probably on their way.
He'd ducked into this bar for a stiffener, something to calm his nerves.
Barnett exhaled slowly through clenched teeth.
What was he doing here?
He should be miles away by now.
He placed the tumbler on top of the counter, it was empty.
A woman's figure hovered in front of him,
‘Same again love?’ she asked.
‘Yeh, sure.
Same again.’
The glass disappeared.
Barnett fumbled for his wallet.
The door behind him swung open and a blast of chill air swept into the room.
For a second everyone went quiet.
The hairs on the back of his neck stiffened.
Was it the police?
Reflected in the mirror he watched a stocky figure enter the bar, there was a hint of a dark uniform collar under the man's heavy overcoat.
The man looked round the bar before marching over to a group of men down at the end of the counter.
Barnett turned his head.
It looked like the man was asking questions.
Then the man stared straight at him.
Barnett looked away quickly and gazed at his own pale face again.
The barmaid returned,
‘One pound sixty for the double.’
she said.
Barnett kept the backs of his hands resting against the bar as he opened the wallet.
He pulled out a five pound note, and held it out, it shook.
His hand shook.
Take the money, please.
‘Thanks love.’
Then behind him he heard the word, it cut through the fug of the bar, ‘INSPECTOR’.
A policeman.
The man was looking for him.
He knew the line, –Anyone just come in, acting a bit suspicious, not a regular.’
Barnett imagined a finger pointing into his back.
He glanced over his shoulder, the man was coming towards him, pushing through the crowd.
Time to go.
Barnett swung away from the bar, his hand finding the slippery handle of the knife.
He made for the side exit, away from the man.
He just reached it as a shout carried across the room,
‘Hoi you!’
Barnett threw the door open and strode into the street.
The street-lights were pale yellow halos in the steady clinging drizzle.
He glanced up and down the road.
A big saloon car was parked outside the other door with its engine running.
Backup!
He had to run for it.
Head towards the centre where it got busier.
He sprinted along the slippery pavement.
‘Hoi, you.
Stop!’ the man shouted.
Barnett risked a look back, the man was running after him.
Ahead the lights of the main streets beckoned.
He just needed a crowd and he'd be safe.
The steady clatter of the man's heavy shoes was getting closer.
Barnett sucked in a damp lung-full of air and pumped his arms in an effort to increase his speed.
‘Stop!’
Barnett leapt off the kerb, and then screamed as the lights of a bus swept across him.
It was over in a second, Barnett cannoned off the flattened front of the vehicle then tumbled down the road coming to rest in an inert heap.
The bus skidded forward and the body disappeared under the low front.
What was left rolled untidily from under the rear.
When the bus stopped, the driver emerged and walked shakily to the back.
Ticket Inspector Clark, who had just finished his shift, trotted up to the distressed driver,
‘Don't worry son,’ he wheezed, ‘I saw it all.’
He paused to steady his breathing, ‘He's some kind of nutter.
You couldn't have stopped.
I'll make sure the company know what happened.’
Clark held up his hand, ‘The poor sod left his wallet in the pub, I was chasing him to give it back.
Can you believe it?’
Freddy's house
It was funny, walking down the streets seeing the expressions on people's faces as two skeletons went by.
Mrs Palmer's Peke went wild, wrapped its lead round and around her ankles.
One gentle push and she would have been over.
‘Jimmy Mathew, Stu Briggs!’ she shouted, ‘I know that's you boys.
What you doin' frightening folk like that?
It's not even Halloween!’
Bob, the old bum that sleeps at the bus station, just stared.
Glazed red unblinking eyes followed us by.
A thin stream of spit fell from his mouth.
He wiped it away with the edge of his sleeve.
We were well past him when I heard a bottle smash.
Kinda loud, like it had been thrown.
Tuesday nights we always had the place to ourselves.
Freddy's folks were at the country club.
Freddy saw us coming and came to the door,
‘You guys look great!’ he shouted, waving us in, ‘Everyone's round back.’
Everyone was Pete Zoklovsky and big Dave Wallis.
Dave had his mouth round a can.
When he saw us he choked and sprayed the beer onto the lawn.
‘Jeez!
That's outrageous.’
he spluttered.
He pulled his round body out of a wicker chair and wobbled towards us,
‘Where d'ya get the outfits?’
‘Back a’ the theatre.’
I answered, ‘They were throwin' out a pile of ol' props n’ costumes.’
Freddy came out from the kitchen carrying a big bowl of pasta,
‘Who's hungry?’ he asked.
Dave barrelled his way over to the table with the food on it.
‘What's the sauce?’ he asked, as he enticed a good size portion on to a plate.
‘Tomato and peppers.’
answered Freddy.
Pete, the new boy, stood shaking his head slowly from side to side,
‘You guys are just nuts!’ he said.
Pete was a bit stiff.
Probably from living most of his life in cities.
But we was loosnin' him up; bit by bit.
Jimmy and Pete struck up a conversation.
Dave was shovelling pasta into his face.
I grabbed a can and followed Freddy back into the kitchen.
‘We got enough for Dave?’
I asked.
Freddy waved at a pan boiling on the stove,
‘More comin'.’
he said.
‘How's the job doin'?’
Freddy was the only one of us with a real paying summer job.
His face lit up,
‘Great!’ he said, ‘The old bugger left me in charge of the shop for the whole afternoon.
Him and Gary went to that Market over in Tucker.
I made so much money, he went home grumblin' about someone fiddlin' his profits.
I reckon Gary's been toppin' up ‘is allowance outa’ the till.’
‘Jeez.’
I hissed, ‘Never thought he had it in ‘im.’
We both paused for a moment, then chanted together,
‘He's gonna…git…it!’
We were still laughing when we took more food out to the others.
‘What you guys findin' so funny?’ asked Pete.
Freddy told him.
Then we all shouted,
‘He's gonna…git…it!’
The evening wore on, we got a little drunk.
As I remember, it was Pete that started it,
‘What we gonna do?’ he said, ‘We got two walkin' skeletons.
Gotta do sumthin'.’
‘Yeh…gotta do sumthin'.’ echoed Dave.
We sat thinking for about five minutes, then Pete had an idea.
‘We go scare the shit out of a drunk!’ he said.
He WAS loosnin' up.
Jimmy shook his head,
‘We done that with Ol' Bob.
Just ignored us.
Probably sees worse h'self most nights.’
Thinking back.
I suppose it was my idea,
‘We go down the highway.’
I said, ‘Just next t’ the graveyard.
Catch someone gettin' off the late bus from Tucker.’
There was a long silence.
Then heads started to nod up and down.
Everyone had the same stupid grin on their face.
‘Someone's gonna…git…it!’ shouted Freddy.
That was  it then.
We got some torches together and set off for the graveyard.
It was real scary, until Dave started blowing off,
‘Catch that…suckers!’ he bawled.
It got so bad we jumped him.
Made him promise never to eat again or we'd tie him to a tombstone.
It didn't take long to set things up.
We took the light out, just along from the stop, so it was good and dark.
Jimmy said he'd do it.
He was the best runner.
He practised a deep evil laugh, sounded real spooky and sinister.
We heard the bus, from far off, growling its way through the still dusk.
Then it appeared at the end of the long straight leading into town.
Jimmy hid in the rain shelter.
The rest of us crouched in the bushes so's we wouldn't get caught in the headlamps.
The bus arrived, pulling to a halt in a swirl of dust and exhaust.
The door swung open.
The driver turned to his only passenger,
‘You manage that Ma'am?’ he asked.
Old Lillian Tibbs had done well at the Market.
She'd found the perfect present for her niece's wedding.
Getting it home had been a struggle, but she was a determined soul,
‘I'll be fine.’
she said, ‘Just gotta get it down the step.’
Jimmy chose that moment to jump out.
The ghoulish laugh never came.
Instead, he let out a terrified scream.
Then he ran off down the road like a pack o' dogs was after him.
Seeing  this we panicked, and high tailed it out the back of the graveyard; cursing and falling over each other all the way.
Mrs Tibbs looked out from behind the tall mirror she was carrying to see what the commotion was.
There was no one there.
She turned to the driver,
‘You see what happened?’ she asked.
‘No ma'm.’
he drawled.
‘Some kid just ran off though.
Good runner…real fast.’
Lost and Found
People rushed by.
Their heads lowered to avoid the outstretched hand and pale features of a thin leather clad figure hunched over in a shop doorway.
Cold tremors ran through Kim's body.
She tucked her hands under her armpits and stared at the ground.
Her heavy Doc Martin boots had lost their fashion appeal.
Instead they seemed heavy and cold.
She shrank inwards as an icy blast of air enveloped her.
It brought with it a wrinkled piece of brown paper tumbling down the street.
It wrapped around her ankle, clinging to her like some fierce little animal.
She started to brush it off, then realised she was looking at a battered Ten Pound note.
She snatched at it, gripping it firmly in numbed fingers.
Furtively she looked up and down the street.
No one seemed to be looking for it.
She expected a loud shout of.
‘Hoi that's mine!’ but nothing came.
Folding it neatly she thrust it deep into her jacket pocket.
It was a god send.
She'd only made 60p that day.
She stood then walked stiffly towards a local baker's .
A queue had formed outside the shop.
Mostly old age pensioners, mostly women.
Uniform in heavy woollen coats and head-scarfs tied tightly under chins.
They huddled together to protect themselves from the wind.
It reminded Kim of penguins.
Kim joined the back of the line.
The women clucked and tutted as one by one they turned to stare at the tall fourteen year old.
Kim's close cropped blond hair added to her dramatic appearance.
At first she tried to ignore them, self-consciously shuffling from one foot to the other.
Then, tiring of their unfriendly glances, she turned her back on them and looked across the street.
Her eyes were drawn to another old woman on the other pavement.
The woman leant heavily into the wall.
It was as if she needed it to support her.
Every few seconds she looked at the ground and shook her head.
Kim studied her.
The woman's face was drawn into pained mask.
She held a purse in her limp hand.
In an instant Kim knew what had happened.
A guilty pain began gnawing at her chest.
She turned to face the shop window.
The woman's blurred reflection appeared to haunt her from the centre of the glass.
It was too much.
Kim walked across to the woman pulling the £10.00 note from her pocket.
‘Did you drop this?’ she asked.
Slowly the woman's eyes focused on Kim's hand.
Her expression changed gradually to puzzlement.
‘Is that mine?’ she asked.
‘Did you drop ten pounds?’ said Kim holding the note up for the woman to see it better.
The woman's forehead furrowed.
‘It blew away.’
she said.
‘I found it.
It's yours…isn't it.’
Kim flourished the note at the woman.
She just wanted her to take it.
Then she could go.
She was starting to feel very uncomfortable.
The older woman started to smile,
‘You found my money.’
The woman peered into Kim's face, then looked her up and down.
Kim still held the note out.
‘It is yours, take it.’
she insisted.
The woman seemed to change in front of Kim's eyes, seemed almost to grow in size.
‘Your a wee angel.’
she said and took the note pushing it into her purse.
‘Thank you pet.’
Kim turned and started to walk away.
The woman called after her,
‘What's your name dear?’
Kim stopped and turned.
She felt compelled to answer.
‘Kim.’
The older woman nodded her head wisely.
She noticed the  slight tremor in Kim's shoulders.
‘I'm Aggie.’ she announced firmly, ‘I'm going to make you a nice hot cup of tea.
I live just up the street.’
Aggie walked forward and put her arm through Kim's.
She guided Kim along the street and began talking,
‘The clothes you girls wear nowadays, I'm surprised you don't all freeze to death.
In my day we had long skirts, near came right down to the ground.’
Kim allowed herself to be swept along by Aggie's lively chatter.
The words seemed endless,
‘My mam would have had a fit if I'd gone out dressed like that.
Mind I'm not saying against it.
Fashion's very important to you youngsters.
I remember during the war we had…’
Mesmerised by the barrage of cheerful words.
Kim soon found herself in a tiny tenement flat.
A hot cup of tea in her lap, and Aggie was still talking,
‘…after that I worked as a secretary.
Those old typewriters!
My fingers hurt something awful by the end of day…’
Kim took a deep breath, searching for a lull in the conversation,
‘Aggie.’
Aggie stopped mid-sentence.
‘What is it love?’
‘Thank you.’
Aggie flustered,
‘It's me that needs to say thank you.
There's plenty would have just spent that on themselves.
Your a good girl, honest too.’
Kim looked down at the carpet.
‘I was going to spend it.’
she admitted in a low voice.
Aggie lifted Kim–s chin with her fingers.
In a firm but gentle voice she said,
‘But you didn't.
If I'd found it…well I don't know, it's a lot of money to me.’
Kim started crying.
Her shoulders heaving up and down.
Large tears splashed into her teacup.
Aggie sat hugging Kim firmly into her chest.
‘There, there child.
Aggie's here.
Aggie's here.’
She rocked Kim backwards and forwards.
all the time humming an old lullaby.
Kim cried for about ten minutes.
‘Better now?’
Aggie asked.
Kim smiled, she felt so secure.
She hugged Aggie's arm.
‘Oh yes.’
she said.
‘Want to tell me about it?’
Kim wondered if she could trust Aggie.
She seemed so kind  and loving.
And in a strange way very strong.
It came out all in a rush,
‘I'm on my own.
I don't have anywhere to live.’
Aggie rocked her head back, looking Kim over,
‘You must have been living somewhere.’
‘My mum and dad died in a car crash.
I was put in a home.
I hate it.
I won't go back.’
Aggie shook her head.
‘So you're going to live in a cardboard box.
I've seen them…that's no life.’
‘I thought I could get a job.
Rent a room.’
‘But no one will take you on.’
‘It's no good, I can't get work.
They want to know how old I am, where I live…’
‘Haven't you any family?
Uncles or Aunts.’
‘Uncle Michael in America, but he won't take me.’
‘Oh pet.
That's just awful.’
‘The other girls in the home make fun of me and steal my clothes.’
‘There must be a better way.’
Aggie thought for a few seconds, ‘You could come and stay with me.’
Kim shook her head from side to side,
‘They won't let me.’
Aggie laughed,
‘Just like they won't let you wander the streets.’
‘I don't have any money.
You can't keep me.’
Aggie had an answer,
‘I stopped working a few weeks ago.
Stair cleaning.
It's not easy, but you could do it.’
‘Oh Aggie!
It won't work.
They'll catch me and you'll be in trouble.’
‘So.
What will you do?’
Kim stared through the net curtain into the grey cloud filled sky.
She took a deep breath,
‘If I go back…can I come and visit you?’
‘Of course.
We're best friends now.’
Kim's face broke into a wide grin,
‘That would make all the difference.
Having someone.
There's no one just now.
I suppose the staff aren't too bad.
But it's not the same.’
Aggie smiled back at the excited teenager,
‘Having someone.
I like the sound of that…having someone.’
Inside her something stirred, something almost forgotten.
She felt more alive than she had for a long time.
She had an idea, ‘When you go back, say you bumped into an old friend of your Gran's.
Get them to call me up.
I'll give you my  address and phone number.
It's just a wee lie, it wont hurt anyone.
I'm good on the phone.
They'll believe me.’
Mitchell
The smell of rust and human misery soaked into Mitchell's consciousness.
He woke to the sound of Sweepers dragging rotting corpses along the corridor outside his hiding place.
He waited until the noises faded then pressed his face against the mesh of the air vent.
The Sweepers were gone.
Carefully he swung the grill aside and climbed down into the darkened corridor.
The overhead lighting that ran through the complex was seldom maintained at this depth.
A few emergency circuits gave off a faint glow.
The dirty floor was smeared with thin sticky black lines that Mitchell knew would shine red in stronger light.
He crept slowly towards the main corridors.
Guiding his actions was the plan.
The idea had come on him slowly, starting as an uneasy fleeting dream.
Gradually it had firmed itself, becoming a wish, then a possibility, then finally a sacred mission.
He knew now what he had to do.
The DEEP's, who once had an empire teeming with workers, were dying in their hundreds.
The machines that they had worked at were now idle, the section was in ruins.
It was a situation he could not tolerate.
He had to breach the Control Centre in TOP and break through the Outer Wall.
It was the only way the DEEP's would ever be free.
His lucky find, three days before, of food concentrate and a slug gun would give him the edge he needed.
He remembered when the changes had started.
When the barriers and checkpoints between the three sections had first appeared.
The names TOP, MID and DEEP had emerged from nowhere to become a part of the language.
As a young ‘MID’ Energy Technician he'd never questioned the creation of these artificial divisions.
When food got scarce, he'd taken the better paid job of a Sweeper.
His first tours in DEEP were simple.
The squad operated from a Personnel Carrier.
It lumbered its way up and down the ramp systems, infiltrating the DEEP living spaces.
They towed a big hopper into which the cadavers were dumped.
At first it was just the bodies that had been left in the corridors.
The DEEP's had been glad to trade their dead for food rations.
Then, when the food supply to DEEP stopped, the DEEP's began to resist them.
The corpses now had a greater value.
A value that few talked openly about.
Survival became the master of them all.
Finally, a new order came from TOP.
They were sent on ‘Gathering’ missions.
Shooting anything that moved, collecting every piece of human tissue.
The missions became deadly games of cat and mouse as they penetrated further into DEEP territory.
There was no such thing as a casualty, everything was gathered.
One day he was separated from his squad.
To survive he had to hide his uniform.
And in that instant, he realised he had become a DEEP.
He too would be hunted by the Sweepers.
To the rest of his team he was dead.
He survived a year amongst the misery before making his decision.
He would probably die in the attempt, but he knew of no one else capable of completing the task.
Getting back into MID was his first problem.
2
Mitchell watched from his hiding place as the Sweeper vehicle growled into view.
Its powerful headlights probing the grim hallway.
The turret gun chattered, disintegrating a makeshift  barrier of rubble.
The Carrier rolled forward, without slowing, its massive tyres crushing the last of the barricade.
As the hopper passed under him, Mitchell dropped from the ceiling into the human debris.
He dug into the corpses, covering himself.
Some were still warm.
The stench of blood and waste sickened him.
He had his uniform in a sealed pack securely strapped to his back.
He clenched his teeth fighting waves of nausea as the vehicle jostled its way up the ramps to the MID checkpoint.
After a cursory search the carrier was waved through.
Mitchell waited until they were well on the way to the processing plant before digging his way out and tumbling clear.
The routes the Sweepers used were restricted access, so he had little fear of detection.
Once in uniform he was safe.
MID had changed during his exile.
It was dirty.
It now reminded him of his first visit to DEEP.
With the shortage of food throughout the sections; how long would it be before the TOP's stopped the supply?
How long before they started harvesting the MID's with Sweeper squads?
His plan for penetrating TOP was simple.
The task was not.
The TOP's had one facility they shared with the MID's and DEEP's.
The Thermal Power line.
Energy was extracted from boreholes that ran through MID and DEEP into the depths of the planet.
He could use the service ducts to enter TOP.
It was several days later that he found himself rising through the complex of dripping wet catwalks and steps that ran around the Power line.
The air was hot, and the passage of steam through the massive pipes created a constant deep roar.
The occasional guard braved the discomfort for a few minutes before retiring to the cool of the corridors.
It was just a matter of moving carefully and keeping his eyes open.
3
He was unlucky.
as if in slow motion they both aimed and fired their weapons.
The simultaneous explosions echoed around the metal chamber.
Mitchell felt a crippling pain in his leg.
He tumbled back against the slick damp wall.
The shot that should have finished him never came.
He dragged himself to the faceless body.
Direct hit, headshot.
He hadn't lost it.
The running battles in DEEP had trained him well.
Mitchell packed and sealed his wound.
It would hold long enough.
He felt better now after the initial shock of being hit.
He ate food concentrate and drank stale metallic water.
He took the guard's uniform, it would allow him to move freely around the corridors of TOP.
It was a softer cloth, better fitting.
He climbed seemingly endless stairways leading him ever upward.
Then he was there.
Somehow he expected TOP to be different.
It was just like MID!
Maybe cleaner.
If anything was different, it was the faces.
They seemed calmer.
MID faces always wore a troubled expression, a population of depressives.
DEEP faces?
The few living ones he had seen held only despair.
He moved easily amongst the TOP's.
He felt like a predator.
He imagined opening up on these feeble wretches.
Their pathetic screams would be no different than those of the DEEP's, their blood just as red.
These were the people  that orchestrated the crimes, using the MID's as their henchmen.
But he had the mission.
Soon they would all be free.
He felt contempt for the soft lives of the TOP's.
Contempt for their lack of suspicion.
This would be easy.
4
Too easy, he realised as the metal panel dropped behind him.
‘Stand still!
Drop the gun!’
The voice cautioned.
He obeyed.
After a few seconds the panel in front of him rose up.
An old man, in a long grey tunic, looked him over.
He held a slug gun.
‘What have we here?’ said the old man.
Mitchell scanned the room.
Two technicians, the only other occupants, turned to stare at the intruder.
‘Mitchell.’
he replied.
‘You're from MID.’
the old man spat out his accusation.
‘Yes.’
‘What do you want in TOP?’
‘To move up.’
‘Nobody moves up.’
‘You'll need me if you want to keep the MID'S out.’
‘An interesting thought.’
The gun pointed steadily at Mitchell's chest.
He tried again,
‘I worked with the Sweepers.
I know about the food.’
‘Simple economics.’
the man sneered.
‘How long can it last?’ asked Mitchell.
‘Another hundred years.
More if we develop better processing methods.’
‘The MID's wont be as easy to deal with as the DEEP's.’
The old man's brow furrowed.
He hesitated before answering,
‘Maybe not…’
Mitchell lunged forward.
The sound of a neck snapping echoed around the room.
The techs froze with shock for the two heartbeats it took Mitchell to turn the old man's gun on them.
Acrid fumes from the gunfire drifted round the silent room.
Mitchell poised by the entrance ready to respond to any threat.
No one came.
Then he knew the complete arrogance of the TOP's. had never occurred to them that anyone would attempt to infiltrate the control room.
He found the panel that would open the way to escape.
In a few minutes he was ready.
5
The detonation blew a hole in the Outer Wall.
Water under tons of pressure collapsed into the undersea atomic shelter.
In minutes the last remnants of life on the planet were gone.
Proof perfect
Detective Inspector Tom Black pondered the crime notes in front of him.
A loud rap on his office door cut into his thoughts.
‘Come in.’ he called.
It was Sargeant Maxwell.
She shook a folder at him triumphantly.
‘Sir, I think we've got him!’
‘Sit down, tell me about it.’
He felt a quickening of his pulse.
Maybe Gina did have something.
Maybe this was the break they had been waiting for.
The tall woman strode to his desk and laid the folder open in front of him.
He was painfully aware of the proximity of her body as she leant over the desk.
‘First we took the description from the victim and compiled a videofit.’
Black looked at the composite, short dark curly hair, piercing eyes, and a narrow face.
Gina continued,
‘We circulated that, then started a search on known possibles, and the house to house.
We got a good response and came up with a group of suspects.
We started interviewing and eliminating, checking alibis , the usual procedure.
We had one suspect, Kevin Fox, who seemed a perfect match.
But his alibi stood up, He was with his girl-friend at the time of the crime.
Gina paused to draw breath, her voice barely hiding her excitement.
‘Then, this morning the girl-friend came in and said she wanted to change her statement.’
Gina stabbed the folder with her finger.
‘I think it's him.
His psychological profile is revealing, he was abandoned by his mother, brought up in care, he's been in and out of detention centre's and prison, there's a whole list of complaints against him from women for physical abuse.
He was married, his wife left him because of domestic violence.
She got help from the special unit, took out a court order to keep him away from her.
We were called in twice to enforce the order, he spent a weekend in Saughton the second time.’
Black scanned the remaining details,
‘What do you want to do now?’ he said.
‘Bring him back in for questioning, and run a DNA test.’
‘Of course, See if it matches the semen from the victim.’
‘Yes, and we could also try her on an identity parade, see if she can remember him.’
‘We might need a positive ID from her.
Will she do it?’
‘I've talked to the girl, Miranda Lewis, she's not keen, but I think I can bring her round.
She's getting stronger, and angrier every day.’
‘She's going to be OK then.’
Black was painfully aware of the silence that followed his last statement.
Gina identified strongly with the victim.
He knew the figures, the likelihood that she herself had been the victim of abuse was quite high.
‘Gina, I know rape is not just a physical assault, I know Miranda might never recover from the emotional damage, I am concerned for the girl.’
‘I'm sorry sir, I've had a tough time with this.
I should be able to do the job without getting involved, but when I met her and took her statement, it was awful.
I just started to hate the  man, I don't know what I would have done if I had walked out of the interview room and met him in the corridor.’
Black resisted the urge to touch her hand, to reassure her.
‘If you couldn't feel that, there would be something wrong with you.
But the job means you have to cope with it.
We need to get this man off the streets.
That way we protect the next Miranda Lewis.’
‘Thank you sir.
Will we bring him in?’
Black looked through the folder once more, then made his decision.
‘The sooner we get this scum banged away the better.’
It was four days later when Black called Sargent Maxwell back into his office.
In front of him sat two folders.
He sat her down opposite him,
‘There's a problem Gina.’
The woman's face clouded.
‘There can't be!
We've done everything right.
It's conclusive, we've got him in the area, the timing's right.
The tests match, description matches, it's him sir.’
Black picked up the loose pile of paper just faxed through from Glasgow,
‘Look at this.’
Gina started scanning the documents , then after a few seconds she gasped,
‘It can't be.’
She looked up at the blank expression on Inspector Black's face, then continued reading, ‘It's another match, the profile is almost identical.
Martin Dalton, Male, white, aged 32.
Brought up in care.
Trouble with the police.
History of violence against women.
Lorry driver, he was delivering in Edinburgh at the time of the rape.
I remember we passed his name on to Strathclyde.
He had a good alibi.
We dismissed him on their information.
What happened?’
‘His alibi fell through, so they picked him up and ran the DNA test, it's another match, statistically it can happen.’
‘That only leaves a positive ID from the victim.’
‘Can you get her in this morning for 11.00?’
‘Yes, she'll do it.’
‘Good, Fox is on remand in Saughton, I'll get him brought down for an ID parade, Strathclyde will bring Dalton through for us.
You look after the girl.
We'll get him,don't worry.’
Gina handed a cup of coffee to Miranda Lewis, a slight nervous girl.
The cup shook in her hand.
Gina gave her a reassuring smile,
‘He can't see you in here, just take your time, wait until all the men are lined up then have a good look at them.
If you recognise anyone then say the number that is above him on the wall.
That's all you have to do just now.’
‘Gina, I'm frightened.’
‘Oh pet.
Be strong, it's important we see this through.’
‘I know, but I can't seem to stop shaking.’
Just then Inspector Black came through the door into the viewing room,
‘We all right in here?’
Gina answered him,
‘Yes Sir.
Miranda this is Detective Inspector Black.’
The girl gave Black a weak smile, then turned to Gina and whispered,
‘He is nice.’
Black pretended not to overhear, but mused at the private world of women and the bond that had formed between the two.
He doubted whether a male officer could have managed to get Miranda to agree to the ID parade.
A uniformed officer stuck his head round the door,
‘We're ready to start sir.
We've got everyone here and Dalton's just arrived at the front desk.
He'll be down in a minute.’
‘Start lining them up then.’
‘Yes sir.’
The door closed, then Black turned to watch Miranda's face as the five men filed into the adjoining room.
As the second man, Fox, walked in she gasped, and pulled into the reassuring arms of Gina Maxwell.
They had been right all along.
He heard footsteps in the corridor outside the room, that would be Dalton.
Then a sixth man appeared at the door, a small strangled cry came from Miranda.
Gina exclaimed,
‘My god!’
Black peered at Fox and Dalton.
The two men were now staring fixedly at each other.
It was almost impossible to tell them apart.
Their hair was slightly different lengths and their clothes were different.
But other than that they were identical.
Miranda ID'd both of them, she was sure it was one of them, but not sure which.
Black sat in his office staring at a spider's web in the corner of the ceiling, Gina sat opposite uncomfortable in the silent painful atmosphere.
Black let out a sigh then produced a bottle of whisky from the bottom drawer of his desk.
‘Like one?’
Gina gave him a smile and nodded.
He poured a generous measure into a plastic cup then slid it over the top of the desk into her hand.
He lifted his own cup in mock salute,
‘Police Work.’
She grimaced then took a mouthful.
Black put the bottle away.
He came to a decision,
‘Sweat them both, keep them apart, act like it's conclusive.
I want a confession.’
It took two days to find out that neither man was going to admit to anything.
Two days to trace the history of twins separated at birth by the Social work department.
Black's office was becoming the common scene of both his and Gina's despair.
He had just finished talking to the Procurator Fiscal's office,
‘You know Gina, I've never felt so useless.
I know beyond a doubt that one of them did it.
If there was just one of them, we could go to court now, we'd get a conviction.
But because there's  two of them it won't stand up.’
Gina's face started to go red,
‘You mean we have to let them both go.’
‘Or we can charge them, and let a court try and sort it out.
But it just won't happen.’
‘We can't let them go!’
‘We don't have any choice.’
Gina jumped up from her chair, her voice rose with the rage inside her,
‘I can't face that girl, I can't tell her the sadistic bastard that raped her is going to be let loose.’
‘There's nothing we can do Gina, just calm down.’
‘I didn't join the police force for this.’
She pulled out her warrant card and slapped it on the desk then marched out of the office, slamming the door behind her.
A fine trail of dust dislodged from the door frame and drifted slowly to the ground.
Black's hand found the bottom drawer, and the bottle.
He was just about to pour himself a drink when the phone rang,
‘Black here.’
It was George Thompson from St Leonard's CID.
‘Tom, I might have something that can help you with the Lewis case.’
‘We need all the help we can get George.
What is it?’
‘We had a girl came in to report a rape, just got up enough courage to do it.
Same night, almost the same time as the Lewis girl, same description as you issued.
She took a lift from a lorry driver, he did it.’
‘Would she recognise him again?’
‘We showed her that videofit you issued, she said it was him, and she gave a good description of the lorry.
I'll send someone over to question your man Dalton.’
‘Thanks George I'll be back in touch.’
Black opened the two folders, and scanned the information.
Dalton was a lorry driver, Fox didn't even have a driving licence.
Black found Gina in the canteen.
He dropped her warrant card in front of her.
‘You'll need this when you charge Kevin Fox with the indecent assault and rape of Miranda Lewis.’
‘Sir?’
‘We got a break, you'll get your conviction.
Detective work is about a lot of things, mostly it's about not giving up.
My office in 10 minutes, I'll give you the details.’
The Delivery
‘I envy men that one thing.’
Karen's terse voice came from just forward of John.
He stood at the stern of the yacht with his back to her.
His arm wrapped around the wire backstay for balance.
A stream of urine struck the water leaving a phosphorescent trail on the surface.
This merged quickly with the rolling creamy wake.
‘Just this?’ he responded.
‘You know the hassle women have peeing on a boat.
You guys just whip it out and do it over the stern.’
The pressure in John's bladder subsided.
‘God I needed that.’
He sighed.
At least Karen had started talking to him again.
They'd stopped in Port Patrick harbour to wait for the tide.
Then argued about the wisdom of drinking before an overnight sail.
He and Gerry had gone to the pub, Karen stayed on the boat.
She hadn't spoken to him since leaving the harbour.
Karen held her watch to the backlight inside the compass.
It was 1.00am.
‘You're on the helm.
See you in three hours.’
Rolling watches, six hours on, three hours off.
John had just come on watch.
Gerry, who had three hours to go, was below deck making a cup of tea.
It was a clear night, the big racing yacht was sailing at a steady six knots over a calm sea.
A full moon and a glorious canopy of stars gave a clear view to the horizon.
They had three days to get the boat to the South Coast for Cowes Week.
John zipped up his waterproofs and turned towards Karen.
‘OK let me take it.’
He sat beside her, bracing his feet across the cockpit to avoid sliding on the tilted deck.
He passed his arm over the guardrail and settled into a comfortable position.
‘What's the heading?’ he asked.
‘210’
‘Anything to watch for?’
‘Just the Isle of Man!’
‘Funny!
No rocks or anything?’
‘No.
But we're just about to cross the shipping channel .
So keep an eye out.
The only thing I've seen is that light there.’
She pointed into the night, just on the edge of skyline was a tiny flickering spot of white.
‘Right.
Got it.
Karen…,’ he paused, she was staring forward avoiding his eyes.
Her mouth drawn into a thin line.
‘Karen I'm sorry we argued.’
She didn't answer.
John sighed again, ‘Sleep tight, see you at four.’
’ See
you later John.’
Karen climbed through the hatch and disappeared from view.
A few minutes passed then Gerry came up carrying two cups.
He offered one to John,
‘Milk, no sugar.’
he said.
‘Thanks.’
Gerry sat down, then looked around.
‘Nice night, forecast is for the wind to drop.
Did Karen show you the light?’
‘Yes, it's a long way off though.’
They both took a drink then Gerry spoke,
‘Shame we couldn't get anyone else for the delivery, these watches are murder.’
‘It's only for the one night.’
Gerry pointed at the steering gear.
‘No auto-pilot, that's a bloody nuisance.’
‘I don't mind, it's nice to get a shot at steering.’
‘Tell me that at three in the morning when you can't keep your eyes open.’
‘We'll be fine.’
They stopped speaking for a while, then Gerry offered to take the helm.
John took the empty cups down below and placed them quietly in the small sink.
He could hear Karen's regular breathing coming from a cot near the back.
He climbed the short steep ladder that led back onto the deck.
The wind had been dropping steadily.
John inspected the instruments along the top of the hatch cover, the speed was now three knots.
‘Gerry,don't you want the engine on?’
‘Tides carrying us, we're still making about four and a half knots over the ground.
I hate motoring unless I have to.’
‘Where's that ship?’
‘Over there.’
Gerry indicated the running lights of a small tanker.
It was almost directly in front of them but still a good distance away.
The wind dropped gradually over the next 20 minutes.
John checked the speed again, just over half a knot.
‘Sorry to disturb the peace Gerry.
We'll need the engine.
Better start it up.’
Gerry reached across, checked the gearchange was at neutral then turned the ignition key.
A series of loud clicks came from the diesel below deck, then silence.
Gerry cursed,’That's just what we need.’
He tried again.
This time there was one ominous clunk.
All the instruments, the mast head, bow, and stern lights went dark.
Karen appeared,
‘What's wrong?’
Gerry replied, ‘The winds dropped, the engine won't start and I think the batteries have gone dead!’
Karen climbed onto the deck, hastily pulling on a waterproof jacket.
‘Are we clear of that ship?’
John answered,
‘No, it's just off the bow.’
Karen strode to the back of the boat.
‘I'll take the helm, you two crank the engine by hand.’
She looked at the distance separating the two boats then added.
‘Better pass me up some white flares.’
John suddenly realised how serious things were.
‘Why don't we call them up on the radio…’
Karen gave him a withering look, then he realised his mistake,
‘Sorry…it runs off the battery doesn't it.’
Karen softened, ‘We should be OK.
They'll pick us up on radar from our reflector, but I like to be sure about these things.’
It was dark below deck.
Gerry looked out the toolkit.
John found a torch and shone it at the engine cowling.
It was a plywood box tucked behind the steps and underneath the cockpit floor.
‘How do we take it apart?’ said John.
Gerry held up a screwdriver.
‘There's about eight screws.’
John lit the top of the box and Gerry started working.
John thought for a few seconds,
‘What do you think happened, a short in the battery leads?’ he said.
‘No idea.
It was fine when we had it out two weeks ago.
The batteries are pretty new.’
‘Nothing happened between then and now?’
‘Mark did some basic maintenance, I think he checked the batteries then.’
‘Maybe he left the terminals loose?’
‘Check it then, there's another torch on the chart table.’
Karen called down from the cockpit,
‘How long before you can start it?’
Gerry called back,
‘Almost got the cover off, another two minutes.’
‘It's getting pretty close.
I don't think they've seen us.
I'm going to set off a flare.’
There was a small explosion and a flash from the flare as it curved into the air.
A white burning spot hung in the sky over the yacht.
John had gone forward to where the batteries were kept.
He inspected the terminals.
They were smeared with grease.
He checked the screws holding the caps in place.
They were tight, everything seemed fine.
Gerry had the engine cover off when he got back.
‘Hold the light for me,’ he said.
He handed the torch to John.
‘I'm going to pass a rope around the flywheel and spin the engine with it,’ He moved two small levers on top of the engine, ‘That's the decompressors, when the engine turns flick one of those back and it should start.’
Karen's voice came from above them,
‘Hurry it up!
If you can't start it soon we'll have to jump for it.’
Gerry tugged at the rope, the engine turned over.
John flicked the lever.
The engine coughed once then stalled.
Gerry prepared the rope for another try.
‘It's too confined, I cant get a decent pull.’
he said.
Karen shouted anxiously, ‘You two better get on deck, I've got the liferaft loose.’
Gerry called back,
‘Just one more try.’
He pulled the rope, again the engine coughed but it was no  good.
‘On deck both of you!’
Gerry threw the rope down in disgust,
‘Bloody useless place to put an engine.’
He grabbed a large plastic cylinder filled with flares and other survival gear then climbed out of the hatch.
John hesitated on the first step, he had an idea.
Karen called down,
‘John get out!’
‘Give me ten seconds!’
He rushed forward to the battery box, loosened the terminal caps and moved them from side to side.
The sound of another flare being fired punctuated the night.
John felt the hull of the yacht vibrating as the tanker approached.
Karen called again,
‘The navigation lights are on!’
‘Try the ignition!’ he shouted.
The terminals in front of John hissed and sparked.
A pungent metallic smoke filled the air.
Suddenly the engine kicked over then everything went dead again.
‘Lights are out again!’
John put his hands on the hot terminal caps and twisted them again.
The sound of another flare being fired carried into the yacht.
‘Try again!’ he shouted.
The caps sputtered and crackled.
The engine turned over slowly.
John ignored the heat building up under his hands and pressed down with all his weight.
With a loud roar, the engine started.
It rumbled noisily in the confined space.
John ran back and climbed onto the deck.
The yacht started to pick up speed.
Looming over them obscuring more than half the sky, the bow of the tanker swept by their stern, pushing a rolling black mound of water.
‘Christ that's close!’ shouted Gerry.
The yacht pitched forward as they slid down the bow wave.
The black rust streaked wall was barely 3 metres behind them.
They stood in fascinated awe as the immense panelled surface slid past.
After about fifteen seconds the stern appeared.
Under it, the blade tips of a massive propeller broke the surface in a hypnotic slow rhythm.
The yacht rocked violently from side to side as the ship's wake came under them.
Then it was gone.
Karen turned to John and slapped him firmly across the face,
‘You stupid prick,don't ever ignore me again!’
John's face stung from the blow, he was speechless.
Karen turned her back on him, her arms folded across her chest.
‘I sent up three flares.
Their watch must have been asleep!’
‘Should we report them?’ asked Gerry.
Karen shook her head,
‘No point, our lights were out for a long time, they'd just use that as an excuse.
Anyway did either of you see what it was called?
I didn't.’
She turned to face John,
‘What was wrong?’
John let out sigh,
‘That arse Mark used grease instead of vaseline on the battery terminals, the contact broke down.
There's nothing wrong with the batteries.’
Karen grimaced then looked at her wrist watch.
‘I've got another hour before I'm on, get the cover back on the engine so I can get some sleep.’
‘I'll sort that.’
said Gerry.
He stepped down into the cabin.
Karen handed the tiller to John.
He caught hold of her wrist.
She gave him a cold look.
‘Leave me alone!’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘You keep saying that.’
He pulled her to him,
‘Please hold me.’
At first Karen left her arms limp, then slowly they came up until she held him firmly around his back,
‘I don't want to lose you, dickhead!’
John was lost for words, Karen's head was buried in his shoulder.
He started to speak,
‘I'm…’
Karen hissed.’
don't say —
She looked up and they kissed.
A cough came from behind them,
‘That's the engine cover back on.’
Karen pulled out of John's arms then climbed down into the cabin.
He waited until she was out of earshot,
‘Some night!’
Gerry smiled, ‘We're OK, we coped.’
‘Just.’
‘Sometimes it's like that.
It's safer than driving on the road.’
‘Somehow I don't feel any better.’
‘Forget about it.’
John stared through gloom at Gerry, he was right.
‘We'll need to tighten the terminal caps.’
he said.
‘I'll get that.’
Gerry turned to leave, then over his shoulder he said.
’ Do you want a cuppa?’
‘Not just now.’
Gerry went into the cabin.
John stood for a few seconds contemplating the receding lights of the tanker, he dropped the revs on the engine then settled himself.
He glanced at the compass, they were about 15 degrees off course.
He corrected, then scanned the empty sea ahead of him.
It was going to be a long cold night.
Summertime
Peter glided easily to a gentle landing on the lush green lawn outside the ranch house.
The big white timber and stone structure nestled, half hidden, amongst mature oak and elm.
He stepped from the frail craft of gossamer thin nylon and fibreglass.
The ground was soft beneath him.
He closed his eyes and smelt the meadowy air, the scents of mown grass and wildflowers brought back a flood of happy childhood memories.
He felt alive.
All around him were the sounds of life; birds chattered in the trees, insects had their own conversations, off in the distance a dog was barking.
He felt a sense of anticipation as he set off towards the house.
As he got closer he could see that the flowerbeds at the front were awash with colour; yellows, reds, blues, whites.
Climbers had woven their way into the timber railings.
He stepped up onto the porch then felt a hand on his shoulder and a harsh voice assailed his ears,
‘Right you!
Out…you're banned.’
Intense nausea gripped Peter as the Virtuality Helmet was pulled from his head.
He was half dragged, half marched to the door of the shop before being ejected into the street.
He slipped on the damp pavement and tumbled to the ground.
He stood up unsteadily and looked around.
The dark suited security guard glowered at him from within the bright interior of the shop.
He wouldn't get back in there for a while.
A row of limp, blank faced figures sat in front of the windows, begging what they could from the steady stream of shoppers.
Poor bastards.
The wardens would be by soon, so they'd have to move on.
He positioned his face mask then pulled up his hood.
He gathered the draw chord tight to seal out the damp acid mist.
Unthinking, he started to cross the road, there was a squeal of brakes, then a bicycle slammed into his side.
The helmeted figure shouted at him through a face mask.
‘Watch it creep!’
He backed onto the pavement.
The cyclist gave him a parting kick as he pedalled off.
Peter flung him a two fingered salute,
‘Flash bastard!’ he shouted at the retreating back.
He hated the way the rich flaunted their possessions.
He walked to a crossing and pushed the button, the WAIT sign illuminated faintly from under layers of dirt and graffiti .
A sing-song voice announced,
‘Please wait to cross…
Please wait to cross…
Please…
’ After a time the traffic stopped and the green man shone bright against the sickly pale grey of the noonday sky.
‘You may cross now…
You may cross now…
You may…
’ Peter trotted past the row of cyclists , fearful of being caught in the middle.
Glowering faces muttered occasional threats,
‘Move it ass-wipe!’ and ‘Shift it moron!’were two of the more charming comments.
When he reached the south side of the road he pressed his face mask against the glass wall of the immense structure that ran the full length of the street.
Inside; trees, grass and flowers flourished under strong artificial sunlight.
Family groups sat on the grass eating picnics, a band played, couples danced.
He walked towards the entrance; a fancy airlock system over which a large illuminated sign flashed on and off.
SONY LEISURE GARDENS, Day Ticket — £80.00, Weekly Ticket — £450.00.
Peter felt in his pocket.
He had a couple of ten pound  coins, barely enough for a cup of tea.
He was about to walk on when he noticed a much older sign on the metal railings inside the glass, ‘Princes Street Gardens’.
Funny…he'd never heard of a company called ‘Princes Street’.
Arsonist
Colin stretched out his hand to touch the smoke blackened remains of a small electric fire.
‘Don't touch that!’ bellowed Smith, his superior.
Superior in years, but not in manner.
Smith was a painful blustering bully of a man whose only redeeming feature was that he knew his job.
Smith shook his head, ‘You idiot.
That circuit could still be live.’
Sure, thought Colin, he was right, it might still be live.
‘Of course.
Silly of me.’
He stood and turned towards the front of the house.
‘I'll check the fuse box.’
Smith bared yellow tar stained teeth, ‘Already did that.
But you never knew.’
Colin felt his jaw tighten.
It was no use arguing with Smith, he'd just have him dropped from the team.
Smith nudged the fire with his toe.
‘What do you see lad?’
Colin looked around.
It was a trick, it was always a trick.
‘It was accidental.
The fire started when that chair caught fire.’
‘And…?’ prompted Smith.
‘It spread through the house from here.
The smoke fumes overcame the old man and he died in his bed.’
‘Wrong!’ sneered Smith.
Colin felt the familiar nagging pain behind his forehead.
It would swell to a raging headache, just in time for him to finish his shift.
‘Well what did happen sir?’
This was the bit when Smith paced around humming ‘Danny Boy’ and sucking his gums, making small wet staccato kissing noises.
Sometimes he pulled out a hanky, as tar stained as his teeth, and trumpeted loudly into it.
Colin hated the way he inspected the rag before folding the contents into the centre and forcing it into his trouser pocket.
Smith obliged on all counts before announcing firmly,
‘It was Arson.’
If Smith said it was Arson, then that's what it was.
‘Arson sir?’
‘Arson lad.’
Colin fought back the inevitable question.
Smith was enjoying the moment.
Colin inspected the room looking for the clues, looking for the vital piece of information that would lead him to the same conclusion as Smith.
Smith started humming ‘Danny Boy’ again and rocked backwards and forwards on his immense black brogues.
Colin's headache was developing nicely.
Finally he broke,
‘How do you know sir?’
An almost maniacal glee filled Smith's deep grey eyes, his bushy eyebrows rose in triumph.
‘Elementary my dear Colin.’
Here it was, the ‘Coup de Gras’, the masterful insult, the obvious revealed.
‘Well?’ inquired Colin.
Smith bent over and lifted the remains of the TV cable and plug from the floor.
‘The old man always unplugged all his sockets before going to bed.
See,’ Smith gestured to the walls, ‘all the lamps, the radio, everything.’
Colin checked round the room, the only appliance plugged in was the fire.
Smith continued,
‘Check the switches.
I bet you'll find that he turned everything off as well.’
Colin squinted through the bar of pain across his forehead,
‘Yes I see now.’
Smith roared with laughter,
‘See.
You don't know where to start looking.
Ever thought of transferring?’
‘Ever thought of transferring.’
Smith nearly always finished their exchanges with that line.
Still…one day.
One day he would get it right.
One day he would pour petrol over that snot stained rag then stuff it into Smith's mouth and set fire to it.
He'd watch him dance around the room emitting stifled screams.
Finally the flame would engulf his head and he'd explode in a furious orange ball of flame.
Smith frowned,
‘You're looking a bit pale son.
Get some fresh air, have a break, get a bit of colour in your cheeks.’
Smith lit a cigarette and discarded the match amongst the debris.
Martin stared at the thin strand of smoke rising from the burnt end.
‘One day.’
he muttered.
‘Monday.
Good idea son.
Take the day off.
We won't miss you.’
Horror Story
Marlene was fuming!
How had Keith dared to talk to her like that?
It was supposed to be a romantic evening at a remote country pub.
Then he had started on again about getting married and giving up her job.
She felt angry just thinking about it.
She glanced across at Keith's jacket on the passenger seat.
A smug grin passed across her face — let's see how he manages without his wallet.
She pressed the accelerator and the sports car picked up speed.
The head-lamps flashed over bushes and trees lining the sides of the narrow winding lane.
She threw the car into each corner, savouring the feeling of control, the sound of the powerful engine fading into the calm winter's night.
Suddenly a small crate appeared in the centre of the road ahead of her.
She brought the car to a screeching halt.
The bumper struck the container and it fell over.
Marlene pulled on the hand-brake and took the engine out of gear.
Something had tumbled out of the box.
It rolled along the road coming to rest at the edge of the headlight beam.
Should she get out and take a look?
Her hands were shaking.
Marlene chastised herself; ‘I'm not a baby — I can look after myself.’
She swung the door open and stepped out into the cold air.
The box was empty.
What had been in it lay ahead of her.
She walked towards the object.
Her own shadow stretching ahead, making it hard to see it clearly.
As she got nearer, it looked more and more familiar.
It was a severed human head!
A wave of nausea swept over her, then she fainted.
Keith was frozen.
Marlene had stolen his jacket when he went to the loo, he had just enough money in his trousers to pay for the meal.
Finding the car park empty, he was too embarrassed to go back to the pub and ask for help.
The five mile walk back to town seemed more attractive.
Keith kept up a brisk pace, glad that it was a full moon.
After walking for about 20 minutes he saw two red pinpoints ahead of him, the tail-lights of a car.
Maybe he could hitch a lift.
As he got closer he recognised the vehicle.
It was Marlene's.
She was waiting for him.
When he got to the car the engine was running and a pall of acrid fumes gathered in the still air.
The driver's door hung open.
There was no one inside.
He peered into the woods which flanked the road,
‘Marlene!’ he called.
There was no answer, not even an echo.
He switched off the engine and took the keys from the ignition.
‘Marlene!’ he shouted, then quietly to himself, ‘Where has that silly bitch got to?’
He heard a sound behind him and turned towards it,
‘Marlene I'm really sorry about what…’
His words were cut short by a blinding flash in his head.
Keith fell to the ground unconscious.
Marlene woke to the sound of a heavy weight being dragged across the floor.
She was indoors, lying on a damp mattress , it was dark.
Then she remembered; the car, the box, the head, she sat up with  a start only to clatter back down again.
She was handcuffed to the bed.
She glimpsed a hunched figure dressed in rags.
‘Let me go!’ she shouted.
A rasping voice answered,
‘You'll shut your trap, or I'll cut your tongue out.’
A scream choked in Marlene's throat, she started to shake.
‘That's better, keep it shut!’
She craned to see what the man was dragging, it looked like a body.
There was a metallic clicking.
Handcuffs!
The small man waddled out of the room muttering under his breath,
‘It's very easy to lose your head in these situations.’
He laughed as the door closed.
The room was left in complete darkness.
Marlene called softly,
‘Hello.
Are you all right?’
There was no answer.
She moved her arms and legs, only her hands were restrained.
She pushed herself up into a sitting position.
Each wrist was held by a handcuff on the end of a length of chain.
She felt back along of the chains.
It was fitted to a ring bolted through the headboard.
The ring moved slightly.
She inspected the other chain, the ring on that side was firm.
So, one bolt was loose.
Maybe she could work it free?
A scraping noise startled her, and her heart beat furiously.
Someone moaned,
‘Aw…
My head.’
‘Keith?’ she hissed.
‘Marlene?
You didn't need to hit me that hard.’
‘Shush!
I never hit you, it was a dirty little man.’
‘Your not making sense.’
There was a rattle, ‘What's this.
Marlene!
I'm wearing handcuffs.’
‘Would you shut up!
I am as well.’
‘This isn't funny, let me go.’
‘I can't let you go.’
‘Stop mucking about, it's beyond a joke now.’
‘I'm glad I never agreed to marry you.
You're one of the stupidest people I know.’
‘Me stupid?
I offer you a nice house.
We could start a family.
I earn enough to keep us both.
You won't get a better offer!’
‘I don't want a better offer, I don't want any offer!
I'm happy the way things are!’
Before Keith could muster an answer the door swung open,
‘Keep the bloody noise down!
You don't know who you're dealing with.’
Keith shouted from his position on the ground,
‘Let me go and I'll show you who you're dealing with!’
‘You're too cocky for someone in your position ?
’ The man rushed into the room.
Marlene watched helplessly as he swung his foot at Keith.
There was a series of shouts and moans as blow after blow found Keith's body.
Marlene kept her mouth shut.
The little man turned and she caught his profile.
He had a beard and his forehead sloped back at a steep angle.
He walked towards her.
His breath stank when he brought his face close to hers,
‘You learn quick dearie.’
He left the room, slamming the door behind him.
Marlene waited for a few minutes before calling softly to Keith,
‘You OK?’
‘Who was that little creep?’ came his hoarse reply.
‘I don't know.
There was this box in the road.
I stopped.
Inside it was a human head.’
‘Oh god, it's like one of those slasher movies.
You know who he is don't you?’
‘No.’
‘It's Symms.
He escaped from a mental hospital a week ago.
He's a serial killer, he puts the head of his last victim onto the most recent.
Are you sure it was a head?’
‘I think so, but I fainted before I got really close.’
‘Typical, you would faint.’
‘Oh!
I didn't see you walking in here on your own.’
‘I was hit over the head.’
‘By him, he's half your size.’
‘At least he had to hit me, you just fell over.’
‘I didn't just fall over, I fainted.
I got a fright.
If you hadn't been so boring in the pub I wouldn't have left in such a temper!’
‘Oh!
So it's my fault now.
Symms the midget nutter had nothing to do with it?’
The door flew open crashing off the wall,
‘You two are driving me mad!’
‘Driving you mad!
You're off your head already!’ shouted Keith.
‘Shut up!
Shut up!
I can't stand your constant arguing.
Symms dragged a pick-axe handle into the room,
‘I can make you shut up!’
‘Come on then you little creep.
I'm ready for you this time.
Come on!’
Marlene stared in amazement,
‘That's one of the things I hate about you Keith.
Your bloody macho pig-headedness.’
Keith jerked and pulled at his handcuffs,
‘Marlene, I don't know why I ever wanted to marry you…’
Hysterical screams from Symms drowned out Keith's words,
‘Shut up!
Shut up!
Shut up!’
The small man hefted the shaft over his head and brought it down on Keith with the full force that his frame could muster.
Marlene shouted to Keith,
‘See!
Where did all that macho shit get you this time?’
There was no reply.
The ragged figure shook with fury, his breath wheezing in and out of his tiny frame.
He turned to her,
‘You just don't know when to stop!’
His voice rose to a bellow as he strode forward swinging the handle up in readiness.
‘Oh…
Get lost!’ she said.
as if in slow motion, she watched as the pale timber beam swung towards her, then her head exploded and there was darkness.
Marlene woke with a start, her whole body ached and she was freezing cold.
It was daylight.
She was slumped over the steering wheel of her car.
The bonnet was embedded in a stone wall.
Keith sat beside her.
He looked a mess, his face covered in bruises and dried blood.
She looked up into the smashed glass of the windscreen, something was trapped under the wiper blade.
She pushed against the door, it creaked open and she fell out onto  the damp grassy verge.
She pulled herself up to the level of the bonnet by hanging on to the wing mirror then snatched at a scrap of folded paper.
Clutching it firmly she fell to the ground her head spinning.
She placed the note in front of her eyes.
After a few seconds she focused on the crude childish characters,
GET MARRIED I CAN'T THINK OF A WORSE TORTURE S.
