‘The subject of Coleridge's poetry is nothing less than Creation itself.’
Discuss.
The theme of ‘Creation’ is everywhere in Coleridge's poetry and reflects the poet's ‘abstruser musings’; the spur to the theme is the poet's interest in the interface between the conscious and the subconscious minds of the human brain, and it is the product of these two elements meeting together that results in ‘Creation’.
The mingling of the two can be seen clearly in ‘Kubla Khan’, where ‘Alph, the sacred river, ran through caverns measureless to man down to a sunless sea’; here our conscious perception of the river is obscured as the river runs away from our field of view and begins to mingle with our subconscious creative side; critically, at this point in the poem the emphasis switches to the more ‘fantastic’ scenery of Xanadu, where we are informed of ‘incense-bearing trees’and similarly exotic imagery.
The very subject matter of ‘Kubla Khan’, Xanadu, is heavily connotated with creativity, since it was to be Kubla's invention, a mythical city based entirely on his own personal ideas, and to some extent, it can be seen as a product of his own imagination blended with the awesome power which he wields (needed in order to create such a setting).
Coleridge seems to be interested principally in two forms of creativity; both the type connected with the powers of our subconscious, as well as conventional creation as represented by nature itself.
In ‘Kubla Khan’ Coleridge draws our attention to the latter through his use of masculine and feminine imagery, in the ‘walls and towers’which were  ‘girdled’round the area of ‘fertile ground’.
The entire poem exudes creativity through its lush description; the richness of the language and imagery, such as the ‘deep romantic chasm’ conveys a picture to the reader of intense fertility and luxuriance.
Coleridge even dares to take on the subject of the workings of Nature, as it were, as he attempts to describe the power and intensity of the earth breathing; his reference to the ‘ceaseless turmoil seething, as if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing’ shows the poet getting almost as close to the heart of creativity as it is possible to do.
Constant references to nature throughout the poem such as‘Through wood and dale the sacred river ran’ complete this picture of the creative richness.
Yet the whole image of Xanadu is the poet's personal creation, as he connects the practical knowledge of nature that he holds in his conscious mind, with his less readily available powers of creativity which he stores in his subconscious mind.
The two elements are equally well reconciled in ‘Frost at Midnight’, where we are introduced to the workings of the ‘Spirit’ to a large degree; the very setting of the poem, where the poet finds that ‘at my side my cradled infant slumbers peacefully’suggests the power of creation; it is partly owing to the silent yet undeniable presence of the product of his own regeneration that allows Coleridge to ascend to the levels of ‘meditation with its strange and extreme silentness’.
In this poem, the poet attaches sublime importance to the creative powers of our subconscious, to the exclusion  perhaps, of all the logical and reasonable attitudes and ideas that normal society tries to inflict on us.
In the line ‘mine eye fixed with mock study on my swimming book’ the readers sees the contempt with which Coleridge treats the uncreative action of merely ‘learning’rather than discovering anything new.
As we are told by the idea that ‘the idling spirit by its own moods interprets, every where echo or mirror seeking of itself’ we realise the poet's argument that our subjective perception of an event is more important than the event itself; our creative response to an action is all-important, therefore.
The freedom of creation is equally important for Coleridge; as he remarks to his son, lying beside him, ‘but thou, my babe! shalt wander like a breeze’, is a further indication of the poet's personal response to his own ordered Christian upbringing, and the manner in which he wants his own offspring to be free in terms of imagination, and therefore have the freedom of creative thought.
God plays an important role in Coleridge's poetry, as a symbol of ultimate creativity; both ‘the creation’ in biblical terms, and the powers of creation with which we are all invested, are the result of the workings of the ‘Great Universal Teacher’, and so consequently the poet has tremendous respect for God, as he lets us think as we wish; ‘he shall mould thy spirit and by giving make it ask’, is a line that seems to sum  up Coleridge's views adequately.
The Subject of Coleridge's poetry is nothing less than Creativity itself.
Creativity certainly is the predominant theme in Coleridge's poetry.
However, to say that it is the subject is perhaps misleading.
Coleridge's treatment of the topic is so varied, and takes so many forms, that to merely cite ‘Creativity’ as the subject matter of the poetry is to limit the range of Coleridge's exploration.
One of the main ways in which Creativity is treated is in the form of Poetic Inspiration.
This is perhaps the most obvious aspect of the issue of Creativity in the poems, partly due to the fact that the matter is treated with particular clarity and vividness of imagery.
‘Kubla Khan’ is the clear choice for example.
The most memorable image in this poem is probably that of ‘Alph the sacred River’— which is the source of life for the gardens of the pleasure dome, and represents the fountain of inspiration for the poet.
This creativity is explored here in the sense of poetical creativity: the words of the poem describe themselves and their own genesis.
However, creativity is also explored in another, different, way in the poem.
The poet also touches on the subject of creativity in the sense of psychological fulfilment: the creation  of a complete consciousness.
Coleridge suggests that such mental creation can take place if the conscious and subconscious minds are combined, because only then can a mind truly understand itself and its own existence.
If the dark and impenetrable ‘caverns measureless to man’ can be penetrated, and recreated in air in the conscious mind (‘I would build that dome in air’), and made into ‘that sunny dome!
Those caves of ice!’, then true psychological fulfilment can be achieved and the milk of paradise can be drunk, in perfect self-awareness.
This theme of creativity — of synthesis through reconciliation of thesis and antithesis, of bringing together two sides of your nature — can also be seen in ‘Christabel’.
Here the unconscious mind takes the more specific form of Christabel's sexuality and sexual desires, which she has been taught by her upbringing to disregard, and even to suppress, seeing them as the dark and evil side of human nature.
The Creation is used as an image here, with Geraldine as the snake, who does not need to tempt Christabel, because she is really willing and eager to explore her sexuality.
Although she does not realise it, she is searching for enlightenment and encourages her fusion with Geraldine: ‘Christabel stretched forth her hand’.
Christabel does not achieve enlightenment  through this union because she becomes a slave to Geraldine, instead of her equal.
The balance has tipped too far in the other direction: instead of ignoring her sexuality, Christabel is now dominated by it, and so the creative process by which she should have been psychologically fulfilled has not worked.
Another way in which Coleridge addresses the subject of creativity is to look at the natural world in the context of the human mind's perception of it.
The natural world for Coleridge was a synthesised whole, and to a large extent he saw his poetic creativity as stemming from being in unison with his surroundings.
Therefore he strove to understand nature, and had ‘The habit of wishing to discover the good and the Beautiful in all that meets and surrounds me’, thereby becoming in touch with‘plastic and vast, one intellectual breeze, At once the soul of each, and God of All’.
The way to achieve this union, for Coleridge, was to expand the mind beyond its own individual state, so that it was able to incorporate its surroundings into its considerations, thus achieving a greater understanding of the general nature of its existence.
Sheer mental power was the ability which Coleridge possessed which enabled him to accomplish this feat, as he does in ‘Frost at Midnight’, when, sitting in his cottage he takes in the ‘Sea, hill, and wood This populous village!…with all the numberless goings on of life.’
In this poem Coleridge is clearly better able to understand his own mind by putting it in such a context, and, as in ‘This lime tree Bower my Prison’ such intimate understanding of his surroundings enables him to produce incredibly vivid Wordsworthian description of scene.
Creativity for Coleridge does not come from education in the ordinary sense, ‘In the great city, pent mid cloisters dim’, but from a heightened sense of awareness.
Essentially, creativity, as Coleridge sees it, comes down to the ability to perceive the whole picture.
Not only is it necessary to perceive an entire picture of yourself, but it is also necessary to see yourself in the context of your natural surroundings.
Coleridge uses his poetic creativity to achieve his end, questioning, exploring and explaining.
The subject of Coleridge's poetry is nothing less than creativity itself.
Coleridge was in many ways far ahead of his time.
In his understanding of the unconscious mind, pre-dating Freud, and in his willingness to challenge conventional Christian doctrines his thinking was advanced.
So Coleridge had no scruples about challenging the doctrine of the Creation.
In ‘Frost at Midnight’ he puts forward the notion that we are God.
The line ‘My cradled infant slumbers peacefully’, has clear Christian connotations.
The Christian theme occurs right from the first line with the word ‘ministry’ and the hidden word ‘spirit’.
‘The fro s t p erforms i ts sec r et ministry.’
But it is ‘unhelped by any wind’.
In Christian doctrine the wind is a metaphor for the Holy Spirit.
So Coleridge is denying a strong element of Christian theology.
Instead there is another spirit which he mentions.
When he sees the film fluttering on the gate, suggesting something light and insubstantial in a physical sense he thinks
‘Methinks its motion in this hush of nature Gives it dim sympathies with me who live  Making it a companionable form, Whose puny flaps and freaks the idling spirit By its own moods interprets, everywhere Echo or mirror seeking of itself, And makes a toy of Thought.
Coleridge in his state of enhanced perception feels himself part of nature.
This is because he in a sense is God's.
The idling spirit is perhaps the mind contemplating itself.
This is not just about the creation in a religious sense but Coleridge's own creative writing.
If Coleridge is God then his writing is his creation.
This poem represents mankind elevated to the highest possible status.
‘Kubla Khan’ is in some ways directly opposite to it.
Far from calling himself a god he admits his own inadequacies — he cannot rebuild the dome, he cannot claim to have fed on honey-dew and drunk the Milk of paradise.
The sense in which he has created it — by writing the poem — is acknowledged to be simply vicarious pleasure.
Writing is in fact, contrary to what he suggested in ‘Frost at Midnight’ a pretty second-rate creation.
Whilst ‘Kubla Khan’ may delight us it does not delight Coleridge, who has seem the real thing.
The Christian references of ‘Frost at Midnight’ occur in ‘Kubla Khan’too.
The dome is described as a ‘miracle’ and Coleridge speaks about the ‘Milk of Paradise’.
Coleridge is not God for he cannot perform this miracle and he cannot drink in paradise.
Xanadu is a place of creation.
And from this chasm with ceaseless turmoil seething, as if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing, A mighty fountain momently was forced.
The idea of a fountain as a metaphor for creativity occurs elsewhere in Coleridge in his preface to Christabel.
But Coleridge cannot recreate even the dome, which represents what is created, let alone recreate this state of primeval creativity.
Coleridge is offered a glimpse of the power of what true creation is like.
The huge fragments of rock are like ‘chaffy grain beneath the threshing flail’.
Coleridge's inability to explain the dome leads him to try and carry the damsel with a dulcimer.
But that too he is unable to do.
The singing damsel, like the earth is a creator, superior to Coleridge because he is merely trying to recreate rather than create.
‘Kubla Khan’ does not totally reverse ‘Frost at Midnight’!
Both Kubla and the Abyssinian maid are human creations so in a sense they are God — but Coleridge's hubris in wanting to be God himself is doomed to failure.
‘The subject of Coleridge's poetry is nothing less than creation itself’
In Kubla Khan , Coleridge synthesises two elements of his poetry.
His appreciation for nature, its beauty and splendour is still evident, but more remarkable is the power of the poetry, especially towards the end of the poem.
This power, while it is comfortable in the context of this poem sits uneasily with the images of nature and creative forces proposed in the Eolian harp, This Lime Tree Bower My Prison and Frost at Midnight .
The sense of solitude and peace that surrounds these poems, where Coleridge is either alone, or with his sleeping baby or wife, in comfortable instances of reflection, and finally harmony, rests in contradiction with not only the vitality but more importantly the terrifying power that Kubla Khan possesses.
Frost at Midnight , while certainly not explicitly Christian, has tones of Christian sympathy.
The importance of the child (which is his own creation) is significant in the essence of hopefulness that is communicated in lines such as: ‘Therefore all seasons shall be sweet to thee’.
What seems to be of primary importance is the gentleness not only of the scene, but of the forces that surround the child, and himself.
He remembers his lonely school days, in assured manner that his son will not grow up in the same way.
The poem is trusting and paternal, and it from these feelings of reassured security that Coleridge is able to write, to create, a poem of such undeniable calm and peace.
His hopes are set, as ever in the context of the whole — his seas, hill and woods, and mossy apple trees — but his emotions are very specific to the time and place, and environment in which he writes.
As can be seen, while he is almost habitually hopeful and finally optimistic, he is not always so re-assured, and tranquil in his other poems.
Kubla Khan possesses a great deal of the confidence of Frost at Midnight , but lacks its tranquillity, not only are the creative forces violent:
A mighty fountain momently was forced Amid whose swift half-intermitted burst Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail or chaffy grain beneath the thresher's flail.
but the ending of the poem instead of being ‘the frost performs its secret ministry’ is awash with images of extreme human power and intensity.
There is nothing more intense than the cries of ‘Beware!’,
‘His flashing eyes, his floating hair’ and ‘close your eyes with holy dread’.
Coleridge has transformed himself, from his former quietness, to an aggressive god, that has the might to see everything, and his everything is so terrible that it would be best to hide your eyes in awe.
Clearly there is a distinct problem, not so much in the poems, but in the fact that they were written by the same man, they present so clearly different opinions of nature and the role of man, and his enlightenment.
One feeds on honey dew and drinks the milk of Paradise, while the other is moulded by the Great Universal Teacher, who shall make the spirit ask.
Such a clear disparity is partially explained by Coleridge's haphazard method of writing, of his ideas.
Unlike more organised writers he might perhaps more easily fall into contradiction, but it seems more likely, or at least more satisfactory, to suppose that Coleridge was fashioned greatly by his environment when writing.
In essence, what makes Coleridge peculiar is that he was able to write, to create, from several different motives.
While one was clearly a blissful solitude and quiet, he wrote also from excitement and energy, fear and disillusionment.
As historians are very  much writing as the product of their times, Coleridge as the poet wrote poetry very immediately as the result of his state at that particular time.
While this gives great diversity to his work, something that Wordsworth would not be able to achieve, it means that it is quite conceivably contradictory when viewed as a whole.
Creation is an area that will come under strong attack from different sides of Coleridge's character, if this is indeed the case, because the act of creation is involved intrinsically in every poem that is written.
Coleridge's moods are most accurately grouped around his need for love,
To be beloved is all I need And whom I love, I love indeed.
Coleridge required love, as the final lines of the agonizing The Pains of Sleep remind him.
It's a theme that returns increasingly to his later poetry.
He seems increasingly to distrust the idealistic visions of humanity that typify his early works.
His nature, which it might be argued he turned into Nature, always desired love and recognition, in a way that most of us do, but it seemed increasingly the environment in which he lived, and more especially the people which he met, denied him that.
While it was there he was happy and tranquil, and while it was not he was agonized and sad.
Kubla Khan and Frost at Midnight represent the more positive sides of Coleridge.
They capture in two separate and distinct ways, Coleridge's perception of his recollective powers and identification with nature.
There is a simple sense that Coleridge is happy to write them, that although Kubla Khan has its savage side, it is a savage side in which he revels and although Frost at Midnight carries lonely memories (particularly bitter to someone so desperate for love) he overcomes them and thinks upon a happy future instead.
In these poems, and others  already mentioned, creation plays an important part.
This can only be due to Coleridge's awareness and heightened sensitivity at these moments, which cause him ponder on his very means of creation and that of the emotions that cause him to write, which are therefore in a positive sense creative forces.
However, Coleridge's poems are not all so vibrant or meditative.
There is a strain that is deeply perplexing.
It is evident in the images of Kubla Khan , in The Rime of the Ancient Mariner , and in many of his later poems such as The Pains of Sleep, Youth and Age and Duty Surviving Self-Love .
Coleridge is not bitter, and not self-pitying, but certainly confused and disillusioned.
There are no lofty mentions here about creation:
But yester-night I prayed aloud
In anguish and in agony,
Up-starting from the fiendish crowd
of shapes and thoughts that tortured me.
The Pains of Sleep has an unrelenting quality of nightmare.
Although at the end of the first stanza, Coleridge still puts faith in ‘Eternal strength and wisdom’ which are everywhere around us, and this might indeed correlate with the vast intellectual breeze, and Spirit, of earlier poems.
Coleridge is more preoccupied by his own terrifying visions.
This degree of self-inflicted pain, which might be something to do with his opium, clearly though is starting to challenge his conceptions about himself, and therefore about the world.
Within this poem he clearly attempts to square on the one hand the darker representations of his sleep with his pansocratic visions, on the other hand,Pains of Sleep which was published at the same time as Kubla Khan illuminates the ancestral voices prophesying war.
War is in fact something about which Coleridge mentions quite a bit in the long poem  Fears in Solitude , and from this we know his opinions on the whole affair are quite unfortunate:
We send our mandates for the certain death of thousands and ten thousands!
Boys and girls, And women that would groan to see a child Pull off an insect's leg, all read of war The best amusement of our morning meal!
Clearly then, while the ancestral voices prophesying war indicates something revealing of Kubla Khan, and ultimately Coleridge's psyche, this is not a facet of himself that Coleridge would consciously revel in, as the utter wretchedness of the Pains of Sleep , bears witness to.
This conflict is evident in earlier poems too, the Fears of Solitude , being one, written in 1798, and the Rime of the Ancient Mariner being another.
In both these there is a struggle between two opposing forces, between the mariner's evil deed, and the need for penance, which provides the contrast between futility and lack of concern with which the mariner kills the albatross, rather evidently portraying what might in simple moralistic terms be defined as evil, and the desire to make amends for this wrongdoing.
In the context of Coleridge this translates into the struggle between the emergence of his less amenable side, with his simple need for and love of people, which always included himself.
The Fears of Solitude more accurately represents his disillusionment with other people, which he clearly felt towards the end of his life.
It is on the whole optionistic, taking the viewpoint gloomy as it is, and placing his generosity in the light of the hope of a better future:
We have drunk up, demure as at a grace, Pollutions from the brimming cup of wealth; Contemptuous of all honourable rule, Yet bartering freedom and the poor man's life.
Kubla Khan represents a strange moment in this decline, a moment in which Coleridge is fantastically aware of the power of his mind, and yet is not depressed by its imagery.
It is on one level a time of transition between one set of viewpoints, and the gradual emergence of another, if you like, the conscious pantisocracy and the unconscious ‘shapes and thoughts’, but it is a moment at which the two not only meet, as the river Alph becomes a fountain, but merge and seem not only to contradict but support one another.
At such a moment, creation is of the utmost importance, and is central to everything, so strong must have been the mingling of emotions.
However, in the long run, of the poetry of Coleridge, his concern for the condition of humanity would seem to be the most vital concern, of both himself, of those around him, and of the nation.
Coleridge had after all an interest in the maintenance of this humanity, for without it he seemed unable to regain those peaceful days represented in Frost at Midnight .
‘The subject of Coleridge's poetry is nothing less than creativity itself’.
In ‘Kubla Khan’, Coleridge vividly imagines and describes a ‘stately pleasure-dome’ of enormous conception, which is situated at the point where the sacred river delves underground into a savage and huge network of caves ‘measureless to man’.
In the first stanza Coleridge gives a rhythmically measured description of this ‘fertile ground’ which seems so ordered and unthreatening.
This dome is a wonder of man's sheer boldness in creativity and a product of the awe-inspiring Kubla Khan, but it also functions as a metaphor for the conscious mind.
The mind is also ‘girdled round’ in a literal sense, and like the interior of the dome is composed of different areas, ‘gardens bright’, and connected by flowing liquid.
Coleridge recognises the power and excitement of this world, but it is in the second stanza, when he delves into the folds of this metaphorical brain that we see him striving to express the very essence of creativity.
This world of the unconscious mind, beneath the surface of the pleasure-dome is at once ferocious and sacred:
A savage place! as holy and enchanted As e'er beneath a waning moon was haunted By woman wailing for her demon-lover!
Coleridge closes in even further into this world, until we reach the pulsating core of creativity itself.
The process is magnificent, but also painful: the earth itself seems to be in labour, giving birth to creation:
And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething, as if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing, A mighty fountain momently was forced.
This fountain, perhaps of ‘the milk of Paradise’, is only produced with a vast effort: the process of creation is very difficult.
However, the reaction it causes is explosive and powerful, but also dangerous.
It is worthy of the ‘holy dread’ at the end of the poem.
Coleridge's vision of the ‘Abyssinian maid’ shows another perspective on the same ideas of creativity.
The simplicity and beauty of her ‘symphony and song’ personifies inspiration itself, urging Coleridge on:
To such a deep delight ‘twould win me, That with music loud and long.
I would build that dome in air, That sunny dome! those caves of ice!
At the end of the poem Coleridge see himself almost as a shamanic figure who has returned from a prophetic trance, someone whose duty is to spread ‘the milk of Paradise’.
In ‘Frost at Midnight’ we are immediately intrigued by the ‘secret ministry’of the frost, an act of creation which is unseen and unseeable.
Coleridge's silence and solitude gives him an immediate affinity with this frost, and his work of meditation is also an unseen action.
Both acts seem to be manifestations of the unconscious.
We see a reversal of the role of consciousness and unconsciousness then in the first stanza, where the real conscious world slips into the background allowing this world of subliminality to predominate:
…
Sea, and hill, and wood, With all the numberless goings-on of life, Inaudible as dreams!
The fire seems to symbolise the flickering spirit of creativity which literally inspires Coleridge.
This spirit emanates from the unconscious, making conventionally ordered and superficial thinking ‘a toy’.
His baby sleeping in a cradle, like Jesus, is another manifestation of the unconscious.
The babe, emanating from life itself, is the ultimate symbol of creativity, and the description of this small-scale version of unconscious creation is very reminiscent of the description of the ‘chasm’ in ‘Kubla Khan’:
Whose gentle breathings, heard in this deep calm, Fill up the interspersed vacancies And momentary pauses of the thought!
The spirit which inspires Coleridge, is the ‘eternal language’ of God, and all life is infused with it.
By this implication, Coleridge becomes God, as does his child become the son of God.
The ‘trances of the blast’ once again, as in Kubla Khan, are reminiscent of the shaman, and once again the poem is an examination and celebration of these ‘trances’.
‘The subject of Coleridge's poetry is nothing less than creativity itself’
Weave a circle round him thrice And close your eyes with holy dread For he on honey-dew hath fed.
And drunk the milk of Paradise.
The last four lines of Kubla Khan are a dazzling testament to the power of the poet to address the most fundamental and intangible aspects of our lives, to retrieve the most powerful secrets of our existence from the depths of the subconscious and ultimately to convey their force and meaning to those willing to receive them.
But Kubla Khan does not merely illustrate this creative power.
More than this, it not only exemplifies but portrays artistic creativity in a stunning exposure of the human mind and its elaborate yet primal mechanism of imagination.
Coleridge depicts ‘a stately pleasure-dome’ set on the banks of a river ‘girdled’with ‘walls and towers’, with ‘gardens bright with sinuous rills’, forests, fertile ground and ‘sunny spots of greenery’.
Entwined in the language of his description, however, are a number of elements of more profound resonance.
The river is ‘sacred’, the trees ‘incense-bearing’, the forests ‘ancient as the hills’, together with the exoticism of Xanadu, these words combine to lend an uneasy sense of overbearing power to the scene, an uncomfortable mist of the religious and the natural.
Furthermore the ‘forests…/Enfolding sunny spots of greenery’ must be viewed from overhead and the distant perspective of a soaring overview of this uninhabited realm of the ‘bright’and distinct, and the blossoming and suffused creates a mysterious  expanse of visionary symbolism.
Its significance becomes apparent in the second stanza:
But oh! that deep romantic chasm which slanted Down the green hill athwart a cedarn cover!
The perspective of the poem follows its language, tumbling suddenly into a burst of passion and emotion as the poet struggles to observe the forces that buffet him in the heart of his mind.
The deep conflicts are apparent in the description of this ‘savage place!…holy and enchanted’.
Here, the Christian and the pagan meet, at the nexus of the wild and the refined, of Good and Evil, of love and hatred (‘woman wailing for her demon-lover’), of growth (‘the green hill’) and decline (‘a waning moon’).
Behind all these images, and particularly in the reference to the moon, lies a constant process of birth and death, creativity and destruction.
As the heartbeat of the iambic metre draws the poet smoothly through the swell of impressions, its continuity is further expressed as a ‘ceaseless turmoil’.
The disturbing imagery of ‘seething’ and ‘in fast thick pants…breathing’is balanced by the calm and purity of ‘a mighty fountain’.
This process is beyond definition as some wild animal, writhing in a fiery abyss, spitting out its ugly secretions or even as a ‘fount of pure delight’.
Its scale is discarded between ‘huge fragments’ and ‘chaffy grain’, and man's influence is denied (‘like rebounding hail’) and yet acknowledged (‘the thresher's flail’).
Time is condensed into a moment and unleashed to infinity (‘at once and ever…momently’).
From this burst of ‘dancing rocks’ and hopeless poetic expressions issues an amazing calm:
Five miles meandering with a mazy motion Through wood and dale the sacred river ran, Then reached the caverns measureless to man.
All the nervous, frantic recollections of this revelation are now released and the poet drifts along with its harmony, in the aftermath of his realisation.
One way of perceiving this progression is as the struggle of the poet to come to terms with the nature of creativity, drawing on all that he sees in the imagery of lines 12–22 until the attainment of maturity in the ‘momently’ of line 24, when he reaches a state of oneness with his environment and is free to channel its flow into works of art.
But in the repetition of ‘caverns measureless to man’, Coleridge hints at a greater understanding.
At this moment of consummation (and the image is surely sexual as well), and in the time of relief following, the poet gives up his struggle and allows the ‘sacred river’ to draw him to its ‘lifeless’conclusion: to struggle for control in the river is to be controlled by it.
For, in the act of creativity, struggle and conflict are necessary elements instilled in all that is created.
Man fights to understand the power that reigns over him but this fight is itself subject to that power.
And more specifically, in this poem, the artist's act of creativity is not some ‘victory’, wresting beauteous elements out of the mire of the sub-conscious, but it occurs in instants of astute resignation, ‘wise and abandoned’ in Ian McEwan's words, when the eternal act of creativity is acknowledged and the mind released to the currents of its progress.
And mid this tumult Kubla heard from far Ancestral voices prophesying war!
Inevitably, the balance is restored after the exquisiteness of the poet's revelation.
Yet unlike before, there now appears a certain majesty in the cries of so-called ‘Evil’.
War is in some sense a feature of life that loses its distinction as an element of malice.
Stronger than its danger, there arises out of the couplet a sense of the nobility of man, and a grand magnitude that lies throughout the passage of time and whose power, when harnessed, as now by the poet, renders all things glorious and reassuring.
‘The shadow of the dome of pleasure’ flashes past on the waves like a sequence of film, while the poet reflects on what he has seen previously, the only thing now remaining being the sense of wonder amidst the conciliation of paradox and the momentary solution of metaphysical inquiry:
It was a miracle of rare device, A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice!
From this, Coleridge retires from the heart of his vision, from the underground caverns of his mind, as it were, to the bright, fresh air of Mount Abora in reality.
The singing of the Abyssinian maid is soothing after the pressures of introspection.
Then suddenly, we are drawn along with the poet into a new and wonderful realisation.
The poetry above was no mere dream to be forgotten after the moment of its conception (or the requirements of an appointment, as some have claimed!).
It lives on as a reality which the poet seeks to ‘revive within’ him, to reconstruct  the state of mind of the removed passion of the last four lines and the effortless delight of the first two stanzas.
To what extent can Blanch DuBois be described as a ‘victim’ in A Streetcar Named Desire?
Blanche DuBois arrives at Stella's and Stanley's house under very mysterious circumstances.
She is a teacher and has managed to get out of school early and does not tell us why she has left.
Blanche pretends to be shocked by the surroundings that Stella is living in with her husband, when she arrives.
She likes to think of herself as coming from a higher social class.
It is therefore quite ironic that when she wants to influence Eunice she cannot.
She even pretends that she has higher principles than many of the other characters in the play:
Eunice: Well, why don't you just go and make yourself at home till they get back?
Blanche: How could I — do that?
Eunice: We own this place so I can let you in.
Blanche pretends to be so well brought up that she cannot go in.
Eunice's false understanding of the situation adds light humour to the first scenes although we realise that Blanche is trying to already make herself out as someone better than everyone else in the play.
The reality is that she is not.
Tennessee Williams gives her character an ironic twist by calling her ‘Blanche’.
We realise that as the play develops she is not as ‘white’ and good as she wants us to believe.
Almost at once, Williams focuses on the fact that Blanche is not in perfect health.
We are forced immediately to see that Blanche is addicted to alcohol.
It is not the fact that as soon as she arrives she wants a drink which makes her alcoholic, it is the fact that she pretends that she hasn't already had one by replacing ‘the bottle’ and by washing ‘out the tumbler at the sink’.
Stanley is described as a ‘richly feathered male bird among hens’.
The first meeting with Stanley is not a good one for Blanche.
She has put off the meeting with him and it is not surprising that the two different characters clash.
We understand the basic nature of Stanley.
He is a very ‘real’ person who at times seems slightly brash but basically honest.
This is the complete opposite to Blanche who likes to live in a ‘dream’ world.
Stanley is obviously worried when Blanche arrives as he wonders what will happen to his sex life and his relationship with Stella:
Stanley: What do you teach, Blanche?
Blanche: English.
Stanley: I was never a very good English student.
How long are you here for Blanche?
Blanche: I — don't know yet.
Already we can see that there will be a conflict between the two protagonists.
Stanley is very confrontational with Blanche and slightly rude.
The ‘gaudy seed bearer’ will have his sex life disrupted by Blanche living with them in such a small flat.
He obviously must be quite annoyed about the fact that Blanche is moving in, so he even confronts her and asks her how long she is going to stay.
Blanche is overawed by Stanley and is, perhaps, slightly afraid of him.
Blanche needs to shelter from the experience her husband made on her.
Stanley is a very strong character who does offer her a temporary home.
She does have a fetish for young, strong men and this is exactly what Stanley is.
This is why she flirts with him.
By the end of the first scene Blanche has had her first ‘flashback’ to the Casino, where her husband killed himself.
This is the first time we actually feel sympathy for Blanche because she is so upset by the death of her husband.
She is actually physically sick by her revulsion at her thought that she killed her husband.
She felt that in his time of need she left him and this is what causes her sense of guilt, not her husband's death.
Stella tries to look after her sister showering her with compliements to try to get Stanley to ‘understand her and be nice to her.’
This does not work.
Stanley sees through her facade and sees her as a threat to his marriage, and his affection for Stella.
Blanche lives in a fake and unreal world.
It is full of lies and it is this that leads to disaster for Blanche.
She tries to manipulate people and succeeds with Mitch but cannot manipulate the others.
When Blanche's trunk has arrived Stanley looks through it to try to prove to Stella that Blanche has sold Belle Reve and bought herself pearls and diamonds and a huge selection of clothes.
Stella goes outside because she is annoyed at such a suggestion.
As she does so Blanche comes out of the bathroom, and flirts with Stanley.
She gets him to give her a cigarette, after she has asked to have a ‘drag’ on his: This in itself seems quite suggestive.
She also gets him to do up her buttons on her dress.
Later she sprays him with an atomiser.
It is not surprising, therefore, that Stanley ‘gets ideas’ about Blanche.
Stanley is obviously worried that his wife has been cheated over the sale of Belle Reve.
Under the Napoleonic code, whatever belongs to the wife, also belongs to the husband.
Blanche seems fascinated by Stanley.
He offers himself as a strong figure and also a young one.
This is what Blanche finds  difficult to resist but, not one that Blanche can rely on.
Stanley is the opposite to Mitch and an ideal choice for her needs.
Blanche realises that she is becoming old and seeks someone who can offer her stability.
Mitch seems to be the ideal person for offering her this but Blanche knows that she will have to lie about her past to gain his affection.
She will therefore have to exploit Mitch.
Blanche does, though, feel great affinity towards Mitch as he has suffered a great loss like Blanche's, but unlike her he has managed to rebuild his life.
Mitch offers Blanche an escape from a life which she is trapped in.
He is also someone whom she hopes to shelter under:
Blanche: I want to rest !
I want to breathe quietly again!
Yes — I want Mitch…very badly !
She desperately needs security not love and this is what Mitch offers her and the young men whom she likes so much do not.
The world seems cruel and unsympathetic to her and Mitch would help her.
Blanche feels that the only way that she will be able to marry Mitch is if he looks on her as someone still young.
This is why she likes to have all the compliments — it makes her feel young.
This gives a double meaning to Blanche's hatred of naked light.
She needs to hide from reality but she also doesn't want Mitch to see how old she is and the truth that she is hiding from:
Blanche: I can't stand a naked light bulb, any more than I can a rude remark or a vulgar action.
Obviously this is untrue — it is not the naked light that Blanche can not stand, it is the truth.
She likes to cover up the truth like she covers over the naked light.
No one has turned against her until she threatens to break up Stanley and Stella's marriage.
After this declaration, one of the protagonists must go.
It is not until Stanley overhears that Blanche has been calling Stanley ‘an animal’ that he decides that he will have to destroy her to save their marriage.
Blanche's past exploits in Laurel makes her easy to destroy for Stanley — Blanche was, in effect a prostitute.
Stanley can see through Blanche's lies and deception but what annoys him is the pretence that Blanche puts on pretending to be better than him and taunting him by calling him a ‘Polak’.
Although we do feel sympathy for Blanche she seems to wallow in her self pity.
She looks for no way to comfort herself except by degrading herself by having sex.
Conversely, it is easy to see how Blanche brings her problems on herself.
By precisely wallowing in her own guilt and self pity she then needs to heighten her self esteem.
She does this by ‘chatting up’ men.
She is a predator for sex who is  extremely keen on young men.
She has previously been sacked from one of her schools because she slept with her pupils.
This image is completely different to the image that is presented to Mitch, who looks on Blanche as a true ‘lady’:(Mitch has tried to embrace her —)
Blanche: I guess it is just that I have — old-fashioned ideals!
(she rolls her eyes, knowing that he cannot see her face.)
It is blatantly obvious here that Mitch has been taken in by Blanche's deception.
She does not love Mitch and is using him.
He is, however, the person who she opens her heart to about her previous marriage:
Blanche: Then I found him.
In the worst of all possible ways.
By coming into a room that I thought was empty — which wasn't empty, but had two people in it…
The fact that her husband was having a homosexual relationship does not come as a surprise but it is more difficult for Blanche to accept because he needed help but she caused his death by saying that he ‘disgusted’ her.
It is at this stage that it is possible to sympathise with Blanche the most.
It is as if she has opened herself up and not lied but she has still timed her ‘coming out’.
This to gain the maximum effect of her statement so that Mitch will propose to her.
At the same time that she reveals the secret about her husband, we hear about her activities in Laurel.
She has been involved with minors and this is completely horrendous.
We therefore have a clashing interest of views over whether to feel sympathy or revulsion about Blanche.
Stella tells Stanley about Blanche's husband.
Stanley replies that they only discussed ‘recent history’.
This is meant as an insult.
It happened so long ago that it seems incredible that it is still affecting her.
Stella realises that although her sister's husband's death was extremely tragic it was all the same a ‘pretty long time ago’.
Blanche has a ‘twenty fifth’ birthday party.
This is a complete failure because Mitch does not turn up.
Stanley has told Mitch about Blanche prostituting herself.
He comes to see her to demand what he has ‘been missing all summer’.
Mitch has found out that Blanche is not as well behaved as he thinks she is.
Mitch rips off the paper lantern in the flat which covers the light bulb.
This symbolises the end of Blanche's pretentions and also an end to her unrealistic world:
Blanche: Of course you don't really mean to be insulting!
Mitch: No, just realistic.
Blanche: I don't want realism.
The truth is that Blanche cannot live in a realistic world.
She is still haunted by the grief of her husband's death and this causes her to shrink into her own world of deception.
This, though, does arouse pity for Blanche as she does want to escape, by marrying Mitch.
Mitch cannot marry her now that he knows that she is not ‘clean’.
Mitch is set on revenge and tries to rape Blanche but she manages to break off his attack by calling ‘Fire!
Fire!
Fire!’
As Blanche realises that she has no one to turn to she is forced to return to her own world.
She creates a world where she is admired and rich.
Shep Huntley is the main character of her new lie but like so much of what has come before Shep Huntley never materialises.
He represents what she truly wanted in life.
She deceives herself more than she deceives anyone else.
During this period Stella is in hospital as she is in labour and Stanley changes into the marriage pyjamas that he wore on his wedding night as celebration.
While Blanche tries to pass him in one of the passages he grabs her and he hurts her in the cruellest and most brutal way.
By treating her like a whore and raping her he has become the ‘animal’ that Blanche thought he was.
Stanley: We've had this date with each other from the beginning.
Stanley has completely crushed and defeated Blanche.
We are now unsure whether Blanche is the victim in A Streetcar Named Desire .
Although Blanche has brought the consequences of her actions on herself she suffers in a way that no one should have to suffer.
Stanley has sex with her not in a loving way but in a hurtful and spiteful one.
It is at this point that Blanche does lose her rational air.
She becomes completely detached.
He has been determined to destroy her since she described him as ‘something — sub-human — something not quite to the stage of humanity yet!’
The fact that he rapes her on the night that Stella's baby is born, on their bed, and in his wedding pyjamas makes Stanley seem even more bestial.
Once Stella has returned Blanche tells her that she has been raped by her husband.
Stella therefore has a choice to make of staying with her husband or with her sister.
Blanche has to leave.
Stella cannot afford to believe the fact that Blanche could be right.
The consequences of believing Blanche would be very high.
She therefore has to carry on with Stanley.
This does mean though that Blanche has to be sacrificed and so Blanche is sent to a mental asylum.
Blanche is made a victim through Stanley's bestial behaviour but Blanche has brought much of what she got on herself through her lies and deception of herself and of others.
From the moment that Blanche  decides to persuade Stella to leave the ‘brute’, it is possible to see that there can only be a tragic ending.
Discuss one or two poems by Tennyson which illustrate the ways in which he expresses emotion.
Tennyson discloses that the setting of Mariana is in Shakespeare's Measure for Measure where the dejected Mariana resides alone in a moated grange.
The first lines of Tennyson's poem reflect the neglect of the grange.
With blackest moss the flower-plots Were thickly crusted, one and all.
These lines prevent any colour from entering the poem.
The flower-plots represent the colour that could have been but have been taken over by a dull shade of moss.
Tennyson reinforces this with the words ‘one and all’ which in effect multiplies the dull shade already created.
So right from the beginning of the poem a sombre mood is present in the poem.
The poem contains very little human sound.
This helps to express Mariana's loneliness.
For example, the ‘flitting bats’ or the crowing of the ‘night fowl’and also the small sounds of a fly which ‘sung in the pain’and the shriek of a mouse.
In the final stanza Mariana can hear ‘the slow clock ticking’ which spells out the quietness of her surroundings.
The fact that all such unimportant everyday noises ‘confound her sense’ helps to convey her loneliness
The poem interlocks the narrative description with Mariana's own sorrowful moans.
This allows the description of Mariana's surroundings to relate to her own mental condition.
The description of the grange is lacking any energy as is Mariana.
The broken sheds look'd sad and strange: Unlifted was the clinking latch.
The sheds have fallen into disrepair and are described as ‘Sad and strange.’
This line is also possibly a picture of Mariana herself.
She has also lost all hope of repair, she does not believe that her lover will return.
Her face is probably both ‘sad and strange’.
The latch to the barn is ‘unlifted’ which highlights the lack of action in Mariana's life and the ‘clinking’sound is a reminder of when there was once some movement around the grange.
This last line is similar to lines 37–38.
About a stone cast from the wall A sluice with blacken'd waters slept.
To make the measurement from the wall to the sluice gate would require energy.
‘A stone cast’ suggests that a stone should be thrown.
This description is inexact.
This perhaps underlines the unimportance of this information.
The water is black and therefore stagnant, and again a lack of action is used to picture what was once a functioning  sluice.
This sluice is said to ‘sleep’.
This suggests that there is still the possibility of it waking and again working.
Mariana herself could also be seen as asleep because she refuses to wake up to the probability that her lover will not return.
Sleep is a temporary state which we awake from.
It is only at the end of the poem that Mariana finally despairs at the realisation that her lover will not come.
She has no wish to wake up and find a new purpose in her life.
The continual repetition of variations on the following lines,
She only said ‘My life is dreary He cometh not.’
she said; She said ‘I am aweary, aweary, I would that I were dead!’
This shows the depths of Mariana's feelings.
She only has herself to talk to and all she is able to say is ‘I would that I were dead.’
The repetition is a reminder of this despair and what seem like her only daily thoughts.
Day by day, hour by hour she goes deeper into depression until finally she exclaims
Oh God, that I were dead!
This is potentially very strong language but it is also a plea to God to remove her from her misery.
It is also possible that this is meant to show  her inability to do anything without her lover, even to kill herself.
Mariana's real emotion is shown through her repeated wish for death.
But it is the description of the neglected grange which brings about an understanding of the depths of her emotion The use of assonance throughout the poem creates the sound of Mariana's despair.
For instance the ‘oh’ sound in ‘lonely moated’may represent Mariana's anguished cries.
This same sound is echoed in various other lines in the poem.
The ‘oxen's low’ in the third stanza is yet another example of this.
By interlinking Mariana's own words with a detailed account of the derelict grange, Tennyson creates more than an outline of Mariana's deep emotional state; Her longing for death, as a result of a lonely life without her lover.
Discuss one or two poems by Tennyson which illustrate the way in which he expresses emotion.
Tennyson's poem ‘Morte d'Arthur’ deals with strong emotion, and as was common in his poetry, with death.
It reflects Tennyson's own life and the tragic death of his friend Hallam, ‘snatched away by sudden death’; a death that had a deep effect on Tennyson as can be seen in this poem.
The beginning of Morte d'Arthur is the beginning of the end of the age of the Round Table.
It is the last battle between Arthur and his nephew Mordred .
The section is emotional in its pathetic finality.
The battle continues —
Until King Arthur's table, man by man, Had fallen in Lyonnesse about their lord,
The sense of great loyalty is apparent, and the waste of life as if the knights dying ‘man by man’ are dominoes being knocked over in a long line.
The ‘noise of battle’ that ‘roll'd/Among the mountains by the winter sea’, contrasts with the powerful feeling of emptiness once Arthur and Bedivere, ‘the last of all his knights’, are the only ones left alive.
The landscape echoes the loneliness.
Sir Bedivere takes Arthur to a chapel —
That stood on a dark straight of barren land.
The fact that —
On one side lay the ocean, and on one lay a great water…
— may represent the tin line between life and death.
At the beginning we are confronted by a huge battle which leads on to the deaths of loyal knights.
This sense of loyalty still remains in the figure of Sir Bedivere who goes on to‘fling Excalibur ’ back to the lake; a task of great difficulty because of the sword's ‘worthy note’and ‘the wonder of its hilt’which entranced him.
It is the moment of separation of Arthur and Bedivere that is the climax of the poem.
Tennyson describes how Bedivere carries Arthur, with a furious rush to the ‘dusky barge’.
The emotion of the moment is conveyed through the power of the passage.
The run-on lines create a continuous flow capturing the rush of Bedivere.
The passage is very physical.
It is noisy: ‘Dry clash'd his harness…
The bare black cliff clang'd around him.’
And on a sudden, lo! the level lake,
Tennyson writes.
The ‘juts of slippery crag’ are replaced by a horizontal, flat lake, accentuated in the fluid sounds of the ‘l’.
The ‘winter moon’ that reflects in the water indicates the stillness of the lake, there is no rippling.
The loud emotion of the rush to the lake is now replaced by a quiet melancholy and a vivid sense of death.
The description of the barge, and the people on it, is very solemn.
The image is like a funeral before death.
Everything is black.
Tennyson describes it as —
…a dusky barge, Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern.
He continues the list of what can be seen, using  run on lines to build up to the climax:
…and descending they were ware That all the decks were dense with stately forms, Black-stoled, black-hooded, like a dream…
The silent description of the dark scene seems to hold in all emotion, until it all breaks loose, and the melancholy that drags on throughout the poem is let out.
Tennyson seems to continue his description:
…by these Three Queens with crowns of gold…
— but then the list stops:
…and from them rose A cry that shiver'd to the tingling stars.
When the outburst comes it is very effective.The lyricism of Tennyson's poetry is magnificent.
The fear and great sadness is expressed through the ‘cry’ and the use of ‘shiver'd’as if with fear and ‘tingling stars’.
A great noise rises out of the quiet, and the stars are like bits of metal clinging together.
Then pain and the sorrow of Arthur and his knights' defeat and deaths are realised in the beautiful phrase: ‘an agony of lamentation’.
But it is the sense of abandonment and utter loneliness that is most powerful, in the realisation that the cry cannot be heard.
There is no comfort.
For it is —
like a wind that shrills All night in a waste land, where no one comes, Or hath come, since the making of the world.
Once Arthur is in the boat Bedivere realises for the first time that ‘the true old times are dead’.
He talks of the future and the past, lamenting his fate, but he dwells on memories.
It is emotional because he is saying goodbye to the last of his kind.
There is a sense of regret when he talks about how:
Every morning brought a noble change;
And every chance a noble knight.
Now knights no longer come everyday, and the good deeds are left undone.
Tennyson emphasises the greatness of the day by comparing it to the birth of Jesus pin pointing:
the light that led The Holy Elders with the gift of myrrh.
The mention of ‘the light’ echoes ‘the star of tournament’which refers to King Arthur and his jousts.
The myrrh reminds us of death, again connecting Jesus and Arthur.
The contrast between this Golden Age and the uncertainty of the future, Bedivere laments in fear of: ‘the days darken round me’.
Again Tennyson uses the image of darkness as a sign of loneliness.
There is no more colour in Bedivere's life.
Bedivere does not know what to do when Arthur dies.
The questioning of Arthur emphasises how lost he is:
Ah! my Lord Arthur, whither shall I go?
Where shall I hide my forehead and my eyes?
It is pathetic to see Bedivere the bold in such a state.
It indicates the change that has come over the world.
With death Bedivere breaks down, having no context for his existence.
the loneliness embodied in the ‘wind that shrills/All night in a wasteland’ haunts Bedivere.
But at the end this melencholy loneliness is replaced by possibly happy memories:
long stood Sir Bedivere Revolving many memories, till the hull look'd one black dot against the verge of dawn, And on the mere the wailing died away.
But it is memories that are all he can hang on to in a world of ‘new men, strange faces, other minds’.
This is the feeling that must have haunted Tennyson himself, along with the loneliness, the struggle, and the sense of finality, that are all illustrated in Morte d'Arthur.
And it is his understanding of death, and the lyricism of his language that make Morte d'Arthur so emotionally moving.
The Man With Night Sweats Arouses Strong Sentiment But Is Never Sentimental.
Discuss.
There can be few topics more important to Thom Gunn than the subject of AIDS.
As a homosexual himself we learn, through his poetry, that Gunn has lost many close friends to the disease and may well have the HIV virus himself.
In answering the question, whether Thom Gunn is sentimental in his poems about AIDS, I have decided to examine three poems which explore different aspects of Gunn's experience of the disease and its victims.
The first of these is a poem called ‘The Missing’.
This poem deals with Gunn's feelings as he watches the disease strike down all those close to him and the way it changes his perceptions of life and death.
The first lines of the poem are chilling:
Now as I watch the progress of the plague, The friends surrounding me fall sick, grow thin, And drop away.
They create an image which seems more appropriate to the medieval Black Death.
The word ‘plague’ in itself carries a much more terrifying portent than the almost innocuous sounding AIDS.
Yet for Gunn and his circle of friends AIDS is nothing other than a plague, striking randomly but inevitably.
Gunn introduces in lines three and four of the verse a metaphor which continues throughout the poem, and indeed appears often within the anthology as a whole.
This is the image of the sharply defined, sculpted statue as a reflection of the physical signs of AIDS.
The disease causes its victims to waste away and take on the sharp  outlines of a statue with the shiny, sickly pallid hue of marble as the disease destroys them.
In lines 3 and 4 Gunn is looking for the beginnings of these dreaded signs in himself.
Verse two begins:
I do not like the statue's chill contour.
Not nowadays.
In the past Gunn has admired the male form in the peak of condition as a statuesque work of beauty.
Now however, it only fills him with horror, the chill marble is like the cold of the corpse.
This contrasts with the warmth of feeling which used to exist:
In mind, limb, feeling, and more
in the past before AIDS, which Gunn describes as
An involved increasing family
Verses three and four are a nostalgic reminiscence of how things were before AIDS.
Gunn remembers the times when he could practise his promiscuity without danger.
It was a time:
Which for all I knew might have no end
Gunn continues, describing the feelings which thrilled him in that time now past.
Verse five begins:
But death — their deaths have left me less defined
This contrasts the earlier description of shape as becoming more defined with the onset of Aids.
By contrast Gunn feels his soul becoming less defined and losing purpose.
The deaths of those around him have left him as he says, ‘unsupported here’.
Verse six returns to the statue image.
It is a hostile image:
Eyes glaring from raw marble.
AIDS leaves its victims with a terrible anguish, its  randomness leaves its victims with the feeling that fate has been so terribly unfair to them.
Gunn creates the image of the part finished statue growing out of the unhewn marble block.
Yet in this case I think that the block, which perhaps represents a bed on the level of reality, is in the (statue) metaphor reclaiming the man.
We come from the earth and must inevitably return there.
It is Gunn's memories of his friends lying dying in hospital beds which inspires this verse.
Their skin taking on the pallor of death, is the same colour as the linen sheets.
Their long shins are clearly defined, yet the fatty calves have wasted away.
Above all only the eyes retain any spark of life, and they are filled with the overwhelming emotion of anguish.
This is an image from which Gunn has no escape.
There is no return:
Back to the play of constant give and change.
The poem ‘In Time of Plague’, while addressing similar themes to ‘The Missing’ does so with a different emphasis.
While the overriding emotion in ‘The Missing’ was one of despair, here Gunn expresses the dilemma he faces, torn between his old way of life and the constraints of the new.
Gunn presents his quandary in the opening lines:
My thoughts are crowded with death and it draws so oddly on the sexual that I am confused confused to be attracted by, in effect, my own annihilation.
Gunn is expressing what he can see is a completely irrational attraction.
In the danger of AIDS and the risks of promiscuous sexual encounters he perceives an old excitement and thrill.
In his  mind he is attracted to his own glamorisation of death.
This thought is inspired by two men.
The poem is written so as to give the impression of fleeting thoughts, which take him even as he is in conversation with these men, Brad and John, in a bar.
In them he perceives a devil-may-care attitude which is attractive to him.
They are inviting him to share their risks:
These fiercely attractive men who want me to stick their needle in my arm
Gunn is fascinated and attracted by:
Their daring, their looks, their jargon.
And what they have in mind.
However in the second verse the reason in Gunn's mind expresses itself in conflict with the attraction expressed in verse one:
Their mind is the mind of death They know it and do not know it And they are like me in that (I know it and do not know it)
What Gunn means by this is, I think, that everyone realises the risks but yet we all feel a tendency to delude ourselves of any possibility that it might happen to us.
There is a temptation to believe, even subconsciously that we are all immortal.
Gunn is able to detach himself and view this impartially:
Brad and John thirst heroically together for Euphoria
In the last six lines of the poem Gunn balances and presents the two conflicting viewpoints for Brad and John's action.
He questions himself:
Am I a fool and they direct and right?
He is torn between one perception of the two  as:
Properly testing themselves against risk, as a human must, and does
And the other perception as
Fools, their faces mere death heads lighted glamorously?
It is a chilling image but reflects the quandary which Gunn faces as romanticism and reason come into conflict.
The third poem is called ‘The Reassurance’.
In this poem Gunn examines coming to terms with the deaths of close friends.
It is written in the 2nd person, a direct message to the dead friend.
The dream which Gunn describes is clearly a moving event for him.
The words of the friend ‘I'm all right now’, seem to inspire such a release for Gunn, weighed down with his grief.
Gunn stresses the reality of the dream:
And it was you
Further, the image was one of the friend before AIDS took its toll, a healthy image.
The mood is one of joy as is the dream,
You hugged us all around then, And gave your welcoming beam
This is the image Gunn wishes to remember.
He suggests at the start of verse 3 that it is a sort of divine reassurance from his dead friend.
After all the pain death has freed him.
It is old character:
Seeking to reassure
However, the last two lines change the whole mood of the poem:
And yes, how like my mind  To make itself secure.
There is a bitter twist of irony in these last lines which completely changes the complexion of what might before have been viewed as a sentimental poem.
Gunn is acknowledging the dream as an act of reassurance coming from his own soul, not that of his dead friend.
It is his own mind's way of coping with the grief, and he knows it.
Within all three poems there are passages which at least verge on sentimentality.
Passages such as verses three and four in ‘The Missing’ which describes with great nostalgia which I think might be called sentimentality, the joys of the past now gone.
Lines such as:
Supple entwinement through the living moss which for all that I knew might have no end, Image of an endless embrace
are nostalgic to the rim of sentimentality.
Equally in ‘In Time of Plague’:
Brad and John thirst heroically together for euphoria — for a state of ardent life in which we could all stretch ourselves and lose our differences.
However, although sentimentality exists in these poems, their real strength is their detachment which Gunn manages to give his poems as a whole.
If there is ever a shadow of self pity, as I think there may be in the final verse of ‘The Missing’, it is completely overshadowed by the cruel indifference and bleakness of Gunn's other description.
It is this which so powerfully arouses sentiment in us.
The ‘statue’ metaphor which is so chilling in ‘The Missing’; the balance of the mental conflicts in ‘In Time of Plague’which never sways to either side and leaves the question unanswered: the  twist in the tale of ‘The Reassurance’with its bitter irony.
It is because Gunn does not impose his views on the reader and does not demand the reader's pity that his poems arouse such sentiment.
Thom Gunn does not demand our pity, he inspires it.
Discuss one or two poems by Tennyson which illustrate the ways in which he expresses emotion.
Tennyson was probably the most musical of all the poets.
He was greatly affect by the death of his best friend Arthur Hallam.
There is a wonderful misery that pervades Tennyson's poetry which enables him to create an amazing selection of emotions.
The poems Tithonus and Morte d'Arthur both evoke deep emotion in similar ways.
Both poems reflect the melancholy that Tennyson was feeling after the death of Hallam.
Tithonus is a poem of great loss and despair .
This is shown right from the beginning when Tithonus is being haunted by his memories.
The repetition of ‘the woods decay’ stress the sense of despair that Titonus feels.
It immediately causes a stark image which was to be the main theme of the poem.
Tithonus also gives us an amazingly depressing view of a human beings life and its pathetic uselessness .
It is an extremely bitter view of the life cycle.
Tithonus creates a sense of emotional anguish by Tennyson's use of inversion between lines five and six, ‘Me only cruel immortality/consumes’: This breaking up of the main image of the poem suggests that Tithonus has been captured by immortality.
There is also a change of rhythm at this point which contributes to the understanding of the words.
Overall Tithonus is extremely sad and elegiac which is helped by the musical quality of the passage.
The run-on line also conveys the immortal life of Tithonus which he does not want any more.
Man comes and tills the fields and lies beneath, And after many a summer dies the swan.
Me only cruel immortality Consumes: I wither slowly in thine arms.
Tithonus spends a great deal of time in the poem reflecting on the past.
There is a lot of regret and self pity in his words.
He talks about his gray shadow which was one day a handsome man.
Tennyson talks for Tithonus in the third person.
This element of the second stanza creates a sensation that Tithonus now refers to himself as a completely different man to what he was in his youth as it was such a long time ago.
The diction about Tithonus by Tithonus in the third person also adds to the loneliness felt by Tithonus.
He speaks of himself as a man who could have been a God.
These bitter words express the pity and patheticness of Tithonus situation so invoking emotions of sympathy.
Tithonus asked for immortality but he expresses it in such a way that one feels sad for him.
The word order and language help this emotion of feeling.
The emotion of bitterness is conveyed by his metaphor for the granting of his peril, like ‘Wealthy men who care not how they give’.
The hours which are wasting him away also seem to have a mental effect on Tithonus as well.
The tone of Tithonus' words seem to be of great regret and self lamenting.
I ask'd thee, ‘Give me immortality.’
Then didst thou grant mine asking with a smile, Like wealthy men who care not how they give.
But thy strong Hours indignant work'd their wills, And beat me down and marr'd and wasted me,
Tithonus' most emphatic pleading for death takes place in the last stanza.
Tithonus directly begs the Gods to release him from their grip and let him die.
Tennyson uses imagery combined with run-on lines to create a lyrical emotion.
Tithonus can see the normal human beings who can die and so longs to be one of them.
This appeal for Death is full of poignancy because most men fear death.
This craving for death is amazingly emotional .
It creates an unbelievable pathos for Tithonus.
The imagery of the death of human beings is helped by numerous run on lines that add to the lamentation of the words.
The image of the cold wrinkled feet on the glimmering thresholds and the steam from the dim fields again shows Tithonus hopeless situation.
Rhythm of the last stanza suggests that all his begging for death is in vain.
Immortality is for Tithonus a punishment, it is cold and silent whereas death is warm and inviting for the old man.
Of happy men that have the power to die,
And grassy barrows of the happier dead.
Release me and restore me to the ground;
Tennyson in Morte d'Arthur again creates similar types of emotion because again the poem was prompted by the death of his best friend Arthur Hallam.
After the battle Sir Bedivere is carrying Arthur's weak body down to the shore.
Tennyson creates an amazingly bleak and enclosing image to evoke emotion of loss.
This use of imagery such as‘barren chasms’, ‘icy caves’ and ‘slippery crag’help conjure an unbelievable picture of depression and sorrow.
It is this bleakness that Tennyson uses to express sadness and death.
Dry clash'd his harness in the icy caves
And barren chasms, and all to left and right
The bare black cliff clang'd round him, as he based
His feet on juts of slippery crag that rang
Sharp smitten
Arthur is then taken away by three Queens who appear in a ‘dusky barge, /Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stem’.
Here Tennyson combines language and imagery to portray an awesomly haunting picture of the boat in which Arthur is to be placed for his trip to a new world.
The emotion given out by the barge is horrifying and unknown.
The details of ‘stately forms/Black-stoled, black-hooded’ have a voice of lamentation and melancholy.
Tennyson then goes onto portray a wonderful quality of desolation and despair in a wasteland where no one has been since the beginning of the world.
Again Tennyson uses run on lines to emphasis the sudden and piercing cry from the boat and the wind that ‘shrills’ in the wasteland.
Overall there is an atmosphere of dispossession which again is full of sorrow.
And, as it were one voice, an agony Of lamentation, like a wind that shrills  All night in a waste land, where no one comes, Or hath come, since the making of the world.
Apart from the sadness over Arthur's death there is also a pathos for the loyal knight Sir Bedivere.
He was the first, best and last of King Arthur's knights. he now does not know what to do.
He shouts to Arthur in the barge for advice about what to do.
There is deep regret and lamentation on Sir Bedivere's behalf for the loss of Arthur and his now useless life as shown in ‘where shall I hide my forehead and my eyes? /For now I see the true old times are dead,’ There is a real passion for Bedivere as shown in theses words.
The sense of pathos is combined with Bedivere's idea of loss or hope.
Long stood Sir Bedivere Revolving many memories, till the hull Look'd one black dot against the verge of dawn, And on the mere the wailing died away.
In conclusion, Tennyson creates a complete picture of sadness and loss.
The two poems were prompted by the death of Arthur Hallam.
The imagery and language help conjure up the bleak picture of death in the two poems.
Perhaps Tennyson wanted to die like Tithonus or even Sir Bedivere.
The women are fair and just, the men dishonest and immoral!
These two judgements certainly appear to be precisely correct, if we read the script through, concentrating simply on the story line.
Portia appears indeed in Act four to be just in her defence of Antonio, and no one can comment on her choice of suitor in Act three, for surely it was the suitors' luck and character that were the key to her, or so it seemed.
The men also can be said to live up to how they have been described.
There is no hiding of the racism between the Christians and the jew.
This fact can read them to be described as socially immoral.
Indeed they do not only appear to be immoral, but dishonest as well.
For in the final Act, Act Five, did not Bassanio and Gratiano go against their oaths of love towards Nerissa and Portia?
This proved not only a dishonesty towards the oath, but also an immorality.
If however we look more deeply into the play between the lines, we notice that the women are not totally fair, and just, and indeed seem to be both dishonest and immoral.
In the choosing of her suitors it appears there is  nothing that Portia can do, and must leave her fate in the hands of Good Fortune.
However Portia is not content to leave her destiny in such a way.
During Bassanio's contemplation of the caskets in Act Three Scene Two, Portia remarks that she ‘could teach you (Bassanio) to choose right’.
She goes on to say that she can't due to the oath made to her dead father.
However this hold upon her does not seem strong, as later on in the same scene she launches into song, cleverly making the first three lines rhyme with lead!
An example of this is in line 65 when she sings ‘How begot, how nourishèd?’
This action alone does not seem fair, however Portia is neither just.
In Shylock's trial against Antonio, having preached towards Shylock for mercy in line 180 ‘The quality of mercy is not strained’, she promptly forgets to show any mercy towards Shylock, stripping him of all his wealth, possessions and even religion.
This is both unjust and totally immoral.
Portia however is not the only woman to have these traits, however.
Jessica, although not unjust or unfair, is not all good either.
She shows both traits assigned to the men, immorality and dishonesty.
In Act two scene 6, she not only in many eyes is very immoral in her flight from her father and religion, but is also extremely  dishonest.
For earlier on in Act two scene five Jessica is entrusted with the keys to Shylock; her father's house.
She is told to guard the house from marauding strangers and to make sure his beloved money is not stolen.
Jessica not only leaves the house unguarded but takes some money as well, saying in line 34 of Act two scene six ‘Here, catch this casket’ and then in line 50 ‘with some more ducats’.
These two examples perhaps show that Jessica, and once again, the women are dishonest.
The men are claimed to be dishonest and immoral.
On the surface these remarks appear to be true, and even between the lines immorality occurs regularly.
In the court scene in Act four this feeling fault appears clearly in line 63 Bassanio says ‘This is no answer, thou unfeeling man’.
Dishonesty is also brought out in this scene, when the Duke expects Shylock to forgive Antonio in line 23 ‘which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh, thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture, but touch with human gentleness and love, Forgive a moiety of the principal;’.
Thus the Duke and the rest of the Christians are dishonest towards the bond of business set by Shylock in expecting him to be forgiving.
However, unlike the women who can not be described with generous words  the men are not all bad.
Antonio believes strongly in his religion, and is worried for Shylock's safety in being a jew.
Antonio believes that by making Shylock in Act Four Scene one convert to Christianity he is saving his soul, however unwittingly he does not realise he is killing Shylock.
These two judgements are not entirely correct.
The women were not fair and just, even towards their husbands,(they tested their husbands' bonds by asking for the rings).
However the men generally do appear to be very immoral and dishonest.
They will do anything in their powers to get what they want, and to satisfy their greed.
Tamburlaine is a Giant among Dwarfs.
Discuss.
Marlowe's will to move from unprofound drama is perfectly personified in his play Tamburlaine the Great .
The character Tamburlaine dominates throughout this tragedy, and although he is rarely challenged, it is interesting to see the stark contrast between his character and those he is surrounded by.
Tamburlaine is in fact a very complex character, far removed from the ‘barbarous’ and ‘incivil’man that we are led to believe he is by Mycetes, Cosroe and Meander.
Although his character does incorporate these descriptions, he has many different sides to him, something which is not fully appreciated by those who try and oppose him.
For example, he is likened to a thief, but he actually wants to become a king, and speaks as if he were a Prince.
We learn more about Tamburlaine as we get deeper into the play, and Marlowe carefully disguises the fact that there is more to Tamburlaine than meets the eye.
One of the first characters we meet in the play is the king of Persia, Mycetes.
It is clear from the very beginning that he is a weak and unpopular ruler as the following lines suggest: ‘I see the state of Persia droop’ and ‘Your despised brother’.
There is a severe weakness in power, for Persia used to be the ‘seat of mighty conquerors’.
However, I feel that there is one line which virtually sums Mycetes up, and that is when he says: ‘Yet insufficient to express the same’.
This is essentially what Mycetes is because he is not strong enough to be in power, not brave enough to lead armies and not powerful enough to command respect among his followers and country.
He only has one loyal follower and that is Meander, and when a king has such little support, it is obvious that you are in the realms of revolution.
On the other hand, Tamburlaine commands  great respect from his followers, and not only are they unfailingly loyal but they are also his friends.
It is as though Mycetes and Tamburlaine are total opposites; everything Mycetes is, Tamburlaine is not, and vice versa.
One of the main themes of the first two acts is the conflict between Mycetes and his brother, Cosroe.
This conflict is made clear when Cosroe mockingly tells Mycetes that he ‘might do well to kiss his royal seat’.
This shows total disrespect to the king because openly implies that he is weak and foolish and should not be in his position of power.
However, there is a comparison between Cosroe and Tamburlaine in the fact that they are both hungry for power.
We learn that Cosroe is trying to get the throne from his brother, and we are constantly reminded of this fact: ‘To crown me Emperor of Asia’.
This only goes to show how narrow minded and blinkered Cosroe is compared to Tamburlaine.
Tamburlaine is not just interested in becoming a king and instead he bases his vision of power on a much higher scale.
Tamburlaine's self-confidence and ambitions are far greater than that of any other character, and this is one of the essential features of the play.
We are told that Tamburlaine is ‘misled by dreaming prophecies’ in the opening scene, and this may well turn out to be true.
However, they have underestimated Tamburlaine to the extent that they believe that he will always be a ‘sturdy scythian thief’ and that he will never change.
It is true to say that Tamburlaine sets himself very few limits, and this is shown when he makes his aspirations clear by telling his friends that he wants ‘to become immortal like the Gods’.
Immortality and a Godly status are two things that Tamburlaine wants to achieve and he believes this will happen due to his ‘protection by the Gods’, especially Jove: ‘And shall the sun fall from his sphere than Tamburlaine be slain or overcome’.
Tamburlaine is confident that he is in control of his destiny because he believes it is his fate.
The only powers that control fate are  the Gods, and so when Tamburlaine mentions in a conversation which he has with Theridamas that he controls his own fate, this implies that he believes he is a God: ‘I hold the fates bound fast in iron chains, and with mine hand turn fortune's wheel about’.
Tamburlaine's effervescent personality and self-confidence are also echoed throughout the play.
He has total faith in himself that what he set out to do, he will achieve.
He never shows the slightest bit of doubt or anxiety, especially before a battle, when he knows he can win one way or another.
His two principal assets are his way with words which are then followed up by fierce and uncompromising actions.
Tamburlaine is not a man to be dealt with lightly, because if he says something, he means it.
For example, in his verbal sparring which he has with Bajazeth before their battle he tells him that ‘every common soldier of my army shall smile to see thy miserable state’.
This statement is of course true, because Tamburlaine does put Bajazeth in a cage in his camp, in full view of all his men.
Another amazing aspect of Tamburlaine's character are his skills as an orator.
For a man who started life as a ‘Scythian shepherd’, he is incredibly intelligent and he does speak as if he were a prince.
This particular skill of Tamburlaine's is a recurrent theme from start to finish, and we first notice it when he is confronted by Theridamas. he realises that the odds are stacked high in Theridamas' favour when it comes to the battle, and so he decides to appease Theridamas, and he uses his words as weapons.
By the end of it, Theridamas accepts that he has been ‘won with thy words’, and this shows how influential Tamburlaine is with his words over other people.
These skills are again evident when Tamburlaine successfully manages to woo Zenocrate with lines such as: ‘Zenocrate, lovelier than the love of Jove’ and ‘Fair is too foul an epithet for thee’.
He had been accused early on in the play by Agydeus that he was too barbaric to offer Zenocrate any amorous discourse, yet he manages to produce a lovely speech for her where he talks about he stunning beauty  and his love for her: ‘Zenocrate, the loveliest maid alive…whose eyes are brighter than the lamps of heaven…that with thy looks canst clear the darkened sky’.
This adds a new dimension to Tamburlaine's character which people didn't appreciate, and emphasises the fact that he is a man of many talents.
On the other hand, Tamburlaine isn't one to mince his words, as Bajazeth can testify: ‘we use to march upon the slaughtered foe, tramping their bowels with our horses hoofs’.
As the play goes on, we notice that when Tamburlaine is confronted by war, he first offers words as a way of warning and deterrent, and then is the opposition do not listen, he follows this up with swift and bloody actions.
This is signified in Act four when he uses contrasting colours to symbolise his feelings: white for mercy, red for blood, and finally black for death and destruction.
These are the colour changes in Tamburlaine's army on the three days before the destruction of Damascus.
Theridamas offers us a useful way of looking at Tamburlaine's character when he comes to fight him in Act one.
Theridamas is supposed to be all that Persia stands for, even to the extent that he is ‘the hope of Persia, and the very legs whereon our state doth lean as on a staff’.
However, he is quickly conquered by Tamburlaine's rhetoric and comes across as a weak and easily influenced man, not to say disloyal to King Mycetes.
This is where the contrast lies because unlike Theridamas is here, Tamburlaine is always extremely strong-willed, and once he has set out to do something, nothing will get in his way.
This is perhaps best signified in Act five when Tamburlaine is sent two young virgins by the governor of Damascus.
They are meant to appeal to Tamburlaine's humanity and hopefully stop him from plundering the town.
He does feel sad about it, that is why he dressed in black, but he has already set out on what he believes to be his destiny, and so he won't allow these emotions to stop him.
Instead, he has  Tectelles hoist up ‘their slaughtered carcasses’ on the walls of Damascus.
Although this does show the nastier side of Tamburlaine, it re-inforces the point that Tamburlaine is stronger both physically and mentally than his fellow characters.
Finally, Bajazeth offers us perhaps the most complete view of Tamburlaine because these two men are in some ways very similar, and so bring out the true side of Tamburlaine's character.
We see how on the stage Bajazeth is portrayed as a giant due to the clever stilts he wears.
This is quite appropriate because he is the Emperor of Turkey, and a mighty one at that.
Therefore, before Tamburlaine arrives, there has been no-one to really challenge his authority and supremacy, and so he is justifiably confident and arrogant about the forthcoming battle.
However, Tamburlaine is also like this because it is in his nature, and so when these two clash, one of them is going to suffer.
It turns out to be Bajazeth, and so having suffered the bitterness of defeat, he is now totally dehumanised by Tamburlaine, and is humiliated at the same time.
Not only is he locked in a cage, but he is also treated as Tamburlaine's ‘footstool’.
However, he manages to retain his honour up to his death which is an indication of his strong character and resilience.
Therefore, I think the opening statement is mostly true because Tamburlaine is a giant in this play, although it is more likely to be among less great men.
A Zenocrate said: ‘Speak of Tamburlaine as he deserves’.
This is something not everybody did.
The Merchant of Venice.
Tom
Hello, who is it?
I
Hi, Tom it's me.
How are you?
I'm having a great time here.
The weather has been wonderful and some of the monuments and art are amazing.
How's the weather with you?
Tom
Oh, the same old English rain.
Have you met anyone of interest over there?
I
As a matter of fact I met a whole bunch of people this afternoon.
Tom
tell me about some of them, any nice girls?
I
Well not many girls but there is this shipping merchant Antonio.
He is very wealthy and everyone looks up to him but as for me I could understand from my limited Italian he is very sad because one of his ships is very late in arriving in port and is feared lost.
Antonio is very cunning and shrewd though for he has got many ships and so doesn't have all his eggs in one basket.
So I don't see why he is so unhappy.
I think that there is something deeper than the ship.
Tom
How about some of the others?
I
Well, Bassanio is a lord.
He's a good and well trusted friend of Antonio.
He enjoys a good time and is well respected by others.
He is young, tall, well-built but has big ears like Ian's.
I liked him very much.
Also there was Gratiano, he never stopped talking.
Though he does speak a lot it is hard to distinguish the jokes from what he is being serious about.
He is a bit of a jester but great fun to be with.
He succeeds in making the most melancholy people happy.
Gratiano's great friend is Lorenzo.
He is polite and very careful about what he says so as not to offend anyone.
I think you would like him very much.
I'll tell you about two more then I must go and get ready for supper because Antonio has invited me round.
Salario and Salarino are very similar characters, they try hard to keep Antonio happy almost being sycophantic in a way to keep in his favour.
I don't like them  as much.
Anyway I'm having a great time.
How's Jenny and the kids?
Tom
Nick just came first in his class which is very good.
I think it is the first time he actually worked hard.
I must go now and you get ready for supper with the merchant fellow.
So bye and I'll see you when you're back I guess.
I
I'll be back in about 10 days.
I will go via Mum and Dad in Bristol.
See you then.
Bye.
Tom
Okay bye.
Merchant of Venice
The women are just and fair, The men are dishonest and immoral.
The Merchant of Venice is a play full of opposites.
In every aspect of the play, both opposites are portrayed.
The characters of the play can all be described by two adjectives — one of which is opposite to the other.
For instance, referring to the title, some characters are just and immoral, some are fair and dishonest.
To prove my point of the play being one of opposites, the two main place where the play is set — Venice and Belmont — are opposites in themselves.
Venice is the place where all the men are situated.
All the men that appear in the play are part of a circle of friends, situated in Venice.
Belmont, however, is where the women, Portia and Nerissa, are situated.
Here is where the women come from — the place where Portia, a woman, has the most power.
Venice is also a large city, portrayed as being busy, chaotic and full of movement.
The men are always going somewhere to do business.
Belmont, on the other hand, seems to be a calmer establishment, with order and control.
We can see this kind of order from the way Portia sticks to the command made by her father although he is dead.
Although she dislikes her father's will — not to let her choose her own husband — she has no intention of rebelling against it.
She is convinced by Nerissa that this is not so bad:(Act 1, Scene 2, 23–24, 26–27)
Your father was very virtuous; and holy men at their death have goo inspirations…will no doubt never be chosen by any rightly but one who you shall rightly love.
In this way, we can see the obedience and acceptance that people have in Belmont, as opposed to the lack of order and commotion seen in Venice.
The characters of the men in the play can all, as I said earlier, be described by opposites.
Antonio, to a Christian audience, is portrayed as an unselfish and generous man who risks his own life for his best friend.
To many in those days he would have reminded them of Jesus.
This sacrifice of Antonio for Bassanio is like Jesus who ‘gave his body for us’.
However, this Christian character does have an immoral side to him.
He is willing to extend his generosity to people who mean something to him or are of the same religion.
When he come across someone of a different religion, namely Shylock, he abuses and generally mistreats them just because of their religion.
Shylock describes the persecution he has suffered from Antonio in Act 1, Scene 3, lines 102–104.
You call me misbeliever, cut-throat, dog.
And spit upon my Jewish gaberdine,
and, later in lines 118, 119–120
Fair sir, you spat upon me on Wednesday last,…, another time You called me a dog.
Surely this kind of action is not righteous.
There is another aspect of Antonio that is a possible  flaw in his character.
That is the hint of homosexuality that can be felt in Antonio's character.
Homosexuality, in those days, to a christian audience, was not altogether moral, and this suspicion in his sexuality causes a feeling that Antonio is, after all, immoral.
We sense this first after Salarino talks of Bassanio's departure and Antonio's reaction, to Salanio, to which Salanio says,(Act 2, Scene 8, line 49)—
I think he only loves the world for him.
Later, Antonio himself declares his sexual indifference to the others at the trial in Act 4, Scene 1, lines 114–115 —
I am a tainted wether of the flock,…meetest for death
A wether was the word for a castrated sheep, and thus he made clear his difference.
Shylock, the Jew, on the other hand, is portrayed to the Christian audience, as being the epitome of the words immoral and dishonest.
His immorality can be seen from the simple fact that he is a usurer.
In those days according to Christian laws, usury was a sin and considered immoral.
He is dishonest in the way he makes a light-hearted, open contract with Antonio, which Antonio himself thinks is a joke.
This can be seen in the way Antonio responds to the bond suggested —(Act 1, Scene 3, lines 145 and 146)
Content, in faith!
I'll seal to such a bond, And say there is much kindness in the Jew.
However, Shylock, if we look at his character in modern day terms, is sticking to the laws of his own faith in his actions.
For instance, usury was not a sin in the Jewish laws so his way  of living, which is seen as immoral by Christian terms, is justified by the fact that he is abiding by his own laws.
His determination and stubbornest to carry out the bond is also regarded as immoral.
However, in the Old Testament, it states ‘an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth’.
Shylock has been prosecuted, wrongly done on numerous occasions, by Antonio, therefore he is getting revenge — the Old Testament says he should.
Shylock says himself that it is not only a Jewish teaching, it is also a Christian's way of thought, and he is only doing what a Christian would do:(Act 3, Scene 1, lines 54–55)
…
Revenge.
If a Christian wrong a Jew, what should his suffrance be by Christian example?
Why, revenge!
The women, to an audience of that period, are portrayed, as described in the title, as being fair and just.
However, interpreting their actions nowadays suggests to us that this is not altogether true.
The two main women are Portia and Jessica.
I would like to start with Portia.
She is portrayed as the heroine of the play.
She saves Antonio's life, is rich, beautiful, dutiful to her father — everything a man could want in a woman.
To an audience of the period, she would be perfect.
Some compare Portia's characteristics to that of the Queen at the time — Elizabeth I. Women were thought of being inferior and for a woman to have so much power was a very rare situation.
Elizabeth was someone to be in this situation and Portia is also.
Portia has control over her men because of her power and beauty, and even over the whole judicial system, as she proves towards the end of the play.
This rarity — for a woman to have so much power and influence — caused some to compare her to Elizabeth.
There are some flaws, however, in her behaviour that make her turn out to be not so impressive.
The mere fact that she tricked the court in her disguise is dishonest.
It all refers back to the lack of acceptance of women in the society.
If she appeared simply as a woman, she would have been discarded and ignored, therefore she put on a disguise of a man, and fooled the court into accepting her case.
People will argue that she did it as a good deed, in helping her husband's friend.
Although she does admire the friendship of the two men, she is doing it to please Bassanio and thus gaining love from him — which profits no one except herself.
We can see that this is her intention as she says, after telling Bassanio to leave for Belmont to help Antonio,(Act 3, Scene 2, lines 304–305)
For never shall you lie by Portia's side With an unquiet soul.
Surely this is not totally moral.
There is also evidence of this in the last scene of the play.
Everybody goes off with their wives to celebrate except Antonio.
Antonio is left alone.
In the stage production, all the other characters walk to the back of the stage, so they cannot be seen, yet Antonio stays at the front, looking into the audience with a depressed expression on his face.
Surely if Portia really cared for him, she would not have left romantically with Bassanio thus leaving Antonio alone, but taken Antonio with them.
Another example of Portia's dishonesty is shown when she tests Bassanio with the ring she had just given to him.
She handed him the ring, telling him never to part with it.
When Bassanio  asked the doctor, a dressed up Portia, how he could pay her, she answered that she would take nothing but the ring.
He refuses to give it, but after much persuasion from Antonio, he decides to give it to her.
This testing of bassanio, her own husband who she is meant to love and trust, tells us how cunning, powerful and suspicious she really is.
Her attitude towards all the different suitors is yet another example of her immorality and dishonesty.
In Act 1 Scene 2, between lines 33–91, she is dictated a list of suitors to which she is both critical and particular.
When Bassanio. ‘a Venetian, a scholar and a soldier’ is mentioned, in Act 1 Scene 2 lines 92–94, she replies (line 95):
Yes, yes it was Bassanio!— as I think so he was called.
His name had not been mentioned to her at all yet she knew his name from the description straight away.
She tries to cover over her acknowledgement by saying, ‘— as I think so was he called’.
She tries to play dumb.
However, after watching it on stage, it was obvious from her facial expression that she knew of Bassanio and was very fond of him.
This means, therefore, that she was perhaps over-critical and over particular towards the suitors.
She also shows her bias for Bassanio in the music she plays when he is choosing the caskets.
The first three lines of the song all purposely rhyme with lead — the correct one Act 3, Scene 2, lines 63–65)
…bred…head…nourishèd
So, although interpreting her character nowadays, she is  quite immoral and dishonest, to the Christian audience in those days, she would have been a heroine.
Much the same would have been thought of Jessica as she would have been seen as someone who walked away from an evil religion and stepped into the right path.
However, these thoughts would only have been thought by a Christian audience of that time.
In these days, looking at it through neutral eyes, what Jessica did was both very immoral and very dishonest.
She lied to her father on the day of her escape when Lancelot says to her of the escape — Act 2, Scene 5, line 39–41:
Mistress, look out at window for all this: There will come a Christian by Will be worth a Jewès eye.
When Shylock asks what he said to her in line 42, she replies (line 43):
His words were, ‘Farewell, mistress’, nothing else.
Also, although ashamed as we can see in Act 2 Scene 6, lines 30–32 and 34–40, her simple carrying out of the deed is immoral and dishonest.
She takes away everything that means anything to him — his jewels, his ducats, the family religion and herself.
To do something as cruel as this to a member of your own family cannot be something a fair and just woman would do.
As Shylock says himself of the incident in Act 3 Scene 1 — line 28:
My own flesh and blood to rebel!
In this play there is no single character who is either perfect or evil.
I therefore think that such a generalisation as in the title, cannot be made.
This play is full of opposites and contraries and the characters of the play can be described as this as well.
Is Troilus and Cressida a sour and cynical view of existence?
By the Elizabethan age, the love story of Troilus and Cressida had undergone a radical transformation.
It was no longer believed to be a sad tale of the power of fortune to undermine love.
Chaucer's Criseyde is a dignified and thoughtful widow, who suffers terribly when she leaves Troy.
But by the beginning of the Seventeenth Century, her character had been redefined by playwrights such as Chettle and Dekker as a harlot.
The name of Cressida had indeed become ‘the very crown of falsehood’, and the story of their fleeting love represented the epitome of inconstancy.
This forms the basis of Shakespeare's play.
However the betrayal of love is not the only example of inconstancy the audience is given.
Shakespeare demonstrates how men of every different nature reject or betray ideas they claim to hold dear.
It is this that has caused many readers to find in Troilus and Cressida a nihilistic vision of human life, where nothing of true value is maintained.
This is evident from the very first scene.
The prologue promises a fierce tale of ‘orgulous princes’, ‘warlike fraughage’, and ‘the chance of war’; but Troilus introduces himself as a character, ‘weaker than a woman's tear’.
He is shown taking off his armour for the pathetic reason that he is not ‘master of his heart’.
His high blood has been chafed, not by the need to fight for the benefit of Troy, but in a lascivious lust for Cressida.
This is clothed in ornate language, but he seems merely impatient to knead, make, heat and bake the girl, encouraged by Pandarus's drooling imagery.
However, while Troilus is fantasizing about Cressida's bed, men are fighting and killing each other on the field outside Troy.
Aeneas returns to try and persuade him to join the battle, and succeeds by describing it as ‘good sport’.
Troilus immediately forgetting his ‘love’ and weakness, leaves to join the fight.
He has changed his mind, belittling the flimsy premise which had led him to stay in the city.
In this way Shakespeare's central themes are revealed in his opening scene.
Troilus has nothing which is obviously valuable to defend or give him guidance.
The basis of his love is imaginative desire: he never speaks of the person that lies beneath ‘Her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voice’.
And yet his other option is to take part in a senseless war, to join ‘the fools on both sides’.
The searing lines,
Helen must needs be fair, When with your blood you daily paint her thus
show exactly the worth he discerns in the Trojan conflict.
Troilus can only oscillate between debased instincts: the need to have sex, and the need to ‘play’.
There is nothing of real value in his life.
‘Value’ is a key word in Troilus and Cressida .
At the heart of Trojan society is the adultery of Paris and Helen.
Their action seems to licence immorality in the city, setting an example which others seem destined to follow.
As the play progresses, the consequences of Troy's distorted values are revealed in disease: physical and mental infection.
It is hardly surprising  that the city will eventually crumble.
But the Greek camp is no less guilty, as an inspection of their society cannot fail to show.
Ulysses identifies the problem:
The speciality of rule hath been neglected; And look, how many Grecian tents do stand Hollow upon this plain, so many hollow factions.
The following speech extols the virtues of order and degree.
It is calculated to stir the Greeks against the destructive influence of Achilles, whose self-indulgence has sent ripples of discontent through the Greek forces.
As an invective against chaos it is convincing — and was even held up by past critics as an illustration of Shakespeare's own belief in hierarchical society.
But in the very same scene Ulysses is left alone with Nestor, and describes how he really intends to entice Achilles from his tent.
The noble values of order and degree are not apparent in the ‘young conception’ that has formed in his mind.
His plan relies on the simple expedient of envy: the ‘blockish’ Ajax will meet the challenge laid down by Hector, and this will ‘physic the great Myrmidon Who broils in loud applause’.
The morality of Ulysses's speech just cannot apply to life in the Greek camps; base instincts clearly hold sway outside, as well as inside, the Trojan gates.
Before the action returns to Troy, Shakespeare introduces the audience to Thersites, a character previously described by Nestor as, ‘A slave whose gall coins slanders like a mint’.
He is worse than this.
In a protracted argument with Ajax, he mingles his ‘slanders’ with filthy and sinister threats:
I would thou didst itch from head to foot; an I had the scratching of thee, I would make thee the loathsomest scab in Greece.
Thersites has a duty in the play: to point out the egotism of the warriors, and the reality behind their ‘valiant’ exteriors.
But he rails in such a disgusting way against the play's characters that it is difficult to accept his view of human life.
He next appears alone, and yet maintains his infected speech:
The vengeance on the whole camp!
Or rather the Neapolitan bone-ache, for that, methinks, is the curse depending on those that war for a placket.
I have said my prayers, and devil Envy say ‘Amen’.
The audience may accept that the war is being fought over an ignoble cause, but Thersites's response to existence is too much to take.
However there seems to be little of worth in the other characters to hold up against Thersites's world view.
One of the most important scenes in the play occurs directly before he makes his ‘prayer’ for syphilis to overtake the camp.
The war council in Priam's palace portrays the essential Trojan dilemma: to fight or not to fight.
The king introduces the problem:
After so many hours, lives, speeches spent, Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks: ‘Deliver Helen, and all damage else — As honour, loss of time, travail expense, Wounds, friends, and what else dear that is consumed In hot digestion of this comorant war — Shall be struck off.’
Hector, what say you to't?
The ensuing discussion is based around the concept of value: whether Helen is worth the daily blood with which she is painted.
Hector believes that ‘She is not worth the holding’, and, ‘Tis mad idolatry To make the service greater than the god’; But Troilus counters with the statement:
What's aught but as ‘tis valued?
Troilus believes that the war is justified because they all consented to Paris's original deed, and it would be a ‘theft most base’, if ‘we have stolen what we fear to keep’.
This view completely contrasts with his earlier, scathing opinion of the war, which was similar to Hector's present position.
But Hector then gives an even more shocking illustration of inconstancy:
Thus to persist In doing wrong extenuates not wrong, But makes it much more heavy.
Hector's opinion Is this in way of truth.
Yet ne'ertheless, My spritely brethren, I propend to you In resolution to keep Helen still; For tis a cause that has no mean dependence Upon our joint and several dignities.
He admits that he wants to continue fighting for the respect, and honour it endows his name.
And Troilus immediately confesses that this was his real motive behind his defence of the present Trojan stance.
He wants to be ‘canonized’ by the ‘valiant and magnanimous deeds’of military action.
Once again the war has been reduced to the status of a game, Hector's childish and immature tone shows:
I have a roistering challenge sent amongst The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks.
They have discussed the value of the war: Hector's carefully considered will and judgement have favoured glory over Trojan blood; and the adultery at the heart of Troy has been reaffirmed.
This is shocking, but the effect is doubled when Helen finally appears.
Her entrance and words allow the audience to see in the flesh what Hector and Troilus have valued more than peace.
She is seen with Paris, whom she has  persuaded to stay in Troy while his companions fight; and Pandarus is also present, soaking up and intensifying the sensual atmosphere.
He sings sordid lines, celebrating the ‘tickling’ and ‘dying of sex’; and it is easy to imagine Paris's hands straying over his lover's body while the tune progresses, and throughout the entire scene.
He has valued the sexual instinct more than action, while others kill and maim to allow his debased relationship to continue.
However Shakespeare employs several devices to ensure that the audience realises that the adulterers' behaviour is wrong.
The word ‘sweet’ is used so often throughout the scene that it loses all worth, in the same way that a Chaucerian epithet such as‘fresshe’comes to mean almost the opposite when continually applied to January's wife May in The Merchant's Tale .
And Paris and Helen make throw-away comments which have deeper meaning than they intend.
Helen says:
This love will undo us all.
but her statement could be applied simply to the love she feels for Paris, which will both morally and physically ‘undo’ Trojan society.
In a similar way Paris remarks at the end of the scene:
Sweet, above thought I love thee.
He means this as a compliment, but this merely demonstrates the extent to which his value of Helen is based on his will, rather than his judgement.
This should have been plainly ridiculous to the Elizabethan audience.
Juliet is overpowered by passion when she first meets Romeo, and yet still considers his welfare when he is below her in the garden, and the rashness of a contract that is too sudden.
Before Hector is blinded by a lust for glory, he say to Troilus:
But value dwells not in particular will.
It holds his estimate and dignity As well wherein ‘tis precious of itself As in the prizer.
When Paris claims he loves Helen above thought, he is providing piercing insight into the twisted motives behind the adultery that has infected Troy.
Even the love of Troilus and Cressida is debased by the Trojan atmosphere, and misplaced values.
They make long and elegant speeches before Pandarus leads them to a chamber where they can be alone for a night; but their words seem superficial: it is as if Rosaline had agreed to love Romeo, and he only ever experienced the satisfaction of his sexual appetite.
Troilus's words of anticipation before their meeting dwell exclusively on the subject of physical pleasure, and the imagery he uses is sensual and overpowering:
I am giddy; expectation whirls me round.
Th’ imaginary relish is so sweet  That it enchants my senses.
What will it be When that the wat'ry palates taste indeed Love's thrice-repured nectar?
Another aspect of the scene which cheapens the quality of the emotions they express is the presence of Pandarus.
His view of love has already been revealed in his song to Helen; and he seems to enjoy match-making Troilus and Cressida for subversive reasons of his own.
His words end the scene, and taint all that has passed:
And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here Bed, chamber, Pandar to provide this gear!
However the most disturbing illustration of the reality of their love is the way they treat and talk to each other the following morning.
It is this that bears the most striking contrast to the equivalent moments in Romeo and Juliet .
In that play the lovers are wholly sensitive and communicate to perfection.
The ‘aubade’ is tender and moving:
Wilt thou be gone?
It is not yet near day; It was the nightingale, and not the lark, That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear;
They have satisfied all physical desire, but still cannot bear to be parted.
However Troilus shows little interest in Cressida once the morning light has revealed her features and their bed; and she seems to realise this:
Prithee, tarry; You men will never tarry.
O foolish Cressid!
I might still have held off, And then you would have tarried.
She has just given herself to him, and now she is regretting it.
The seeds of her later action are sown here, and Troilus is responsible.
They have pledged to be true, and constant, but all their vows are cheapened by this perfunctory aubade: it makes them seem like verbal foreplay.
Troilus and Cressida's ‘love’, appears to exist only as a framework for adolescent sexual experimentation.
This is a bitter portrayal of their relationship; but in the final two acts the cynicism turns to general sourness.
The characters' inconstancy and lack of values are coupled with violent or weak ethical decisions.
Troilus and Cressida say all the right words when they are informed of the Trojan plan to retrieve Antenor, but the fact that they say so much, and use such perfectly formed phrases, invalidates the underlying emotions.
Cressida says:
I know no touch of consanguinity — No kin, no love, no blood, no soul so near me  As the sweet Troilus.
The word ‘consanguinity’ is too cold — because it fits the metre so well, it implies she has carefully considered the impression she wants to make.
And she describes her lover as ‘sweet’, which would immediately remind the audience of the cloying portrayal of Paris and Helen.
Troilus is equally affected in his ‘grief’:
Cressid, I love thee in so strained a purity, That the blest gods, as angry with my fancy, More bright in zeal than the devotion which Cold lips blow to their deities, take thee from me.
It is therefore no great surprise when Cressida yields to Diomedes.
In ‘Troilus and Criseyde’ the narrator intrudes into his story; he would like to shield Criseyde from her approaching adultery, but claims his role as ‘translator’prevents him from this alteration of the text.
Cressida's action is in keeping with her flirtatious character, which she herself can analyse:
Troilus, farewell.
One eye yet looks on thee, But with my heart the other eye doth see.
Ah, poor our sex!
This fault in us I find, The error of our eye directs our mind.
The scene in which she breaks her vow, encourages Diomedes' advances, and gives him Troilus's sleeve, is extraordinary.
She is watched by Troilus himself, with Ulysses ; and they in turn are watched by Thersites, who provides a scathing commentary .
The audience can see all.
Troilus self-control, his patience, is admirable: he perceives that the Cressida whom he ‘loved’ is no longer unified, that it is another girl who is giving ‘The fragments, scraps, the bits, and the greasy relics Of her o'ereaten faith’to Diomedes.
He realises that his value of her has decayed, and he does not seem broken-hearted.
But he achieves this with an intense desire for revenge.
He wants to use the battle field, which he had previously described as a place of ‘ungracious clamours’, to purge his anger and hurt.
He had never showed sensitivity for Cressida's feelings, and was equally responsible for her unfaithfulness.
Now he vents his fury on the man she has chosen to love, as a way of making sense of her life in the Greek camp.
His lust for revenge is grotesque, even if it is understandable.
It shows the extent of his egotism, and gives more evidence of his distorted values.
Troilus's last words to Aeneas demonstrates how his own inner struggle has been adopted by the whole of Troy after Hector's death:
Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe.
The Trojans wish to avenge the death of Hector; their misplaced values mean that patience in adversity is impossible.
The manner of Hector's death makes their reaction even more disturbing — he is killed as a result of a materialistic whim for a soldier's ‘sumptuous armour’.
The sickening way in which Achilles sets his Myrmidons on the unarmed Hector, and then tells them to ‘cry you all amain, ‘Achilles has the might Hector slain’’ shows that the morality of the Greeks is equally detestable.
It is left to Pandarus to end the play, on an infected note which is perfectly fitting; he describes the audience as ‘Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade’, and implies his venereal diseases will kill him within months.
The consequences of his immorality have come to bear upon him, but he has no desire to reform the next generation:
Till then I'll sweat and seek about for eases, And at that time bequeath you my diseases.
Troilus and Cressida is a play about inconstancy and misplaced, distorted values.
A wry and comical early cynicism rapidly transforms into an overwhelming sense of sourness.
There seems to be nothing of real worth in either Troy or the Greek camp.
The absence of any form of cathartic end means that the play cannot be classed as a ‘tragedy’.
And the comedy of Thersites and Pandarus does not provide relief: it merely reveals the hypocrisy of war and lechery of ‘love’.
Therefore the genre of Troilus and Cressida is as inconstant as the characters it describes.
Its defiance of critical labelling is perfectly in keeping with its central theme: the corruptibility of structure and ideals.
However it would be wrong to claim that this represented a view of existence.
Shakespeare is portraying a particular society and time which was cynical and sour; his play is not a nihilistic vision of the whole world.
This can be proved by the character of Ulysses, who can perceive that social and military values have been twisted.
He is completely detached, as his final lines show:
Ajax hath lost a friend, And foams at the mouth, and he is armed and at it, Roaring for Troilus, who hath done today Mad and fantastic execution…
There is a definite sense that Ulysses is above the cynicism and sourness, even if he has to descend to the level of the other warriors to convince them of his ideas.
He realises they are fighting only to ‘gild’ Menelaus' horns; and is disgusted by Cressida's easy morals when she arrives in the Greek camp, kissing anyone that offers:
Her wanton spirits look out At every joint and motive of her body.
Hector is a man who is simply perverted by his time: his speech in the war council shows that, with different values prevalent, he might not have opted to  continue such a war.
This could apply to almost all of the play's characters — for even if they cannot live up to their ideals, at least they have some.
When Troilus says:
What's aught but as 'tis valued?
he is stating the play's premise: that at a certain time and place, existence could be based on immoral, infected, cynical and sour values.
