Dozens of terrapins bought during the Teenage Mutant Turtles craze are being abandoned by their owners and dumped in council ponds.
In one area alone more than fifty have been found.
Zoologists say the problem's so bad native species could be at risk.
Nick Clark reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Cllr MAURICE FANNING/Thamesdown Borough Council
NIGEL PLATT/Cotswold Wildlife Park
Voice over
You'd be suprised what you can find in a municipal pond in midwinter.
This red eared terrapin is a victim of a fad that's out of fashion.
In Swindon's council parks and gardens, ponds in hot houses have been accumulating an unwanted collection of the American reptiles; large and small.
Terrapins have been left here and in similar ponds around the country by bored pet owners for years, but the numbers have been growing thanks to children who have tired of the Teenage Mutant Hero Turtle craze that led them to buy terrapins in the first place.
Male speaker
Indulgent parents bought their children terrapins and now they don't want them.
Voice over
The problem with the terrapins is reaching proportions that's worrying zoologists.
So many have been released in the wild that they're threatening native species.
Male speaker
They threaten eco-systems.
Voice over
Some criticism is being levelled at pet shop owners for indiscriminate buying and selling.
Male speaker
Pet shops should stop importing these animals.
Voice over
Meanwhile council officers in Swindon say they can't cope with any more terrapins.
They say pet owners should recognise their responsibilities and stop abandoning their pets.
The New Year brought a change of luck for Swindon Town who ended a run of ten games without a win by beating Millwall three-one at the County Ground yesterday…in the fourth division Hereford lost at Gillingham…
Tim Russon reports 
Voice over
Ring out the old ring in the new.
Swindon Town celebrated the start of 92 with a three goal blast.
They had Millwall running for cover in the first half and for once made the most of their superiority.
Duncan Shearer shot them into the lead midway through the first half with his 21st goal of the season.
The second came seven minutes later.
Mitchell and Simpson opened things up and created the chance for Martin Ling to score.
One of Town's resolutions must have been to make more of their chances.
It was 3-0 just before half-time as Shearer threw himself at the ball.
Millwall were a disappointment in the first half; they never played.
This was their best chance; their only chance really.
Different story after the break; Swindon were blown out; Millwall full of steam.
John McGinley made it 3-1 after 52 minutes and Swindon were under a fair bit of pressure.
They held on, kept Millwall out; came close to a fourth but that would have flattered Swindon: 3-1 and a happy new year at the county ground.
No bubbles or balloons for fourth division Hereford.
The first day of '92 brought defeat at Gillingham; they were sunk by two goals in two minutes.
Steve Lovell got the first, Neil Smith the second.
Hereford's away form is appalling.
Just one win in the league this season.
The only cheer came when Harry Caffrey got a goal back just before half-time; that was it, 2-1 to Gillingham.
Now with just 358 days left until Christmas, here's the ultimate present for the festive season in nineteen ninety-two.
It's a model train with a price tag that puts it in a league of its own.
Tim Hurst reports.
ROSS-on-WYE/Herefordshire
ALAN KEEF/Engineer
Voice over
It must be the ultimate train-set, a real steam engine, whistle an' all, built by a company near Ross on Wye in Herefordshire.
This one won't stay on a model track in the back garden, it's being exported to Holland to pull passengers round a theme park, but the builder would be delighted to do it again.
In the past Alan Keef has specialised in small diesel trains that just LOOK like steam engines.
He traces his love of trains back to his great grandfather in the 1870's.
He admits he's just a small boy at heart.
Oh the idea of saving now for this year's Christmas present, there's one small snag, it will cost around £60,000.
A car enthusiast has found a new way of making money out of Minis…he's turning them into furniture.
He's making sofas which he calls driving seats…and they're selling all over the world.
Richard Barnett reports:
STINCHCOMBE Gloucestershire
PAUL MASON Furniture Maker
Voice over
At first sight, you might think Paul Mason is about to build a Mini.
But these two wings and the grille won't go onto a car at all.
They're about to form the basis of a sofa.
Paul had the idea of turning cars into furniture after working for years restoring classics.
When the classic car market collapsed, he had to find something else to do with the vehicles awaiting restoration:
Male speaker
He looked out of the window and saw a Singer Vogue and decided to turn it into furniture.
Voice over
Paul started making the sofas he calls driving seats last Spring and he's already sold thirty.Some have gone abroad to Canada, the United States and Germany.
And the Japanese are keen to import them too.
Paul no longer uses old cars as a basis for the sofas; it's cheaper to buy the parts that he needs new.
The Mini sofa has proved the best seller and if demand goes on rising he's hoping to turn out up to twenty of these off-beat seats a week.
Male speaker
The furniture is something different which appeals to people.
And it's also very comfortable so you can sink into the sofa and watch television.
Voice over
Paul sells the Mini driving seats for around five hundred pounds.
They retail in the shops for around £800.
You could actually buy a second hand mini car for that, but the seats wouldn't be nearly as luxurious as this.
IRA threat to intensify violence
The IRA has threatened to intensify violence in Ulster and on mainland Britain.
Man shot by marksmen had replica guns
A man shot dead by marksmen during a siege in West Yorkshire was armed with replica guns which could not be fired.
Esso and BP to cut petrol by 6p per gallon
A petrol price war is expected after Esso and BP announced they're to cut prices by more than six pence per gallon from tomorrow in response to cuts of four point five pence made by other companies.
Prices rise in Russia and Ukraine
Shop prices in Russia and the Ukraine have risen sharply as the two countries take their first steps to a market economy by removing state controls.
Drink-drive arrests rise
There's been a rise in the number of arrests for drink-driving over the holiday period.
Bank of England against rise in interest rates
The Governor of the Bank of England, Robin Leigh-Pemberton has argued against a rise in interest rates or the devaluation of the pound.
FTSE down 8
A busy day on the financial front, at one point the FTSE index of the top one hundred companies rose above the twenty-five hundred mark to suffer later losses.
It closed down (8.3 at 2492.8) eight point three at twenty-four, ninety-two point eight.
The pound is up at ($1.87) one dollar, eighty-seven and at (DM2.85) two marks, eighty-five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.45 p.m.
Goodbye.
(ad lib)
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
IRAQ 1991
WITHINGTON/Gloucestershire
DOUGLAS MORRIS/Gulf Families/Crisis Line
Dr STUART TURNER/Stress Specialist
Sir TEDDY TAYLOR MP/Con Southend
Voice over
Almost a year since the end of the Gulf War, more and more of the British men and women who took part are asking for help in straightening out their lives.
At the headquarters of the Gulf Families' Crisis Line support group at Withington in Gloucestershire, volunteers have announced previously confidential figures on the depth of the problem.
Of 1200 families who asked for help in 1991, 56 percent of marriages are breaking down, 55 percent are depressed, 39 percent are drinking too much, and one in five is abusing their partner.
Eleven people have attempted suicide and three have succeeded.
Psychiatrists agree that the so-called post traumatic stress disorder afflicting service personell returning from war can change their lives forever.
The Families' Crisis Line is running out of money — it costs around £250 to help each family — now senior politicians say the Government must help.
The Ministry of Defence say they'll help anyone who asks for help…
Crisis Line say many who need help don't know it; and it's the family that suffers.
Police investigating the death of a man in a house fire have now ruled out murder.
Detectives launched an enquiry after the body of Michael Chatfield was found as firemen fought a blaze in a three storey house.
Nick Clark reports.
BANBURY
CHRIS DAVIES/Eyewitness
Det Ch Insp JOHN MAYNE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Fire crews were called to the house in Banbury at six o clock yesterday morning.
Inside the blazing bedsit accomodation, in a hallway of the top floor they discovered the body of Michael Chatfield, believed to be in his forties…he'd died from smoke inhalation.
Another man escaped from a back window, cutting his hands as he smashed a way through…blood from the injury still evident on the doorstep of the neighbouring house where he raised the alarm.
Male speaker
The bloke knocked on the door with a bleeding hand.
Flames were pouring from the house.
Voice over
Detectives said the fire appeared to have started in several places at once.
Earlier this morning Home Office forensic experts were called in as the police believed they may be dealing with a murder investigation.
That possibility has since been ruled out.
Male speaker
The man who died started the fire himself.
We do not know whether it was deliberate.
Voice over
An inquest is to be held into Mr Chatfield's death at a date yet to be set.
The RSPCA is attempting to trace the owners of three starving dogs which were dumped in the street.
Officials say the dogs had been starved for over a month.
Debbie Kelly reports.
WHITMINSTER/Gloucestershire
Insp ALAN BROCKBANK/RSPCA
Voice over
The starving animals were found shivering after being left to die at the side of a road at Staverton in Gloucestershire.
The three two lurchers and a Staffordshire bull terrier are being cared for now by the RSPCA workers who believe they hadn't eaten for at least a month.
The RSPCA believes the dogs were dumped because the owner feared he may be proscuted on cruelty charges.
It'll take time, but vets believe with proper care the dogs will recover and go to new homes.
It'll take time, but vets believe with proper care the dogs will recover and go to new homes.
Police have been getting tough with drivers over the new tyre safety legislation which came into force yesterday.
Some drivers whose tyre tread is below the new legal limit have been let off with a caution…others face prosecution.
But one tyre specialist says the law doesn't go far enough and he thinks the limit should be increased even further.
Erika Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
PC NIGEL KINDERMAN/Wiltshire Police
DOUG HALL/Manager ATS Swindon
Voice over
This tyre is illegal.
The tread has been worn below the new limit of 1.6mm.
In fact three tyres on this one car failed the test.
It was a shock to one taxi driver, even though he knows about the new law.
Male speaker
I'm only too aware of it.
I'm a trained mechanic which makes it even worse.
In seven years driving a cab this is the first time I've been done for anything.
Female speaker
What are you going to do now?
Male speaker
Take the car back to its owner and kick him…hard!
Voice over
In this roadside check, drivers with one or two suspect tyres were given fourteen days to get them into shape.
Although some weren't sure about the need for tighter legislation.
Male speaker
I thought one millimetre was good enough on this kind of car.
With a high performance car a greater depth is required.
I think it's probably right on this one.
Male speaker
As tread depth gets down to a certain level, the efficiency of the tyre reduces.
So in wet weather the tyre aquaplanes in heavy breaking and will go out of control.
Voice over
It's been all hands to the deck at this tyre fitters.
With the New Year legislation, many drivers have have been making a New Year resolution to steer clear of trouble.
Male speaker
Most of the tyres we change are worn to the legal limit.
There are a few that are changed before that and there are those that go beyond the legal limit.
When you consider that when a tyre is down to one point six millimetres there's not enough rubber on the road when conditions are wet, in hazardous conditions.
I personally would have prefered two millimetres, the full width of tread and full circumference.
But the law has been changed to one point six so we must accept that.
Voice over
Offenders could face a fine of a thousand pounds.
But it'll cost something in the region of a hundred pounds to replace a set of tyres.
A small price to pay when staying legal can save lives.
A watchmaker needed thirteen stitches after being knocked unconscious in an unprovoked attack.
when he was set upon outside The Steam Train pub in Cheney Manor road.
A twenty one year-old man and woman are due in court in connection with the incident.
The founder of a group formed to support relatives of those fighting in the Gulf war, has denied stealing from the organisation 
GLOUCESTER
Drink drive campaigners have renewed their call for random breath tests following the release of figures for the police's Christmas and New Year campaign.
Overall, the number of postive tests was down across the region, but campaigners and the police say the figures are still not low enough.
Kim Barnes reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES
Asst Ch Const TIM DAVISON/Thames Valley Police
GRAHAM BUXTON/Campaign Against Drink Driving
Voice over
Police forces around the region mounted their seasonal crackdown on drink-driving…carrying out breath tests wherever they had grounds for suspicion.
As ever they found drunk drivers but across the area the numbers fell.
Thames Valley police caught one hundred and fifty four…thats down on last years one hundred and ninety nine.
But the proportion of positive tests was up…to five point four per cent from four per cent.
Police chiefs remain concerned 
says clearly the total isn't good enough and the campaign goes on.
After years of increasingly dramatic campaigns the message does appear to be getting through…
West Mercia police found ninety nine drivers over the legal limit out of more than nine hundred tested.
That was one fewer than last year.
In Gloucestershire police breathalysed almost five hundred motorists with forty-three positive.
Last year fifty nine were positive.
In Wiltshire out of more than a thousand tests fifty one proved positive compared with sixty last year.
But campaigners still arent satisfied.
Grahan Buxton who lost a daughter to a drunkne driver says police need tougher powers.
Buxton…says police should be able to carry out random breath tests.
Top traffic officer Walter Girven, Wiltshire's Chief Constable accuses those found positive of a blatant disregard foir the law.
All sides say the battle against drink driving is yet to be won.
Two Northamptonshire policewomen have been disciplined after incidents involving remand prisoners in cells.
WPC Helen Smith has been banned from cell duties after she was seen getting a shoulder massage from one prisoner.
Detective Constable Julie Bignall was reported for allowing a prisoner to plait her hair.
Both incidents happened at Campbell Square police station.
Both women are now on other duties.
An inquiry is underway into an illicit New Year's Eve drinks party at a top-security jail.
LONG LARTIN/Worcestershire
Thirty prisoners at Long Lartin jail in Worcestershire refused to return to their cells until they had seen in 1992.
At midnight they drank a toast to the New Year, joined hands to sing Auld Lang Syne and then returned to their cells.
All thirty will be disciplined.
An investigation's begun into how the men got hold of the alcohol.
A car enthusiast has found a new way of making money out of Minis…he's turning them into furniture.He's making sofas which he calls driving seats…and they're selling all over the world.Richard Barnett reports:
STINCHCOMBE Gloucestershire
PAUL MASON Furniture Maker
Voice over
At first sight, you might think Paul Mason is about to build a Mini.
But these two wings and the grille won't go onto a car at all.
They're about to form the basis of a sofa.
Paul had the idea of turning cars into furniture after working for years restoring classics.
When the classic car market collapsed, he had to find something else to do with the vehicles awaiting restoration:
Male speaker
He looked out of the window and saw a Singer Vogue and decided to turn it into furniture.
Voice over
Paul started making the sofas he calls driving seats last Spring and he's already sold thirty.Some have gone abroad to Canada, the United States and Germany.
And the Japanese are keen to import them too.
Paul no longer uses old cars as a basis for the sofas; it's cheaper to buy the parts that he needs new.
The Mini sofa has proved the best seller and if demand goes on rising he's hoping to turn out up to twenty of these off-beat seats a week.
Male speaker
The furniture is something different which appeals to people.
And it's also very comfortable so you can sink into the sofa and watch television.
Voice over
Paul sells the Mini driving seats for around five hundred pounds.
They retail in the shops for around £800.
You could actually buy a second hand mini car for that, but the seats wouldn't be nearly as luxurious as this.
IRA threat to intensify violence
The IRA has threatened to intensify violence in Ulster and on mainland Britain.
Man shot by marksmen had replica guns
A man shot dead by marksmen during a siege in West Yorkshire was armed with replica guns which could not be fired.
Esso and BP to cut petrol by 6p per gallon
A petrol price war is expected after Esso and BP announced they're to cut prices by more than six pence per gallon from tomorrow in response to cuts of four point five pence made by other companies.
Prices rise in Russia and Ukraine
Shop prices in Russia and the Ukraine have risen sharply as the two countries take their first steps to a market economy by removing state controls.
Drink-drive arrests rise
There's been a rise in the number of arrests for drink-driving over the holiday period.
Bank of England against rise in interest rates
The Governor of the Bank of England, Robin Leigh-Pemberton has argued against a rise in interest rates or the devaluation of the pound.
FTSE down 8
A busy day on the financial front, at one point the FTSE index of the top one hundred companies rose above the twenty-five hundred mark to suffer later losses.
It closed down (8.3 at 2492.8) eight point three at twenty-four, ninety-two point eight.
The pound is up at ($1.87) one dollar, eighty-seven and at (DM2.85) two marks, eighty-five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.45 p.m.
Goodbye.
(ad lib)
Exactly one hundred years ago, the author J.R.R. Tolkien was born.
His books have sold more than sixty million copies, but today's anniversary is being marked quietly by a few devoted readers.
Debbie Kelly reports.
DOUGLAS GRAY J
ANN HAYWARD Tolkien Society
Voice over
’’ In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit’’’’the opening to a novel that transformed the face of fantasy literature.
The author was an Oxford don, JRR Tolkien.
His books still sell nearly four million copies a year, but he wrote his first stories to entertain his children.
At Oxford his subject was medieval English.
The man who now holds the chair in his name remembers him as a tutor.
There's a bust of the author in Exeter college chapel; one of the few reminders of him in Oxford.
Others are in the the Eagle and Child public house in the centre of Oxford.
Here, in what was the landlords back room, Tolkien would meet with other dons including CS LEWIS.
Once a year, members of the Tolkein Society visit here.
Anne Hayward has been a member for 15 years and re-reads the Lord of the Rings annually in three or four days.
At nine o'clock precisely members of the Tolkien Society will raise their glasses to the author.
Its something the author would have appreciated.
Tolkein died in 1973 and is buried in the corner of a cemetry on the outskirts of Oxford.
The anniversary of his birth is being marked with the re-issue of his books including one by the English artist Alan Lee, another interpretation of Middle Earth and a saga that endures.
New breast cancer treatment proves successful
Doctors claim they've found a new way of treating breast cancer which could save thousands of lives.
Gunmen shoot protestors in Georgia
The violence in Georgia continues.
Three protestors supporting President Gamsakhurdia have been shot dead by gunmen in Tblisi.
President accuses Russia of supporting rebels
Meanwhile, the President has accused Russia of supplying arms to the rebels.
PLO claims Middle East talks are in jeopardy
The Palestine Liberation Organisation says the Middle East peace talks could be in jeopardy unless the USA persuades Israel to rescind the explusion of twelve Palestinians.
FTSE up 11
The hundred shares index closed up (11.3 at 2504.1) eleven point three at twenty-five o four point one.
The pound is down at ($1.85) one dollar, eighty five, and up at (DM2.86) two marks, eighty-six.
And finally…news of a special series next week on Central News South.
Fifty years ago, the Oxford Committee for Famine Relief was formed to help the victims of Nazi occupation in Europe.
Now known as Oxfam…
Britain's largest Aid Agency works in seventy countries around the world.
Voice over
(ad lib)
Thieves have stolen thirty thousand pounds worth of silver, including historic racing trophies from a stud farm.Police say the crime was the work of professionals, as only the most valuable solid silver was taken.Richard Barnett reports:
BACTON/Herefordshire
BRUCE MANLEY/Stud Farm Owner
Voice over
In Bacton stud farmhouse, only sprigs of holly now decorate a dining table that had been used to display forty eight pieces of antique silver.
The family had put out the items including tea services and Georgian candlesticks so house guests could admire them over the New Years holiday.
But on the night of January 1st, thieves crept in through a back door and took £30,000 worth of family heirlooms, including two trophies won by the stud farm nearly a century ago:
Male speaker
The silver is always put out at Christmas.It's worrying that the thieves knew that.
Voice over
It's the second time thieves have stolen horse racing trophies from the family.
Five years ago they took the 1927 Grand National Winners Cup.
It was awarded to’ Sprig’a horse bred at Bacton.
Viewers who are deaf or hard of hearing will be getting a new service from Central next week.
We'll be providing subtitles on our main news programme at 6.25 each evening.
They can be seen on the Oracle teletext system.
The decision to go ahead with subtitling was taken after a successful experiment pioneered at Central South last year.
CHRIS ROBERTSON/Central Television
ANDREW LAMBOURNE/System Inventor
JACK ASHLEY MP/Lab Stoke South
Voice over
The control gallery is the centre of Central South's output.
It's from here the new subtitling system will be operated.
This is an example of the how the subtitles will appear on screen if you dial page 888 of Oracle.
The system works in conjunction with Central's newsroom computer system and will provide a word-for-word transcript of the day's news stories as they are presented on-screen.
Chris Robertson of Central TV explains how many will benefit from the service which will keep up with events as they happen.
Central News South was the first regional news programme in Britain to experiment with sub-titles for the deaf and hard of hearing last January.
After a year of further research, planning, test transmissions and consultation with concerned groups, the service is now going into operation on the main edition of Central News.
The systems inventor explains that information will present news more or less word-for-word.
It's all part of a commitment by Central to subtitle as many programmes as possible and has been welcomed by campaigners for an improved service for the deaf and hard of hearing.
Jack Ashley MP says the deaf and hard-of-hearing will now be able to keep up to date with the news.
The Oracle subtitling service begins here on Central South on Monday night at six twenty-five.
Voice over
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
ANDY MELVILLE/Oxford United
Voice over
all the cup news will be on Central at just after five tomorrow…now Britain's boat people will be setting course for Earls Court over the next week to take in this year's Boat Show…
In Central South we're landlocked but boating still plays an important part in our leisure and local economy…so let's set sail to London to see the show 
TONY PERRINS/Sealine
MIKE MORTON/Barrus
RICHARD SIMMONS/Laser
TOM BALLANCE/Bossom's
ANGELA HOLROYDE/Volunteer
Voice over
the first weekend of ninety two is a busy one…our weekly roundup starts with the big rugby game in Gloucester…here's Mark Kiff 
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
FIRE BRIGADE VIDEO/RAF HULLAVINGTON/Wiltshire
CHRIS GREEN/Wiltshire Fire Brigade
Wing Cmdr MIKE CHAPPLE/Base Commander
Voice over
The fire at the Parachute Services Flight at RAF Hullavington was one of the biggest ever seen in Wiltshire.
The flames quickly engulfed the entire hangar, lighting up the night sky.
At its height more than one hundred and fifty firemen tackled the blaze called from three counties.
It took them three hours to bring it under control.
All that remains is the crumpled skeleton of the burnt out hangar.
Its walls weakened on the verge of collapse; the roof, caved in.
Male speaker
It was quite a traumatic sight.
You can see the devastation behind me.
The building will probably have to be demolished.
Voice over
The fire claimed hundreds of parachutes which were being prepared for military exercises.
Around eighty-five thousand are packed and serviced here each year for the RAF and the army.
The number one Parachute Training School at RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire is one of its biggest clients.
The fire means some courses will be disrupted.
Elsewhere other airborne training exercises will be cancelled.
An emergency parachute operation will be set up at Hullavington but the consequences of the fire go deeper.
Male speaker
It's regrettable but we have lost all the service records.
All the historical records have gone up in flames.
Male speaker
It's a very sad sight.
The aftermath of a fire is always sad.
It was built in 1937 and withstood World War two.
Now it's totally ruined.
Voice over
An RAF Board of Inquiry and Fire Brigade investigation will try to establish how the fire happened.
The parachute service was due to be taken over by a civilian operation when the base closes in the Autumn.
The fire has put it's future in doubt.
Scientists may have made a breakthrough in the treatment of breast cancer using drugs first developed in the nineteen sixties.
The disease is the second biggest killer of women in this country — the new treatment could save a thousand lives a year.Russell Trott reports.
OXFORD
JEAN GILLILAND/Breast Cancer Patient
RICHARD PETO/Imperial Cancer Research Fund
Voice over
Jean Gilliland from Oxford developed breast cancer last autumn at the age of 75.
She's undergone vital surgery to remove the cancer and now, in addition, is taking the drug, Tamoxifen, which, according to the new research, can reduce the risk of death by a quarter.
For the victims of breast cancer like Jean, the drug may mean the difference between life and death.
The drug has been around for the last 20 years, but this is the first time the research has been carried out over such a lengthy period.
Researchers say the drug can save 1,000 lives in this country alone and more than 10,000 worldwide.
Although the findings are encouraging, they're by no means the complete answer to the problem.
Many women will still require surgery; for some the treatment of cancer with drugs isn't appropriate.
This drug isn't suitable for every woman…will only affect older age group…who's
The researchers claim older women like Jean Gilliland may now have an improved chance of living longer and without the need for surgery or the side effects.
The team at Oxford's cancer fund are now planning longer term research with other organisations world-wide to assess the effects of tamoxifen over a longer period of time to see if it can continue saving lives.
Small garages in the region could be forced out of business in a new petrol price war.
Forecourts are drastically cutting prices after the Tesco supermarket chain announced a massive drop in the cost of a gallon.
Gargy Patel reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
SIMON WALKER/Tesco Manager
GRAHAM DUNN/Garage Manager
Dr PAUL HORSNELL/Institute for Energy Studies
Voice over
Garages like Tyre Sales in Abingdon are meeting the Tesco challenge head on; slashing prices to match the supermarket chain's move to sell petrol for under two pounds a gallon.
Motorists queued to take advantage of the reduction.
They say it's great and say other's should cut their prices.
The supermarket's suppliers Gulf Oil, based in Cheltenham, said it was reacting to a local situation and Tesco says the cut is part of it's service to customers, denying it's creating an artificially low price.
He says they are market leaders and serve one in twenty drivers, other chains can follow them.
With prices now at their lowest for two years, motorists are no doubt hoping the competition will drive prices down even further.
and finally congratulations to the first big Central South winner of the New Year.
Liz Macdonald from Gloucester helped sail the Nuclear Electric boat over the line first in Tasmania at the end of the second leg of the British Steel Challenge…she was at sea for 48 days…22 hours…and 26 minutes 
ad lib handover 
The first weekend of the new year has been a busy one for the regions fox hunts — and for anti hunt campaigners.
Opposition to fox hunting continues to grow — a recent gallup poll showed eighty percent of people in England want to see it banned.
One alternative which is attracting increasing interest is drag hunting, where the horses and hounds chase an artificial scent.
Anne Dawson spent a day with the Bucks and Berks draghounds.
IAN BALDING/Hunt Master
ROGER PALMER/Hunt Chairman
Ch Insp DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
MARK CHAMBERLAIN/Drag Hunter
Voice over
Britain today salutes a new champion.
Far away from the drama of the FA Cup, and other peaks of athletic endeavour, the 1993 winner of the Poohsticks championships is cuddling her prize teddy bear.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
LITTLE WITTENHAM Oxfordshire
JORUND KJAEREM Norwegian Competitor
FRODE REICH Norwegian Competitor
MOIRA CREEK Winner
LYNN DAVID Organiser
Voice over
Can there be a better of example of the fairytale world meeting reality than the World Poohsticks Championships on the Thames in Oxfordshire.
The glory of victory, the bitterness of defeat, the sunny nature of everyone as they cross the bridge into the magic world for a few hours on a frosty January day.
The idea is to buy a stick, then drop it; not throw it mind, but drop it on one side of the bridge and hope it beats the others past the finishing line.
Female speaker
I don't think the white ones are anby good; they never seem to win.
Female speaker
I don't think I'll win, it's only for fun really.
Voice over
The idea comes from the Winnie The Pooh characters created by A.A.Milne.
This was the 9th championships at Little Wittenham.
The number of entries grows every year and they come from all over the world, including Norway.
Male speaker
We have read Pooh since we were children.
Male speaker
I think it's the best book I ever read.
Voice over
The rules are fiercely applied.
Each stick has a colour code and infringements are easily spotted.
Male speaker
It was in the lead, but it was thrown and that's against the rules.
They must be dropped.
It means a life ban.
Voice over
Such is the shame at being found out, that no one would admit to owning the orange stick.
Eventually they were wittled down to 3 finalists.
A nail-biting finish, but finally won by Moira Creek at her first attempt and a complete stranger to Pooh culture.
The prizes, a teddy bear, plaque, cup and a big jar of yummy in the tummy honey.
Male speaker
Highlight of the year so far.
I shall not live it down when I get to the office.
Voice over
Another triumph as well for organiser Lyn David, the lock keeper and recently awarded the British Empire Medal.
Male speaker
It's becoming a tradition now.
And it gives us an excuse to let people know about the River Thames.
Voice over
And that was it for another year.
The fairy tale was over; the winners and losers and gone.
All water under the bridge until next year.
Wall of silence over’ known’killer
Police investigating the murder of John Stanley, who was fourteen and from Moss side in Manchester, say that some people know who the killer is, but are too frightened to speak out.
Bosnian peace talks near break up
Yugoslav peace conference chairman, Lord Owen has warned failure of the talks could unleash more ferocious fighting.
The conference, involving the three warring factions in Bosnia, is close to breaking up.
’ Face me’MP tells gunmen
A nationalist MP has challenged Loyalist gunmen, who murdered a father and son in Tyrone, to meet him face to face.
Seamus Mallon accused the terrorists of doing their talking down the barrel of a gun.
Man held over bin bag body
A man is being questioned by detectives hunting the killer of a woman whose burned body was found in a bin liner.
The body of Angela Stewart was found at a picnic spot near Farnham.
FTSE up 15
The hundred shares index closed up 15 points at 28-61 point 5.
The pound is down at one dollar fifty and up at two marks forty-five.
Before we go a word about tomorrow night's programme when we'll be looking back at some of the highlights from the first ten years of Central News.
In the early eighties the area was affected by the Falkands War, The Miners' Strike, the Chernobyl disaster and the American bombing of Libya.
But there was always time for a look at the lighter side of life too, as you'll find out in,’ A Decade of News’, tomorrow, Wednesday and Thursday at six twenty-five.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Students from all over the world have gathered for a unique championships.
They'll spend the next week battling with each other to see who is the champion student debater.
Mike Rowbottom reports 
OXFORD
GEORGE SOLVENERO/Adelaide University
ADAM BRUCE/Debate Judge
Voice over
This is the next generation of international politicians honing their debating skills at Oxford University.
They're trying to interrupt a speaker to give information during the first round of the World Student Debating Championships.
It's supposed to clarify and illuminate the argument, but if it confuses and muddies it, so much the better.
Female speaker
Is he aware of the fact that the president of the Bosnian state is a moslem?
Voice over
They're aiming to emulate the practiced masters in Parliaments around the World.
Male speaker
you'd raised itself you twit it wouldn't have mattered.
Male speaker
You can tell when my honorable friend is losing the debate.
Voice over
These are the 13th championships and they're being staged in Oxford for the first time.
Some 400 students from all over the world are trying to prove that words can hurt just as much as sticks and stones.
Female speaker
I've always enjoyed talking and arguing since I was a kid.
Female speaker
A lot of us are here to see how this sort of debate goes, but some people will be very competitive.
Male speaker
His argument is so wrong I don't know where to begin.
Voice over
Teams have 2 speakers and they must be for or against whichever motion is on the table.
They don't get to choose which side and they have just 15 minutes to prepare.
Male speaker
Who are the UN in their light blue berets and pretty blue and white flag?
Cambridge Rugby Team on tour perhaps…
No.
Voice over
Here it's a virtue to have no belief in what you say, bandying words is an admired skill.
Male speaker
95% of the time I'm arguing for something I don't believe.
That's the fun of it.
Male speaker
We award points for wit and delivery, but most of all, it's for the content of the speeches.
Voice over
The finals take place later in the week when the last 32 teams will battle it out in the historic surroundings of the Oxford Union.
There they'll find talk is anything, but cheap.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BBC WALES
BRIAN HORTON/United Manager
Voice over
Second division, Swansea away in the cup was never going to be an easy ticket for Oxford, but when Nick Cusack scored with just over 10 minutes to go at the Vetch Field, United looked a good bet for the 4th round.
Within a minute, though, it was 1-1.
Swansea hit back with an equaliser from Colin West and so it is all back to the Manor for the replay a week on Tuesday.
The winners have Grimsby in the next round and that's a good draw.
Brian Horton says it is a good draw for United, but they have to beat Swansea first.
Swindon Town will be at home to Manchester City or Reading in the Fourth Round if they can beat Queens Park Rangers in the Third Round…that tie kicks off in an hours time in London…
Town of course have been hit by the big freeze…this is their first game in a fortnight 
GLENN HODDLE/Town Manager
Voice over
The earliest risers over a frostbound Swindon yesterday, were the hot air balloonists.
For them, conditions couldn't have been better.
Next up, the Swindon Town first team squad.
For them, conditions couldn't have been worse.
They used to play on grass.
For the last few days, though, they've been having to train where and when they can.
This was the squad's last training session before travelling to London to face Queens Park Rangers.
Town lost both of their Christmas games to the weather.
They've gone 16 days without a game
Glenn Hoddle says its been frustrating and annoying not to have had a game, but they've played Spurs in a friendly and are in good shape.
And there are changes in the Town team tonight.
Full-back, Paul Bodin is back after injury and striker, Dave Mitchell, drops back into the defence to cover for Colin Calderwood, who's suspended.
And just to prove that Swindon are in good form, how's this for a keep fit routine — the Hoddle hoki-koki.
Hereford United next and what they would do for a cup run…come to think of it what they would do for a win…on Saturday United lost out again in the third division…two-one at Cardiff City 
Voice over
There's not that much wrong with Hereford that a win wouldn't put right.
They're short on luck and confidence and more worringly league points.
They took the lead against Cardiff with a goal from Max Nicholson.
That's his first for the club and couldn't have come at a better time for Hereford, though.
Taking the lead is often easier than holding onto it.
Cardiff came back with an equaliser just 6 minutes later.
A bad pass by Hall dropped United into trouble and a great finish by Phil Stant made things even worse.
Mr Stant of course, used to knock the goals in for Hereford and they could do with some of his sharpshooting right now.
City got their winner just after half-time.
They took it well, although Greg Downs will want to know why his defence didn't stop Nick Richardson from scoring.
United have won just one of their last 7 league matches.
For them, the only way is up.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES
LITTLE KIMBLE/Buckinghamshire
JOHN PARKER/Vet
LADY MOBBS/Owner
PC BRIAN PRICE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
An airforce technician has admitted starting a fire at an RAF base which caused nineteen million pounds damage.
The fire destroyed a hangar full of parachutes.
A second man is on trial accused of helping the technician to destroy evidence.
Simon Garrett reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
3 JANUARY 1992
Voice over
Senior aircraftman Douglas Bailey pleaded guilty to arson at Swindon Crown court.
A year and a day ago he set light to number eight hangar at RAF Hullavington in Wiltshire.
A lrge percentage of the parachutes used by British airborne servicemen were inside at the time and destroyed at a cost of more than nineteen million pounds.
It had been THE facility for parachute servicing.
Forensic evidence showed the fire had been started in two places, possibly by a cigarette lighter or match.
A friend of Bailey stationed at Hullavington at the time, Corporal Steven Paterson, is accused of helping cover up the crime.
The prosecution says Bailey smashed a window in the hangar and climbed inside to set the fire.
It's alleged he cut his thumb on the broken glass and that Paterson helped him get rid of the bloodstained clothing.
Paterson told police that on the night of the fire he and Bailey had gone to investigate the broken window incase there were intruders in the hangar.
During interviews he denied all knowledge of how the fire started but investigators said he must have been awarethat Bailey had confessed to his wife.
It's claimed as the hangar burned the two men were seen pointing at the flames and laughing.
Paterson denies helping to destroy evidence and the trial is continuing
The owners of a department store which was evacuated because of a bomb scare have criticised the police operation.
It's claimed that clearing Dickens and Jones in Milton Keynes on a busy pre-Christmas shopping day cost the firm one hundred thousand pounds in lost business.
But police say they had to act quickly to protect staff and shoppers.
Kim Barnes reports.
23 DECEMBER 1992/MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
MICHAEL COLE/House of Fraser
Ch Supt CAROLINE NICHOLL/Milton Keynes Police
Voice over
The bomb scare just 2 days before Christmas, brought Milton keynes to a halt.
Army bomb disposal experts scoured the city for 5 hours, after receiving a coded telephone message.
Thousands of shoppers were evacuated.
It's thought to have cost the Dickens and Jones department store £100,000 in lost business.
But owners House of Fraser say police should have allowed trained staff to search the shop first.
But police say the IRA message gave them less than an hour to respond.
Not enough time to involve shop staff in the search.
House of Fraser say agreed procedures weren't followed.
Police say they have to make decisions affecting hundreds of lives in minutes.
A woman who's set up a cat sanctuary in her back garden is facing a battle to stay open, after neighbours complained to the local council.
Audrey Spooner has been told she must get planning permission — or close down.
Ian Maclaren reports 
TWYNING/Gloucestershire
AUDREY SPOONER/Sanctuary Owner
Voice over
Audrey Spooner opened her Cats Protection League sanctuary four years ago.
She started with ten pens in the back garden of her bungalow in Twyning near Tewkesbury.
But in recessionary times, the number of unwanted cats has grown.
Sometimes up to fifty cats are housed here.
And that's landed Audrey in trouble…
Most neighbours support Audrey Spooner's cause…but not all of them are happy…vox
even other pet lovers are in opposition…
but one close neighbour is perfectly content…
Audrey says it's vital she wins her case…
Tewkesbury Borough Council will discuss the planning application on the 12th of January.
Audrey says she'll appeal if they turn it down.
It may not have shown on screen, but January 1st marked the beginning of a new era for Central Television.
That was the day our new licence to broadcast came into force.
It was awarded to us by the Independent Television Commission after we submitted an unopposed bid for the franchise.
As we prepare for the future, we thought we'd take a few minutes to look back — at the first ten years of Central News.
On December 31st 1981, ATV, which had served the region for 26 years, disappeared from our screens and a new era in TV began.
Cheerleaders herald the first Central News.
From Day one, when news happened, Central's cameras were there.
But romance was in the air not only for the Royal Couple.
There was always time for the unusual, like the man whose birthday present to his wife, was her chance to drive a Cheltenham and District double decker.
Whatever the weather, in Herefordshire and Shropshire, our reporter, Peter Green became firm friends with some people for whom time had stood still.
Villager, Dennis Crowther welcomes viewers to the Clee Hills in Shropshire.
And our reporters had an eye for many a shaggy dog story.
Geoff Meade tells the story of the woman from Chinnor in Oxfordshire who made a coat from her dog's hair, the woman from Swindon who moved house several times because her cat was homesick, the dog from Aylesbury with an aversion to music.
The couple from Swindon who invited 50 strangers to their wedding.
Another couple from Banbury who enjoy wedding celebrations despite a delay in the official papers coming through to make it legal.
But it seemed many of the biggest news stories came from the world of industry, most notably, the miners' strike.
Hard times came to Swindon with the closure of the rail works.
And tension grew as Stroud suffered a meningitis epidemic.
But serious or lighthearted Central News always brought you the offbeat, like the catfish who loved to be fed by hand.
The man from Bicester who blew his redundancy pay on a Rolls Royce.
A Cotswold hotel for goats and the World's biggest pancake made in Cheltenham.
A taste of Central News in the early 80s.
All that came from the time when Central News was transmitted from Birmingham.
Central News South took to the airwaves in January nineteen eighty-nine and tomorrow night we look back over our first four years.
Grounded tanker leaking oil
Oil is pouring into the sea from a stricken tanker off the coast of Shetland.
It's threatening to cause a huge ecological disaster.
The tanker, the Braer, crashed into the rocky coast in heavy seas and gale force winds.
Princess Margaret in hospital with pneumonia
Princess Margaret is in hospital with pneumonia.
She's expected to stay there for a few more days, as a precautionary measure.
Stabbed policewoman takes first steps
Policewoman, Leslie Harrison, who was stabbed in the heart, has been speaking from hospital about her ordeal.
She said she's walked for the first time and felt exhausted.
Pools companies promise more jackpot winners
The football pools companies are changing their points system, to meet the challenge of the national lottery.
It'll mean more million pound jackpot winners.
’ No doubt’about Falklands sovereignty
On the eve of the Foreign Secretary's visit to Argentina, the Government has reiterated there's no doubt about UK sovereignty over the Falklands.
FTSE down 27
Financial news, the hundred shares index closed down twenty-seven point nine at twenty-eight, thirty-three point six 
The pound is up at one dollar fifty-three, and up at two marks forty-nine.
(ad lib)
A health tribunal's been hearing how residents at a home for the mentally handicapped were fed bread and water as a punishment.
The couple who run the home are appealing against the loss of their operating licence.
Their laywer has accused former staff giving evidence of telling lies.
Tim Hurst reports.
HEREFORD
Voice over
Suzanne and Andrew Hopkinson owned a home for the mentally handicapped near Hereford when residents were abused and fed bread and water, according to former staff.
Hill House home at Bodenham near Hereford lost its registration last year following an investigation by Hereford and Worcester County Council.
The enquiry produced allegations of abuse against residents.
Mr and Mrs Hopkinson are appealling against deregistration at a health tribunal in Hereford, where former staff members are being questioned about conditions at Hill House.
A care assitant, Margaret Thoms, said she saw a woman resident who'd cut her head, lying in blooded bedclothes and nightwear for 2 days.
The tribunal has heard from another former staff member that residents were sometimes punished with meals of bread and water and confined to their rooms, if they didn't conform to a strict regime.
Hill House caters for 12 mentally handicapped residents with learning difficulties.
It remains open pending the outcome of the tribunal, which is expected to last 3 weeks.
An airman's wife has told a jury how her husband told her he started a fire which caused nineteen million pounds damage to an airbase.
The man's friend denies helping him destroy evidence.
Simon Garrett reports 
SWINDON/Wiltshire
3 JANUARY 1992
Voice over
Heather Bailey said her husband told her how he'd cut cut down a parachute in hangar 8 at RAF Hullavington and lit it with a match.
He went back later and set a second fire.
Douglas Bailey admits arson.
The fire destroyed a large portion of the armed forces parachute supplies.
Mrs Bailey says her husband told her he and Corporal Steven Paterson had gone to the hangar after a drinking spree.
Both had gone inside but it was her husband Bailey who set the fire.
Female speaker
’ Steve tried to grab my husband and take him out.
But my husband wouldn't go, so Steve left.’
Voice over
Interviewed by police Paterson said he and Bailey had gone to investigate a broken window at the hangar and that he knew nothing about how the fire started.
Steven Paterson denies helping Bailey try to destroy evidence linking him to the crime and the trial is continuing.
Roadside checks have been carried out to try to discover the identity of a baby found dead in a ditch.
The newly born boy was wrapped in a ladies jump suit.
Police say they're anxious to trace the mother as she may be in need of medical help.
Ken Goodwin reports.
LEONARD STANLEY/Gloucestershire
Det Insp MARK SUMMERS/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
The newborn baby was found next to a pile of rubbish in a ditch alongside the Leonard Stanley to Frocester road.
Police are stopping motorists who use the road in their search for clues.
Detectives hope that one major clue to the identity of the babies mother is the distinctive garment in which the body was wrapped.
He says that the woman's black jump suit is size 14, with turned up sleeves.
A post mortum examination has not revealed any sign of injury to the baby.
Police want to reassure anyone who's nervous about coming foreward with information.
He says that the main concern is that the mother is receiving the right amount of support.
If the mother is traced police can at least make sure she has recieved the correct medical attention, as well as finding out what led to the tragedy.
Swindon’ s hopes of an FA cup run came crashing down in London last night…
Town lost three-nil to premier league side Queens Park Rangers in the third round…
Tim Russon reports 
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
The scoreline doesn't tell the story.
It doesn't do Swindon justice; it doesn't say how Town could have won.
At 0-0, they missed 2 of the best chances you're ever likely to get in a cup tie against a premier league side.
A winning strike from Steve White or Craig Maskell could have changed everything.
Three goals from Rangers in 5 minutes did change everything though.
Les Ferdinand got the first 2.
Swindon had striker, Dave Mitchell playing as an emergency defender but even the very best of centre halves have trouble in stopping Ferdinand at the moment.
Goal number 3 was thumped home by Gary Penrice and after that there was no way back.
Town did everything they could, though.
The London fans applauded their skill and spirit.
Rangers buckled under the pressure, but they didn't break.
Hoddle, Maskell and Horlock could have all got goals.
It wasn't their night.
Queens Park rangers 3, Swindon 0.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
TONY HUGHES/Solicitor
JIM CROOK/Buckinghamshire Social Services
Voice over
The 14 year old from Milton Keynes has been called the boy they can't lock up.
Last summer he was placed under a supervision order after being found guilty of burglary, armed robbery and car theft.
But just one day later he was involved in a car chase — a passenger in this vehicle as it was pursued across three counties, at speeds of up to 95 miles an hour.
A month later he struck in a suburb of Milton Keynes — loosing control of a Ford Granada and crashing into a fence and a parked car.
In September he appeared before Milton Keynes magistrates, but they deferred sentence.
And in October he struck again — this time in Aylesbury, breaking into a sports club, and taking a Thames Water vehicle — for yet another joy ride.
But today his solicitor Tony Hughes told Milton Keynes magistrates the youth had changed his ways after leaving council care and moving in with foster parents.
In three months he hasn't committed a single offence.
And his foster mother told the court he was now’ learning to fix cars, not steal them.’
She believed he was’ sorry for what he had done.
The foster mother said she thought the teenager was lucky to be alive — and people couldn't believe the change in him.
The magistrates chairman told foster parents had given him a chance — it was now up to him to take it.
The 14 year old's solicitor insists the magistrates had no option but to impose a supervision order, but he can't guarantee that he won't reoffend.
He says he's been in the business too long to predict the future.
But everyone has high hopes for him.
He says if people had listen to the voices who were calling for him to be locked up then he wouldn't have had this chance to show an improvement.
Thames Valley Police will be keeping an open mind.
In the past they've called publicly for notorious joy riders to be held in secure units.
But tonight they refused to comment on the court's decision.
The miners leader Arthur Scargill has condemned the import of five thousands tons of cheap Russian coal being unloaded at docks in the region.
Mr Scargill said it was obscene to import foreign coal when British pits were under threat.
The coal's importers deny they're putting miners jobs at risk.
Ken Goodwin reports.
SHARPNESS DOCKS/Gloucestershire
ARTHUR SCARGILL/NUM President
BOB DERRICK/Ebco LTD
Voice over
Coal to keep Britain; s home fires burning, dug from mines 2,000 miles away in Russia.
The coal being unloaded at Sharpness docks is cheaper than British coal.
For the docks, it's welcome business.
But for British miners whos pits are under threat from closure it could be the opposite.
He says that it's terrible that Britain is importing foreign coal.
It costs jobs, as well as being more expensive in the long run.
The 5,000 tons of coal is one of the biggest loads ever to be brought into Sharpness docks.
It's importers, Ebco, deny that they're harming the British coal industry.
He says that the coal is for domestic use, and is being used to suppliment british supplies because demand is high at this time of year.
The increasing use of Sharpness docks for imported goods is undoubtably good news for workers there; helping to secure their jobs.
But miners say that the continuing importation of cheap foreign coal is helping to put their jobs on the scrap heap.
A murder inquiry is underway after a pensioner's body was found at his Oxfordshire home.
Jim Eggleton, who was seventy, was found lying at the foot of the stairs of his council home in Russells Water, near Nettlebed…
He'd suffered head injuries and had been stabbed in the neck.
Police have issued an artist's impression of a man who raped an eighteen-year-old woman in Milton Keynes.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire/
The rapist, who has a scar on his face, is in his early twenties and around five feet six tall.
He wore a green jacket.
The daughter of a judge has appeared in court on four separate drugs charges.
They follow an all night drink and drugs party at which a brilliant student died.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
Voice over
21 year old Georgia Griffiths, the daughter of a judge, appeared before Oxford magistrates to face 4 drugs related charges.
posession and supply of LSD from the first of december and from the following day, possession and supply of amphetamine sulphate.
Georgia a post graduate business student is the daughter of crown court recorder Peter Griffiths who sits on the Wales and Chester circuit.
The charges follow the death of 21 year old student, Henry Skelton after an all night drink and drugs party on December 2nd.
Henry, a talented sculptor and musician from Faringdon in Oxfordshire fell from a top floor window.
Meanwhile Edward Peer was fined £240 by Oxford magistrates after facing a drugs charge.
Peer, an Oxford University student, pleaded guilty to possessing LSD.
Second bomb blast in Ulster
The second bomb blast in Ulster in twenty-four hours has caused millions of pounds damage and several minor injuries.
Lamont and Smith clash over taxes
The Chancellor, Norman Lamont, has said the average taxpayer would have to pay an additional thousand pounds every year under a Labour government.
The Shadow Chancellor, John Smith, denied the Conservative claims, pledging to keep the rate at twenty-five pence.
Ousted Georgian President seeks asylum
The ousted President of Georgia, Zvlad Gamsakhurdia, has fled to Azerbaijan as rebel leaders in Georgia plan a new regime.
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down (10.9 at 2493.2) ten point nine at twenty-four, ninety-three point two.
The pound is up more than two cents at ($1.88) one dollar, eighty-eight cents and down at (DM2.85) two marks, eighty-five cents.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Goodbye.
Away from the razza mattazz of the cup life is getting harder for some of our local teams…
Take Cheltenham Town in the Vauxhall Conference league…
They're celebrating their centenary this year…not much of a party so far…the club are short of money and struggling near the bottom of the table…they haven't won a game in two months…on Saturday they were at home to Yeovil…
Mark Kiff reports 
ALLY ROBERTSON/Cheltenham Manager
Voice over
The FA Cup might have dominated the weekend's sports headlines, but for the 900 fans at Whaddon Road, the really big game was between the Robins and Yeovil.
The West Country side are bottom of the Conference; Cheltenham are in severe danger of replacing them.
And all in their Centenary Year.
No wonder there's little to smile at.
Cheltenham faces turned even glummer when Yeovil took the lead after 11 minutes, the goal from Andy Wallace.
Cheltenham had lost their last five games and despite creating some excellent chances, looked as if they might lose their sixth.
Yeovil were looking increasingly dangerous.
But the Robins kept fighting, although still the ball seemed destined not to go in.
Finally in the 64th minute, they made the breakthrough: Paul Evans, in only his second appearance since joining from Merthyr Tydfil, scoring the goal.
They could have snatched the game with some better finishing.
Like nearly every club in the land, Cheltenham are struggling financially.
It's not the way to celebrate your centenary, as manager Ally Robertson knows only too well.
Male speaker
’ It doesn't help whatever year it is, if you're in the bottom three or four in the league.
We've just got to pull ourselves together and stick together and we can pull out of this.
It's difficult, because every mistake we make, we're punished for.
We are making the chances but we can't find the back of the net.
As long as the lads keep making the chances, we have a chance to get out of this.
And if they keep showing the same committment they showed this afternoon, then we've got a chance.’
Voice over
What Cheltenham Town need it seems, are confidence and more goals like this one; then the Robins might really have something to sing about again.
Now what will nineteen ninety two bring for Gloucester Rugby Club…the league championship…well the cherry and whites are joint top of the first division and they're the only team left with a one hundred per cent record…on saturday at Kingsholm they beat Rosslyn Park by twelve points to nine…
Gloucester are in black 
Voice over
It all looked easy enough for Gloucester at first.
Tim Smith could have blown this kick over, but it was downhill then for the rest of the first half.
Rosslyn Park came back with a penalty; 3-3.
The cherry and whites pack were missing the Scottish trialists, Smith and Jones: nothing funny.
No laughs from this move in which Gloucester should have had a penalty try for a deliberate knock on.
They were struggling just afterwards, as fly-half Paul Roblin put Park into the lead with a drop goal.
Worse to come from this scrum.
Roblin again bang on target with another kick which gave the visitors a 9-3 lead at half-time.
Gloucester came back with a penalty and thankfully a matchwinning try which was masterminded by Marcus Hannaford and scored by Paul Ashmead.
Tim Smith converted, the cherry and whites made whoopee but what does the coach think about it all?
Can Gloucester win the league?
Fifty years ago in the midst of world war two a group of people got together to help the victims of Nazi occupation.The charity Oxfam was born, and it's grown steadily to become Britain's largest overseas aid agency, with an income of seventy million pounds a year.
This week to mark the anniversary we'll be looking at the work of Oxfam around the world.
Tonight we start with the early years.
1963/CANON DICK MILFORD/Co-Founder
JIM HOWARD/First Field Officer
OXFAM COMMERCIAL
DAVID BRIAR/Oxfam Director
JIM HOWARD/First Field Officer
Voice over
The fires have been burning in the orchards this weekend.It was all part of ancient rites to ensure a good crop of cider apples.And there's some evidence that it really works.Richard Barnett reports:
MUCH MARCLE/Herefordshire
BEN BYDAWELL/Leominster Morris
MICHAEL ROFF/Westons Cider
Voice over
At Westons cidermill in Much Marcle, Herefordshire three hundred revellers are setting off for the apple orchards.They're following in the footsteps of their pagan ancestors in the hopes of ensuring a bumper harvest.
In the orchard, twelve fires are lit and the work of placating the tree spirits begins.It's called wassailing…after the Anglo Saxon Was Hal meaning good health.Members of Leominster Morris pour cider around the tree roots to feed it…and a piece of toast is placed in a cleft of a branch for the spirit to eat.
Male speaker
The idea behind the ceremony is to keep the gods happy to ensure a good crop.
Male speaker
The ceremony has died out in many areas over the past hundred years, so it was a good idea to revive it.There's cider and singing and it's good fun.
Voice over
The ceremony ends with a shotgun blasted into the boughs to wake up the sleeping tree.Does it work…apparently yes.It's now thought that making such a rumpus around the trees scares off harmful insects…so wassailing really does make the orchards healthier.
And since the custom was revived four years ago the cider crop has never been better.
A new meals on wheels scheme is being tested which could cut the cost of providing hot school dinners.
The meals are cooked in larger school kitchens, then put in special containers and taken to smaller schools which would otherwise be unable to give children a hot lunch.
Tim Hurst reports.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
DIANE EMERY/Dinner Lady
JENNY d'ESTERRE/Head Teacher
ROBERT LANGFORD/Gloucestershire Services
Voice over
Thousands of primary school children in Gloucestershire faced sandwiches when county chiefs cut 3 million pounds from the education budget.
That threatened dozens of jobs in school kitchens, but now the staff have worked out that by concentrating cooking in larger schools and using a meals on wheels principle to serve others, they can provide a hot meal for everyone, without a subsidy and without putting up prices.
It does mean more effort.
New insulated containers keep the food hot for five hours, far longer than the staff need to send it to neighbouring schools like Uplands Primary in Stroud.
The scheme has to be voted on by Headteachers and parents within ten days to guarantee it's success.
The customers themselves have no doubts.
It means half the school kitchens in Gloucestershire will be redundant, except of course for the washing up.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BSkyB
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
You know that old old saying about football being a funny game, well this tie was even funnier than that, Joey Beauchamp shot United into the lead midway through the first half.
And then made the second just before half-time.
Rovers Defender, Dave Higgins punched the ball out; he was sent off for deliberate hand ball as Jim Magilton slammed home United's second.
In the second half there were chances galore.
Tranmere came back with a goal from sub Chris Malkin and could have easily snatched a draw.
On the other hand United missed four or five sitters and their third goal came from Tranmere's Steve Vickers who headed Ceri Evans' free kick into his own goal; cracking cup tie; great win for Oxford.
At the County Ground it was just as close.
Swindon took the lead against Watford after only 4 minutes, deadly Duncan Shearer once again the scorer, but here's the goal of the game, goal of the season.
Just watch this one from Dave Mitchell.
Anything Swindon did, Watford tried to better.
They came back with a beauty from Luther Blissett.
At the start of the second half, Blissett struck again and at 2-all it was anybody's game.
But Swindon came up with the winner 10 minutes from time.
Nice and neat it was too.
Greaves and Law used to score goals like these.
Swindon 3, Watford 2.
Hereford were held to a goaless draw by non league Woking…. what a prize if they win the replay though a fourth round tie at the City Ground…
Oxford must be confident…they put three past Sunderland in the league only last week…
Swindon have a tough tie no matter who wins the Coventry…
Cambridge replay…
and Town could have an old favourite back in their side for that match
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
REBECCA STONE/Cashier
Insp STEWART HAVERON/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
A shop owner is believed to have murdered his wife and then killed himself in a double shooting.
The bodies of Roy and Sue Prescott were found by their son at their Oxfordshire home last night.
Nick Clark reports.
APPLEFORD/Oxfordshire
Det Supt MICK COX/Thames Valley Police
PADDY GALE/Neighbour
Voice over
This afternoon the bodies of fifty two year old Roy Prescott and his forty seven year old wife Sue were taken from their cottage in this quiet Oxfordshire village.
Their twenty seven year old son had returned home around eleven thirty last night and found his parents dead…next to them a shotgun.
Police say they're almost certain it's a case of murder followed by suicide.
They're not looking for anyone else.
Male speaker
We've found a shot gun and are not looking for anyone in connection with this.
Male speaker
I just can't believe it.
they were a lovely quiet couple.
Voice over
Today the Prescott family business in nearby Didcot remained closed.
They'd been there for more than fifteen years.
Neighbouring shopkeepers said the business was doing well…and the couple seemed happy.
Male speaker
I just can not believe it.
Male speaker
They were very happy.
Male speaker
They were known to have argued on the day of their deaths.
Voice over
In the house tonight the Prescott's two sons and daughter are being comforted by friends as they all try and come to terms with last night's sad events.
Police are stepping up their hunt for two armed raiders who've kidnapped and threatened shop managers in a spate of robberies.
A gun's been recovered after the latest attack, in which a store manager was held captive for six hours.
Gargy Patel reports.
BICESTER/Oxfordshire
Det Chief Insp GORDON THOMPSON/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Officers have been combing scrubland and bracken on the outskirts of Bicester where the revolver was found, looking for other weapons, baseball bats used in the attack.
Store manager Richard Northover was dumped there by the two masked raiders who'd kidnapped him as he locked up the Woolworths store.
Despite a police chase the men managed to escape through bushes.
Detectives are linking it with a series of recent armed robberies, and warn the men could inflict serious injury.
He says the victims only escaped injury because they cooperated with the robbers
Three week's ago, a night supervisor and her husband were forced out of their home at gunpoint and kidnapped.
The raiders grabbed the keys to the Mac's store in Bicester and stole cash.
And in November a manager at Martin's newsagent was pushed to the ground, forced to hand over the shop keys and locked in a cupboard.
A week earlier, there was another kidnapping at a Happy Eater just outside Bicester.
A total of four thousand pounds has been offered as a reward by the Mac's store and Woolworths to find the robbers.
A new round of fare increases on British Rail have come into force, and commuters are warning they could force people off trains and into their cars.
BR says the increases — ranging from three to nearly nine percent — are needed to pay for service improvements.
Kim Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
PHILIP WHITE/Commuters' Club
RICHARD WILLIS/British Rail
Voice over
The loneliness of the long distance commuter.
Philip White's day starts on a dark station platform before most of us are up and running.
Increasingly his demanding routine is hurting his wallet as well.
With the latest round of fare increases implemented today, he's seen his season ticket to the city jump £500 to £4,200.
He represents local commuters who are angry at yet another increase.
He says it's diabolical.
Membership of the club has dwindled from 70 to 20 and its clear commuters are feeling the pinch.
Its more than my wage rise
BR have made the mistake of charging more in an attempt to make more.
Across the region fares on different services are going up anything from 3 per cent to nearly 9 per cent.
British Rail admits travellers to London are at the sharp end.
They have been targetted over recent years.
Admits commuters are dropping out but blames the recession.
And they say the increases are necessary to pay for improvements to the service.
Some hard-pressed commuters may not make it to the end of the line.)
A black and white cat called Priskin is the cleanest and luckiest in the neighbourhood.
He's survived a ninety minute spin in a washing machine, and apart from bruised ears and a broken claw, seems none the worse for wear.
Robin Powell reports.
ABINGDON Oxfordshire
CAROL BISHOP Priskin's Owner
LEONI BISHOP Carol's Daughter
Voice over
If cats had nightmares, this would be the ultimate.
Just when you thought it was safe to explore the inside of your owner's washing machine, she slams the door shut and before you know it you're hurtling through a 1200 spin cycle at 60 mph.
It did the trick.
Priskin was a little shocked, with bruised ears and a broken claw, but otherwise none the worse for wear.
Priskin's back to his mischievous ways, though he now knows to keep a low profile on washing day.
He's learned his lesson, but has she learnt hers?
As long as he keeps out of the washing machine, the vet says Pristine Priskin can expect a long and happy life.
One down, 8 to go.
Shetland slick stretches seven miles
The Shetland Oil slick now stretches seven miles.
Airlift plan to save stricken birds
Plans are being drafted to airlift birds affected by the slick to safety.
20
According to an EC delegation, twenty thousand Moslem women have been raped by Serb forces in Bosnia.
IRA firebombs four West End stores
The IRA has firebombed four department stores in the West End of London, but there were no injuries.
Ballet dancer Nuryev dies aged 54
The ballet dancer, Rudolf Nureyev, has died at the age of fifty-four following a long illness.
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven points at twenty-eight, twenty-six point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-four and up at two marks, fifty-two.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A charity worker has appeared in court to face a fresh charge of stealing from a fund set up to help Kurdish refugees.
LIBRARY PICTURES
Ruth Hilali, a former co-trustee of the Worcester Refugees Association, has been charged with stealing a hundred and twenty seven thousand pounds from the charity.
It replaces an earlier charge of stealing more than six thousand pounds after she was arrested last month.
A home for reformed alcoholics may have to close because of Government cuts.
Staff say they're worried some residents will go back to drinking.
But the local council says it's doing all it can within a limited budget.
Clare Lafferty reports.
WOOTTON BASSETT/Wiltshire
SONNY BAINS/Resident
GAY WHITTOCK/Wiltshire Council on Alcoholism
Voice over
Sonny Bains is an alcoholic.
He started drinking 18 years ago.
Last year he reached a point when he knew he had to stop.
After a period in a drying out clinic Sonny came here, to the Touchdown House residential home in Wootton Bassett.
With the help of counsellors, residents here prepare to go back to a normal life…without drink.
But now Government cuts means the home is threatened with closure.
Staff here say that would spell disaster for hundreds of alcoholics.
It costs around £100,000 a year to run Touchdown House.
Cutbacks look set to cut that by a third.
Wiltshire's Social Services department has promised not to turn its back on the problem of alcoholics.
But it says with it has a limited budget and Touchdown will have to compete with other deserving projects.
Male speaker
It's a matter of life and death.
Voice over
Animal experts from the world's biggest wildlife hospital are to join the Shetland oil disaster rescue operation.
Their task will be to help otters and seals which have been contaminated by the seven mile long oil slick.
Even so, many animals and birds won't survive.
Erika Barnes reports.
HADDENHAM/Buckinghamshire
LES STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles
Dr JOHN LEWIS/Veterinary Surgeon
Voice over
An environmental catastrophe in the making.
The broken tanker has leaked thousands of tonnes of crude oil and threatens to destroy the wildlife paradise of the Shetlands.
The fear is that thousands of birds and other native wildlife like seals and otters could die in the oily bath.
The ecological balance in the area could be destroyed.
Now the staff at St Tigglywinkles Wildlife Hospital in Buckinghamshire are preparing to come to the rescue, taking with them the experience and expertise to deal with sick creatures of the sea.
Male speaker
It's a sense of despair.
They don't know what's happened to them.
No fellow animals are going to help.
They'll just sit and die.
It's upsetting.
Voice over
The hospital team will travel to the disaster area under the banner of the European Wildlife Rehabilitators' Association.
They'll set up an emergency centre at the home of one of the islanders and have enlisted the support of one of the world's most prominent sea mammal vets.
Male speaker
We'll be dealing with animals with lung and kidney problems and others with just oil on their coats.
The first group will be more difficult to deal with.
Voice over
It'll take more than a tender touch to help the victims of the oily sea.
It'll be a daunting and soul destroying task.
Their hope is to ease the suffering, but their worst fear is that many of the creatures have been claimed by a black tide of death.
And tomorrow night we'll be reporting on the progress of that rescue operation, direct from the Shetland Isles.
Now the second part of our series on a decade of Central Television.
So far we've seen the highlights of Central News up to the end of nineteen eighty-eight when the programme was broadcast from Birmingham.
Then came Central South, to cover this area more comprehensively than was possible before.
Voice over
Central News South first took to the air for the first time on January 9th 1989.
With bases in Abingdon, Swindon and Gloucester, there'd now be a more localised news service than could be provided when Central News came from Birmingham.
However, technical hitches plagued the first night.
But viewers soon came to rely on Central South as their major source of regional news.
Central Broadcasting's Managing Director, Andy Allan, says how important it is to offer a good mixture of regional programmes with news at the heart.
Whatever the news in the region, Central South cameras were there.
One Hereford shopper claims she is a fan of the Chippendales.
Tomorrow night we turn our attention to a decade of entertainment, a review of some of Central's other programmes over the past ten years.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
RUSSELL'S WATER/Oxfordshire
JOHN TIPPER/Friend
PAUL BEECHEY/Neighbour
MYRTLE ATKINSON/Neighbour
Det Supt ROY PAYNE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Jim Eggleton had a great Christmas according to his friends, but he probably didn't live to see the New Year.
The 70 Year old Pensioner's body was found this week lying in a pool of blood at his council house in Russell's Water.
(He says: We looked through his frontwqindow and he was lying in a pool of blood.
Blood was dripping on to his hand)
The body was badly beaten with a severe slash across the throat.
Police think whoever did it may have been searching for a non existant stache of money.
Jim Eggleton, a retired van driver, was well known and liked in the hamlet of Russell's Water.
He'd lived there most of his life and got on well with his neighbours.
They got worried when they hadn't seen him for a while.
Male speaker
We hadn't heard or seen him for a while so my father suggested I go round and check I'm really horrified.
I didn't think he had a stockpile of cash there
Voice over
The last time anyone saw Jim Eggleton alive was 10.30 on Boxing day.
He'd spent Christmas with friends in Crowmarsh.
Police have searched the house They think robbery may have been behind the attack and they note that the house was open and there's no evidence of a fight.
Male speaker
Jim may have known the assailant or he may have entered the house either quietly or under a pretence
Voice over
Police say there were rumours in the village that he had a large sum, but friends say he kept it all in bank and building society accounts.
He may have died for nothing
An airman accused of setting fire to an RAF hanger has been jailed for five years for arson.
Thousands of parachutes were destroyed in the fire which caused damage put at twenty million pounds.
The court was told the airman had drunk seventeen pints of beer.
Simon Garrett reports.
JANUARY 1992/RAF HULLAVINGTON/Wiltshire
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Voice over
The final RAF assessment of twenty million pounds damage was read out by the prosecution at Swindon Crown Court.
It had taken a hundred firemen from three counties to bring the blaze under control, and it destroyed half the British armed forces stock of parachutes.Senior Aircraftman Douglas Bailey had drunk the equivalent of seventeen pints of beer.
He broke in, set a parachute alight and then went back to start a better one.
He told police many people hated working in the hangar and the thought had just come into his head that something had to be done.
Judge Mark Dyer told Bailey there was no comparable case law to base a sentence on because of the immense damage he had caused.
He said’ You are a man of exemplorary previous charecter.
But you went back to the hangar a second time with your matches to start a second fire — to destroy the very work which you did.’
Corporal Stephen Paterson was found guilty of helping Bailey try to destroy evidence by a washing a pair of his bloodstained jeans.
He's been remanded on bail for a month pending pre-sentencing reports
Prison officers at a top security jail say mental patients who should be in hospital are being locked up instead.
They say that too many sick people are being sent to prison again and again instead of being treated.
Tim Hurst reports.
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
BOB PITT/Long Lartin Officer
PHIL SAVAGE/Former Patient
Voice over
Some prisoners at Long Lartin jail near Evesham in Worcestershire should be in hospital, not a prison cell, say prison officers.
Small time offenders in need of psychiatric help are being jailed by the courts because of a rundown of psychiatric hospitals.
Now a hospital officer from Long Lartin has sparked a national debate by highlighting the problem in the latest issue of Nursing Times.
Care in the community is a new national policy for dealing with the mentally ill, following the closure of psychiatric hospitals, but many former patients are apparently falling through the net.
Prison officers say the mentally ill are harmed not helped by life in jail.
Unable to cope in the outside world without treatment, they'll be jailed by the courts again and again.
A security video is being used in the hunt for a man who raped a sixty seven year-old woman on Christmas Day.
Muriel Harvey was attacked as she walked home from midnight mass at 
LUDLOW/Shropshire
A team of British scientists have been called in to help save the city of Venice from flooding.
They've built a model of the Venetian coast to help them find a way of saving the historic Italian city from potential disaster.
Mark Kiff reports.
WALLINGFORD/Oxfordshire
Dr KEITH POWELL/Project Manager
Voice over
Venice, the city of canals, a mecca for romance and the home of many of the greatest historical treasures in the western world.
Venice is a city with a great past, but a threatened future.
The islands on which Venice is based are sinking, 9 inches in this century alone; at the same time the world's sea level is rising as the polar ice caps melt.
The Italian authorities have set aside three and a half billion pounds to bolster the city's coastal defences.
A vital part of the research work is being carried out in Oxfordshire.
Engineers at HR Wallingford have built a scale model of part of the threatened coast, they can reproduce the effects of the storm surge floods which can overwhelm the present defences.
The idea being tested is an artificial beach.
Male speaker
If it's going to work at , it will work in areas of low tidal range like the Mediterranean and the Adriatic.
It's been toyed with a few times but as far I'm aware, this is probably the first serious attempt — certainly at the sort of scale we're talking of — to use a perched beach to provide coastal protection.
Voice over
The dangers facing Venice were brought to the world's attention in 1966 when high winds and tides turned the city into a lake.
The flood, called Aqua Alta by the Venetians, lasted three days.
Venice is built on a lagoon.
The Italians are building a series of barriers at its three inlets to protect the city during a storm.
But the spit at Pellestrina, which is only a few feet high, is vulnerable to being breached, the experts believe a 12km long perched beach could provide the answer.
The present sea wall at Pellestrina is protected only by rocks.
The artficial beach would great an additional barrier; 300m wide and constructed from four million cubic metres of sand, held in by a sill made of rock, it would also create a new beach for tourists.
The engineers from Wallingford have also built a larger model in Italy, which shows that the idea will work.
Combined with computer analysis in Oxfordshire, they've discovered that the scheme can be built more cheaply.
Male speaker
Hopefully if the money is there to enable the works to be built, then we'll see Venice safeguarded well into the next century.
Voice over
Assuming Dr Powell's right, the people of Venice will be able to continue living their lives in the manner and surroundings which have made it one of the world's greatest cities.
The very first Miss World is celebrating being a cover girl on a magazine…eighty years after she won the original title.Alice Hyde is now 97 years old…but she still remembers the excitement of winning the world's top beauty contest.
Richard Barnett reports:
LEOMINSTER Herefordshire
ALICE HYDE Miss World 1911
Voice over
When Alice Hyde came out of the Broadward Lodge Elderly Peoples home in Leominster today, there was a surprise waiting.
A basket of flowers.
And it brought back the memories of bouquets and the first Miss World competition she won way back in 1911.
Alice entered the competition in London under a stage name Lavender Lee.
The event was called the Queen of the World and it was a far cry from the glitzy shows of today with their parades of scantily clad contestants.
To beat off worldwide opposition 80 years ago, Alice had to dance, sing and act.
And she carried off the title:
Female speaker
It was very exciting…a far cry from her quiet home life.
Voice over
This month's Saga Magazine features Alice at the age of 17 when she won the title.
The artist recreated her beauty from a faded photograph.
Female speaker
It was an accurate portrait of her when she was younger.
Voice over
After becoming the first Miss World, Alice appeared in two British silent films.
But her moment of stardom was brief.
At the age of 22 she married a farmer and turned her back on showbusiness.
Now she's back in the limelight, but Alice still finds time to look back over 97 happy years:
Female speaker
She was happy before winning Miss World, and she's still happy.
EC peace monitors die as helicopter is hit
Voice over
Four Italian soldiers and a Frenchman acting as European Community peace monitors in Yugoslavia were killed when their helicopter was shot down by an air-to-air missile north-east of Zagreb.
Kinnock assurances over tax
The Opposition leader Neil Kinnock has pledged that a Labour government would leave eighty-eight per cent of taxpayers paying the same rate as at present.
Major calls on Labour to withdraw pledge
Meanwhile, the Prime Minister John Major has called on Labour to withdraw their promises on tax.
He says that people earning more than seventeen thousand pounds a year WOULD face a substantial tax increase under Labour.
Surgeon accuses US of’ scaremongering’on implant ban
A top British surgeon has accused the American Government of’ scaremongering’after it called for the halt of silicone breast implants on health grounds.
Overseas Development Minister to visit Russia
The Overseas Development Minister, Lynda Chalker, is to visit Russia to try to work out the best way to distribute British emergency food supplies.
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten point three at twenty-four, eighty-two point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-eight, but down at two marks, eighty-five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Goodbye.
As the charity Oxfam moves into its fiftieth year, Central News South has been looking at the work it does away from the headlines of war and natural disaster.
We've just come back from Chile, where chemical pollution, factory fishing, and poverty are the everyday reality facing fishermen, slowly destroying their ability to make a living and support their families.
In our second report on Oxfam's work in South America we meet a researcher from Oxford whose efforts may help forgotten people to take back control of their own lives…
NEIL MACDONALD/Oxfam
MAURICIO LABORDE/Director Oxfam Backed Project
NEIL MACDONALD/Oxfam
Voice over
The sprawling industrial outskirts of Concepcion…
Chile's second largest city.
It's this region that produces half the country's wealth…exporting tons of fish and timber all over the world.
It's home to the vast fish plants which process two and a half million tons of fishmeal every year…to be sold as animal feed.
For some of the people who live here this recent trade boom has meant new found wealth…and young people enjoy the fruits of industry like any of their European counterparts…on the few hundred yards of coastline yet to be swallowed up by industry.
For many others the picture could hardly be more different.
In the shadow of the chimneys which are bringing prosperity for some they eke out whatever living they can.
They haven't noticed the so-called economic boom Chile's been enjoying for the last twenty years.
Day and night toxic waste pours out of the factories straight into the sea, poisoning the waters which once provided them with a living as independent fishermen.
And out at sea the same companies' trawlers suck up their catches through giant vacuum pipes…with little thought to the future of the region's fish stocks.
It's the victims of this galloping industrialisation that Oxfam is trying to help…
Neil MacDonald has been out in Chile meeting the leaders of the fishing community…
Male speaker
They described themselves as the forgotten people of Chile.
No politicians ever come to visit them: 75% of the houses are in a precarious position, and compared to our lives the conditions are desparately poor for at least 40% of the population.
Voice over
This family comes from a long line of fishermen…now unable to float their boats in the silted up harbour except at high tide they catch hardly enough to feed themselves.
Where once they lived on a beach now their home is part of a toxic wasteland.
The man of the house told us that he had to repaint his boat every few weeks as the chemicals stripped it back to bare wood.And his wife complained of burns all up one arm from washing her clothes in contaminated water.
Male speaker
They were describing a very serious situation.
Their catches are going down, and people are afraid to buy their fish because of the fears about pollution.
Voice over
But it's more than just a problem of pollution.
Since the big companies moved in the annual haul from these waters has increased from three and a half thousand to two and a half million tons a year.
Many of the fish caught are immature, just a few inches long.
But when they're to be ground up for fish meal it makes no difference.
Local academics and ecologists estimate that if it's allowed to continue industrial fishing will exhaust the stocks in just five years from now.
For the multinationals that doesn't matter, they'll move further down the coast to find new fishing grounds.
For those whose home waters have been fished out it'll be devastating.
The fish that used to feed them has been taken away to feed animals.
Oxfam, by funding and working with a local project in Concepcion, is helping the independent fishermen organise themselves to lobby government for changes in the law.
The poor have lost the ability to campaign after nearly twenty years of repression…
Male speaker
the social position of the fishermen and their families means that they are scared to speak out, scared to get together with other people to talk about the problems, and they think there is nothing they can do about it.
Voice over
It is the belief that his work is making a difference to these people despite their appaling conditions that makes Neil MacDonald feel that his work for Oxfam is worthwhile.
He said: it gives me hope for the future of the planet that people can work for a solution to poverty and problems and can enjoy life at the same time.
Tomorrow we follow Neil MacDonald to another Oxfam project where the wives of out-of-work miners are forced to collect coal dust from the sea to earn enough to feed their families.
Sales of Rover cars slumped last year by nineteen percent.
But the company say they haven't done as badly as some of their competitors, and predict a better year ahead.
Manufacturers say the overall decline in car sales could have serious consequences for the motor industry as a whole.
Nick Clark reports.
PAUL CALLAWAY/Motor Dealer
Sir HAL MILLER MP/Society of Motor Manufacturers
TREVOR ELLIOTT/HONDA UK
Voice over
Despite the depressing statistics Rover chiefs are publicly at least taking an optimistic view.
They say they've bucked the trend.
New car sales may be down 19 percent, the lowest figure since 1982, but that, say Rover, is better than the near 21 percent downturn for the industry as a whole.
With Rover works in the region employing thousands in Cowley and Swindon, the company says it's looking forward to an upturn later in the year, they say jobs aren't at risk.
At this dealership in Oxfordshire there's optimism too.
Male speaker
We've gone against the trend and will do all right in the year ahead.
Voice over
Meanwhile the Society of Motor Manufacturers today said the immediate outlook is bleak.
Male speaker
it's been a bad year.
More manufacturing jobs could be on the line.
Voice over
It's with this dismal economic backdrop that Honda will start producing their new executive car from Swindon in October.
Male speaker
It's not the best time to launch a new car but we're optimistic that by 1992 it'll be alright.
Voice over
Company chiefs hope the industry's prospects will be given a boost in the Budget when they'll look to the Chancellor to help ease the situation by, amongst other things, reducing taxes on company cars which make up 55 percent of the new car market.
Two groups of council officials have been in London pleading for more money from the government.
One delegation from Oxford City Council says it needs more cash to serve an extra thirteen thousand people whose homes now fall within the the city boundaries.
Meanwhile MPs and councillors from Gloucestershire have asked the Local Government Minister to give the county enough money to prevent it having to make cuts.
Jon Lander reports.
WESTMINSTER
RICHARD IZETT/Gloucestershire County Council
PAUL MARLAND MP/Con West Gloucestershire
Voice over
Former Environment Secretary Nicholas Ridley went back to his old department today to see what could be done to help crisis-hit Gloucestershire County Council.
He was among four MPs and a group of councillors who went to ask the government for more money.Education in the county they say will be hit because the council needs to cut thirteen million pounds from its budget.This could mean the loss of 250 teachers.
Social services, like old people's homes could also be affected.
Male speaker
The council will balance its budget this year but it's only getting an increase of 6.5 per cent and it needs 8 per cent.
Voice over
Tory MP's and councillors blame previous administrations for getting the county into a financial mess.
Male speaker
The Audit Commission had strongly criticised the county council's financial policy.
Voice over
Local Government minister Michael Portillo isn't expected to comment on Gloucestershire's problems until he's heard similar demands for help from twenty five other councils.
A convoy of lorries is to travel with food and medical supplies to Albania, one of the most deprived countries in Europe.
An aid organisation says that if supplies don't reach Albania soon, the world could face one of the most serious refugee problems it's ever seen.
Erika Barnes reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES
DAVID GRUBB/European Director/Feed the Children
WOOTTON BASSETT/Wiltshire
NICK HOLTHAN/Lorry Driver
Voice over
The children of Albania have been robbed of their childhood.
Isolated from the rest of the world under stalinist rule for 46 years.
The people were cheated into believing they had the highest standard of living in Europe.
When the borders opened up last year, they realised they had the worst.
They were starved of food and basic necessities.
Many thousands of children had never even seen, let alone owned a pair of shoes.
It was an alarming experience for the very first aid workers to reach them.
Male speaker
It's the sterile hopeless silence of the country as well as the pollution and dirt that leaves a stain on your memory.
There's silence in hospitals.
It's pointless to make a noise.
The smell, the stench the lack of paint or any equipment is disturbing.
Voice over
So concerned for the plight of the Albanians, people of Wootton Bassett near Swindon have decided to take action.
They've launched an appeal to send canned food, medicine and toys to the needy.
They'll be taken by a convoy of local lorry drivers in March.
Male speaker
I would imagine conditions will be pretty primative.
I've been to most European countries, but Albania has always been a closed country.
No one really knows.
I'm going to take a deep breath everytime I see something and just hope you can make things work properly.
Voice over
The distressing scenes of Albanians trying to escape from their poverty shocked the world.
But worse could happen if the aid efforts don't succeed.
Male speaker
Then the people will hi-jack more boats.
They'll vote with their feet.
We'll have one of the biggest refugee problems, violent refugees, the world has ever seen.
Voice over
The communist dictators of Albania fed the nation with words.
The people of Wootton Bassett want those words translated into a more palatable future.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ROSS-ON-WYE/Herefordshire
NADIA SMITH/Ashley's Mother
CAROL OVIATT-HAM/Spastics Society
Voice over
Just a few months ago walking like this would have been impossible for 12 year old Ashley Smith.
Cerebral palsy had reduced his co-ordination and limb movement so much that he couldn't even crawl.
But friends and well wishers rallied round and calling themselves Ashleys army, raised enough cash to buy him his own gymnasium.
But his parents soon realised that Ashley would need more specialized help, so they turned to the Peto Institute in Hungary, which has pioneered the treatment of children like Ashley with what's known as conductive education.
She says that the Institute concentrates on repetetive exercises.
Ashley returned from Hungary at Christmas.
His mother says he's considerably improved.
She says the improvement is magnificent, she wants her son to be as independant as possible.
Ashley says it's hard work at the Institute, but says two of his friends he made there who were also from England encouraged him.
He says that walking is easier when his two friends help him.
The spastics society, which have their own centres in Britain, say that they want to introduce conductive Education to this country, but setting up a centre like the Peto Institute will take time and money.
She says that it could take at least ten years and cost a considerable amount of cash.
The cost of another course of conductive education for Ashley will be about £10,000.
Mrs Smith, who's Belgian by birth, has taught herself Hungarian so she can work in Hungary to raise money — but ultimately without more funds the cost of helping Ashley stand on his own two feet may prove too high.
Police have condemned as despicable the theft from a widow's home of a cask containing her husband's ashes.
The cask was later recovered, but it had been forced open and emptied.
Harriet Ryley reports.
MILTON KEYNES
ELSIE FIELDING
DEREK FIELDING/Son
Voice over
It's two years since Elsie Fielding's husband Eric died.
They were a devoted couple, marrying after a teenage romance.
On his death, Mrs. Fielding had her husband's ashes put in a specially-made cask which she kept on her dressing table in her bedroom.
Mrs. Fielding, who suffers from extreme nervousness, was staying with one of her sons over the new year when thieves broke into her home in Milton Keynes and ransacked it.
They took jewellery, spirits and the cask.
Female speaker
I'm a nervous wreck…belonged to me.
Voice over
Mrs. Fielding's two sons had the task of sorting through their mother's house after the theft.
Male speaker
The house was completely ransacked…be together.
Voice over
Derek Fielding then had the further unpleasant experience of coming across some of his father's ashes when he went to recover the cask which had been dumped near a newsagent.
Male speaker
I'd heard…drink.
Voice over
Mrs. Fielding's family had been hoping to have her moved to shelterd housing since her husband died.
Following the burglary, she has been offered a place in a warden controlled block in Milton Keynes.
The cask is now being repaired by a local funeral director, but there can be no comfort for Mrs. Fieding for the loss of her husband's ashes;
He came from Sheerness…buried there…
I'd got him, you know?
A man accused of two arson attacks in a city shopping centre has appeared before magistrates.
His arrest followed a major security alert before a visit by the Prime Minister.
Debbie Kelly reports.
OXFORD
Richard Warin appeared before magistrates in Oxford.
Warin who's 29 and comes from South Hinksey in Oxford faces two charges of arson.
The first alleges he set fire to clothing valued at £10 in Littlewoods store in Oxford city centre, the second alleges that a few minutes later he set fire to clothing worth about £100 at the Nicklebys store nearby.
After a 30 minute hearing, he was remanded in custody and will re-appear in court on January the 14th.
His appearance follows a security alert in Oxford last night.
The city centre was cordoned off after fires were discovered in two stores a few hours before the Prime Minister, John Major, was to address a farmers conference 400 yards away.
The Prime Minister's speech went ahead as planned.
Transfusion row: Jehovah's Witness who refused blood dies after crash.
Guns at dawn: Police raid caravan site after post office robbery.
And it had to go: The man who killed Crossroads tells why.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Surgeons say the men's refusal to accept blood severely hampered their treatment after their car was speared on a motorway crash barrier.
But a leading Jehovah's Witness claimed tonight that other treatments are available which don't break the rules of their faith.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
TETSWORTH/Oxfordshire
JAMES WILSON-MACDONALD/Consultant Surgeon
SAM COOK/Jehovah's Witness
STEPHEN WESTERBY/Consultant Heart Surgeon
Voice over
The two men spent two hours trapped in their Ford Sierra on the M-40 at Tetsworth.
They had serious injuries to their legs and the survivor Mark Southall had one amputated.
His companion forty five year old Robert Bain died at the John Radcliffe Hospital.
A life saving operation was hampered because their Jehovah's Witness religion demands that they refuse blood transfusions.
Male speaker
They were concious of their decision and didn't seem to put them in a great dilemna
Voice over
Both victims were concious of their ordeal.
Ambulance crews were able to give them fluids but doctors had to stop short of giving blood.
Jehovah's Witnesses say it's a form of divine protection.
Male speaker
The bible forbids the taking of blood but we also believe it protects us against many of the medical problems which exist today
Voice over
Research has developed new techniques to help Jehovah's Witnesses including the Cell Saver, a machine which extracts blood from patients, washes the red cells, and returns them to the body.
It's used by heart surgeon Stephen Westerby at the John Radcliffe.
There's still a question mark over the efficiency of the crash barrier which brogught about the death.
Normally they are supposed to bend to allow the car to slide along them.
This one appear to have broken shortly after impact spinning the car onto its jagged edge.
Police have taken it for tests and an inquiry is under way.
Five men have been arrested in a dawn raid on a caravan site.
It comes the day after a village post office was held-up at gunpoint and a police officer shot at.
Police say the arrests follow a spate of crimes in the area.
Kim Barnes reports.
SANDFORD on THAMES/Oxfordshire
Chief Insp PETER CLARKE/Thames Valley Police
YESTERDAY/MORTIMER/Berkshire
Voice over
Scores of officers, many of them armed went in to this caravan site at dawn.
They were looking for 4 men.
They'd been watching the site for some time.
They also arrested a 5th man.
All the men are said to be between 20 and 30.
One of them was hurt during the arrests.
Around 17 families live on the council run site.
Some were shocked and disturbed by the dawn raid.
The operation follows an armed robbery at a village post post office near Reading and a 2 and a half hour police chase during which an inspector was shot at.
He was cut in the face by flying glass.
During their getaway, the men wearing balaclavas and armed with shotguns hijacked 6 cars, crashing into a lorry at one point.
Police invetsigations at Sandford continued for most of the day.
2 further people were arrested during the search and police say they've recovered a substantial sum of money, eight stolen cars and a shotgun.
Workers at a piano factory threatened with closure have been demonstrating in support of a management buyout.
They say it's the only way to save nearly forty jobs.
But the owner has refused to say whether he'll agree to the rescue plan.
Richard Barnett reports.
WOODCHESTER/Gloucestershire
PETER FREKE/Company Secretary
RICK CARNABY/Union Organiser
Voice over
The whole workforce turned up outside the Bentley Piano factory at Woodchester as part of their battle to keep it in business.
As they demonstrated outside, shareholders met inside to decide the firm's fate.
3 members of the management want to buy out the firm to save it.
The owner has proposed selling the firm's assets to a competitor and closing the Woodchester factory with the loss of 40 jobs.
One of the management team came out of the meeting hopeful that the buyout could be agreed.
Male speaker
The buyout team have mortgaged their possessions to pay for the company.
Voice over
But the men's union was angry at the way the fate of the firm was in the balance.
Male speaker
He's disgusted at the way the workforce has been kept in the dark about its future.
Voice over
If the firm does shut, the workers have little hope of finding other jobs:
Owner David Grover wouldn't comment on the factory's future:
Bentleys have made pianos at Woodchester for more than 80 years.
The craftsmen there hope their careers won't end on a sour note.
Now to the last in our series marking the start of Central's new licence to broadcast.
So far we've looked at the news over the past ten years.
Tonight, we look at other memorable programmes from the archives and ask what the future holds?
Voice over
Central Television was born on January 1st 1982 and with it, the promise of a new era in broadcasting for the region and the ITV network.
As well as Central News, there would be dramas, like Auf Wiedersehen Pet, there were game-shows like Bullseye, the phenominally successful, Blockbustersand Central broke new ground with entertainment and comedy shows like Spitting Image.
But in many ways, the company had a tough act to follow.
Central's predecessor, ATV, had been on the air since 1956 and brought programmes like The Muppet Show, Edward the Seventh and the Golden Shot to our screens.
In 1980, ITV's governing body, the former IBA, decreed that ATV would change its financial structure, build a new studio centre in the East Midlands and change its name to reflect the region it served.
After a period of managerial changes, Central Independent Television was born.
Understandably, some didn't like the idea of change.
When it was announced that Central was to take over from ATV, many were concerned that they would lose their favourite programme, the serial’ Crossroads’.
There had already been uproar when the darling of the Motel, Meg, played by Noele Gordon, was sacked in 1981.
Crossroads fans complain about the dismissal of their favourite star.
Noele Gordon says she does not know the reasons for her dismissal.
Crossroads lived on under the Central banner, but there were many more changes in store and some viewers didn't like take to those either.
On Central Post, a Crossroads fan says she does not like the new characters.
Although Crossroads would change radically during its life under Central's leadership, the most drastic decision came in 1987.
Central News reports on the axeing of the soap and actress, Jane Rossington says she's not surprised as it was only supposed to last 6 weeks anyway.
Central's Andy Allan justifies ending Crossroads to allow Central to provide other dramas to the network.
So the death of Crossroads led to the start of perfect partnership.
Based on the crime novels by the Oxford author, Colin Dexter, Inspector Morse would be sold worldwide and attract an audience of millions.
Central's cameras have also captured a good deal of real-life drama thanks to the Cook Report.
And people can also get pretty hot under the collar on Central Weekend.
Indeed, Central has always brought you the unlikely.
Ken Dodd says:’ We are all buffoons, that's like a spitoon, only more polished!’
There were to be many success stories in the world of Light Entertainment, Current Affairs, Documentary, Drama, schools and children's programming and regional programmes, including of course Central News.
However, the Broadcasting Act and new technology have changed the Television industry dramatically since Central began in 1982.
The company had to bid for its new broadcasting licence at auction and won it with a bid of £2,000.
The way the ITV map will look at the end of the next decade is also open to debate.
The economics involved may mean some smaller ITV companies are taken over by larger ones or even open to takeover from Continental broadcasters.
So will the sort of programming we enjoy at the moment be under threat?
Central Broadcasting Managing Director says ITV's regionalism is its strength and that sets Central apart from any opposition.
So far, so good.
No one can predict what will make news as we enter the next ten years of Central, but as long as the talent survives, we're promised entertainment well worth watching.
Allies prepare attack on Iraq
Allied planes are preparing to strike in Iraq after Baghdad's refusal to comply with United Nations resolutions following the Gulf War.
Shetland residents threatened by toxic fumes
Residents of the Shetland Isles are now under threat from toxic fumes released in the oil tanker crash.
Salvage hopes wrecked by poor weather
Meanwhile, poor weather has halted hopes of boarding the stricken vessel to try to prevent further oil spillage.
FTSE down 9
The hundred shares index closed down nine point five at twenty-eight, sixteen point five.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-four and down at two marks, fifty-two.
Wesley Smith
That's the news from me for now, but not quite all from Anne.
Anne Dawson
After the weather I'll be back with a brand new series called,’ Lifeline’, a short programme which aims to give advice on a whole range of subjects from alcoholism to education.
Tonight, in this post-Christmas period we look at the problem of debt.
But from Central News for now, goodnight.
A farmer who's threatened to shoot her cattle rather than allow a bypass through her land, has come face to face with officials who want to build the road.
She's appeared at a public inquiry, claiming that her herd is unique, and that the road would destroy it.
Tim Hurst reports.
CIRENCESTER/Gloucestershire
LIBRARY PICTURES
LETTICE ROBINSON/Farmer
Voice over
Mrs Lettice Robinson, who's 93, arrived by wheelchair at a public inquiry in Cirencester deciding the route of a £20 million town bypass.
The preferred route is through her farm, which she's farmed organically since 1935.
A vet told the inquiry her Jersey herd is unique, her natural breeding programme has produced the only such herd strong enough to winter outdoors.
Mrs Robinson has been fighting the bypass for more than 4 years, because it will take too much of her land.
The bypass is part of a scheme to link the M4 and M5 motorways and the inquiry is expected to last another 6 weeks.
Conservation experts are warning of catastrophic longterm effects from the Shetland tanker disaster.
The Marine Conservation Society, which spent months on an underwater survey of the area says the slick is a serious threat to marine life.
Ken Goodwin reports.
ROSS on WYE/Herefordshire
Dr SUSAN GUBBAY/Marine Conservation Society
Voice over
It was an accident everyone at the marine conservation society had been dreading.
They know more than anyone how much wildlife is under threat from the oil.
Experts from their Ross-on-Wye headquarters carried out an extensive survey of the coastal waters around the Shetland isles.
They found a marine paradise, a habitat rich in all types of coldwater sea life.
She says that there are many rare species and whilst the damage on the sea surface is very visible, e.g. dead birds, it won't be so visible down below, where the real damage will be done.
The organisation has campaigned for oil tankers to be equiped with double hulls to minimise dangers of oil spills and for them to avoid such environmentally sensitive areas such as the Shetland isles.
As far as the marine conservation society is concerned, the tragedy is that it may have taken an ecological disaster to finally make people listen.
A twist in the tale…why Hereford is missing the point.
And ten years of Central: Meet the man who killed Crossroads.
Welcome back:Work has started to rebuild one of the biggest church spires in the country.
The fourteenth-century spire of All Saints Church in Hereford is famous for being crooked.
But that distinctive curve has now made the structure dangerous.
HEREFORD
Rev ANDREW MOTTRAM All Saints Church
Voice over
Bush collapses at Tokyo banquet
President Bush is recovering after he collapsed during a banquet in Japan.
He has been suffering from gastric flu.
1220 jobs axed as Ravenscraig closes
Twelve hundred and twenty jobs are to go with the closure of the Ravenscraig steel works in Scotland.
TSB workers vote to strike
Workers at the Trustee Savings Bank have voted for selective strike action in a staffing dispute.
EC halts Yugoslav truce monitoring
Following yesterday's helicopter shooting in Yugoslavia, the European Community is halting truce monitoring until it receives safety assurances for its observers.
FTSE down 15
The hundred shares index closed down fifteen points at twenty-four, sixty-seven point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-eight and at two marks, eighty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin will be at 10.35 p.m.
Goodnight.
Voice over
The families of thousands of workers at a key atomic research plant are to be surveyed to discover how many children have suffered from cancer.
It's part of a new study which it's hoped will determine once and for all whether there is a greater incidence of cancer in the families of radiation workers.
Kim Barnes reports.
HARWELL/Oxfordshire
SELLAFIELD/Cumbria
Prof VALERIE BERAL/Project Leader
LEN SALMON/Harwell Laboratory
Voice over
20,000 past and present employees of the Harwell laboratory are being asked to take part in the new survey.
There's been concern for the families of radiation workers after a report found clusters of Leukaemia around Sellafield.
Now a 3-year investigation aims to find out once and for all whether there is a higher rate of illnesses like cancer amongst the children of those who work in the nuclear industry.
It'll be led by Oxford academic, Valerie Beral.
Harwell's just one of seven Atomic Energy Authority sites to be surveyed, along with employees of British Nuclear Fuels and the Atomic Weapons Authority.
100,000 people have worked in the industries over the years and a huge exercise will begin to try and trace everyone.
Harwell keeps detailed information on radiation exposure.
Employees wear dose meters like this, but no-one's looked at their families yet.
This detailed questionaire will go out to 500 people as part of a pilot study.
The real work will start by the end of the year.
It'll be ground-breaking research.
No other country has yet investigated the link all sides anxious to get at the truth.
A group of woman so poor they are forced to scavenge coal dust from the sea are looking to Oxfam to help them to create a better life.
For some of the women, selling the coal dust provides their only income to feed their families.
The Oxfam-backed project set up to teach them new skills is another example of how far the charity has developed since it was founded in Oxford fifty years ago.
Central News South has been to South America to see at first hand the lives that Oxfam hopes to improve.
NEIL MACDONALD/Oxfam
MARIA ORMENA/Coal Collector
NEIL MACDONALD/Oxfam
Voice over
Saturday afternoon on the beach at Lota, on the outskirts of Chile's second largest city.
There's little to disturb the fun for these young people, the middle class children whose parents are enjoying the country's new found wealth.
Further down the beach, women and children are trolling the same waters with nets collecting coal dust to try to earn enough money to feed their children.
If they manage to collect 50kg of the slag which is washed ashore from the coalmines further up the coast they'll be paid 80 pesos, that's about 10 pence.
The coal is sold to the fishmeal factories to fire their furnaces.
In the summer the working conditions are bad enough; in the winter they're tortuous.
Oxfam is trying to help these families escape from their hand to mouth existence.
Neil MacDonald whose out from Oxford to visit Chile, has been talking to them and his reaction to their plight was direct.
Male speaker
Shock that people have to live from the garbage heap of a richer surrounding economy.
People have to stand up to their waist all day in water to earn 10 pence for a 50kg bag of coal.
Voice over
Despite, or perhaps because of the hardship they face, the women have a strong sense of community.
There's no room here for the individualist ideals of post Thatcher Britain.
Here, if you are lucky enough to own an oven, you lend it to all your neighbours who don't have one.
So the fire is burning round the clock seven days a week as the women and their children do the family baking.
In the same way six women in the area got together 5 years ago to set up a project which would bring the women together to tackle their problems as a group, to teach them new skills which will help them find alternative sources of income.
The group runs workshops where the women watch videos and then hold discussion groups and where they have been taught how to make simple handicrafts.
Male speaker
There is an enormous distance to travel for people to have a dignified life here: the confidence these people exude is impressive.
When they come together in these workshops the sense of greater self-esteem is more important than the extra few pence they earn.
Voice over
For Maria Ormena and her two children collecting sea coal is a daily necessity.
Maria's husband finds whatever work he can, his income is at best, sporadic, so the couple frequently relies on her meagre income to feed and clothe 8 year old Luis and 9 year old Eveline.
But the women's workshop gives her new hope.
Female speaker
I feel very good when I am involved in the woman's group.
I feel very important.
I have been shown how to make warm clothes for myself and my children for the winter.
Voice over
And her case is by no means unusual.
In a part of Chile where half the region's income goes to 10 per cent of the population and a quarter of all the people regularly don't have enough to eat, the day to day problems of scraping together an income are common.
Part of Neil MacDonald's task in visiting Chile is to write a book about Oxfam's work there to try to bring the problems home to the British public.
Male speaker
People often think that the problems of the Third World are a long way away.
What I hope comes out of this is the realisation that the hopes and aspirations of people here are the same as those of people at home in Britain.
That is the way to communicate to people.
Voice over
Tomorrow night we move away from the Chilean coast and travel 13,500ft up into the Bolivian Andes, where Oxfam is helping the indigenous Indian people who are struggling to make a living now that their mines have closed down and their farmland been destroyed by drought.
Police are hunting a gang of robbers who're terrorising elderly women in their homes.
It's believed the same gang have raided at least three homes…and they may be linked with a series of other burglaries.
In one case the victim was ninety-four and the thieves stole money from a bag attached to her walking frame.
Keith Wilkinson reports.
WORCESTER
Det Chief Insp KEN CRANE/West Mercia Police
Detectives at a briefing in Worcester today were looking for leads that could link the gang with a whole series of raids described by police as deplorable.
The thieves have been forcing their way into the homes of elderly people, holding them down while searching for their savings.
There've been robberies at Tibberton near Droitwich, Worcester and Wyre Piddle near Pershore.
And there may be links with other robberies at Malvern and Droitwich, a burglary at Worcester and the sighting of 3 men in a garden, also in Worcester.
This 87 year old woman, who's too frightened to be identified, was pushed into her home after opening the door.
The thieves cut her telephone wires and took the money she was saving for a cooker.
SHE SAYS’ I think it's disgusting.
I suppose they want the money.
But to rob old people is dreadful.
I really think so.
I think they sink to as low as they can.
Fortunately I'm one of the strong ones.’
At Tibberton, a frail, 94 year old woman had £600 stolen.
Some of the money was in a bag fastened to her walking frame.
At Wyre Piddle, a 65 year old woman suffered injuries to her face when the gang broke into her isolated bungalow.
Male speaker
Well of all the crimes we deal with, these are the ones that police officers really get annoyed about.
They're the ones that are the most emotive.
Anyone who's attacked who is very old or very young fills us with deep concern.
And ensures that our efforts are unabated really’.
Voice over
The police have only the briefest of descriptions of the men.
The gang of three are white.
One is aged about 16 or 17 and between 5ft2in and 5ft4in.
The others are in their 20s between 5ft8in and 6ft.
For the 87 year old, it was the second time thieves have raided her home.
She had another break-in 20 years ago.
Female speakerVoice over
But of course it was a shock; a terrible shock to me.
I wouldn't wish it on anybody.
Being pinned in the chair like that and I couldn't move.
You never know.
Fortunately they didn't knock me on the head or anything which they could have done, couldn't they?
If I tried to fight or anything.
But what is the good of three on to one.
Anyone with information is asked to contact police at Worcester on 0905 723888.
Two cyclists have been thrown into jail in Nepal only days after breaking a world altitude record by riding across a glacier in the Himalayas.
They were jailed after their visas were found to be forged.
The Foreign Office is calling for them to be freed on bail.Richard Barnett reports:
CHALFORD HILL/Gloucestershire
TONY RICHMOND/Father
MARY RICHMOND/Mother
ROGER KNAPMAN MP/Con Stroud
Voice over
Mountain bike enthusiast, Martin Richmond gave up his job as an environmental scientist for British Coal at Stoke Orchard in Gloucestershire to make the world record attempt.
Martin, who's 25, and a colleague, Trevor Nott aimed to cycle across the Himalayas and they succeeded.
After riding across a glacier at 20,000 ft, Martin told his parents by fax from Nepal he'd broken the world record.
But within days, the two cyclists were in jail in the capital Katmandu.
They'd bought visas from a travel agent, not realising they were forged.
Martin's family who live near Stroud have been shocked by the news of the arrests:
Male speaker
We've been losing sleep with worry since we were told about the arrests.
Female speaker
They were being kept nine to a cell in the jail.At first they were sleeping on the concrete floor, now they're on wooden slats.
Voice over
Stroud MP Roger Knapman has taken up Martin's case, and is pressing the Foreign Office to get him released on bail:
Male speaker
We want them to be bailed.A consular official has made regular visits to the jail.
Voice over
The Foreign Office said today its raised the matter at the highest level with the Nepalese authorities.
It's calling for the two men to be released on bail immediately.
Meanwhile for the family, the anxious wait goes on.
Councillors have thrown out a motion calling for a ban on foxhunting on all council owned land.
Hunt supporters say it's a victory for democracy — anti hunt campaigners have vowed to continue their fight to get hunting banned.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
JOE EDWARDS/Tenant Farmer
HILARY SMITH/Tenant Farmer
WENDY CLARKE/Tenant Farmer
LIBRARY PICTURES
PAT STACPOOLE/British Field Sports Society
Cllr FRANK THOMPSON/Gloucestershire County Council
PETER PONTING/League Against Cruel Sports
Voice over
Dozens of hunt supporters from all over Gloucestershire turned out to lobby councillors before today's meeting.
They wanted them to vote against a motion to ban hunting on all county council owned land.
Tenant farmers were particularly vocal about what they called their right to choose who to allow on their land.
Anti-hunt protestors stayed away from the meeting, preferring to show their support by way of a petition of more than 5,500 signatures.
The ban was proposed by the leader of the council's Labour Group, Frank Thompson.
He said fox hunting was a cruel practice and should be condemned.
But at the final vote, the motion was lost with 22 voting in favour, and 34 against.
Hunt supporters were victorious.
Many councillors said they felt compelled to vote against the motion because they believed in the tenant farmers freedom of choice.
The opposing lobby rejected that argument.
Despite today's vote, anti-hunt campaigners say they'll continue to campaign against fox hunting.
The League Against Cruel Sports will now turn it's attention to the next major debate on fox-hunting in the House of Commons next month.
*
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
Chief Supt DAVID LINDLEY/Thames Valley Police
Chief Insp ROBERT DAVISON/British Transport Police
Voice over
Police went on to the site in the centre of Oxford at around 2.30, 70 officers in all, in riot gear, backed up by helicopter, sniffer dogs and the marine section.
They searched each person, every vehicle and made ten arrests for possession of drugs.
Police chiefs say they had evidence of drug dealing on the site, and had met with violence when they approached before.
Chief Supt David Lindley: it was a planned operation, a crackdown on known drug dealing
It's been a joint operation between the Thames Valley force and British Transport police.
The travellers have camped illegally on land owned by British Rail.
Now they have 24 hours to leave.
Chief Insp Robert Davison: both they and police are aware of problems caused by the travellers in the city.
Police had staked out the site in a plan code-named Operation Yogurt.
Today they seized drugs and goods and made a detailed search of the area.
It's thought around 70 travellers have been living on the site for several weeks.
Many condemned the police operation.
Police tonight called the operation a success.
They plan to clear the site as soon as possible forcing the travellers to move on.
A nanny has been jailed after fracturing the skulls of two new born babies in her care.
Now the parents of one of the children are demanding stricter controls on childcare agencies and a labour MP wants a registration scheme for nannies.
Debbie Kelly reports.
ERICA FERRARI/Mother
CHRISTINE LITTLE/Recruitment/
Voice over
Eight days ago Jade Ferrari celebrated her 2nd birthday.
There was a time doctors thought she would never live to see it.
Jade's skull was fractured when she was a few days old when her nanny, Carol Withers battered her with a heavy weapon.
Today Withers, who lives with her husband Nigel in Lydney in Gloucestershire was sentenced to 15 months in jail.
Mrs Ferrari employed Withers after she'd been recruited by a child minding agency by pretending she was a qualified maternity nurse.
What Mrs Ferrari didn't know, was that another baby had suffered a fractured skull while he was being looked after by Withers.
Mrs ferrari believes agencies should carry out stricter checks.
Mrs Ferrari believes the agency should carry out stricter checks.
The parent body for many nanny agencies plans to tighten its code of practise
But Labour's Spokeswoman on Children, Joan Lestor, wants tougher measures to avoid this kind of tragedy.
There should be a registration system for nannies and in the meantime, there should be a public awareness scheme to make parents more careful about who they employ.
That's something Erica Ferrari has learnmt the hard way.
Two airmen have appeared in court on a forty million pound arson charge after a fire destroyed a hangar at an RAF base.
The hangar was used to service and prepare parachutes for the armed services.
Thousands were destroyed.
Nick Clark reports.
CHIPPENHAM/Wiltshire
FIRE BRIGADE VIDEO/RAF HULLAVINGTON/Wiltshire
Wing Co MIKE CHAPPLE/Station Commander
Voice over
Corporal Stephen Patterson was brought to Chippenham magistrates court this morning along with senior aircraftsman, Douglas Bailey.
The men are neighbours living in married quarters at RAF Hullavington.
The men were led into court to hear the charges read out to them.
They only spoke to confirm their names.
Both were jointly charged with unlawfully damaging by fire property belonging to the Ministry of Defence, worth, the court heard, an estimated £40m.
Last Friday's fire at the Parachute Services flight was one of the biggest ever seen in Wiltshire.
150 firemen were drafted in as flames swept through and destroyed number eight hangar.
It housed more than 4,000 parachutes, waiting to be serviced and packed, representing 60 percent of the requirement for the whole of the armed services and worth up to £15m.
The two men were remanded in custody for a week.
The court heard there was a possible threat to their safety should they be released on bail.
This afternoon workmen were continuing with the clear up operation in and around the burnt out hangar.
The fire has curtailed some parachute exercises around the country and temporaily grounded the Red Berets Parachute regiment in Hampshire.
But despite the obvious problems it's hoped the unit will be operational within two weeks.
Male speaker
We're setting up in another hangar and hope to be back in business soon.
Voice over
Not much escaped the flames, though staff at the base HAVE been heartened by the safe recovery of all the parachute service records.
Vital documentation at one point thought destroyed.
What do I tell the children?
Mother widowed at Christmas faces the future.
Mission impossible:St Tiggywinkles join the oil-slick rescue
And epileptics beware.
A mother's warning on computer games.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The family has been inundated with cards and donations from wellwishers since Richard Adams' death.
Mrs Adams wanted to say thank you publicly.
A van driver involved in the accident has been charged with causing death by careless driving.
Simon Garrett reports 
16 DECEMBER 1992/WITNEY/Oxfordshire
CATHY ADAMS/Widow
Voice over
Riding home from a pre-Christmas shopping trip 42 year old David Adams collided with a van on Curbridge road in Witney.
He left a widow and four sons aged from nine years to eight months.
Public sympathy following Mr Adams death has brought a flood of cards and almost twelve thousand pounds in donations for his family.
But it's been left to his wife to explain to their children
Female speaker
Stewart's only five.
He's just started school.
He's just started doing the things Richard did with his daddy.
He doesn't understand at all, children say things to him at school he's very mixed up i'm going to have to seek a lot of help for all the children.He asked me:’ Am I going to get the bike back for Mark and Thomas to ride on the child's seat?’
I told him’ No I don't think I will.’
He asked me if daddy will be back next Christmas.
I had to tell him, no, he can't come back.
What else can I say?
Voice over
Mr Adams was a keen birdwatcher and often took his sons with him.
He was an able woodworker, making toys and furniture for them — He even built one of them a bed
Female speaker
Mark's two and a half.
He's going to be three in April.
Everytime he hears daddy's name it's’ daddy daddy.’
He gets so excited any two and a half year old would wouldn't they.
He's waitng for him to come back on his bike.
He remembers him going out that day with his orange reflector coat on.
I always used to pick him up when daddy went out in the morning on his bike or on the bus, pick him up and wave bye-bye, see you soon.
He's still waiting.
I've got a little baby boy, he's eight months now — he'll never know his daddy, will he
Voice over
The van driver Martin Clark from Witney has been charged with causing death by careless driving while under the influence of alcohol
Experts from the world's biggest animal hospital have joined the rescue operation for wildlife caught in the Shetlands oil slick.
The team from St Tiggywinkles say it's the worst disaster they've ever seen.
They've set up an emergency centre, but fear they can do little to stop the devastation.
Our reporter Gareth Furby is with them in the Shetlands.
LES STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles
Dr JOHN LEWIS/Vet
SUE STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles
Gareth Furby reporting.
And in Monday night's programme we'll be reporting on the animal hospital's efforts to save the lives of seals trapped in the Shetlands oil slick.
Friends and relatives of a man who was found dead in a prison cell are demanding a full investigation into his death.
They have the backing of a prison reform group, and will hold a candlelight vigil outside the jail this weekend.
But the prison governor insists the correct procedures were followed.
Kim Barnes reports.
KINGS SUTTON/Oxfordshire
VAL ALLSOP/Friend
LIBRARY PICTURES/BULLINGDON PRISON/Oxfordshire
SAMANTHA SHERRATT/Howard League for Penal Reform
JOHN THOMAS-FERRAND/Governor
Voice over
Val Allsop like many of David Pratley's friends was distraught when she heard of his death.
The 28 year old father of 3 was found dead in his cell at Bullingdon Prison, with a ligature around his neck.
Val's behind a candlelight vigil to be held tomorrow.
Val says it was known that David had suffered from depression.
He was on remand charged with criminal damage after allegedly setting fire to his girlfriend; s house.
An full inquest will be held later this year, but prison reformers are calling for a full judicial inquiry.
But prison officers say their procedures to pick up at risk prisoners were followed.
All new inmates are seen by a hospital officer.
They say they can't discuss the case until the inquest is over.
Friends say they hope all the facts about David Pratley's death can then be brought into the open.
Detectives investigating the murder of a pensioner, have tonight arrested a man.
The body of Jim Eggleton, who was seventy, was found in his home in the village of Russell's Water near Watlington in Oxfordshire.
Police said a short time ago that a thirty one year old local man had been arrested.
He's being questioned in Reading.
Earlier another man was released without charge.
An inquest has opened on a woman who was found in her submerged car in the River Severn.
Tanya Probyn who was (28) twenty eight and from Whitminster died last
September.
STONEBENCH/Gloucestershire
Her body was found when her car was recovered from the water at Stonebench.
The coroner adjourned the inquest after he was told that Mrs Probyn's husband Jonathan had been charged with her murder.
Sixty two jobs are to go at a milk depot.
WOOTTON BASSETT/Wiltshire
The redundancies are being made at St Ivel in Wootton Basset near Swindon.
The depot is bearing the brunt of a package of cost cutting measures across three sites.
St Ivel is blaming the cuts on the state of the economy.
and now the moment you've all been waiting for…if of course you entered our Christmas cracker competition…the answers and the winners 
Voice over
Here's the solution to the football puzzle…four Jimmy Greaves books to be won here…so congratulations to Mr. Soule and Philip Gearing…and Neil calcutt and Linda Betteridge…lots of you tried the rugby…winners of a book each are…
Susan Dowling and Peter Jubb…
In the general sports round…these are the two answers we were looking for and the two winners…
Miss Field and Jane Martin…the adventure puzzle proved the trickiest winners of the books here are Mrs. Windsor and Graham Williams…most popular round was the racing…you all knew the answers only two winners I'm afraid…well done Mrs. Cullis and N.Bonner…and three cheers for the kids who found the secret santas toys and games have been won by Tim Overton…
Justin Lathwell and Jonathan Barclay
A row over plans to build a loo in the vestry of a church has split a village.
Parishioners of Saint John the Baptist are so divided on the issue that the dispute is having to be resolved at a church court.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GREAT RISSINGTON Gloucestershire
Rev DAVID BUSH St John the Baptist Church
PHILLIPA MITCHELL Protestor
Voice over
TOILET
Lawyers joined clergy and laymen for the first day of the hearing at the Saint John the Baptist Church in Great Rissington.
They're here to settle a dispute over whether or not to build a loo in the vestry of the fourteenth century church.
Supporters, say it's essential because they want to start using the church to host a club for primary school children every Thursday afternoon.
But objectors say the loo is an unnecessary expense.
The proceedings were opened by the Gloucester Diocese barrister, June Rodgers.
She caused a few titters when she said she'd held the court in the church for the convenience of all parties.
At one stage the whole congregation went outside to see where the drainage ditch would be sited.
Objectors are concerned that the drains will disturb old graves.
The row over the loo has split the village.
The court sat all day, and it's expected to make a decision on the loo next week.
By then legal costs alone will have run to more than half the price of the toilet.
Iraq refuses withdrawal of missiles
Iraq has refused to withdraw missiles from the no-fly zone in the South of the country with the expiry of the United Nations deadline just hours away.
Major warns Saddam to comply with ultimatum
The Prime Minister has warned Saddam Hussein to comply with the United Nations ultimatum.
Oil slick prompts no-fishing zone
Fishermen have introduced a voluntary ban on fishing in the area surrounding the Shetland oil slick.
Businessman charged with stealing
George Walker, the former chairman of the property and leisure group, Brent Walker, has appeared in court charged with stealing twelve million pounds from his company.
Princess Margaret leaves hospital
Princess Margaret has left hospital after being admitted with pneumonia five days ago.
Average Council Tax
A survey has revealed that the average Council Tax bill will be five hundred and five pounds per household.
FTSE down 17
The hundred shares index closed down seventeen point three at twenty-eight hundred exactly.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-four and up at two marks, fifty-two.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
It's been confirmed that a woman who disappeared from Swindon three months ago is now married and living in Pakistan.
Rabina Ali, who's twenty one, was born in Pakistan but has a British passport.
Her boyfriend Doug Robertson is worried that she may have been forced into an arranged marriage.
Swindon police are now liasing with British diplomats in Pakistan to check on her welfare.
A mother is blaming her son's addiction to computer games for triggering his epileptic fits.
She's had to restrict the amount of time he spends playing them, and she's warning other parents not to let children use the games for long periods unsupervised.
Ken Goodwin reports.
HIGHNAM/Gloucestershire
SIMON EVANS
JANE EDWARDS/Mother
Dr ZENOBIA ZIAWALLA/Paediatrician
Voice over
Simon Evans was hooked on his gameboy from the minute he was given it as a present.
But after one particularly long session of playing on it he began to feel strange.
He says that he felt strange and fell onto the floor.
She says he was shaking and foaming at the mouth — she was terrified.
Doctors at the National Epilepsy centre at the Park hospital in Oxford carry out research into what can trigger epileptic fits.
They can simulate the flashing effects of video game and TV screens and measure it's effects on the brain.
She says there are a small amount of children who are sensitive to flashing lights, which can trigger a fit.
This could be happening when the child uses a video game or watches a TV screen.
The Department of Trade has announced it'll be holding an inquiry into possible health risks from using the games.
2 of the biggest manufacturers of video games both say they print advice on epilepsy with their games.
Sega says that the risks are extremenly minimal.
Nintendo says that if any adverse symptoms are experienced by anyone using their games, they should stop playing immediately.
Simon; s mother says parents must play their part, too.
She says parents should make sure their children don't use the machines for long periods unsupervised.
Simon has now cut right down on the amount of time he spend playing and has also undergone treatment from his doctor.
He hasn't suffered another fit since.
In part two: Head to head…
Oxford and Swindon in the first clash of '93.
All at sea: The half million pound dreamboat.
And oh dear, what can the matter be?
The great church loo saga goes to court.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Local Derbies on Merseyside or in Manchester are often dull and drab, but in Central South land, they're usually overflowing with action and excitement.
In the last 5 head to heads, we've had 25 goals, so what will 1993 bring.
Let us have their resolutions first.
Who's going to win?
Well, Oxford United have the better record in recent weeks.
Last time out in the league they destroyed the runaway leaders, Newcastle United.
United will be at full strength.
The only question is whether Mike Ford will be brought back into the team after suspension.
On form, United are looking good.
A couple of wins would take them to the edge of the promotion race.
And that's where Swindon Town have dropped down to.
No presents came their way in December.
Their last league win, 3-2 against Southend 8 weeks ago.
Changes in the Town team.
Fraser Digby replaces the injured Hammond in goal and Andy Gray on loan from Spurs makes his debut in midfield.
Only 2 points have come from their last 4 league games, but they want revenge for last season's 5-3 defeat at the Manor.
In Division 3.
It is Hereford against York at Edgar Street.
United have got a new Centre Forward, Leroy May, has come from non league, Tividale. let us hope he strikes it lucky tomorrow.
The first rugby match of ninety three is a real cruncher for Gloucester…
London Irish away…the cherry and whites have to win it 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Coach
Voice over
They've been open all hours…at Kingsholm this week…running on overtime getting ready for a game that could simply make or break the season…you know what they say about it never raining…it's been pouring on Gloucester this season…defeat for the Cherry and Whites tomorrow would put them on the relegation trapdoor…
chat keith richardson
STING
They're at full strength…
John Hawker returns at hooker…and Paul Ashmead switches to the back row to bring more speed…
in their last league match Gloucester beat the Sarecens…they need the same luck against the Irish
lets keep the action rolling…darts…racing…table tennis…ice hockey…netball…rugby league…
Erika Barnes has got all the news 
a ray of sunshine in the middle of the winter is the annual Boat Show at Earls Court.
It's opened this week…local firms are out in force, so let's go and join them for our Friday Feature 
RICHARD SIMMONDS/Laser
TOM BALLANCE/Bossoms Boatyard
PETER FAULKNER/Coracle Maker
CHARLES KEILY/Sales Manager
STEVE REDGRAVE/Olympic Champion
Voice over
A group of new-age travellers whose camp site was raided by police yesterday say they have nowhere to move on to.
They were given until three o'clock this afternoon to leave the site which belongs to British Rail.
But county councils aren't legally obliged to provide facilities for travellers, and they can't use camps for gipsy families.
Harriet Ryley reports.
OXFORD
YESTERDAY
BARRY SHEPHERD/Oxfordshire Planning Dept
JIM/New-Age Traveller
LIBRARY PICTURES
BOTLEY ROAD/Oxford
Voice over
Not all of the new-age travellers had left the site near Oxford station by the three o'clock dead-line imposed by police following yesterday's raid.
But British Transport Police said they were satisfied the rest would leave shortly.
70 police officers in riot gear raided the site which is owned by British Rail.
They made 11 arrests for drug possession, in an operation which the travellers described as heavy-handed and unreasonable.
Female speaker
If there's a crime on a housing estate, the police don't raid every house, so why do that to us?
Voice over
The problem for the travellers now is where to go next.
As the law stands County Councils do not have to provide sites for people who are not deemed to be traditional travellers — or gypsies:
He says the nineteen sixty-eight caravan act doesn't include new-age travellers who are not traditional gypsies so we don't have to provide anything for them by law.
New-age traveller Jim says that under European law, the new-age travellers are recognised as needing sites and British law should recognise them too.
There have been numerous clashes between land-owners and new-age travllers in the county — last October two farmers lost 10 sheep in several attacks by dogs which they say came from a nearby travellers encampment.
The farmer shot several dogs and had confrontations with the travellers.
But the nomadic lifestyle of the travellers means that even if they were recognised by law, it would be difficult to provide sites for them;
He says maybe they could provide separate winter and summer sites for new-age travellers — but I feel we should be allowed to use any piece of land which is just derelict, like the Maxwell land in Oxford which was just being used as a rubbish tip.
The travellers don't know where they're going now.
But wherever they end up, there's a good chance they'll be moved on again in the next few weeks — 28 groups have been moved on in the last 18 months and the County Council is moving on another group from Kirtlington, north of Oxford tomorrow.
Unless the law is changed, new-age travellers will be unwelcome wherever they go.
An animal rescue centre that cares for sick and injured wildlife may have to close because of the recession.
Staff there say they simply can't afford to look after their charges anymore.This report from Clare Lafferty.
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
TIM GOULD/Vale Wildlife Rescue
Voice over
This is just one of hundreds of hedgehogs who owe their lives to the Vale Wildlife Rescue Centre in Evesham.
The centre is one of only a handful in the country that caters exclusively for sick and injured wildlife.
Last year it nursed more than 1400 animals back to health.
But it has to rely entirely on public donations.
In this time of recession they're becoming few and far between, and the centre's future is in jeopardy.
If the centre does close it'll mean injured animals will have to be destroyed.
Animals like this deer.
She caught her leg in a fence and has badly damaged her muscles.
With the care of the centre she's likely to make a full recovery.
If it wasn't here, her prospects would be very different.
With vets bills, drugs and food, the centre is currently going through about 200 tins of food alone each week.
It costs about a £1,000 a month to run the centre.
Staff here are desperate for donations of both food and money to tide them over until the recession ends.
For the sake of their charges they're hoping that'll be very soon.
In part two: The margins of survival.
How Oxfam is helping the poorest people of South America.
Two up, but they threw it away.
Oxford United still fighting relegation.
And not to be sniffed at.
The canine perfume for that problem pooch.
Under water:Flash floods and blizzards bring winter chaos.
A gun at her head.
Building society cashier robbed by masked raiders.
And victim of recession: The wildife home threatened with closure.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
AMATEUR VIDEO/EWYAS HAROLD/Herefordshire
GRAHAM SALT/Postmaster
TERRY MORGAN/Garage Owner
JOHN MAILES/Butcher
Act Insp BOB WILSON/West Mercia Police
PAUL DAMARI/Weather Communications
Voice over
Herefordshire was worst of three counties affected, the village of Ewyas Harold was under 4 ft of water by breakfast time.
Homes and shops were flooded and farm animals marooned as rivers burst their banks.
Around Malvern in Worcestershire driving snow slowed rush hour traffic to a crawl, as it did on high ground in Gloucestershire when overnight rain turned to snow at dawn.
An isolated section of rail line on the Herefordshire Welsh border was washed out by flash floods and snow ploughs were on standby on main roads in the county in case the snow persisted.
Just 3 miles away, back in the village of Ewyas Harold, the snow ploughs were called in to shift inches of mud left by the receeding floods.
Torrential rain and heavy snow was worst in the west of the region, from Cheltenham to the Welsh border.
Home video, shot by the village doctor in Ewyas Harold, shows how quickly the waters rose, trapping cars and turning the village street into a torrent.
Mopping up operations began as the flood receeded, leaving mud inside as well as out.
The floods, combined with heavy snow, produced 300 calls for help to the police.
Heavy rain and falling temperatures had been forecast, produced by a complex weather pattern moving from the north.
Tonight snow is still lying on high ground, but the floods are falling.
Some minor roads are still under water.
A Building Society cashier had a gun pointed at her head while robbers emptied the office safe.
The men stole four and a half thousand pounds in cash before escaping in a stolen car.
Simon Garrett reports 
PRINCES RISBOROUGH/Buckinghamshire
GWENDA WALKER/Cashier
Chief Insp BARRY PRENDERGAST/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The raid was on the Princes Risborough branch of the Halifax Building Society run by a local firm of solicitors.
Two men in their late teens or early twenties came into the office and pointed their guns at the cashiers face.
Female speaker
The door burst open and two men came in wearing stocking masks.
I couldn't believe what was happening.
They demanded to know where the safe was.
Voice over
The men got away with £4,500 in cash as well as cheque books and cashpoint cards which were kept along with their pin numbers.
They were thought to have been driven away by a third man in a stolen Golf GTi.
The car was found dumped 3 miles away.
No shots were fired but Mrs Walker was treated for shock.
Female speaker
I just thought I should do exactly as they said.
I didn't really believe their guns could be real but I wasn't going to find out.
Voice over
It's the tenth time already this year Thames Valley Police have dealt with an offence where a member of the public's been threatened with a gun.
Senior officers say more and more criminals are prepared to carry firearms in cash raids.
That and the Building Society's own policies are making them increasingly frequent targets.
Male speaker
Real and fake guns are too readily available.
Also the Building Societies have taken away their security screens to make counter staff more approachable.
They are so for robbers too.
Voice over
No one 's been arrested in connection with the Princes Risborough raid.
Police are asking for witnesses to come forward.
A man accused of murdering his mother and father has been sent to the crown court for trial.
Twenty six year old Christopher Gore appeared before magistrates charged with the double killing.Ken Goodwin reports.
CIRENCESTER/Gloucestershire
Voice over
26 year old Christopher Gore, is a former Bath University student, described as having no fixed address.
His parents were found dead at their house by firemen who'd been called to their cottage in Tetbury.
His father, Dr John Gore worked as a nuclear physicist at Berkley Nuclear Laboratories.
Today at Cirencester magistrates court, John Gore, bearded with a long ponytail, was committed for trial at Crown court.
Mr Gore stood in the dock looking straight ahead as the charges were read to him.
He's accused of murdering Dr John Gore and his wife Ruth Gore at their cottage in Tetbury between the 6th and 9th of September last year.
When he was asked if he understood the charges, he said,’ Yes I do.’
There was no application for bail and Mr Gore was further remanded in custody.
His trial will take place at Bristol Crown court at a date yet to be fixed.
A sixth former at a Gloucestershire public school has been expelled for allegedly supplying cannabis to other pupils.
An investigation at Dean Close School in Cheltenham revealed that seven A level pupils had smoked cannabis in woodland near the school in the last week of term.
Six of the pupils have been allowed to stay on at the seven and a half thousand pounds a year school.
Staff have held a one-day strike at the organisation which processes university applications.
CHELTENHAM
The biggest event in the canine calendar has opened today.
Nearly twenty thousand dogs have entered the one hundred and first Crufts Show, which is expected to pull in a hundred thousand vistors by the time it closes on Sunday.
Among the attractions is a perfume which, it's claimed, can stop dogs barking.
Mark Kiff reports.
NATIONAL EXHIBITION CENTRE
BILL EDMONDS Kennel Club
MICHAEL JENKINS Petfood Manufacturer
Dr RODGER MUGFORD Animal Behaviourist
Voice over
It's the show which almost every dog lover wants to be at.
166 breeds from all over the country are expected to line up at this year's event, competing to become the Supreme Champion.
Crufts is now into its second century.
It's success has sparked off many imitators, as far afield as Russia.
Male speaker
It's a British institution.
Many countries in the world would be delighted if they could have the success we have.
There are shows in Moscow now.
It's a world-wide occuptation showing dogs.
Voice over
The show has everything a dog could want, even career opportunities, with advice on hand available from the professionals themselves.
It's an action packed event; the chances to eat and drink are taken when they can.
There's plenty of awareness too of the problems dogs can cause.
This year a pet food manufacturer has issued all the exhibitors with their very own pooper scooper.
Male speaker
It's a social problem.
Every dog owner should take the responsibility of clearing up after his or her dog.
Voice over
Crufts also has the answer for those dogs which refuse to keep quiet.
The French have invented a perfume spray, mostly lemon, which stops dogs barking.
Tests have shown nine out of ten dogs fall silent when wearing it.
Male speaker
It arose from some very good scientific research into smells that animals like and there's no animal with a better sense of smell than a dog.
It works by distracting them from barking and they change their behaviuor.
Voice over
It seems the French might be onto something.
Not only are sleeping dogs allowed to lie, but also their owners.
New checkpoints in Belfast security clampdown
There were long tailbacks as new, permanent security checkpoints opened in Belfast.
Part-time Ulster Defence Regiment staff have been called-in to work full time.
Liberal Democrats outline election plans
The Liberal Democrats have outlined their plans for what they call,’ national recovery and regeneration’, by the turn of the century.
Bush recovers after flu bug
As he began another banquet in Japan, President Bush said he was fine, after his collapse yesterday, and that he'd just been suffering from a flu bug.
New Maxwell death controversy
The Magazine, Paris Match, says it has photographs to suggest that the publisher, Robert Maxwell, was beaten before his death.
Flooding and snow cause chaos
Flooding and snow have caused chaos in much of the Central South area.
FTSE up 30
The hundred shares index closed up thirty point eight at twenty-four, ninety-seven point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-six and up at two marks, eighty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back: The charity Oxfam celebrates its fiftieth anniversary this year.
From its beginnings in the second world war the Oxford Committee for Famine Relief is now Britain's largest aid agency, with projects in seventy countries.
Everything Oxfam does is funded by public donation, and tonight in our fourth report from South America we look at projects in Bolivia, one of the continent's poorest countries where farmers have been hard-hit by drought and recession…
JUAN VARGAS/Oxfam
CHRISTINE WHITEHEAD/Oxfam
16,500ft up in the Andes; Bolivia is home to some of the world's most beautiful scenery.
But it's a rugged landscape where only the animals and the hardiest of peasants can exist.
In Bolivia's altiplano even the valleys are 10,000ft above sea level.
It's a country of contrasts.
6 hours drive from the almost uninhabited mountain region, lies the world's highest capital.
La Paz: It's a city of shining skyscrapers where the wealthy industrialists and politicians enjoy life in a suburb which could be mistaken for Los Angeles.
Rubbing shoulders with this aggressively 20th century lifestyle, are the traditions of the majority indigenous Indian population, who forced out of their villages by drought and unemployment to seek work in the city, have established their own communities and their own markets where they come to buy and sell potatoes and cornmeal and where the Fortune-teller sits playing his chanrango while waiting for his next customer.
But not all the families can move and many still live in the countryside doing whatever they can to grow enough food to eat.
It's these peasants, the Ayllu people living high up in the west of the country that Oxfam is trying to help.
They look to the local officer, Juan Vargas for help and advice.
Their main worry is their children.
The reality of poverty here is that 60 per cent suffer from malnutrition.
Male speaker
The people only have small parcels of land and cannot grow enough food.
Many people have to emigrate leaving the women and children behind.
Voice over
While local officers work to deal with the everyday problems of the communities supported by Oxfam, assessing the overall situation is the responsibility of the Latin American desk at home in Oxford.
Female speaker
The farmers only have small plots of land and have little technical support.
They receive low prices for their products.
They are always fighting on the margins just to stay alive.
Voice over
And the situation has been aggravated by droughts in 1982 and again this year and by the introduction of free market policies in South America which have left Bolivia uncompetitive.
So they have provided funds to build a greenhouse with its own irrigation system to sprout barley.
This is then used to feed the rabbits which they are producing to provide a valuable source of protein.
There's another greenhouse which the children run themselves.
Here they grow tomatoes and lettuce to provide valuable nutrients and at the same time they're learning to grow vegetables in a way their parents didn't know how.
Meanwhile their mothers are receiving advice from the project's doctor on health and nutrition.
There are also steps now to teach the women basic reading and writing skills.
Water is a major problem in this arrid region, so local technicians funded by Oxfam have set up a system with water from a local thermal spring, which up until now has been too salty to use.
They've planted reeds in the irrigation channels leaving good clean water for the land.
By working with these communities Oxfam hope to achieve two objectives.
Female speaker
We work with community organisations to find ways of combatting and preventing drought.
Also to give those community organisations enough knowledge and confidence to help them produce more productively.
Male speaker
Oxfam won't solve all the communities' problems.
But we can pass on experience whiich will be a great contribution.
Voice over
Tomorrow night we travel to Potosi the highest town in the world where Oxfam is working with the families of out of work miners as they try to find other ways of making a living.
Onto football, and it's three games without defeat now for Oxford United who kept up their revival in London last night by drawing two all with Charlton Athletic.But United are still three points adrift at the bottom of the table…
Tim Russon reports 
Voice over
When you're bottom, a point never goes amiss — but United will be kicking themselves for not taking all 3 in London last night, after throwing away a 2 goal lead.
John Durnin headed them into the lead after 15 minutes.
And you know what they say about every cloud having a silver lining — well could young Joey Beecham be United's ray of hope?
Watch how he scored the second — and that's 3 goals in 3 games.
2 goals up.
Yes, United should have seen it and a third strike would have killed Charlton off, but Oxford began to lose fire power.
In the second half, Charlton came good.
They turned up the heat and the United defence started to cook.
After only 5 minutes, it was 2-1 with Carl Leaburn scoring with a glancing header.
The test for Oxford then was to keep Charlton out.
They manned the barricades — did a good job, but survival was down to luck at times.
Nothing lucky about Ken Veysey's goal-keeping, though — he did a great job and kept United afloat with some superb saves.
Here's the best one coming up.
Leaburn's header looked a goal, but Veysey just managed to put it onto the post.
After all the pressure, United looked good for a win, but then with just 5 minutes to go, they cracked.
The ball should have been cleared long before it found its way onto Robert Lee's left boot.
A pity, but they are making progress.
Charlton 2 — Oxford 2.
and the table tennis festival bounces on this weekend with the English Open Championship in Birmingham…skills of a different kind now…some of the country's top hockey players have been in Swindon battling it out in the National Indoor Championship…these were the qualifying rounds…the action though worthy of the finals…here's Erika Barnes 
IMRAN SHERWANI/Former GB International
RUSS BAILEY/Gloucester City
TIM LAWRENCE/Oxford Hawks
Voice over
It's a game of great speed…total commitment…quick thinking…a few surprises…and goals galore.
It's a game of brave goalkeepers…fallen heroes and amazing skill.
Stourport's Imran Sherwani was in Swindon for the qualifying rounds of the National Championships.
He brought with him the kind of gold medal form that helped Great Britain to Olympic glory in the Seoul sunshine.
Now he's retired from the International scene and competes in the Indoor game.
Male speaker
Obviously the Olympic success put the outdoor game into view.
But the indoor game is a better spectator sport even for TV.
It's fast and dangerous with lots of goals.
There are very few purple patches whereas the outdoor game — tactically — can be slow.
Voice over
Stourport along with Bromley qualified for the Crystal Palace finals.
But it was left to Oxford Hawks in the gold shirts and Gloucester City in the red to battle it out for the minor places in a Central South derby.
Here you'll see six players on the pitch with rolling substituions.
No off side…and no holes barred.
Male speaker
There are blokes crying out there when they come off the pitch, when they've been substituted.
They want to stay on as long as they possibly can.
Voice over
And with twelve guys and only six playing they'll only get half a game at the most if they're lucky.
That's the beauty of the side.
Being in close confinement and everything like that.
Despite the spectacle the indoor game provides…it's struggling to survive.
Once a way of beating the British winter it's now being beaten by the upsurge in all-weather pitches outside.
Male speaker
The outdoor game is now played on astroturf and is very similar to the indoor game.
Obviously the size of the court is different.
But the indoor game has suffered from this because people are now playing more outside on the astroturf.
Voice over
Our derby match inside produced ten goals in just half an hours play.
Coming up is one of Simon Dawsons personal tally of six…he helped Oxford Hawks take final honours…with a seven-three victory.
Now as promised it's time to zig zag to the onion bag…what is this man talking about…it's football speak from Cambridge manager John Beck whose team play Swindon tomorrow…it's the order he gives to his strikers before a game…zig zag…well that means running…weaving with the ball…the onion bag is the goal net of course…so here we go with this week's football roundup 
Voice over
Swindon's game against Cambridge at the County Ground tomorrow will be a good gauge of their promotion chances.
At the Abbey Stadium in August Town lost3-2 to United.
Duncan Shearer scored his first but hardly the finest goal of the season.
An own goal by Nicky Summerbee and two from Lee Philpott won the match and helped make Cambridge into a promotion force and lead the second division for two months.
Town could have some team problems tomorrow; keeper Nicky Hammond is facing a fitness test.
So too is Martin Ling; new signing, but an old face, Paul Bodin could find himself straight back in action.
Cambridge have slipped back in recent weeks.
Their last win was against Charlton back in November.
While Swindon and Cambridge fight it out near the top, the Oxford — Grimsby game at Blundell Park could be a relegation battle.
Town won 2-1 at the Manor.
Cockerill got a lucky first; McDermott a cracking second goal.
United's came from Jimmy Magilton, his second of 7 this season.
And United will be unchanged for the Grimsby game.
First name onto the team sheet was young Joey Beauchamp whose scored 3 goals in 3 games.
Important game tomorrow Grimsby are just two places above United but have five more points.
Oxford need to close the gap.
In the 4th division its Hereford against Cardiff at Ninian Park.
Now here's how they should psyche themselves up.
On Boxing Day they played Wrexham from Wales and won 3-1.
Last week look what Wrexham did to league champions Arsenal.
So they you are Hereford that makes you something special.
Team news.
United have just about shaken off the flu bug and are back to more or less full strength.
Goal of the week comes from Oxford United's new local hero 20 year old Joey Beauchamp who scored a smasher of second against Charlton, a real zig zag to the onion bag.
I don't know what rugby coaches tell their try scorers before a game…let's hope in Gloucester's case it's something good because the Cherry and Whites are chasing the championship…we start our weekly roundup with them: here's Mark Kiff 
Voice over
Gloucester will be at full strength for tomorrow's game against Saracens.
Victory for the Cherry and Whites could take them clear at the top of the Courage League, if Orrell and Leicester come unstuck.
Last Saturday, a weakened Gloucester side struggled to overcome Rosslyn Park.
Captain Ian Smith and Peter Jones were playing in the Scottish Trial; both have been selected as replacements for the Calcutta Cup.
Cheltenham badminton ace Nick Ponting flew out to the Far East this week with the England squad.
Also on the plane was Oxfordshire's Julie Bradbury.
She's celebrating her first international victory in the women's doubles at the Spanish Open.
Swindon Wildcat Darryl Lipsey's international career has taken off.
The Canadian-born forward has been selected for the Great Britain squad which plays France later this month.
The Oxford City Stars start their New Year campaign this weekend.
The key game: home to Streatham on Sunday, who are one place above the Stars in the League.
Finally, former world champion Hans Neilsen will be riding again for the Oxford Cheetahs.
The Danish star has signed up for his ninth successive year with the club.
Hundreds of fans queued for hours in the cold to see the pop group EMF stage a special concert in their home town.
But as Clare Lafferty reports, many were eventually turned away, because they were too young.
CINDERFORD/Gloucestershire
PROMOTIONAL VIDEO
Around 400 fans braved freezing temperatures to see the Forest of Dean's most famous sons.
More used to venues like Wembley Stadium, tonight EMF were at the Dean Snooker Club in their home town of Cinderford.
It was their way of saying thank you to the locals who'd helped them on the road to stardom.
The concert was a sell out, but younger fans, some with their parents, were disappointed to find they couldn't get in because they were under sixteen.
EMF's management refused to allow us to talk to the band or film them playing live.
All the proceeds from the concert will go to the local Cinderford Forge Appeal for the Blind.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
DON PARKER/England Team Manager
MATTHEW SYED/Oxford University
Voice over
For soccer skills, we've always looked to the Brazilians; in cricket, the West Indies have been the power.
As for table tennis, it's the Chinese who've dominated.
Although times are changing and China's crown is slipping, Sweden are now World Champions, the Chinese are the ones who turn the tables up-side-down.
They held the bat like a pen and set the game spinning in weird and wonderful ways.
Over the past few weeks, their National Team has been on a British Tour and wherever they play, the house is packed.
They've just beaten England 6-1 in a test series.
So what's been their secret?
Male speaker
Chairman Mao and his little red book actually sort of advocated table tennis because it didn't take up paddy fields; it was very economical; you can stick 10 tables in a canteen, so it was very much conducive to the communist way of life and of course, China…
I don't know; is it a third of the world is Chinese?
Table tennis was their main sport, so of course, just by sheer numbers and probability, they were going to have a fantastic team.
Voice over
The Chinese may not be the force they were, but they still beat England easily in the last match at Bletchley Sports Centre this week — good match it was too.
International table tennis is hard and sophisticated stuff.
Matthew Sayed of Oxford University is the England number 4.
Male speaker
It is tough.
I mean, it's not like in a Youth Club; you're not just hitting a ball backwards and forwards like ping-pong.
It is very physically demanding and you know, you have to work hard to be good at it.
Male speaker
Like all sports, it's very tough.
You've got to keep your cool, you've got to be strong in the head.
You've got to have a sharp brain to work out the tactics and you've got to have a very good technique, so it's a demanding sport.
But having said that, it's a sport that anybody can play.
Voice over
International table tennis is something else.
The ball flies across the table at speeds of up to 100 mph.
Long live ping-pong.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ROSS-on-WYE/Herefordshire
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
PAUL BAILEY/NRA
PERSHORE/Worcestershire
EWYAS HAROLD/Herefordshire
AMATEUR VIDEO
DAPHNE MAILES/Villager
LESLEY KEATES/Barmaid
TOM MORGAN/Villager
RAYMOND DAVIES/Villager
Voice over
The most serious risk of flooding this evening is on the River Wye between Ross on Wye and Hereford.The National Rivers authority has issued a red alert along the whole stretch until midnight.And there are also flood warnings on the River Severn in Gloucestershire and Worcestershire.The situation is being monitored at the NRA's control room in Tewkesbury:
Male speaker
Twelve flood alerts have been issued along the River Severn.
Voice over
At Pershore in Worcestershire a JCB driver was stranded after his digger got stuck in deep water.He had to be rescued by firemen.
Meanwhile residents of Ewyas Harold have been counting the cost of yesterdays flooding.
The village brook overflowed with such force that cars were washed away, and homes were under feet of water.
Female speaker
Carpets, lino and even the central heating have been damaged.
Voice over
The Dog pub in the village was closed as staff mopped up:
She says the pumps and other equipment have been damaged.But the pub hopes to reopen on Monday.
There were claims today that flood prevention measures further down the brook at Pontrilas had caused the problems in Ewyas Harold:
Male speaker
The flood prevention downstream has made the water back up to the village.
Voice over
Other villagers claimed the local council could have done more to help:
Male speaker
There should be a stockpile of sandbags to help people cope with the floods.
Voice over
Despite the flooding, one angler at Ross on Wye was determined to enjoy his sport.
An inquest's been hearing how a teenage joyrider died when he crashed a stolen car while trying to escape from police.
The car reached speeds of ninety miles an hour before overturning and hitting a lampost.
Mike Dolan reports 
NORTHAMPTON
Ch Supt GRENVILLE LEASING/Northamptonshire Police
Voice over
Advanced police driver Constable Paul Phillips and Constable Zena Goode told an inquest Northampton General Hospital that 17 year old Mark Windram was travelling in a stolen car at speeds of up to 90 miles an hour through the town.
Seconds later this was all that remained of the Fiat Tempra; its body work smashed after rolling repeatedly and hitting a lamp-post.
The car chase had lasted less than a minute.
The car had been stolen from the Weston Favell shopping centre in Northampton.
It was spotted by police officer being driven eractically early one morning last September.
The car turned on to the A45 heading towards Wellingborough.
The police followed from a distance its blue lights flashing.
The Fiat's driver was forced to swerve to avoid an on-coming car.
As he did so he lost control of the vehicle which rolled over smashed into a lamp-post.
Mark Windram from Eastfield in Northampton had to be cut from the wreckage by the fire brigade.
He died at the scene.
His father, Jonathon said his son had been in trouble with the police before but had never stolen cars.
Coroner Michael Colcutt was told the police officers had followed the forces procedures when chasing cars.
He recorded a verdict of accidental death.
Male speaker
We conducted an investigation into the accident and are satisfied the officers behaved correctly.
Voice over
Tonight as the family of Mark Windram come to terms with his death police officers have again warned those who steal cars that their actions all too often end in tragedy.
At another inquest, a jury has decided that a man who was scalded to death in a bath at an old people's home was the victim of an accident.
The home has since taken action to ensure that such an accident doesn't happen again.
Simon Garrett reports.
CHACOMBE HOUSE/Northamptonshire
DOROTHY PECKOVER/Step-daughter
AYLESBURY MAGISTRATES COURT/Buckinghamshire
JOHN MARSHALL/Health and Safety Executive
Voice over
Bill Warmington was recovering from a stroke.
His family chose Chacombe House Nursing home near Banbury for him because he was allowed to keep his beloved pet dog there.
But five days after he moved in he was found by staff horribly scalded across his back and chest lying face up in the bath.
It's thought he'd been incontinent and tried to wash himself.
He probably fell under the hot tap…the water was at seventy-five degrees centrigade…well above health and safety guidelines.
Less than twelve hours later Mr Warmington died at Stoke Mandeville hospital.
His family say it was a loving caring home and they're happy with the verdict
Female speaker
I'm quite happy really, no-one could have done more
Voice over
The taps at Chacombe House have now all been fixed so they only produce water at less than forty-three degrees centigrade.
But Health and Safety officials say they could still be many homes where staff aren't aware of the rules.
Male speaker
We're trying to get in touch with all the homes we haven't already seen to make sure this can't happen again.
Voice over
Staff from the home were clearly relieved by the verdict.
Female speaker
It's the only verdict they could have returned.
Voice over
Health and safety officals say this isn't the first incident of its kind…and they're renewing their efforts to convince all nursing home boards to check their plumbing isn't potentially lethal
All this week we've been reporting on the work in South America of Oxfam, which this year marks its fiftieth anniversary.
Our final report comes from Potosi in Bolivia, the world's highest city, where Oxfam are helping the families of some of the twenty-five thousand miners who lost their jobs when the world tin market collapsed.
JUAN VARGAS/Oxfam
ROSA LAIME/Project Director
CHRISTINE WHITEHEAD/Oxfam
CHRISTINE WHITEHEAD/Oxfam
16,000ft up in the Bolivian Andes the miners of the Cerro Rico chew coca leaves, they're preparing for another day in the tin mines.
They'll be underground all day without stopping to eat and they may find nothing at all.
The coca takes the edge off their appetites and brings them luck in their search for tin.
It's the discovery of minerals on this mountain in the 16th century which brought a flood of entrepreneurs to the region and Potosi, the world's highest city was built.
To the outsider it's a grand colonial city where the legacy of more than two centuries of Spanish rule and the ethnic traditions of the largely Indian population make an incongruous mixture.
Once Potosi was one of the richest cities in South America.
Today when you look down from the top of the mountain which once provided jobs for 85 per cent of the male population you're looking down on one of the poorest cities in Bolivia.When the price of tin crashed on the world markets in 1985 the state mines were closed down and 25,000 people lost their jobs.
Now if there is work in the mines at all it's with the co-operatives.
Here teams of men work at their own risk in the most basic and dangerous conditions imaginable, to scratch whatever they can from the rockface.
At the end of the day they'll sell the minerals and divide up the profits, but without proper equipment and with the prices so low their income is minimal.
Oxfam is working with the mining communities in San Pedro, the poorest part of the city, trying to provide basic facilities for a community where 27 per cent of the community have no access to fresh water.
And to try to create jobs for the women so that even if their men are out of work they can provide at least some income.
Male speaker
The crisis is hitting so hard that most of the people are unemployed, and you see children begging in the streets or forced to go out to work.
Our work is not a solution for the area, but its a relief for the area.
Voice over
Oxfam has provided materials and equipment to set up this bakery.
Rose Choque is fourteen, she works here every day, earning just under a pound a day.
It's not much but its vital to the family.
Her father is a casual miner and on the days he can't get work her income is all they have.
The projects's director told us how important Oxfam's help is.
Female speaker
The families are suffering badly because they don't earn enough to live on.
Working in the bakery at least guarantees the women will take home a piece of bread each day.
Voice over
But Oxfam do more than just provide jobs.
Their funding has allowed the community to set up a health clinic where the families can bring their children for the sort of check ups we in Britian take for granted.
Here they're weighed and measured and checked for the early signs of malnutrition, cholera and smallpox.
There's a nursery as well with places for a hundred children aged between one and eight.The smallest children are taken off their mothers hands while they're out at work and given a meal each day.
The older ones are given perhaps the only education they'll ever receive.
The project is managed in Bolivia by local officer Juan Vargas, but back home in Oxford it's the job of the Latin America desk to decide which communities should receive funding.
Female speaker
We get a lot more requests for funding than we can fund, and we have to develop priorities.
It's important to put Oxfam's work into perspective, we are a drop in the ocean but an important drop in the ocean.
Voice over
Back in Bolivia it's women like Serapia con Quispe who pray that the Oxfam funding continues.
Her two year old is the youngest of nine children, and as well as struggling to bring up her own family she's set up a health project in her community.
This region has just suffered a smallpox epidemic, and Serapia works to teach the women about the risks of disease, and to teach them basic health care.
Female speaker
The main thing Oxfam is asking for is more money.
But we also want people to understand what is happening in places like Latin America so they have a better awareness of why Oxfam is trying to help.
Voice over
Oxfam's greatest wish on their fiftieth anniversary is that they can put themselves out of a job.But in the meantime they believe the problems of the third world can only be solved when the developed world understands.
If you'd like more information about Oxfam's anniversary activities you can write in for their special action pack.
IRA claim responsibility for Whitehall car bomb
The IRA has claimed responsibility for the car bomb which exploded near Downing Street this morning.
Thirty minute warning No injuries reported
There was a thirty minute warning and no injuries were reported.
Bomb alerts in Belfast
There were also bomb alerts in Belfast at the time of the London blast.
Chancellor plans election year budget
The Chancellor, Norman Lamont, is planning his election year budget.
Ratners Chairman steps down
The Chairman of Britain's biggest jewellery chain, Ratners, is to stand-down.
EC resumes Yugoslav peace monitoring
The European Community is to resume peace monitoring in Yugoslavia in spite of the killing of five observers in a helicopter.
Hurd rules out devaluation
The Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, has ruled out devaluation of the pound.
FTSE down 20
The hundred shares index closed down twenty points at twenty-four, seventy-seven point nine.
The pound is down more than three cents at one dollar, eighty-one, and up at two marks, eighty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.35 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A lucky find on the edge of the Cotswolds is helping archeologists discover what life was like in Roman Britain.
They've uncovered the remains of a first century village and graveyard…but they only have a short time to dig up the relics, before work continues on a pipeline straight through the site.
Erika Barnes reports.
ASTHALL Oxfordshire
PAUL BOOTH Oxford Archeological Unit
MIKE HALL Thames Water
Voice over
Asleep for hundreds of years.
The secrets of a Roman village died with its inhabitants.
But interest has been re-awakened with the discovery of this graveyard at Asthall near Burford in Oxfordshire.
This man was buried here in the fourth century.
But the quality of the soil has helped protect this part of the past for present day archeologists to observe.
Male speaker
The cemetery is only small; about 10 to 12 burials.
It's interesting there's a wide range from neo-natal infant to adults.
They're aligned east to west which suggests they may have been Christian burials.
But some are north to south which confuse things.
Voice over
The site was uncovered by Thames Water engineers, who are building a water treatment pipeline.
The village they found lined the ancient Akeman Street, the Roman road which linked St Albans with Cirencester.
Male speaker
When any pipeline is made, we strip the top soil.
Archeologists were on hand.
They noticed masonary walls and thought we've got a big site here.
Male speaker
It seems it served as a market centre because it was on a major Roman road.
People were passing through and staying and using the facilities.
Voice over
One sestertius might have helped the visitor pay his way during the time of Emperor Antonius Pius.
And even as far back as the second century, Britannia graced the back of their coins.
Brooches and pins and even iron tools give the archeologists a clue about life in Oxfordshire in Roman times.
But some things never change and the appalling weather might just have been one of the reasons why the Romans abandoned the village and Britain, 1,500 years ago.
Hurricane force winds continue to hit Shetlands
FTSE down 25
The hundred shares index closed down twenty five point eight at two seven seven three point four 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty five and up at two marks, fifty three.
(ad lib)
tomorrow night Swindon have a chance to get even nearer the top of the table…they're at home to Birmingham City…while Oxford are chasing a place in the next round of the cup…they're at home to Swansea in a third round replay…
Hereford United meanwhile are just fighting for survival…on Saturday they drew one-all with York City 
DEREK HALL/Hereford Captain
Voice over
Hereford were bottom of the table when they kicked off on saturday…the lift they needed came after just seven minutes when top scorer Owen Pickard shot them into the lead…
United should have killed York off then…they had more of the ball and the best of the chances…even York manager reckons that Hereford are a better team than their league position suggests and he was happy with a draw…the equaliser came after 33 minutes a header from John Borthwick…one all…what now for United…
skipper Derek Hall says that his team need a bit more luck and his ambition for 93 is to see the ground fill up…
now lets hear three cheers for Gloucester rugby club…on Saturday they won at London Irish in the league…a victory that could help keep them in the first division 
Voice over
No ifs…buts or maybes the cherry and whites had to win this one and for once luck was on their side…
London Irish thought they'd scored a try here…the ref tho rightly gave a knock on…and the cherry and whites rolled on to take the lead with a penalty from Martin Roberts…another penalty apiece made it six three to Gloucester at half-time…but they deserved more…the forwards were fired up but so too was the exiles defence which took a fair old hammering…the turning point came at the start of the second half when referee David Matthews awarded Gloucester a penalty try…
London Irish were horrified at the decision…the cherry and whites happy to be on the way to victory…
No one could argue they didn't deserve it though…and they made the match their own with a second try…a good one too…skipper Ian Smith made the break…number eight Paul Ashmead started a charge to the line and full-back Martin Roberts ran on to finish the scoring…
London Irish six Gloucester eighteen…just the result coach Keith Richardson wanted
Keith Richardson says this was a game Gloucester had to win…it was a turning point and the players will now be able to relax and play the football they are capable of
and the first division table looks a lot healthier for Gloucester today…remember the bottom four go down…there are still games to go though…next one is Bath
finally news is coming in from the ski-slopes of Europe that a strange bird has been spotted…an eagle…yes Eddie the Eagle is back in business 
Voice over
It's a long time since Eddie the Eagle…the clown prince of sport bounced along the streets of Cheltenham…but Britain's one and only ski jump champion is planning a comeback…
His target the winter olympics next year…
Eddie has been spotted in Europe training hard and is planning to compete in the Europa Cup…
Are you wondering what to do with your old Christmas tree?
Well now there's an environmentally-friendly solution.
A giant shredding machine will take even the largest tree, AND it produces a useful by-product.
Ian Maclaren reports.
OXFORD
MANNIE KELSEY/Recycling Officer
SUE MATTHEW/Head Teacher
Voice over
Oxford City Centre's Christmas tree gets the chop.
The Carfax tree, taken from the Blenheim estate, has served its seasonal purpose…delighting thousands of Christmas shoppers.
But even now it has its uses.
It's being fed into a shredding machine as part of the city's re-cycling scheme.
The council hopes to shred more than a thousand trees this year…turning them into wood chips…
There are eight recycling points throughout the city…and if you want to be the complete environmentalist…they say it's better to walk there or cycle if you can.
Taking a close interest are the pupils and teachers from St Ebbes First School…
vox
The wood chips will be of practical benefit, too, for the school children.
The trees remains form a mulsh that can be spread in the garden…and the chips are a useful alternative to concrete on the school's play area.
Innocent homeless:The family whose landlord didn't pay the mortgage.
Saved: The Shetland seals rescued by St Tiggywinkles
And inches from death: His pram is crushed, but a baby boy survives.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The building society involved says the mortgage is in arrears, despite monthly payments being made directly by Social Services.
Now Anne Henderson is going to court to try to keep a roof over her head.
Ian Maclaren reports.
WANTAGE/Oxfordshire
ANNE HENDERSON/Mother
Voice over
Anne Henderson gathers together her belongings.
She's still suffering from the shock of returning to her rented home in Wantage last week to find the bailiffs changing the locks.
It was the first inkling she had that she could end up homeless.
Anne signed an agreement last February, paying 450 pounds a month rent to private lanlord.
The money has been paid every month on her behalf by Social Services.
But the building society says the mortgage repayments are in arrears.
Now she's been given notice to quit by Wednesday…
Tonight the Cheltenham and Gloucester building society issued a statement saying it was most unfortunate that Miss Henderson and her children are the victims.
it is a situation which has become more frequent, when a borrower lets his house without telling us.
We have no option but to take the property back into our possession.
The landlord of the house is Thomas Collins, whose solicitor confirmed that payments had been received at his office.
It's understood the owner doesn't intend to stop his property being repossessed.
anne Henderson says her prdicament is a warning to others in her situation…
As she reads her sons a bedtime story, she hopes a hearing at Oxford County Court tomorrow, will grant her more time to find a new home.
Hurricane force winds are hampering efforts to save seals caught in the Shetland oil slick.
Experts from the world's biggest wildlife hospital say they can't reach many of the seals, which are dying on inaccessible rocks.
But some are now recovering at an emergency field hospital.
Gareth Furby reports from Shetland.
SHETLAND ISLANDS/Scotland
LES STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles
RICHARD BALL/Islander
SUE STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles
Dr JOHN LEWIS/Vet
This seal was washed up on an oil covered beach.
Toxic fumes had knocked it out.
But now its joined other seals at an emergency wildlife centre.
It's being set up with the help of staff from the Buckinghamshire-based St Tiggywinkles animal hospital.
He says the seals breath in the fumes and its really just like glue sniffing for them.
They loose all sense of direction and get into trouble.
Hundreds of Sheltand Otters are also at risk.
So the islanders are coverting an old barn into an emergency hospital.
He says they care about all animals and want to do everything they can to help.
She says they've set up a field hospital with the latest equipment.
But even the best of care may not help the worst affected.
He says the otters that have swallowed a lot of oil may be so ill there's nothing that can be done.
They'll be put to sleep.
But others will be kept in cages until they're well enough to be released on another coastline unaffected by the oil slick.
In just a few days the centre will be a hive of activity.
Everyone will be working for free, and all with the same goal, to try to save as much of the island's wildlife as they can.
But many seals and otters are now dying on inaccessible rocks and today's high winds are preventing any rescue attempt.
Wildlife experts fear the calm weather may return too late to save them.
A baby boy narrowly escaped death when his pram was crushed between a car and a garden wall.
The impact demolished the wall, and the baby's mother was thrown over it, but the child was unharmed.
Tim Hurst reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
SANDRA TURNBULL/Kyle's Mother
Voice over
Six month old Kyle Turnbull is back at home in Swindon after hospital checks.
He was being carried in a pram on a shopping trip at Gorse Hill in Swindon when a parked car was shunted onto the pavement, squashing the pram against a wall with such force that the wall collapsed.
Kyle's mother was pushed over the wall by the impact.
A driver whose vehicle collided with the parked car was treated for shock but otherwise unhurt.
Hundreds of sheep have been rescued from rising floodwater.
The fire service and R-S-P-C-A used boats to help ferry the flock to safer ground.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
Chief Insp BILL CORNWALL/RSPCA
Voice over
SHEEP
The sheep were grazing on land next to the River Severn in Gloucester when the flood water started to rise.
The RSPCA feared that the animals would become stranded.
So together with the fire brigade, they took to the water to steer them onto safer land.
Most of the animals ran straight to the river banks, but eight panicked and jumped into the water.
Rescuers had to battle against strong winds and teaming rain to try to rescue them.
The fast currents made the job even harder.
Two of the eight sheep died.
The rest were pulled from the water and ferried to safety.
RSPCA officials are now urging all farmers to listen out for flood warnings and move their animals away from danger as soon as posible.
A lucky find on the edge of the Cotswolds is helping archeologists discover what life was like in Roman Britain.
They've uncovered the remains of a first century village and graveyard…but they only have a short time to dig up the relics, before work continues on a pipeline straight through the site.
Erika Barnes reports.
ASTHALL Oxfordshire
PAUL BOOTH Oxford Archeological Unit
MIKE HALL Thames Water
Voice over
Asleep for hundreds of years.
The secrets of a Roman village died with its inhabitants.
But interest has been re-awakened with the discovery of this graveyard at Asthall near Burford in Oxfordshire.
This man was buried here in the fourth century.
But the quality of the soil has helped protect this part of the past for present day archeologists to observe.
Male speaker
The cemetery is only small; about 10 to 12 burials.
It's interesting there's a wide range from neo-natal infant to adults.
They're aligned east to west which suggests they may have been Christian burials.
But some are north to south which confuse things.
Voice over
The site was uncovered by Thames Water engineers, who are building a water treatment pipeline.
The village they found lined the ancient Akeman Street, the Roman road which linked St Albans with Cirencester.
Male speaker
When any pipeline is made, we strip the top soil.
Archeologists were on hand.
They noticed masonary walls and thought we've got a big site here.
Male speaker
It seems it served as a market centre because it was on a major Roman road.
People were passing through and staying and using the facilities.
Voice over
One sestertius might have helped the visitor pay his way during the time of Emperor Antonius Pius.
And even as far back as the second century, Britannia graced the back of their coins.
Brooches and pins and even iron tools give the archeologists a clue about life in Oxfordshire in Roman times.
But some things never change and the appalling weather might just have been one of the reasons why the Romans abandoned the village and Britain, 1,500 years ago.
Hurricane force winds continue to hit Shetlands
FTSE down 25
The hundred shares index closed down twenty five point eight at two seven seven three point four 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty five and up at two marks, fifty three.
(ad lib)
An injured swan is on the road to recovery — thanks to the ancient oriental science of acupuncture.
Other patients benefiting from needle treatment are dogs, cats, and a tawny owl.
Ken Goodwin reports.
STROUD Gloucestershire
GREG SIMPSON Vet
SANDY CASSEY Swan Aid
Voice over
This injured swan is about to receive some rather unorthodox treatment.
The bird was found in a field after it had flown into power cables.
It has been paralysed ever since.
Conventional vetinary medicine failed to help the bird, but since undergoing a course of acupuncture at a surgery in Stroud, the Swan has begun to make a remarkable recovery.
He says that it's worked well.
She says that it's made a great difference, the swan can now struggle to it's feet.
No-one quite knows how acupuncture works.
In humans it's thought to stimulate the body's own natural painkillers.
He says that certain morphine like substances are released from the brain during acupuncture.
Other birds to benefit from the treatment include a tawny owl with an injured leg, now making a fast recovery.
As for the swan, when it's course of treatment is over it'll be released into the wild.
Bosnian peace talks collapse
FTSE down 15
The hundred shares index closed down fifteen point five at two seven five seven point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty three and down at two marks, fifty.
(ad lib)
A mother of two young children who faced eviction because her landlord hadn't paid the mortgage, has been given a reprieve.
A County Court Judge decided to suspend the repossession order, allowing Anne Henderson three more weeks to find a new home.
Housing workers say the case highlights what's becoming a growing problem for unsuspecting tenants.
Ian Maclaren reports.
OXFORD
ANNE HENDERSON/Tenant
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
CHARLES RULE/Tenant
GERARD WARD/Housing Advisor
Voice over
Anne Henderson emerged from Oxford County Court, delighted, after what she described as’ A week of Hell’.
Judge Barrington Ward suspended a warrant on behalf of the Cheltenham and Gloucester Building Society, for the repossession of her home in Wantage.
As a single mother with two children, he said, she should be allowed time to find alternative accomodation.
Anne Henderson says she desperately needed the 21 days breathing space…
The case is one of a growing number affecting tenants.
Charles Rule waits in his Aylesbury flat for the inevitable notice from the baillifs to get out of his home.
His landlady is in arrears with the mortgage.
And the Halifax building society is about to repossess the flat.
Charles, who estimates he's spent 2,000 pounds improving the property, expects to be evicted by the end of next month…
According to the Oxford Housing Rights Centre, repossessions have doubled during the recession…and tenants increasingly end up as innocent victims…
The Building Societies say they're often unaware that tenants have moved in to properties until they've been repossessed.
The advice from the Building Societies Association is that prospective tenants should ask to see written consent from the lender, before entering into a tenancy agreement.
But there was one piece of good news for Anne Henderson tonight.She's been offered a three bedroomed home to rent…and could be ready to move in by the weekend.
Welcome back: Ronald and Reggie Kray, who ran the London underworld of the nineteen sixties have been idolised by a pair of twins who weren't even born then.
The Krays were jailed for life in (1969) nineteen sixty nine, but their young fans have written to them, and one has even met Reggie in prison.
They claim that despite their reputations, the Krays are really kind and generous people.
Here's Gargy Patel.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
DAVID CLARK/Kray Fan
MICHAEL CLARK/Kray Fan
BETHNAL GREEN/London
FRED DINEAGE/Kray Author
Voice over
March 1966…
Ronnie Kray walks into the Blind Beggar pub in London's East End…and shoots dead George Cornell.
The murder proved to be the downfall of the Kray twins, who ruled London's gangland in the sixties.
It was one of the biggest trials seen at the Old Bailey.
Ron and Reggie Kray were convicted of two killings…eight members of the Kray firm were jailed.
For the police it was the end of a brotherhood of evil.
For some, the Krays have become a fascinating subject.
Twins David and Michael Clark weren't even born when Ron and Reggie were put away.
But they collect everything they can about the notorious criminals.
David's bedroom in Banbury has become a shrine.
To them the Krays weren't all bad.
The most treasured items in their collection are letters from the Krays written from their prison cells.
Ron even warns the twins to stay out of trouble.
David managed to see Reggie Kray in prison.
The former gang leader, who'se now fifty nine, was flattered by their interest.
Since 1969, Ron and Reggie Kray have only been out of prison once.
For their mother's funeral ten years ago.
Reggie is due for parole in three years.
It's unlikely Ron will ever be released from Broadmoor.
The East End they knew has changed a great deal.
The Clark twins often visit all the old Kray haunts.
David and Michael are the first to admit they've got a bizarre hobby.
Even if it means sitting at the same bar where Ronnie Kray's victim sat twenty seven years ago.
Some might say it's a sinister way to spend your time.
Others who've met the Krays and written about them, like TV presenter Fred Dineage, say it's harmless enough.
For now, the Clark twins watch the Kray twins on documentary videos, and follow their advice to stay on the right side of the law.
They just look forward to meeting the notorious killers again face to face.
An off-duty policeman who was attacked with a hammer had his teth broken and bones in his face shattered.
PC Bob Holt has been assaulted three times in his three years in the force.
Senior officers now say they want tougher punishments for those found guilty of attacking the police.
Clare Lafferty reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
PC BOB HOLT/Assault Victim
DAVID BLAKELY/Chief Constable/West Mercia Police
Voice over
HAMMER
Bob Holt, a constable with the Gloucestershire force has had four hours of surgery to rebuild his mouth after being hit in the face with a hammer.
It happened when he was off-duty in Cheltenham.
He saw a youth in a struggle with three men and ran to his aid.
It's the third time PC Holt has been assaulted.
But he won't let that put him off his work.
Senior policemen are becoming very worried about the number of attacks on their officers.
In Gloucestershire there's been a sixty per cent increase in the number of attacks on police women.
In the West Mercia force, which polices Hereford and Worcester, it's estimated that on average, one officer is attacked every day.
In the meantime, PC Holt now has to face the prospect of more surgery to rebuild his palate and his jaw.
Sixty jobs are to go at the Dowty Seals factory at Ashchurch near Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire.
ASHCHURCH/Gloucestershire
Staff were told about the job cuts last night.
Up to a third will affect clerical workers.
The company's owners, T-I, say the site is unprofitable.
It hopes to make the redundancies voluntary.
A prisoner who's been on the run for more than six months has been recaptured.
GLOUCESTER
Six remand prisoners broke through a fence and climbed a wall at Gloucester Prison last May.
Four were soon recaptured, but two others, including Ricky Roberts, evaded capture.
He was arrested on suspicion of burglary at Salisbury in Wiltshire at the weekend.
Legal squabbling is preventing a hundred and fifty million pounds being shared out between former employees of Robert Maxwell whose pensions were stolen by the publishing tycoon.The allegation is contained in a report by a powerful committee of MPs, which wants a mediator appointed to knock heads together.Chris Moore reports.
4 NOVEMBER 1992/LONDON
FRANK FIELD MP/Chairman/Social Security Committee
KEITH KIRBY/Maxwell Pensioner
BOB KNIGHT/Maxwell Pensions Committee/Oxford
Voice over
The cheated Maxwell pensioners won't let go of their money, and have mobilised into a vociferous force with a mission to get it all back.
This report by the Commons Social Security Committee says they could have some of it now…if it wasn't for administrators and liquidators spending months in legal wrangles over who gets what.
Male speaker
The committee was shocked and appalled by that state of affairs.
The government should now set a time limit for this saga to be brought to a conclusion.
We want to limit the amount of fees being charged, but also we want to bring security back to the pensioners.
Voice over
Since Robert Maxwell died over a year ago, and the lid was blown off the pension scandal, about 250 million pounds of the missing money has been recovered.
But 34 million…three milliuon a month…has gone on the fees incurred in doing so.
People like Keith Kirby, who lost thirty thousand pounds of his Nuffield Press pension have had nothing.
He says the government should pay the money back itself.
Male speaker
I believe the government should come up with the money outstanding from our pension funds, and then try to recover it themselves.
Voice over
The social security committee wants a time limit of six months on the recovery process.
It also wants this man, Sir John Cuckney to be put in overall charge.
He's been heading government efforts to help victims of the scandal.
But Bob Knight of the Oxford Maxwell pensioners committee doubts that the poorest victims will be put first.
Male speaker
Appointing Sir John Cuckney is a good idea which I think the government will take on board.
That will save money and expense, but the question is, will it guarantee anything for the pensioners themselves?
That is still not clear.
Voice over
On Thursday, the pot of Maxwell money will be swollen still further when the contents of his Oxford home are auctioned at Sotheby's.
Unless procedures change, it looks like that money too will be argued over at length, with only lawyers and accountants seeing any of it going into their own pockets.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
BOB PITT/Prison Officers' Association
RAY WIRE/Therapist
PETER LLOYD MP/Prisons Minister
Voice over
More than 50 women work at Long Lartin prison near Evesham in Worcestershire, 17 of them as uniformed prison officers.
The remainder, like the assitant chaplain who was raped, are civilian staff, working amongst some of the most dangerous prisoners in the country.
The attacker, who was serving life for rape, was immediately transferred to another jail.
He was one of a handful of men trusted to work unsupervised — a mistake say prison officers.
The assistant chaplain at Long Lartin, in her 40's, has decided not to press charges.
The director of a clinic for sex offenders agrees with the POA that such prisons need more staff.
Officers at Long Lartin argue they're understaffed since the abolition of overtime.
The Government doesn't agree.
The Home Office has demanded a full report into the attack.
It's expected to be completed in the next few days.
A great-grandmother has lost her life savings after masked robbers tied her up and ransacked her home.
Lily Goodenough, who's seventy eight and partially blind, was threatened with a knife and forced to lie on the floor.
Her relatives are now offering a reward for information leading to an arrest.
Gareth Furby reports.
OXFORD
LILY GOODENOUGH/Victim
DAVID MEARS/Son-in-law
MARGARET ELSTON/Daughter
ALBERT GOODENOUGH/Husband
Voice over
For the past twenty years Lily Goodenough has been fighting a brain tumour.
It's left her partially blind and a semi-invalid, an easy target for robbers.
Yesterday morning two masked men walked into her Oxford home through an open back door.
They tied her up and left her lying on the lounge floor.
They even stole the rings off her fingers.
She only kept her wedding ring because one of the robbers dropped it on the way out.
She says they asked where her money was.
She said she hadn't any but they wouldn't listen.
Mrs Goodenough's son-in-law was handcuffed and locked in a cupboard after he disturbed the robbers.
He says they could have killed her.
She says her mother is very shocked.
The police say several thousand pounds was stolen…the elderly couple were keeping it to pay for their burial.
He says it was for their funeral but now they've got nothing.
She says she'll never forget the robber.
He was ugly.
Tonight the seventy eight year old's being comforted by her great grandchildren.
But she's too frightened to go back home.
And she's now moved in with relatives.
And her family is now offering a substantial reward for inforation leading to an arrest.
A woman has been raped in her own home by a masked man wielding a knife.
Police say the man escaped across fields after what they said was a despicable attack.
Richard Barnett reports:
HEREFORD
Insp RON DAVIES/West Mercia Police
Voice over
The rapist was already lying in wait for the twenty eight year old woman when she arrived home last night.
He'd forced a window to get into the ground floor maisonette in the Belmont area of Hereford.
As the woman went into the bedroom, the rapist struck.
Police believe the man escaped across a field at the edge of the estate.
And they've been carrying out an exhaustive search for clues.
They say the rapist would have been covered in mud after crossing the field:
As detectives continue their hunt for the man, a woman who counsels rape victims in Hereford has been talking about the crime:
Meanwhile in the supermarket car park only a few hundred yards from the scene of the rape, women expressed their shock at what had happened:
Police have described the man they're looking for as white, in his early twenties, five feet eight to nine inches tall, and with a local accent.
Tomorrow detectives will be visiting houses in the Belmont area in the hope someone can identify the rapist.
Hereford back in action tomorrow…at Edgar Street they face non-league Woking in the FA Cup…winners away to Nottingham Forest…our losing run stops now thanks to Gloucester rugby club who on Saturday in the league drew twelve all with Saracens in London…it was a close thing tho 
Everyone's out to beat Gloucester at the moment and don't the Cherry and Whites know it.
That's why they went for Saracens right from the start.
Gloucester needed an early score, an early lead and they got it after just 9 minutes when they won a penalty right in front of the posts.
Tim Smith knocked it over, scored a second and this was his third at the start of the 2nd half to put the Cherry and Whites 9-0 up.
But Saracens hit back with 2 penalties and the only try of the game, an up and under; Gary Owen from Rudling had Gloucester struggling and Martin Gregory raced into the corner to touch down.
Rudling added a giant of a conversion so Gloucester were 12-9 down until the very last kick of the game which turned out to be a penalty.
Do or die for Tim Smith.
What a hero and what relief for the Gloucester fans.
12-12 the score.
I reckon they'll be an inquest on this one.
Richardson Report:
Gloucester's league match at Saracens was a cliff hanger right until the very last kick of the game.
Gloucester seemed to be well in control.
For 35 minutes they actually dominated possession and position and Saracens seemed in a lot of trouble.
Gloucester seemed to be coasting to an easy 2 points.
But Saracens had different ideas.
A very quick try, 2 penalty kicks and Gloucester seemed not to be coasting to the win, but a very unlikely defeat.
Gloucester were very fortunate in getting a late penalty kick and in fact the very last kick of the game saw Tim Smith come up to get one point which for the last 35 minutes looked the most improbable result of all.
The championship race is wide open.
There are still 5 teams probably still in it and Gloucester will be hoping to improve things and get another couple of comfortable wins under their belt.
And here's the race for the championship; the top 3.
Gloucester still the only unbeaten team.
The month of March could decide it with games against both Orrell and Northampton.
One sign of Gloucester's success is the news that skipper, Ian Smith, has been called into Scotland's team to play England on Saturday.
It's his first cap.
Now the good news…we did have winner at the weekend with the racing Duke of Gloucestershire…
David Nicholson 
Voice over
The Nicholson a double in the big meeting at Ascot…first winner was For the Grain and then good old Waterloo Boy won the major race of the day…
Richard Dunwoody rode them both…he's ridden 63 winners…the stables have turned out 34
A woman they called Supermum has given birth to her fourteenth child.
Anne Cullen has spent nearly half of her twenty two years of married life pregnant…and says she's the happiest mum in the world.
Julie Dolphin reports.
NORTHAMPTON
ANNE CULLEN/Mother Of Fourteen
JOHN/Aged 21
CATHERINE/Aged 6
Voice over
It was nineteen sixty nine when Anne walked down the aisle with John Cullen…since then along has come John junior, Teresa, Angela, Clare, Caroline, Imelda, Aine, Martin, Owen, Paul, Catherine, Kerry, Christopher and more recently Declan…a grand total of fourteen children.
It's an expensive business having so many children…the weekly shopping list includes a hundred and twenty five pounds of potatoes, twenty one loaves of bread and seventy pints of milk.
The family gets by on a hundred and sixty pounds a week from social security and family allowance payments.
Husband John used to be a professional boxer…and has beaten former heavyweight champ Joe Bugner on more than one occasion.
For many years he ran his own scaffolding company but the recession forced him out of business.
Anne, who's forty one, admits things can get tight but it's worth it to be surrounded by so many loving children.
The family live in a five bedroom house in Northampton…a temporary measure while their other home is being renovated.
It can be fairly chaotic in the Cullen household…especially at mealtimes…
But having lots of brothers and sisters can have its benefits.
A trip to the park involves almost military-style organisation but once there there's no shortage of playmates.
Anne is hoping that in years to come they'll be just as many grandchildren to keep her on her toes.
A man awaiting trial for the murder of his wife has been found hanged in jail
The body of thirty nine year old father of three Bernard Dean was found in a gymnasium at Horfield Prison in Bristol.
Staff tried unsuccessfuly to revive him.
He was charged with the murder of his wife Jenny, who was thirty seven.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
A seven year old schoolboy has written to the Prime Minister complaining about education cuts.
Geoffrey Coombs wrote the letter after discovering that his school may have to lose a teacher if planned cuts to the education budget go ahead.
Now he's had a reply from the Prime minister's office.
Ken Goodwin reports.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
GEOFFREY COOMBS/Pupil
GILL COOMBS/Geoffrey's Mother
ALAN BROOKS/Headmaster
Voice over
Geoffrey Coombs was worried when he heard his mother, a school Governor, talking about proposed cuts to Gloucestershire's education budget of £13m.
He started asking questions — and found that at his own school — Ashchurch primary — the cuts could mean the loss of a teacher and an increase in the numbers of children per class.
Geoffrey decided to complain.
He went straight to the top — with a two-page letter to the Prime Minister.
Although Geoffrey's mother is a school Governor she says her son wrote the letter without any prompting from her.
The Headmaster is disappointed that Geoffrey only recieved a standard reply from the Prime Minister's office — not even signed by John Major.
Geoffrey says he's considering writing another letter to the Prime Minister asking him for a proper reply to his questions.
Pupils, parents and teachers will now have to wait until a full meeting of Gloucestershire County Council next month to see whether the cuts will go ahead.
A new computer system for checking on chemical reactions deep below the ground could dramatically improve monitoring of the build-up of explosive gasses.
The device is being used at landfill rubbish tips and can tell scientists within minutes precisely what's going on underground.
Simon Garrett reports 
MARCH 1986/LOSCOE/Derbyshire
CALVERT/Buckinghamshire
NEIL STEPHENSON/P
ANDY RYAN/Shanks
Voice over
An explosion of methane gas which seeped up from the ground in Derbyshire 5 years ago demolished a pensioner's house.
The build up of fumes was too quick for safety checks to pinpoint.
But this small orange box produced by a Thame company could help prevent such accidents in the future.
Before now, checks on methane levels around a landfill site had to be collected and interpreted through a computer churning out reams of highly complex figures.
But minutes after this sample is taken electronically, the logger is plugged into a computer which immediately displays graphic images of the chemical cocktail underground.
Male speaker
Things on a landfill site happen very quickly and it's vital both for safety reasons and for effective management control to have immediate knowledge of what's happening beneath the ground.
Voice over
Every day, trains bring hundreds of tonnes of rubbish to Calvert.
The dis-used brick pit has been a tip for 10 years and will continue as one for 30 more.
The site operators enforce safety controls far tougher than those insisted on by Government.
The Logger's helping them tighten up even more.
Male speaker
It's essential we can move the monitoring team around the site quickly and that they can interpret their findings immediately.
This device helps us do just that.
Voice over
The Logger's already been adopted by most private operators and the manufacturers hope it'll eventually be used by Council and Government watchdogs as well.
Male speaker
Ultimately the regulators will be able to use a phone call to test the methane level of a particular well at a particular site.
They'll be able to make safety checks without even leaving the office.
Voice over
Which means in future keeping track of methane levels at sites all over the country could take no more thanb a simple phone call.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Voice over
The body of 10 year old Nicola Yates was found beneath trees at the Coate Water Country Park in Swindon by a man walking his dog.
She'd been strangled.
Today detectives undertook an inch by inch search of the area.
They were trying to find any clues that might help in the investigation.
To protect the scene, the park was closed off to the public for much of the day but has since been re-opened.
Nicola's 32 year old father appeared before Swindon Magistrates this morning.
During the 5 minute hearing Mr Yates spoke twice, to confirm his name and date of birth.
He lowered his head as the charged was read to him, that he murdered Nicola Jane Yates.
Shaven headed Richard Yates was remanded in custody for 3 weeks.
No application was made for bail after the court heard that he was at risk to himself and others due to the nature of the crime.
Nicola who was one of 6 children, was last seen alive at the Crumpled Horn pub at Eldene in Swindon.
Her mother who lives at nearby Bowleymead is estranged from her husband Richard Yates.
She's being comforted by friends.
A man has died and three other people were injured in a ten car pileup on the M-forty motorway.
Police say bad driving, and not the weather, was to blame.
The accident has led to new calls for motorway driving to be included in the driving test.
Gargy Patel reports.
M40/Oxfordshire
BOB PHILLIPS/Eye Witness
PC MARK EALEY/Thames Valley Police
NIGEL ROBINSON/Oxfordshire Fire Service
LLOYD CARBY/British School of Motoring
Voice over
The crash happened at the start of the morning rush hour.
Nine cars and a van collided, spilling wreckage across all three lanes of the motorway.
Some drivers tried to help others who were trapped or injured…they made efforts to free the driver who died but couldn't reach him.
The northbound carriageway between junction ten at Ardley and junction eleven at Banbury was closed off…traffic queues stretched back ten miles.
The motorway is notorious for being prone to bad weather conditions like fog, but police say this morning's crash was the result of bad driving.
One driver was taken to hospital with back and chest injuries…others were treated for minor cuts and bruises.
Rescuers say they're amazed more people weren't killed.
It's the second multpile collision on the M-forty since it opened almost exactly a year ago.
Last February a woman died in a pileup involving eighty cars in thick fog.
Today's crash has led to renewed calls from instructors for motorway skills to be made part of the driving test.
In a statement tonight, the Department of Transport says there are no plans to include motorway driving in the normal test.
However, a letter is sent out to newly qualified drivers advising they have a qualified instructor with them for their first motorway trips.
A cyclist who's been in prison in Nepal for over a month could be freed later this week.
Martin Richmond and a friend were jailed after their visas were founds to be forged.
They were arrested only days after breaking a world record by riding across a glacier in the Himalayas.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
CHALFORD HILL/Gloucestershire
MARY RICHMOND/Mother
Voice over
Martin Richmond, who's from Stoke Orchard in Gloucestershire, has been held in a Katmandu jail since the beginning of December.
He and a friend, Trevor Nott, were arrested as suspected accomplices in a visa-forging ring.
Their arrest came only days after they set a new world record for cycling at altitude across the Himalayas.
The two say they're innocent.
They'd bought visas from a travel agent in Nepal, not realising they were forged.
Today, the Foreign Office said that the Court in Nepal, which originally ordered their detention, had been given 3 days to either release the men, or to start trial proceedings.
That could mean their release by Wednesday.
Speaking from prison in Katmandu, Martin says they're coping with life in prison, but release can't come too soon.
There were rumours earlier today that the two men had already been released.
Martin's mother phoned the Foreign Office for more details, but the information turned out to be false.
She says such conflicting reports make it even harder to cope.
Female speaker
I jump for joy…but until I hear from the Foreign Office or from Martin, I won't believe it.
Voice over
If the Nepalese court decides that there is no case against the two men, they could be back in Britain by the end of the week.
But, that is by no means a certainty and for Martin's parents, the anxious wait continues.
Crews from four fire stations threatened with closure have been holding a demonstration against the plans.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
WOBURN SANDS/Buckinghamshire
Fire stations at Woburn Sands and Wolverton could be shut down if county councillors agree to make cuts in the fire service.But the county says it is trying hard to avoid cuts in that part of the budget.
Tall people from all over the country met up over the weekend for the first-ever gathering of Britain's first Tall Persons' Club.
The response by’ tallies’as they like to be known was so good that at least a hundred had to be turned away.
DATCHET Berkshire
MARK GRAY Tall Persons' Club
PHIL HEINRICY Club Founder
UWE SEYLER German Tall Persons' Club
Voice over
There might not seem to be anything unusual about this group of people until someone who's a mere five footer joins the line-up.
For the members of Britian's first Tall Persons' Club, this inaugural gathering was a chance for some to have to look up to other people for a change.
Though that's not the case for 23 year-old Mark Gray.
At 7ft, he's the tallest man in his home town, Gloucester and hopes he's reached his full height.
Male speaker
my parents and I both hope I've grown to my full size now!
Voice over
Phil Heinricy a businessman from Hereford founded the club last year.
He had no idea the club would prove so popular — with 750 members joining in the first 5 months.
Male speaker
I was amazed by the turnout — with 150 at the meeting and at least 100 turned away.
Voice over
One of the distractions on offer over the weekend was a ride in a tall person's car — a 20ft limo belonging to a visiting German tall person — 6ft9in.
Uwe Seyler from Hamburg who's campaigning for a cut in tax for German tall people:
Male speaker
we're hoping to get tax cut for tall people in Germany — things are more expensive if you're tall, but you're not paid a salary proportionate to your size!
Voice over
Plans agreed on by the first meeting included a shopping trip to Holland to visit a shop which sells outsize jeans and sweat-shirts and another to Germany to a shop which claims to sell the biggest size shoes in the world.
In the meantime they'll be campaigning for bigger British sizes in clothes, beds and door frames.
Fatima Whitbread to retire after series of shoulder injuries
FTSE up at 2490
The hundred shares index closed up twelve point two at two four nine zero point one.
The pound is up at one point seven nine dollars, and down against the Deutchmark two point eight four marks.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Worried head teachers have gone to Westminster to plead with the Government for more money.
They say unless they get more cash they'll be forced to opt out of local control, and seek funding directly from Whitehall.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
GLOUCESTER
ALAN FOLLIARD/Head Teacher
JOHN BRAITHWAITE/Glos Education Department
DAVID ABBOTT/Headmasters' Delegation
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Voice over
Education has reached crisis point in Gloucestershire's secondary schools.
All forty two of them are threatening to leave local authority control and be directly financed from Westminster because they say they haven't got the money to do their jobs.
Brockworth School in Gloucestershire has over a thousand pupils and the numbers are rising.
But the staffing has been cut by twelve per cent over the last three years.
Opting out has a short term attraction because it will bring in cash…but the feeling is will be little use in the long run.
Seventeen schools have already opted out in Gloucestershire.
There could be more by the end of the year despite the reservations.
A delegation of head teachers went to see Education Department ministers today to explain their predicament.
They say they had a good hearing
They were accompanied by Gloucester MP Douglas French.
The problem is financial inequalities won't be rectified…if at all…until next year, and then it may be too late.
Antique dealers and bargain hunters have been looking through the belongings of the late Robert Maxwell.
They're on show at Sotheby's before being auctioned on Thursday.
The sale will recoup a small portion of the money stolen from company pension funds by the publisher.
Simon Garrett reports 
SOTHEBY'S/London
JAMES MILLER/Sotheby's Expert
Voice over
This bronze bust of Maxwell can be yours for an expected five hundred pounds.
His bedside snack caviar dish — a functional item at two to three hundred.
Since the Headington Hill Hall collection arrived the auctioneers' viewing rooms have been buzzing with the wealthy and the curious
Male speaker
Constant hum, people started from the first day and they've been flowing through ever since with a high point at the weekend when they've had more time to come up to London to have a look at things look at things.
Male speaker
I've just come to see what there is, part of the interest is to see the great bad taste of Robert Maxwell, no matter how much you spend of your own money or other people's it can't buy you taste
Male speaker
There are a few items I would like for my own use and some I'd like to sell
Voice over
Many of the lots are just big.
The biggest bottle of perfume in the world valued at a hundred and fifty pounds…
A vase for big flowers…two hundred and fifty.
This table lamp used to sit on Maxwell's desk…the microphones…according to Sothebys were part of an intercom system and had nothing to do with secretly recording conversations.
All the dealers who habitually haunt Sothebys salerooms have been looking at the furniture and glassware and silver.
But they know prices on the day of the auction could go anywhere as ordinary members of the public bid for a piece of Maxwell notoriety.
Female speaker
I was amazed how much there was of everything.
Just ordinary furniture like anyone would have I'm surprised it isn't more glamorous somehow, only larger than life which is what you'd expect I suppose
Female speaker
Big things massive things, his ego, it reflects his personality
Voice over
Tomorrow will be a long day in the auction house with no room to move.
The catalogue value of all the exhibits is up to three hundred thousand pounds.
If the expected rush materializes the final total could go even higher
Out of the cup…
Swansea sink Oxford in penalty shoot out.
The Mystery of Morse…
Investigating the great detective.
And your no mate of mine…the red panda who doesn't want a partner.
Oxford United are out of the FA Cup…
At the Manor Ground last night they lost to second division Swansea in a penalty shoot out…
It was a disappointing night for Swindon Town too…they could only draw nil-nil against struggling Birmingham in the league…
Here's Tim Russon 
Pictures BBC WALES
Voice over
Oxford's third round battle against Swansea was a great cup tie to watch…an absolute thriller…for United though it turned into a chiller…swansea went two up just after half-time…
John Cornforth got the first…six minutes later Andy Legg made it two nil…
United had four cleared off the line…hit the bar twice but it took a hand ball and a penalty from Jim Magilton to get them back into the game…with ten minutes to go the Manor was celebrating an equaliser from Joey Beauchamp and surely they could see the second division side off…but after extra time it was still two all and now down to penalties…the crunch came when Chrissy Allen's kick was saved…and Swansea's Keith Walker scored to make it five four to the second division side on penalties…
STING
At the County Ground…the referee had to think long and hard about allowing the game to go on…the pitch was wet and heavy…
Swindon Town tried to get a grip but everyone of their chances slipped away…
The Birmingham goal was like a shooting gallery…the target never moved but could swindon hit it…
roll roll up…
Colin Calderwood was next to have a go
Micky Hazard then joined the queue…and his shot went the way of all the others…
How Birmingham survived was a mystery why Town couldn't score was an even bigger puzzle…
There was only one shot on the Swindon goal all night and that believe it or not was by Town full-back Paul Bodin…
The second half was the same…all Swindon…the Blues packed the goalmouth and Town couldn't find a way through…
Hot shot Maskell nearly broke the post…
Keeper Andy Gosney performed heroics as Swindon charged forward…
Birmingham striker John Gayle got sent off for two bookings in as many minutes…
but even with only ten men to beat Town weren't able to score…it was one of those nights…
