A Chinese gangster who ran vice rings and protection rackets used a Chinese restaurant in the region as his weekday base, according to a television documentary.
Now MPs are demanding he's kicked out of Britain.
Tim Hurst reports.
’ THE COOK REPORT’/Central Television
HOWARD FOSTER/’ The Cook Report’
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem Cheltenham
GEOFFREY DICKENS MP/Con Littleborough
Voice over
Georgie Pi, a Hong Kong Chinese, is alleged to head a Chinese Triad gang, the Wo Shing Wo, often from a Chinese restaurant at Cheltenham in Gloucestershire.
That's the belief of anti-triad police, highlighted in last night's Central Television programme The Cook Report.
Pi was filmed in the restaurant, in Cheltenham's fashionable Montpelier district, as part of a programme which exposed his gang members beating up a business competitor in Manchester.
The programme was researched in Manchester and Hong Kong as well as Cheltenham.
This morning, the Cheltenham restaurant, the Orient Rendezvous, was closed.
There were people inside, but the only person to come to the door was a woman, who checked it was locked.
Gloucestershire police asked Central South News for a tape of last night's programme, which is now being studied by detectives.
The town's MP wants Pi deported.
Another MP has tabled questions to the Home Secretary about George Pi's activities in Britain.
Georgie Pi has been named by anti triad police in Hong Kong as a convicted mobster.
Worried head teachers have gone to Westminster to plead with the Government for more money.
They say unless they get more cash they'll be forced to opt out of local control, and seek funding directly from Whitehall.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
GLOUCESTER
ALAN FOLLIARD/Head Teacher
JOHN BRAITHWAITE/Glos Education Department
DAVID ABBOTT/Headmasters' Delegation
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Voice over
Education has reached crisis point in Gloucestershire's secondary schools.
All forty two of them are threatening to leave local authority control and be directly financed from Westminster because they say they haven't got the money to do their jobs.
Brockworth School in Gloucestershire has over a thousand pupils and the numbers are rising.
But the staffing has been cut by twelve per cent over the last three years.
Opting out has a short term attraction because it will bring in cash…but the feeling is will be little use in the long run.
Seventeen schools have already opted out in Gloucestershire.
There could be more by the end of the year despite the reservations.
A delegation of head teachers went to see Education Department ministers today to explain their predicament.
They say they had a good hearing
They were accompanied by Gloucester MP Douglas French.
The problem is financial inequalities won't be rectified…if at all…until next year, and then it may be too late.
An American millionaire who gave away his fortune and founded a Christian housing organisation has announced plans to build homes in Britain.
Millard Fuller, President of Habitat for Humanity International, says he wants to build and renovate houses for low income families — and he doesn't want to make a profit.
Ian Maclaren reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
MILLARD FULLER/Habitat for Humanity
HABITAT FOR HUMANITY VIDEO
STEPHEN MIZZI
TERRY NETHERCOTT/Cherwell District Council
Voice over
Millard Fuller, one time business entrepreneur, has a different philosophy of life these days.
He's in Banbury to spread the word of Habitat for Humanity.
At 29 he was a millionaire several times over.
But his health and marriage suffered.
He decided to renew his Christian commitment and took a drastic step…giving away all his money and possessions…
Millard Fuller founded what has become one of the largest and fastest growing housing organisations in the world.
It thrived with the help of high profile helpers including former President Jimmy Carter and President elect, Bill Clinton.
Through volunteer labour, donations, Habitat builds and renovates 8,000 homes a year, which are sold at no profit and with no interest mortgages.
The organisation in this country would be designed to help people like, Stephen Mizzi.
Forced to move his family out of rented accomodation he's had to rely on relatives…
There are 1700 families on Cherwell District Council's housing list…and the council welcomes help from any quarter…
The Banbury Baptist Church who invited Millard Fuller here…believes this seed planting mission could lead to Habitat for Humanity eventually setting up a nationwide centre based in the town.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
M40/Oxfordshire
OVER/Gloucestershire
Insp DAVE McFARLANE/Gloucestershire Police
BRIAN FINCH/Flood Victim
SALLY MEEN/Weather Department
Voice over
There have been so many accidents on the M-40, police have lost count of the number.
They say as many as twelve vehicles could have been blown over, and for the rest, its a slow journey home.
On the M-Four the westbound carriageway at junction thirteen had to be closed while police tried to recover a lorry.
In Gloucestershire some roads are under two feet of water.
One of the worst affected areas is at Over, where traffic is at a standstill.
And one pub landlord who only had his pub refurbished six months ago, will now have to redecorate again.
For many, its the worst flooding they can remember.
The A-Forty-Eight Gloucester to Lydney road also badly affected, with some roads under two feet of water.
At Westbury on Severn the A-Forty-Eight is underwater and the A-Thirty eight Gloucester to Tewksbury road is also said to be treacherous.
Gloucestershire police have set up a special flood hotline.
The number is 0242-262906, that's 0242 262906.
The farmer, Colin French, who's received more than sixty convictions for cruelty to his animals, has started a three month jail sentence.
Last November he appealed against the sentence, imposed on him for breaking a ban on keeping livestock.
But today, he withdrew that appeal.
The RSPCA described French as callous and inept and it was time he got his comeuppance.
Erika Barnes reports.
WINSLOW/Buckinghamshire
LIBRARY PICTURES
Ch Insp DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
Voice over
Colin French left his farm in Winslow this morning, prepared to go to jail.
It was here that RSPCA officers uncovered a catalogue of cruelty.
Animals were neglected and lived in appalling conditions.
Some were so badly treated they had to be humanly destroyed.
Over the past four years Colin French has been in and out of court…receiving sixty-five convictions for cruelty.
The punishment started with a fine…and then with a ban on keeping animals.
More court appearences followed.
Last year he was convicted of breaking that ban…and was given a jail sentence.
His immediate response was to appeal.
But today at Aylesbury Crown Court, French asked for the appeal to go no further.
Judge Slack said the law must take its course.
And French was led away to begin his sentence.
Officers from the RSPCA say hundreds of animals suffered at the hands of a callous and inept man.
They're relieved that French is finally facing his punishment.
It's not before time.
He's flouted the law and failed to take advise.
He's brought it upon himself.
He's not the victim.
The animals are, and he's got his comeuppance.
This is Colin French's legacy.
Today we saw these animals on his land.
The horses look well fed, but without shelter from the driving rain.
They're now being kept by French's aunt, Miriam Carter.
When he leaves prison he'll still be banned from tending the livestock…but he'll still live at the farm.
Ministry of Agriculture and RSPCA officials will be keeping regular checks on the animals welfare.
As French starts his jail sentence, he's left to reflect on the misery he's caused to hundreds of animals.
A grammar school teacher has been charged with indecency and assault offences against young boys.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Forty seven year old Malcolm Brown, who's head of the lower school at Pates Grammar School in Cheltenham is accused of indecent behaviour and violence towards several boys.
Mr Brown has been Head of the Lower School for six years.
He's expected to appear in court on Monday.
Pates Grammar school was recently named as the best performing school in Gloucestershire.
Police investigating an attack on a seventy eight year old woman have arrested a man.
ROSE HILL/Oxford
Lily Goodenough interrupted two intruders as they ransacked her home at Rose Hill in Oxford.
They threatened her with a knife and bound her hands and feet with a rope.
A man was later arrested in West London.
Good Evening 
ANNE DAWSON
HUDDERSFIELD/West Yorkshire
BROADMEAD/Bristol
Det Insp CHRIS FARRELL/Avon
WOTTON-UNDER-EDGE/Gloucestershire
PETER SHORE/NACRO
Voice over
Forty-seven year old Trevor Hanson was jailed for life in nineteen seventy-one after a string of sex attacks in the Huddersield area of West Yorkshire.
Violent attacks and sex offences followed Hanson's previous releases from prison.
Yesterday he was on an official visit home.
At the same time a twenty-three year old woman was grabbed at knife point in Bristol and dragged to her car.
She only escaped when a passer-by heard her screams
Hanson was let out of Leyhill to give him a chance to get used to life outside prior to release.
But women living in nearby Wootton-Under-Edge in Gloucestershire say such prison freedoms put them in fear for their lives 
Children could be sent home from a school which is suffering from chronic overcrowding.
Sixteen hundred pupils now attend the school which was originally built for thirteen hundred.
Some of them are being taught in dining halls, store rooms and offices.
Kim Barnes reports.
NEWPORT PAGNELL/Buckinghamshire
ALAN BROWN/Head Teacher
ANN FOUNTAINE/Parent
FREDA STEWART/Parent
10 DECEMBER 1990
ROS WINGROVE/Education Chairman/Bucks County Council
Voice over
After 12.30 p.m. it's a dining hall, but until then it's a geography classroom as Ousedale School tries to sqeeze in 300 extra children.
Others have lessons in offices and storerooms and sixth form classes like this have been increased from 10 to 18.
The head has already had to refuse entry to many new pupils.
Now he says current pupils may have to stay away.
Tonight, he'll explain the desperate measures to Governors.
He's just broken the news to parents in a letter to each family.
The school's been lobbying for new buildings for several years.
13 months ago schools minister Tim Eggar came to see the problems for himself.
It's a complicated procedure where the local County Council has to ask the Department of Education for permission to borrow money.
Now it's blown up into a dispute between the two, with each side blaming the other for the lack of progress.
Buckinghamshire's Education Chairman now wants an urgent meeting with the Government Minister responsible.
But the Department of Education says they approved money back in 90/91.
In a statement they say the LEA may have decided to use the allocation for other priorities.
But just where the money is doesn't help Ousedale's pupils or Alan Brown having to contemplate sending some of them home.
He's hoping for emergency cash for building work and the chance to keep all his students at school.
Two passenger jets have been involved in a near-miss over Oxfordshire.
The incident happened at about nine-thirty this morning, but details weren't released by the Civil Aviation Authority until late this afternoon.
The last crew from one of the region's biggest air force bases has returned from the Gulf.
It means the end of the key role in the war played by American servicemen based in the region.
Julie Dolphin reports.
UPPER HEYFORD/Oxfordshire
Lt Col JIM WORTH/Squadron Commander
Voice over
The lights in the sky mean it's over for Heyford's last remaining servicemen in the Gulf.
40 second electronic combat squadron played a key role in the conflict, jamming radar.
This plane brings home the squadron's support staff after a 3-month stint in the desert.
Many missed Christmas at home second time around.
Male speaker
We made the best of it.
We missed our families and it was a sad time.
Male speaker
It's great to be back.
Male speaker
These people gave up three months of their life for an important mission.
They have done a superb job.
Voice over
45 maintenance and support personnel were on the flight from Saudi Arabia.
They provide vital back-up service for EF1-11s used to disable the enemy's early warning radar systems.
These were first deployed to the Gulf 3 weeks before Operation Desert Storm, the war which started a year ago this Friday.
The last EF1-11s based at Saudi arrived back at the Oxfordshire base at the weekend.
Male speaker
The jets came home and then the maintenance and support staff.
Now we're all home it's great.
Voice over
Shortly after landing the servicemen were re-united with their families.
Male speaker
My daughter has changed so much since I left.
Male speaker
I've missed my family and I'm happy to be back.
Voice over
With all Heyford's jets and crew now home, the families are looking forward to a period of tranquility,
Jaguar's new supercar has made its European debut at the Brussels Motor Show.
The car, designed and built in Oxfordshire, costs four hundred thousand pounds, and is capable of two hundred and twelve miles an hour.
David Crabtree reports.
ROGER PUTNAM/Jaguar Director
Company Video
PIERRE DIEUDONNE/Former Jaguar Driver
This was the big moment at the Brussels motor show today the unveiling of Jaguars new super car.
The £400,000 machine is capable of speeds in excess of 200 miles an hour with its 3.5 litre twin turbo V6 engine.
The car is acknowledged as the fastest production car in the world.
At tests the car exceeded 212 miles per hour, which for a production car is a world record.
It is our attempt to get the world to recognise what we can do technologically.
I think it's a beautiful car and that's what Jaguar is capable of doing.
I think it's just like a drop of water in the wind.
It's fluid and it's just beautiful the colour is just like the beauty.
It's a fantastic car, really fantastic, very beautiful.
Jaguar, taken over by Ford two years ago made a £66m loss in 1990.
Other companies at today's show with strong local links have also suffered.
High profile promotion was the order of the day.
But this kind of razamatazz hasn't been necessary for the XJ220.
When the company announced it would be building only 350 of them, 1500 people made a bid within 24 hours — even though the company required a £50,000 deposit.
But in these days of fuel economy and concerns about speeding why should such a super car be developed.
Its a car fully appreciated by former Jaguar team racing driver Pierre Dieudonne.
Jaguar have shown that the very top end of the car market more than buoyant they hope the extra prestige the XJ220 will bring will ensure that following troubled times 1992 will be the year of the cat.
BCCI to be wound up by High Court
FTSE up 26
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-six point two at twenty-five, sixteen point thirteen.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty and up at two marks, eighty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The RAF has made its first parachute drops in Britain since fire destroyed sixty percent of the parachutes used by the Armed Forces.
Training exercises had to be postponed after the fire, which destroyed a hangar used to pack and repair all of the country's military parachutes.
Erika Barnes reports.
RAF HULLAVINGTON/Wiltshire
FIRE BRIGADE VIDEO/3rd JANUARY 1992
Sq Ldr CHRIS PICKTHALL
Cpl DAVID SKINNER
Voice over
Back in the sky and back in business.
Britain's military parachutes are in service again.
These servicemen are making their first ever jumps; vital training that might have been sabotaged by the £40m fire at the country's parachute headquarters at RAF Hullavington.
60 percent of the parachutes used by Britain's armed forces went up in flames.
They'd been stored in a hangar which was totally destroyed.
Now the building is being demolished bit by bit for safety reasons.
The 11 tonne doors are being pulled down, before they fall down.
Today's training exercise was only able to go ahead because of an emergency packing operation which has been set up at the base.
Male speaker
It's very difficult.
What we're doing is a makeshift operation.
It'll take 9 months to get back to normal.
We'll carry on as best we can.
Voice over
Another first for these trainees.
This is the first time the 'chutes have been used in Britain since the fire.
Although it was the last thing on their minds.
Male speaker
I didn't have any doubt it would open.
They wouldn't throw you out otherwise!
Voice over
Seeing the parachutes back in the air has been a great morale booster for the base.
But after today it'll be back to earth with a bump.
An RAF board of inquiry is continuing its investigations into the fire.
It could be several months before its completed.
Tomorrow two servicemen from Hullavington are due to appear in court again charged in connection with the fire.
It's just over two years since the world was shocked by pictures of thousands of Romanian orphans living in filthy and freezing conditions.
Aid poured in and couples rushed to adopt the children.
In the first of two reports, Mike Rowbottom looks at how the situation has changed 
BUCHAREST/Romania
1990
DICK TAYLOR/Driver
ORPHANAGE DIRECTOR
PETER SPARKES/Unipart Coordinator
Voice over
Two years on and the faces smile a little more, but thy're still dirty, like their clothes.
It's two years since the world recoiled in horror when they saw Ceaucescu's orphans.
Hundreds of thousands of them simply abandoned in so called orphanages.
A lot has happened since then and the eyes of the world have been diverted elsewhere to the Gulf, the Kurds, the break up of the Soviet union.
But the orphans are still there in the same orphanages and some people at least are not going to forget them.
Relief work and voluntary aid continues, which is what brought truck drivers Dick and Ray a long way from their Oxford homes to deliver important equipment to the struggling hospitals and orphanages.
They were at the sharp end of an operation conceived at the Oxford based company Unipart.
It's been a revelation.
Male speaker
Romania leaves a lot to be desired, it's a big change from England.
Voice over
Two years on there's no doubt that aid is working.
20 miles outside Bucharest, 160 children between 7 and 14 now have heat, thanks to a heating unit built with British aid.
They also have a washing and toilet area indoors; a far cry from the filthy old outside block they used with no hot water in deepest winter.
This is the recreation area: Its dirty and smelly and the childrens clothes are dirty, but it's an awful lot better than two years ago.
They didn't even know what a TV was then.
Male speaker
They wanted to help the children but they had not money, it was dirty and cold.
Voice over
The children have warmth, shelter and food; much more than they could have dreamed about before the revolution.
But they're still stuck in an institution which would be absolutely unnacceptable in the Western World.
Male speaker
This is not average orphanage.
It's pretty grimy but it's had a lot of attention.
There are still far worse than this.
Voice over
There are an estimated 200,000 orphans still languishing in the orphanages.
Romania has only recently made abortion legal and Ceacescu's legacy will be with them for decades.
His dream was to create a population bent to his will.
He created a nightmare instead which Romania is still having trouble waking up from.
There's speculation that the Duke of Marlborough, owner of Blenheim Palace, may try to disinherit his eldest son, Jamie Blandford.
It comes after a frank interview given by Becky Blandford, Jamie's wife, to a Sunday magazine, re-opened the rift between them.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
WOODSTOCK/Oxfordshire
ROSS BENSON/Daily Express
HAROLD BROOKS-BAKER/Burke's Peerage
Voice over
As the eldest son of the eleventh Duke of Marlborough, Jamie Blandford stands in line to inherit one of Britain's greatest stately homes, Blenheim Palace.
But there's renewed speculation that the Duke is seeking to disinherit his eldest son, in favour of his younger son, Edward, after a Sunday magazine interview with Lady Blandford, Jamie's wife.
In a frank interview with the Mail on Sunday, Becky Blandford said that the Duke had called her a’ filthy little scrubber’after she posed in lingerie for Tatler magazine…and complained that she and Jamie had not once been invited to dinner at the Palace even though they live on the estate.
Daily Express Diarist Ross Benson was amazed at the frankness of the interview.
Male speaker
I was dumbstruck…
I've known Becky for a long time and I never thought she'd go public with what is a private afffair…it may in part be naivity…but I think some of it was vengence.
Voice over
It's believed the Duke had hoped his son's marriage to Becky Few Brown would be the making of the Marquis, a former drug addict who's twice been to prison.
But Becky's revelations have reopened the feud.
The publishing director of Burkes peerage says disinheriting his first born would be an unprecedented move and would involve introducing a new bill in the House of Lords…but he thinks the Duke may try.
Male speaker
he's a traditionalist…and wants what is one of Britain's greatest stately homes to go to someone who will look after it.
Voice over
It seems likely that, unless the law is changed, Blenheim palace will go to Jamie Blandford.
If it does, the responsibility that goes with it, could be making of the man, who's been described as a victim of his own background.
The Rover Montego car may soon be built in Russia.
Rover is negotiating a deal that could lead to a factory being built in Siberia.
British Aerospace, which owns Rover, says talks are still underway.
Chris Moore reports.
1984/COWLEY/Oxford
Dr JULIAN COOPER/University of Birmingham
VADIM KUTENYOV/Russian Industrialist
MARK JONES/Orbicom
Voice over
Mikhail Gorbachev got his hands on a Montego when he visited its home at the Cowley assembly plant in Oxford 7 years ago, just before taking office at Soviet leader.
His country may be taking the first steps to a market economy, but on the streets there are remarkably few cars.
The few that there are, are well out of reach of the ordinary Russian.
But that could change.
Rover is already exporting the cars to Siberia, where they're being used by among others, the police.
The Montegos have been specially adapted to cope with the extreme climate.
The Russians have apparently been impressed by the cars' reliablity.
Now according to a report in today's Guardian, the company is considering going a step further by setting up a manufacturing plant in Russia.
It could produce 50,000 cars a year in a deal with the Russian state controlled motor company.
A sensible business plan, according to one motor industry expert.
Male speaker
This could be an important deal in the future.
The Russian car market is growing and other companies are already moving in, so Rover is probably timeing this quite well.
Voice over
This Shrewsbury company, Orbicom has been acting as middleman in selling Montegos to Russia.
It might be involved in the building of any car plant too.
Today it was visited by men from the Russian motor industry.
They have strong reasons for wanting the Montego.
Male speaker
The Montego is just right for us.It is reliable, strong and very suitable for our road conditions.
Male speaker
The new entrepreneur in Russia wants to be seen driving a performance car, but one which is tough enough for the conditions there.
That means Montegos.
Male speaker
The average Russian can't afford a Montego at the moment, but if the economy improves then some skilled workers and farmers may be able to afford them in a couple of years.
Voice over
There's still a lot of talking to do before an agreement to build in Russia.
It will probably be at least 3 years before production could begin.
A garage owner has been praised by firefighters for risking his life to drag gas cyclinders from a burning workshop.
The man's prompt action prevented an explosion which could have spread the fire to nearby petrol pumps.
Ken Goodwin reports.
AMATEUR VIDEO/CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
ERIC DEWHURST/Gloucestershire Fire
Voice over
The fire started in a workshop next to a garage in Gloucester Road, in Cheltenham.
This home video was taken by a passer-by and shows how quickly the flames engulfed the building.
The fire brigade closed off the whole road while they dealt with the fire.
Afterwards there was praise for Geoff Cocksedge, the man who leases the workshop, for his prompt action in removing welding cylinders from the burning building.
Male speaker
he was a brave man and his swift action prevented further damage.
Voice over
It's thought that the fire had been caused by a welders spark.
Firefighters say it was important to control the flames as quickly as possible because of the close proximity of petrol pumps.
Male speaker
In any fire of this nature there's a risk of a major explosion should the flames spread to the petrol pumps.
Voice over
Mr Cocksedge was treated in hospital for burns to his hands and face, but he later discharged himself so he could help clear up.
An eighteenth century mansion which has been a convent school, a Hari Krishna temple and a training ground for police tracker dogs is up for sale.
Now Croome Court is expected to start another new life, this time as a luxury hotel.
Simon Garrett reports 
CROOME COURT Worcestershire
ALBERT EDWARDS Caretaker
ANTHONY CHAMPION Chartered Surveyor
Voice over
Croome Court was built around 1750 by Capability Brown for Lord Coventry.
A luxiurious home even then, it has eighteen different Adam fireplaces, wall decorations and ornamental ceilings.
Just to make the view complete, the Countess of Coventry even built Broadway Tower folly on the skyline fifteen miles away.
But the family moved out in 1949 to be replaced by caretaker Albert Edwards who's seen many residents.
Male speaker
It was school run by nuns.
There were fifteen sisters here, but sadly most of them are gone now the old originals
Voice over
Police dog trainers, youth trainees and failed hoteliers have all had brief stays.
But among the most enthusiastic residents of Croome were the followers of Hari Krishna
Male speaker
The first twelve months or two years it was very good.
But then you got three or four hundred a day coming and it was a little over-crowded.
Then they asked me if I wanted to join in, and I said no, my wife's a Catholic, I think I'll start going with her.
Voice over
These may be trying times for estate agents but Croome Court's still expected to go for one and a half million pounds
Male speaker
It always generates tremendous interest when it goes on the market because it's a grade one house.It is a fascinating and very beautiful house
Voice over
Croome's owners are confidant it can be a glorious success.
It's being sold with planning permission to turn it into a hundred and twenty bed hotel.
Pilots review Iraq bombing evidence
American pilots have been reviewing the evidence of yesterday's bombing of Iraq.
Planes ready for more action
President Bush has said Allied aircraft are ready to attack again if the need should arise.
Further British forces deployed in Bosnia
Further British forces, including the aircraft carrier, Ark Royal, are to be deployed in Bosnia.
Calcutt report recommends fines for press intrusion
The Calcutt report into the workings of the press has recommended fines for a series of proposed offences including so called’ physical intrusion’.
FTSE up 13
The hundred shares index closed up thirteen point nine at twenty-seven, fifty-nine point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, but down at two marks, forty-nine.
Wesley Smith
Well that's it from the newsroom for now, I'll be back with the late bulletin at ten thirty.
Anne Dawson
And I'll be back after the weather with tonight's Lifeline in which we look at the problem of alcoholism.
A red flood alert has been issued tonight for one of the region's rivers.
It follows torrential rain yesterday, which flooded roads, and caused chaos as hundreds of commuters were stuck in traffic jams.
Tonight with more rain predicted, the National Rivers Authority said that's just what we DON'T need.
Ken Goodwin reports.
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
PAUL BAILEY/National Rivers Authority
KIRSTY LOWE/Mother
ROBIN PEACEY/Gloucestershire Highways
Voice over
The river avon between Tewkesbury and Pershore has been put on red flood alert, it's banks swollen by torrential rain.
The forcasters say more rain is expected tonight, but that's just what the NRA doesn't want to hear:
He says that's just what we don't want!
The rain has no where to go, it'll flood.
This morning weary commuters returned to cars they'd abandoned during the night, after the A40 flooded at over near Gloucester.
The A48 was also closed between Gloucester and lydney.
Some gave up trying to get home altogether, and stayed the night in Gloucester at the leisure center.
Others braved it, but faced a five hour journey to travel just twenty miles.
For those on foot, the flooding was if anything more treacherous.
Kirsty Lowe was walking back to her house at Newhnam on severn when she lost grip of her daughter's pushchair in the floodwater.
It turned over with her daughter face down.
A cyclist rushed to help — she'd now like to thank him.
She says that she screamed when it happened, she didn't know what to do.
The heavy rain — an inch in less than four hours — simply overwhelmed roadside drains.
Does this mean that they're not up to the job?
He says that the drains are adequate, other drainage measures may need to be taken.
Though more rain is predicted for tonight, the forcasters say it shouldn't be anything like as ferocious as yesterday.
The husband of Julie Godwin, who was murdered while on holiday with a friend in South Africa says he's determined to keep up the pressure on the police to find her killer.
Tomorrow is the second birthday of the couple's daughter.
Sophie Godwin is still asking where her mother has gone.
Jane Saggers reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
TIM GODWIN/Julie's Husband
Voice over
In part two: What am I bid?
The race to buy Maxwell momentoes.
And school was never like this…the egghead with a new slant on science.
Welcome back: The last remaining personal possessions of Robert Maxwell have been sold at auction for about half a million pounds.
Three paintings fetched three times their expected price, going for over a hundred thousand pounds.
But the most sought-after item of the day was the name plate that once adorned the publisher's desk.Simon Garrett reports.
SOTHEBY'S/London
MALCOLM GORDON/Dealer
TIMOTHY DOYLE/Dealer
Voice over
Thousands of schoolchildren are being given a science lesson by going to the theatre for the day.
It's part of a plan to make science more attractive to youngsters.
Mike Rowbottom went to see if it works.
OXFORD
GILLIAN PEARSON/Oxford Trust
MIKE DENNIS/Science Teacher
Voice over
Science has an image problem.
It's terribly unfashionable, so it's getting a new coat of paint at the Old Fire Station In Oxford.
Out goes the stereotype of the egghead with staring eyes trying to see through bottle-end glasses.
In come Mike Dennis, Magician.
Male speaker
Not every scientist looks like this.
You can all be scientists today by helping me do some magic science tricks
Voice over
It's more like a childrens' afternoon TV show than a science lesson, but there's a message in every device.
Male speaker
Now we'll see if we can turn the egg in to a Pidgeon's egg.
What's it doing.
Female speaker
It's floating
Four thousand Schoolchildren from all over Oxfordshire will be filing into the Old Fire Station over the next few days to enjoy the drama, and displays.
It's run by the Oxford Trust to make Science more accessible and attractive tom young people.
Upstairs everyone gets a chance to see Science in action with a hands-on display.
Male speaker
I speak through this and it bounces of the dish to the other one.
Female speaker
If you move the shapes about they reflect the light in different ways
Voice over
Meanwhile it's hotting up, or cooling down, on stage.
Female speaker
Let's show you a typical penguin day and you can tell us when we're wasting energy
Female speaker
It's not fair to say it's just a circus atmosphere.
Everything is designed to illustrate science in some way
Male speaker
If making it more fun is bringing it up to date then I'm all in favour
Voice over
Not a bunson burner in sight.
But if the organisers can spark some interest in the youngsters they'll be happy.
Champagne and LSD: The drugs trip before a fatal fall.
Found hanging.Another student dies on the eve of term.
And Red Alert: More floods are on the way tonight.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The three who shared the drink and drugs will be disciplined tomorrow.
They could be suspended or expelled.
The authorities of New College have also begun investigating the extent of the drugs problem there.
Erika Barnes reports.
OXFORD
2 DECEMBER 1992
LIBRARY PICTURES
MIKE ROE/Drugs Counsellor
Dr ELIZABETH FRAZER/Dean/New College
Voice over
A brillient artist and talented musician.
But Henry Skelton was also said to have suffered from depression…and even wrote his own obituary.
In December at his lodgings in New College Street he shared LSD and a little champagne with his friends, James Merino on the left and Dominique Debastarrechea, here wearing the hat.
In the early hours of the morning, Henry left the gathering and locked himself alone, inside a friends room.
Shortly after he was found lying in the road outside.
He'd fallen from a second floor window.
At the inquest, pathologist, Dr Ian Buley said Henry had taken a high dose of LSD.
He'd taken the drug a square of paper like this, which would have distorted his perception and could have accentuated suicidal feelings.
Male speaker
It's quiet common in student circles.
It has different effects on people depending on their state of mind, but it can exaggerate depression in someone who is suffering from anxiety.
Voice over
It was the third time Henry had tried the drug.
The previous time was only 24 hours earlier.
when he'd said he'd had a bad experience.
The coroner, Nicholas Gardiner, couldn't say whether or not he'd meant to take his own life and recorded an open verdict.
The authorities at New College have now launched an investigation into drugs at the establishment.
Female speaker
We have a working party to look into the problem of substance abuse.
We can't say what the scale is.
But the inquest painted a better picture than we feared.
Voice over
And a New College disciplinary committee will decide the fate of Henry's friends tomorrow.
It has the power to suspend or expel them from college.
Female speaker
The three people in court today will go before a committee who will consider the whole thing in a calm and rational atmosphere.
Voice over
An exhibition of Henry's work will be held at New College as a memorial to a brillient student claimed by LSD.
And an Oxford student has been found hanged at her home just a few days before she was due to return for a new term.
Her friends are at a loss to understand why she took her life when everything seemed to be going well.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
OXFORD
MARGARET VINE/Family Friend
Dr JANE TAYLOR/College Dean
LISA ANSCOMB/St Hilda's Student
ELSA BELL/Students' Counsellor
Voice over
Life should have been good for Pamela Wray.
She was doing well at St Hilda's College in Oxford, and her devotion to the Seventh Day Adventist Church gained admiration from the congregation.
So it's a mystery why her parents John and Joy came to find her hanged at their home in Headington yesterday evening.
Female speaker
She was such a cheerful girl, devoted to the church.
She played the organ for us.
I can think of no reason why she did it.
They say she'd been depressed in recent days
Voice over
Pamela had left no note but it's understood she'd been depressed before her death.
Police say they're not treating it as suspicious.
Her parents were too upset to talk.
Pamela was twenty one and in her last year at St Hilda's.
She was studying modern languages and had spent the previous year working in France to gain experience.
There was no hint of any academic problem.
Female speaker
She was making good progress and was well up to standard
Voice over
Her fellow students had noticed nothing, Pamela was active within the college and got on well with her friends.
Female speaker
She did belong to a group in the University dedicated to helping ethnic minorities.
She felt she had something to give to college life
Voice over
Its the second apparent University suicide within three months.
Tracey Cole killed herself shortly after starting her course in October last year.
University stress counsellors say students often arrive with their problems rather than have them created at College.
Female speaker
Students come here with their own personal histories and the university demands the best from them.
Sometimes that combination can be very stressful
Voice over
But it's still a mystery why Pamela Wray took her life.
The reason may not emerge until the inquest into her death.
A group which has been juggling with fire for the past year is staging its first play.
Fire Noise is at the forefront of a juggling revival — and its first full indoor production opens tonight.
Debbie Kelly reports.
OXFORD
DAN FEDOROWICZ/Director
JIM SEMLYEN/Co-founder Fire Noise
BOB PECKHAM/Juggler
It started with fire.
They've juggled to entertain at college balls and parties this summer, but for their latest production, their first in a theatre, for safety fire has been replaced by ultra violet light.
It's a performance with an environmental message told unusually by jugglers.
Male speaker
The builders move into the valley and adapt it to their own needs.
They take trees down and put concrete up and take away all the natural resources.
Voice over
Fire Noise was formed a year ago; a few jugglers and drummers got together.
Juggling as a performing art is seeing a revival.
Male speaker
there are many benefits to juggling.
Its a meditative and relaxing activity.
Around 90 per cent of people can learn to juggle within a day.
Voice over
Bob Peckham has been juggling for 12 years he regularly entertains shoppers in Oxford city centre.
Male speaker
Juggling is a challenge, as soon as you learn one trick you realise there are others.
Its quite easy to get addicted to it.
Voice over
It's the first time most of the jugglers have performed in a theatre: adapting their skills to the show hadn't been easy.
Male speaker
The moment you see a striped juggling club you think back to the circus.
It's very difficult to break down the stereotypes but if you do that I believe you release a whole new artistic form.
Voice over
After their Oxford performance FireNoise are headed for France spreading their juggling revival internationally.
And you can see Fire Noise in their play, Jugannath, at the Pegasus Theatre from tonight until Saturday.
Government interfered on Gulf War says army
FTSE up 20
The hundred shares index closed up 20.8 at 2537.1 twenty point eight at twenty-five, thirty-seven point one.
The pound is down four cents at $.1*75) one dollar seventy-five, and down at DM2.84 two marks eighty-four.
And finally tonight congratulations to Hereford United on reaching the fourth round of the FA Cup where they'll face the might of Brian Clough and his Nottingham Forest side.
Last night more than eight thousand fans packed into Edgar Street to watch United beat non-league Woking in their third round replay…it was one-all after ninety minutes…the winning goal came in extra-time and it was scored by Simon Brain…
.
The Forest match is set for Sunday January the twenty sixth…
Pictures BBC SPORT
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
It's two years since President Ceaucescu was overthrown, but Romania is still struggling to overcome the legacy of decades of communist dictatorship.
In the second of his reports from Romania, Mike Rowbottom looks at the mountain of bureaucracy which blocks the path of aid workers trying to bring help to a country in desperate need.
BUCHAREST/Romania
PETER SPARKES/Unipart Aid Coordinator
RAY FAULKNER/Driver
RADU VOIGLE/Medical Relief For Romania
1989
DICK TAYLOR/Driver
Voice over
The future of Romania's orphans depends hugely on foreign aid.
The country is still on its knees, exhausted from 25 years of Ceaucescu's oppression, and still trying to catch its breath after the extraordinary heroism which led to his overthrow.
2 years on, the facilities and toys in the orphanages still come from abroad.
Romania still has not learned how to look after its own.
Although they have learned how to look out for themselves.
Male speaker
clothes intended for orphanage children sometimes disappear, possibly taken by staff or other workers
Voice over
It's why tangible help from organisations like Oxford based Unipart is so important, but they don't find it easy.
Unipart drivers Ray Faulkner and Dick Taylor have brought a consignment of mattresses and medical equipment.
They have to carry their own diesel to avoid lengthy queues at the fuel stations.
Male speaker
I can't understand how they can live in these conditions with uncertain water and electricity supplies, and no one able to buy anything
Male speaker
It's hard looking at children in saome area with no clothes in the cold weather, even now, two years after the revolution)
Voice over
The people demonstrated their spirit when the whole country rose up, carried on the tide of revolution in Eastern Europe, and literally fought tooth and nail against their oppressors.
The evidence still litters the Revolution Place in the capital Bucharest.
(Bullet holes still exist all over the Place of the Revolution where most of the fighting took place.
They haven't had the money to repair them)
Dick and Ray have found it hard going.
The roads are bumpy and uncertain and when they do get on a half decent stretch, they get pulled over by the police: they're not supposed to be on it.
The people have the spirit to overthrow oppression, but their imagination can't yet cope with overturning their stifling bureaucracy.
Romania in winter is a grey place.
They have little lighting and Bucharest is an example of mass housing at its worst.
There are western goods in the shops but mostly people can only afford to look.
But the colour is there.
Ceaucescu was unable to completely smother centuries of tradition.
But it will take a long time to change the Romanian attitude.
Dick and Ray were able to testify to that.
Their whole day was spent arguing with a customs official over the contents of their truck.
They had to leave some kit behind.
Their patience has gone.
But still they need the aid.
Romania has a long way to go before it can even begin to climb out of its paralysis.
It will have even further if the aid dries up.
A campaign's been launched to try to increase the number of Barn Owls in the region.
Their numbers have dropped by half over the past fifty years.
The RSPB blames intensive farming for the owl's decline.
NETTLEBED/Oxfordshire
IAN BENINGFIELD/Gamekeeper
MICHAEL COLSTON/Farmer
RSPB FILM
IVAN NETHERCOAT/RSPB
Voice over
This is Rupert, a 5 month old Barn Owl who was deserted by his parents at a few days old, but found in time to be saved and hand reared.
He's one of two being reared on a South Oxfordshire farm by game-keeper Ian Beningfield, who is also looking after a much more common Tawny owl, as well as a kestrel and a buzzard.
Both Rupert and 1 year-old Noddy came from the Hawk and Owl Trust which gives birds in its care to carefully vetted applicants.
Male speaker
Noddy was also hand-reared as a chick.
She became so tame it was impossible to release her back into the wild.
Voice over
But any off-spring from Noddy and Rupert will be able to be released into the wild.
Two other tame birds on the same farm have already produced chicks which are now living in this barn.
It's hoped they too will eventually breed and begin to bring an end to the drastic decline in numbers on the estate.
Male speaker
When I was a boy Barn Owls were very common here, but the pesticide DDT killed them off.
I didn't see a Barn Owl here for 20 years or so.
They're very endearing birds with that lovely colouring and that gorgeous heart-shaped face — enough to make anyone fall in love with them.
Voice over
There are thought to be less than 200 pairs of Barn Owls in the Thames and Chiltern area with 45 in Oxfordshire, 35 in Gloucestershire, 38 in Berkshire and 19 in Buckinghamshire.
One of the reasons for the bird's decline is the loss of many of the barns the it's identified with, when they're converted to housing or offices.
The main reason though is the loss of their feeding and breeding habitat.
The hedgerows and pasture where the owls hunt their prey are disappearing as farmers create bigger fields for intensive arable farming.
The RSPB campaign launched this week has set itself the ambitious target of trying to reverse the Common Agricultural Policy, or CAP, which encourages intensive farming.
Male speaker
We've discussed our policies with ministers in Brussels and the U.K. and many are sympathetic.
The plight of the Barn Owl is symbolic of much of our wildlife.
It's vital to give farmers the incentives to manage their land properly.
Otherwise there'll be a further decline in Barn Owl numbers.
Voice over
The idea is to increase the Barn Owl population in the country by 50 per cent over the next 20 years.
But given that the RSPB has set itself the task of changing European farming policy to save the Barn Owl, it's going to be a monumental task.
Police have issued a picture of a man who stole more than five thousand pounds from a building society, while apparently armed with a handgun.
The food safety minister has been visiting a company that runs an animal crematorium where cattle infected with BSE, commonly called mad cow disease, are incinerated.
People who live near the crematorium have protested about having the building on their doorsteps; but the minister praised its design and safety features.
Ken Goodwin reports.
ELMSTONE HARDWICK/Gloucestershire
JULY 1991
DAVID MACLEAN MP/Food Safety Minister
PETER CASSIDY/Crematorium Owner
TOM BEWLEY/National Farmers Union
Voice over
Food safety minister David Maclean casts an eye over one of the incinerators at the companions rest animal crematorium, at Elmstone Hardwick near Cheltenham.
He's here as part of a fact finding tour of the region.
Last summer, local people demonstrated outside the gates of the newly built crematorium — among other things they were worried about the health risks of BSE infected cattle being burnt there.
But the crematorium owner insisted all along it was safe and environmental health officers agreed with him.
Today the building also won ministerial approval.
He says that the building fits in with its surroundings, and would never have been allowed to be built if it wasn't safe.
He says that he hopes the visit will finaly allay any fears people may have.
Incinerators all across the country are being kept busy burning BSE infected cattle as the disease has now reached it's peak, with 500 cattle a week being slaughtered.
In Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire, which have high concentrations of dairy herds, between 10 and 12 new cases are being reported a week.
He says BSE is a worry, though there are few cases relative to herd sizes.
Although public fears over BSE have largely died down, there are still people worried about the health risks of infected cattle being burnt at places like this animal crematorium.
He says he wouldn't have liked to have been told an incinerator was being built at the bottom of his garden, but having seen this one, he'd be reassured.
In a few years the number of BSE infected cattle is expected to drastically fall.
That'll mean less business for the animal crematorium — but its owners say that'll be more than made up for by the increasing number of people who are choosing to have their familly pets cremated.
The RSPCA is to build a new animal shelter because so many people are dumping their pets.
Over the past year, welfare workers have had to care for fourteen hundred abandoned dogs and seven hundred cats.
Richard Barnett reports:
WHITMINSTER/Gloucestershire
CLIVE SADLER/Shelter Manager
BETTY MERRETT/RSPCA Chairman
Voice over
The RSPCA's Whitminster Animal Shelter in Gloucestershire was built to hold 40 dogs, but at the moment double that number are being cared for.
And the demand is growing all the time.
Over the past 5 years, the number of abandoned pets brought here has trebled.
It means dogs have to share kennels.
And a lot of wear and tear.
This concrete path is cracking up under the strain of thousands of paws padding over it.
Now the RSPCA is looking for a new site locally so it can build a much larger shelter:
The RSPCA will have to raise hundreds of thousands of pounds locally to build the kennels.
It's hoped the new shelter will open within 18 months.
Meanwhile more and more animals are being dumped.
The latest arrival, Pixie the 8 week old puppy.
He was an unwanted Christmas present.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
THORNBOROUGH/Buckinghamshire
TREVOR CHYNOWETH/Father
PETER CHYNOWETH
HEATHER CHYNOWETH/Mother
MICHAEL YOUNG/Food Advisory Centre
KEITH EDLINGTON/Trading Standards Officer
Voice over
A drink of fruit juice can be a life-saver for 6 year old Peter Chynoweth.
Born with a kidney defect, he needs up to 5 pints of liquid every day to stay fit and healthy.
But his parents say that after 2 litres of his favourite blackcurrent drink C-Vit, he became drunk.
At first Peter's parents thought he was still suffering from a recent bout of whooping cough, but when he started a second bottle of C-vit they noticed the drink had fermented, turning some of the juice into alcohol.
It's makers, Smithkline Beecham told them the 2 litre bottle was from a faulty batch and to empty it carefully as it could explode.
Peter was born with horseshoe kidney, a condition where the organs are joined together.
He must drink lots of liquid to keep his kidneys active and free from infection.
Smithkline Beecham say retailers were ask to remove the effected product from their shelves earlier this month but haven't alerted customers because they don't believe there is any risk to public health.
But Peter's parents say the public should have been warned.
But trading standards say the company's actions were within the law.
The family has been offered £6 worth of vouchers by the company, but say they won't be happy until their son has been compensated to their satisfaction for his suffering.
A sixty-two year old man who's had a vital heart operation cancelled TWICE has asked health watchdogs to investigate.
On each occasion he's been sent home from hospital because there were no beds available in intensive care.
Kim Barnes reports.
BICESTER/Oxfordshire
FRED ROBSON/Heart Patient
KEITH TAYLOR/Community Health Council
LIBRARY PICTURES
TONY STAPLETON/John Radcliffe Hospital
Voice over
The days are long and difficult for 62 year old Fred Robson waiting for vital heart surgery.
He needs the main artery to his heart replacing.
It's enlarged and if it ruptures his life is at risk.
Twice he's been ready at Oxford's John radcliffe hospital — twice he's been sent home.
Each time the operation's been cancelled because there's no intensive care bed for him to recover in.
Despite a Health Authority report yesterday claiming recent reforms have improved the NHS, watchdogs say the case shows the service is still chronically strapped for cash.
Meanwhile the hospital says it's only got 6 intensive care beds and in the winter emergency accident and chest cases fill them up.
Managers can't promise Mr Robson a bed.
Meanwhile, Fred remains on standby.
Just this Monday he was told once again his operation wouldn't take place.
He just wants to know why and exactly what his future may hold.
A cyclist held in prison in Nepal on forgery charges for more than a month has been released.
All charges against him have been dropped and he's being allowed to leave the country.
Tim Hurst reports.
KATHMANDU/Nepal
MARY RICHMOND/Mother
Voice over
Martin Richmond from Chalford Hill near Stroud in Gloucestershire had been jailed in Kathmandu before Christmas after entering the country on forged papers.
He and a friend had been on a cycling tour of the Himalayas, when they paid for the papers from a local travel agent.
Minutes after being escorted from jail by the British vice-consul, Martin phoned his mother.
The Foreign Office say all charges against the pair have been dropped, they were the victims of a crime rather than the perpetrators.
An inquest has opened on a young girl, who it's alleged was murdered by her father.
The body of ten year old Nicola Yates was found at the weekend,
SWINDON/Wiltshire
The family of a woman who died after washing her husband's asbestos-contaminated clothes, have issued a write for damages from his former employer.
A writ for negligence has been issued against Cape Limited of Uxbridge.
The company denies liability.
In just under two hours time Oxford Prison will close down, leaving the city without a gaol for the first time in a thousand years.
In the past, the site's been home to a church, a castle — perhaps even part of a palace.
Now it could become a hotel or a university college.
Simon Garrett reports.
GRAHAM AUSTIN/Prisoner
TONY DAVENPORT/Prisoner
PAMELA ELLERY/Officer
ARTHUR TEILFOD/Officer
DAVID STURDY/Historian
JOHN TALBOT/Governor
Voice over
The last prisoner transport leaves Oxford.
The jail, part-Victorian, part-Georgian has until recently been home to overspill prisoners from Wormwood Scrubs and Cardiff.
Before that it was a local prison.
But now it's no longer needed.
Inmates are surprisingly dismayed
Male speaker
I would prefer to finish my sentence here even though I've only got three weeks to go.
It's got a relaxed atmosphere
Male speaker
It's very nice place, very relaxed; good staff, good governor, very relaxed.
Voice over
Oxford's had a good reputation for relationships between staff and prisoners.
The last officers would also have liked the jail to stay open
Female speaker
It's unique I think very relaxed and enjoyable to work here
Male speaker
Very sorry, I've thoroughlky enjoyed myself here and I'll be sorry to see it closed
Voice over
There were ten hangings at Oxford from 1892 to 1952, and two hundred years ago there was a women's prison next door.
The jail was originally built as part of William the Conqueror's castle.
Later it may have been incorporated into an enormous palace compound covering a wide swath of the city
Male speaker
The Royal Palace was somewhere over towards Gloucester Green but that area will have included the jail and castle.
But also on this site was a church
Voice over
Only the Norman crypt remains as evidence of that church.
It and the rest of the prison will officially be mothballed from 8.15 tonight when the governor hands over his keys and relinquishes his responsibliities
Male speaker
This has been a prison of good general health helping people get back in society in the most helpful way to them and society as possible
Voice over
The jail could become university college rooms, or its owners the county council might sell it for a hotel.
Others want it to become a museum, preserving forever a taste of a thousand years of incarceration
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
The echo around Central South this week sounds like this…
We're out of the Cup so now we can concentrate on the league…in other words its promotion or bust again…
Swindon have their hopes of course but for Oxford its perhaps to high a climb
United can start tonight though…they play Tranmere at Prenton Park…
The Rovers are second in the table…they won two-one at the manor in september and on form should win again…
but United have the knack…they have the know how to beat the best…they've proved it smashing four past Newcastle…
STING
after losing in the cup there's going to be changes…
Les Robinson is getting a recall…and Jon Narbett might find a place too…
the bad news is that Tranmere haven't lost at home this season…the good news is that top scorer John Aldridge is carrying an injury…
At the County Ground tomorrow…its Swindon against Charlton…
Town lost 2-0 to them in London earlier in the season but can't afford to slip up again…
Glenn Hoddle and his men are two wins away from second place…one win in six is not promotion form though…
This is…five goals against Notts County was their biggest win of the season
STING
Town are going to be unchanged…
Kevin Horlock keeps his place in midfield with Ling still injured…and back with the squad is Ross Maclaren he makes a comeback in the reserves tonight…
The only jackpot Charlton fans have hit this season…is the pools their last five matches have been score draws…lets hope tomorrow though its a home win…
In the third division Hereford United are off to Rochdale…their one and only away in the league this season was at Darlington back in August…time for another
STING
United are unchanged…player coach Greg Downs has served his suspension but has named himself as sub…a man to watch is young Gareth Davies he's been having trials with Liverpool and may have a future at Anfield…
and the goal of the week…comes from Hereford's top marksman Owen Pickard…this was his twelfth of the season
And we'll bring you news of Oxford's match at Tranmere in our late night news…when we'll also have the score from tonight's game at Kingsholm…
Gloucester are playing Nottinhgam 
Voice over
The Cherry and Whites are used to winning against Nottingham…last time they played it was for league points in the first division…
Gloucester won 14 -3 and Nottingham dropped down to the second division…this time around the Kingsholm men are looking over their shoulders…but those relegation worries were eased last Saturday with that 18-6 win over London Irish…tonight it's a club match no league points to be won or lost but Gloucester want every win they can get
Sting
Team news…
Neil Matthews will be out for six or seven weeks with a broken hand…that means a reshuffle…so Tim Smith…who'se used to playing at full-back is given a new lease of life on the wing…
they're playing tonight to leave tomorrow clear for the internationals…the only Gloucester man going for the Grand Slam…is Mike Teague…he's back in the England pack at twickenham
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
JAMES RUSBRIDGER/Former MI6 Agent
8 SEPTEMBER 1992/CYRIL REENAN/Radio Amateur
DES KAYLOR/Radio Amateur
KENNETH CLARKE MP/Home Secretary
Voice over
GCHQ has equipment costing billions of pounds, capable of intercepting millions of calls a year.
According to intelligence experts, it would be childs play for the Cheltenham based listening centre to intercept and record telephone calls, involving members of the Royal family.
The so-called Camillagate and Dianagate tapes have embarrassed the Prince and Princess of Wales…but suggestions that a top level conspiracy against the Royal Family is the source of the scandal is being discounted.
The very high quality of the tape recordings also seems to rule out amateur enthusiasts.
And the finger of suspicion is now being pointed at GCHQ…
But if GCHQ is involved, James Rusbridger, believes just one disaffected technician, among the 12,000 staff.
could be the source of the leaked recordings…
What seems clear is that the tapes, including the conversation allegedly between Diana and James Gilbey, were broadcast several times.
The Diana tape was intercepted by Cyril Reenan, a retired bank manager from Abingdon…
And it has emerged that the same tape was also recorded at the home of Margaret Norgrove in Oxford several days earlier.
Amateur radio enthusiast Des Kaylor from Oxford says the high quality of the tapes suggests a government agency…
Today the Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke refused to accept that the security services were involved in taping members of the Royal family…
GCHQ has denied any involvement in intercepting, recording or disclosing the royal recordings…although it's been suggested that an internal inquiry may already be underway at the Cheltenham centre.
It's just been announced that three Oxford University students have been suspended for a year after a friend died at a drink and drugs party.
Henry Skelton, who was twenty one, died from severe head injuries after falling from a second floor window at his 
OXFORD
A report into sex abuse at a school for emotionally disturbed children is being sent to every county council in the country.
It's hoped it will prevent a repetition of the sexual and physical abuse that some pupils suffered over a five year period.
One of the former pupils, who's now nineteen, has been speaking about his ordeal.
Elizabeth O'Reilly reports.
LUDLOW/Shorpshire
PAUL PRICE/Former Pupil
TIM YEO MP/Health Minister
Thirty seven workers at a world famous piano factory have been told they're out of a job.
Some have worked at Bentley pianos for forty years, but they haven't been offered a penny in redundancy pay.
The company has been put into liquidation, and some of its assets have been sold off to a rival firm.
Ken Goodwin reports.
WOODCHESTER/Gloucestershire
KEN POWELL/Piano Maker
JOHN MORRIS/Piano Maker
DAVID GROVER/Bentley Piano Company Ltd
CHRISTOPHER WILLCOX/Former Sales Director
Voice over
Ken Powell has worked at Bentley Pianos for forty one years.
Today he's out of a job.
The firm has been put into liquidation by it's owners, who say they can't afford to pay redundancy money.
He says he's bitter, with nothing to show after forty one years.
Workers will now have to apply to the Department of Employment, which steps in and pays redundancy money in cases like this, up to a certain limit.
But that's no consolation for thirty seven skilled workers who up until now had pinned their hopes on a management buy out, but now find themselves out of work.
He says he's angry and bitter at how things have turned out.
he's sure the company could have kept going.
Reading from a statement, one of the firm's owners, managing director David Grover said that they had been badly hit by the recession, and overseas competition.
His board had rejected the management buy out proposal because:
He says that they considered the proposals contained too many uncertanties.
He would not answer questions about the lack of severance pay.
Staff who had tried to buy out the company to keep it working say they're devastated.
He says that they could have turned the company around.
he feels they've been treated in a shabby way.
Some of the firms assets are now being sold to a London based competitor.
The premises, recently rebuilt after a fire, will also be sold.
Eighty years of piano building is all over.
From workers there's bitterness that it's all ended on such a sour note.
Before we go a look ahead to Monday, when we begin a four part series filmed in the desert of southern California.
Nick Clark travelled there with the RAF Falcons from Brize Norton, to see the parachute display team at their winter training camp.
Voice over
Every winter it's touch down America for the RAF Falcons in Oxfordshire.
They're escaping the fog and frost of Britain for the winter warmth of California where conditions are almost ideal for free fall training.
Here they prepare new members of the team for the forthcoming display season back in the UK.
We'll also focus on the military aspect of the training…where troops learn how to free fall with oxygen at night.
And we'll follow a spectacular Falcons descent into an American Football game in San Diego.
That's Free Fall USA, starting on Monday night.
(ad lib)
action round-up now…and pride of place this week goes to Oxford's Eddie Jordan…his grand prix team are getting ready for a new formula one season…today at Silverstone the new car was unveiled 
Voice over
A new year a new car and new hope for the Jordan grand prix team…the 193 is powered by Hart engines…has revamped gears and suspension and a fresh look…
Eddie jordan
last season the Jordan team won just one point in grand prix…so what about 93…
Eddie Jordan
one team that is winning in 93 are the Milton Keynes Aces…they're going for the Wheelchair Basketball championship…their latest win was over league leaders Oldham Owls…the Aces are now just one point off the top…
the Milton keynes kings are in action too this weekend…they're at home to Romford on Sunday…also playing at home the Oxford City Stars…they face Sunderland
Now here's something to argue about this weekend…what would you say is the hardest…or toughest race to win in sport…football's league title…formula one…the olympic marathon…how about the jockeys championship…they've been off and running for six months and leading the chase is Oxfordshire’ s Richard Dunwoody…we're riding with him for this week's Friday Feature 
RICHARD DUNWOODY
Voice over
They call it the Winter Game…and those that follow the form from Kelso to Kempton…from Wolverhampton to Wincanton reckon its the hardest game of all…
six days a week…from dawn till dusk…from gallop to grandstand…fortunes may be won or lost at the betting shops or with the bookies…but for the stables…for the lads and lasses and trainers its a hard grind…
the toughest crack though…is for the pilots…the jockeys…they starve themselves to ride light…they drive themselves thousands of miles from race to race…and then give it everything to go for broke…
so the champion jockey walks tall…
Peter Scudamore has been king for the last seven seasons…but now its Richard Dunwoody's turn to lead the race…he's the best they say…the finest horseman…they all want him to win…suddenly the pressure's on
Richard Dunwoody says there's no more pressure than usual and he can handle it…
The jockey's race never stops…never stalls…so far this season Richard Dunwoody has had three hundred and sixty nine rides…he should be celebrating his century of winners any day…only one man can catch him and stop him and that's Peter Scudamore…at Wincanton this week the reigning champion came galloping back with a winning treble…
Richard says that trainer Martin Pipe's horses are coming into form and its going to be a tough race
Racing's been good to Richard Dunwoody…he's won the National…he's won the Gold Cup…he's ridden the great Desert Orchid…there's only dream left to chase…to be champion
Richard says winning the championship is everything…
and today at Ascot…there was one winner for Scudamore none for Dunwoody…but the Oxfordshire man still leads by 15…the score at the moment 90 to 75
Charlie Chaplin fans are enjoying a revival in their hero's popularity.
A new Richard Attenborough film on his life has just been released, and a Chaplin lookalike competition has produced two regional winners.
Mike Rowbottom went to meet them.
AYLESBURY Buckinghamshire
CHAPLIN Guild Films
SONYA ANSON Chaplin Lookalike
MAXINE FINCH Chaplin Lookalike
Sir RICHARD ATTENBOROUGH Director
Voice over
Some things never die.
Charlie Chaplin's silent black and white movies captivated the world in the early part of the century…and they're still doing it for a new generation coming through.
Sonya Anson, from Aylesbury, is one of them.
At fourteen she's won a Charlie Chaplin Lookalike contest to publicise a new film on his life.
Female speaker
He still surviving and well known.
He's lasted the test of time.
I'ver seen nearly all of his films) Sonya
Voice over
Sonya at fourteen, has made a study of the cheeky little comedian.
She's one of five winners of the lookalike contest.
She was joined by Maxine Finch from Cheltenham.
The thirteen year old is also fascinated by the English born clown who became one of the greatest influences on the cinema.
Female speaker
He's funny and unique
Voice over
The film is directed by Sir Richard Attenborough and charts Chaplin's Hollywood career.
Male speaker
He was a clown and a genius.
But he also produced, directed, acted and composed the music.
He changed movies from just custard pies and Keystone Cops into the cinema we know today
Male speaker
Motion pictures are for the people.
They work for a living and don't make much money.
They like to see officialdom and the upper classes getting a kick up the backside.
And if that can change things, so much the better
Female speaker
He's the little man having a kick.
He's a good actor, as well as doing everything else.
It was a one man show
Voice over
It doesn't matter when it was made, or that it's in flickery old black and white.
Charlie Chaplin had a genius, and that will show in any age.
300 US troops arrive in Kuwait
FTSE up 5
The hundred shares index closed up five point seven at two seven six four point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty two and up at two marks, forty nine.
A hundred and forty jobs are to go at a brewery distribution centre in Swindon.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Across the region, there were similar increases.
In Gloucestershire, another six hundred people are now out of work compared to a month ago.
But in one town, many of those who've recently lost their jobs have quickly found new employment, as Clare Lafferty reports.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
STEVEN SYKES/Lorry Driver
BILL PRICE/Foreman
ANDY FARMILON/Fitter
JASON SCRIVENS/Fitter
BRIAN LONG/Director
Voice over
It's 7.00 a.m. on a cold dark morning in Stroud, but 19 year old Jason Scrivens is more than happy to be getting ready for work.
After being made redundant from his last job, he's finally found work at a glass company in the town.
Associated Windows manufactures double glazing and mirrors.
And Jason has something in common with half the work force here.
They too are all people who'd been made redundant.
Steven lost his job on Christmas Eve.
Bill on his birthday.
And Andy was given half a day's notice.
They all remember it as a worrying time.
Male speaker
I've got a wife and 10 month old baby.
I didn't know how to support them.
I was worried about losing the house.
Male speaker
I was worried about being able to support my family and pay the mortgage.
Male speaker
The first few weeks were okay, but then it really got boring and I just moped about.
Male speaker
Every day I looked for jobs at other window companies, the job centre and in local papers.
But I couldn't find one.
Voice over
Even the Management team here were all redundant.
Brian Long was in his previous job for 35 years.
Male speaker
At the age of 53, it comes as a pretty bad shock to be made redundant.
I'd spent most of my life building that career.
Voice over
But Brian and his colleagues weren't to be defeated.
They invested half a million pounds into this factory.
And 5 months on, there's a steady flow of orders.
So after the worry of redundancy, windows have provided openings for people who would otherwise have still been part of today's unemployment figures.
A council is planning to cut its collections of houseshold waste because residents are recycling so much of their rubbish.
The council says there's not enough waste left to justify a weekly collection, and wants to introduce a fortnightly service.
Residents say that could cause a health hazard.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
ISOBEL WILSON/Resident
SUE MAGUIRE/Chairman/Environmental Health Committee
Voice over
Isobel Wilson is one of thousands of people in Milton Keynes taking part in the borough's recycling scheme.
It involves separating materials, like paper, glass and cans, into different coloured boxes.
These are collected weekly, and taken to the Council's recycling plant.
The scheme's been so successful since it's launch in 1990 that about 60 percent of the Borough's household waste is now recycled.
That's led to a sharp reduction in the volume of other rubbish that's collected in the normal way.
And the council is now proposing to switch to a fortnightly collection.
But that has angered some residents who say it could be a health hazard.
Milton Keynes Borough Council say they will save £400,000 a year by switching to a fortnightly collection of rubbish.
And they say it'll ultimately be cleaner.
The collection of rubbish every fortnight will not start until June to give those people not already using the recycling scheme a few months to get used to the idea.
Any concerns about the proposals will be discussed at a meeting of the Environmental Health Department next week.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
FEBRUARY 1991/NUNEHAM COURTENAY/Oxfordshire
JANET PARSONS/Widow
Voice over
Angry parents are demanding an explanation from a bus company after one of its drivers took their children on a six mile detour.
He then left the children in a town centre, leaving some of them to walk home in the dark.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
SWINDON
LOUISE FLETCHER/Bus Passenger
VAL FLETCHER/Mother
DAVID WILLIAMS/Headmaster
Voice over
The Swindon and District bus Company was back to pick up children from the Kingsdown Comprehensive School at Stratton St Margaret today…including twelve year old Louise Fletcher.
She got home pretty quickly but it was a more frightening story yesterday afternoon when her driver dumperd her in the middle of Swindon after a mystery tour.
Female speaker
he told us he'd take us toMarlborough.
He threatened us
Voice over
Louise was on a normal double decker bus with over thirty of her schoolfriends when the driver appeared to be angered by their continually ringing the bell; so much so that he took them on a six mile detour.
At one stage the route took them past a park where the body of a ten year old girl was found at the weekend.
Eventually the bus load of children was dumped in the middle of Swindon at the main bus station.
Female speaker
I was just worried what me mother would be thinking
Voice over
Louise was eventually three quarters of an hour late.
Other children were left to wander home in the dark.
Furious parents have beseieged the bus company demanding an explanation.
Female speaker
You educate your children to stay away from trouble so what's the use of a person who's supposed to be responsible doing this
Voice over
The Bus company delivers and picks up children at the School every day.
The Headmaster is demanding to know what happened.
Male speaker
I am very angry
Voice over
The bus company says an investigation is under way and there may be disciplinary action.
They say it's a matter of great urgency.
An award winning scientist paralysed by a wasting disease may be forced to give up his research…because he can't afford to pay for the round-the-clock nursing he needs.
Michael Croggon's studies could help save the Amazonian rain forests…but only if he can find the money to fund his own daily care.
Simon Garrett reports 
OXFORD
MICHAEL CROGGON/Research Scientist
MARY CLARKSON/Crossroads Care Scheme
Voice over
Michael Croggon's compiling a computer catalogue of a thousand different species of trees to be found in the Amazon region.
One day it could be used by the timber trade as a guide for preserving the environment which pays their wages.
But he suffers from motor neurone disease and needs twenty-four hour care.
That's only partly paid for by government and social services and Michael has no other income
Male speaker
On average I'm falling behind by two hundred pounds a week.
The debt's already over seven and a half thousand pounds and rising.
Voice over
Recognition for Michael's work has recently come in the form of a fifteen thousand pound joint first prize in the Jameson awards for environmental research.
But that money's for his work…not for living expenses.
The non-profit making organisation which provides his carers is already stretched with other diasabled people like Michael struggling to pay.
Staff say the government must step in with more cash
Female speaker
More money must be available at the time of need.
Mike must be able to finish his work and he needs help for that.
There are other people in his position too
Male speaker
It makes me angry that I'm not being properly provided for by the government
Voice over
Michael's now been notified his debt must be cut or his carers may not be abel to keep coming to help him
A farmer is mounting a round-the-clock watch after seven of his sheep were killed by a dog.
The animals were chased across a field and drowned when they tried to escape by jumping into a brook.
Now their owner fears it could happen again.
Richard Barnett reports.
HAMNISH/Herefordshire
ADRIAN WESTBURY/Farmer
JOHN BELL/Vet
Voice over
The bodies of 6 ewes and a ram were piled onto a tractor trailer near where they drowned in the Stretford Brook.
The animals were part of a flock of 70 sheep which were driven into the brook, apparently by a stray dog.
Farmer Adrian Westbury discovered them yesterday afternoon.
The local vet arrived at the farm to examine the carcases.
Adrian Westbury had spent 5 years building up his flock.
He started with just 4 lambs, and one of the ewes that drowned was one of those original lambs.
Now Adrian is keeping a round the clock watch for the dog in case it returns.
Staff at a centre for birds of prey are being kept busy feeding two new arrivals — baby fish eagles.
It's thought to be the first time the species has been bred in captivity.
Ken Goodwin reports.
NEWENT Gloucestershire
JEMIMA PARRY-JONES Birds of Prey Centre
Voice over
Feeding time for two very special new arrivals at the Newent Birds of prey centre.
For 10 years the centre has been trying to breed African Fish Eagles.
This year, the 25th anniversary of the centres opening, they've succeeded.
This is mum and dad; the two Eagles live in a huge outdoor aviary at the centre and just before Christmas, laid two eggs.
These were removed from the nest and hatched indoors in an incubator.
She says the adult birds can't be trusted at this stage to hatch the eggs properly.
African Fish Eagles are not an endangered species at the moment but are very difficult to breed in captivity, so it's quite an achievement for the birds of prey centre.
She says that she's delighted with their achievement — it's been a long wait.
The chicks need round the clock attention, and have developed very healthy appetites.
She says they're being fed chicken and trout, and have put on lots of weight.
The baby Eagles are sharing the incubation room with some other new arrivals.
These puppies are thriving in the warm environment, their owner says you couldn't get a better start for young bird dogs.
Esso put 4
FTSE up 4
The hundred shares index closed up four point five at twenty-five, forty-one point six.
The pound is up at one dollar seventy-six, and up at two marks eighty-five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A year ago today the final stretch of the M-forty motorway was opened, creating a new link between Birmingham and London.
The Government says it's been a great success — those living close to its route say its ruined their lives.
Gargy Patel looks back on the first twelve months of the motorway completed after two decades of delay.
FENCOTT/Oxfordshire
IAN CHARLESWORTH/M40 Campaigner
14 FEBRUARY 1991
Insp JOHN WHEELER/Thames Valley Police
TONY HUMPHRIES/Banbury Councillor
Voice over
A blessing for traffic planners and motorists, a disaster for campaigners who say it's ruined country life.
The M-forty extension through fifty nine miles of Oxfordshire and Warwickshire has changed the face of the countryside.
But some say it's been too high a price to pay.
For villagers like the Charlesworth family the motorway, less than a mile from their house, has shattered the peace.
They say political pressure forced it through…and they're forced to live with the consequences.
He says they've been hoodwinked and the noise is an intrusion on their lives.
The motorway took twenty one years to build, at a cost of three hundred and thirty million pounds.
It finished two months ahead of schedule, a bonus for both motorists and the contractors.
So far it's cost six lives, the first one just weeks after it opened in a multiple pileup in thick fog.
Planners were heavily criticised for designing the route through a valley notorious for fog.
Police say bad driving is still the biggest danger.
Motorway patrols deal with their share of speeders…the detector showed this German driver was travelling at almost a hundred and twenty miles an hour.
He says he's arresting the driver for exceeding the speed limit.
But almost half the vehicles they come across on the hard shoulder have stopped because there are no services.
He says it's a long stretch of road and you need at least two service areas.
A service station is planned next year at junction nine near Ardley.
But police say when drivers have nowhere to stop and rest, it's a recipe for disaster.
He says some of the M-forty accidents have been a result of drivers suffering from fatigue.
The motorway, used by sixty five thousand vehicles a day, has done the job of easing traffic congestion elsewhere.
It's drawn almost half the traffic away from major roads out of Oxford to Northampton, Banbury and Chipping Norton.
It's also attracted thousands who previously used the M-one.
So for some it's been a blessing.
He says it's very clear now.
She says it's great, especially for getting to work.
She says it's less noise, and traffic which used to be nose to tail now flows freely.
But it hasn't brought the promised boom for towns along the route.
Business parks built outside Oxford and Banbury, anticipating a flood of interest from firms moving into the area, still lie empty.
The promise from the M-forty, hailed as the Golden Corridor, has lost it's shine.
He says they haven't had the economic boom.
They don't have enough attraction to compete with places like Oxford or Stratford.
Those who live with it day and night are now going down the road to compensation, and a legal battle with the Department of Transport.
The Government admits underestimating noise and traffic on the motorway.
There are already plans to expand the M-forty to four lanes.
As planners themselves say, traffic is a part of life…building roads leads to more roads.
Five pubs worth seven hundred thousand pounds have been put up for auction by one of the big breweries.
Among the bidders was a landlady fighting to hold on to the country inn she's run for the past eight years.Richard Barnett reports:
PEMBRIDGE/Gloucestershire
HEREFORD
JANE MELVIN/Publican
JOHN WILLIAMS/Auctioneer
Voice over
Jane Melvin came to the New Inn at Pembridge in Herefordshire in 1984, and turned it into one of the most popular country pubs in the county.
But for the past year she's faced the very real possibility of losing the Inn that's been her life because Whitbreads decided to sell it off along with other pubs to meet the demands of the Monopolies Commission, which had demanded it must get rid of half its tied houses.
Drinkers at the pub were angered by the plan to sell it:
Today the New Inn came up for auction at the Hereford Moat House, along with four other county pubs.
Jane's face showed her anxiety as the bidding began.
A relative was bidding on her behalf, but she feared a competitor would take the pub from her.
Then at £142,000 the bidding stopped.
Jane had retained her pub:
Female speaker
She is thrilled that she has kept the pub.
But the past year waiting for the auction has been very difficult.
Voice over
Out of the 5 pubs, two others sold as well.
The Bulls Head in Hereford found a buyer at £100,000 pounds and the Burley Gate Inn in the city went for 120,000.
Meanwhile the Wheatsheaf at Frooms Hill in Hereford and the Bull Ring in Kingstone failed to attract high enough bids.
Male speaker
The pubs are a very good buy as you get a home and an investment for the price of a house.
Voice over
Tonight the only thing New about the inn in Pembridge will be its name.And no doubt that's something Jane and the locals will be celebrating.
And finally, a family-run clothes shop that's been open for more than a hundred years is closing down because there's no one left to look after it.
The shop is a far cry from the modern boutique, and still has stock dating back for generations.
But for local people, the closure marks the end of an era.
Clare Lafferty reports.
LEDBURY Herefordshire
Voice over
This is the family run Oakes clothes shop in Ledbury.
For generations the place where all the more mature locals have come to buy their clothes.
It's been here since the late 19th century.
That's reflected in the kind of stock it sells.
Although still in pristine condition, some of these clothes have been on hangers or in drawers here since just after the war.
And some garments were definitely designed for use in pre-central heating days.
At first, clothes were even made on the premises.
This upstairs room still holds some of the tailors equipment.
But now, 90 years on, there's no one left in the Oakes family to run the shop, so it's to be sold.
That's bad news for loyal customers.
So this is Oakes last January sale.
A final chance to pick up the kind of luxuries not often seen on sale nowadays.
When the shelves are clear, the doors will close.
The shop's already up for sale.
Locals can only hope that any new buyer would continue to run the shop in the old traditional ways.
Seven people killed in County Tyrone explosion
Seven people have been killed and seven others injured in an explosion on the Omagh-Cookstown Road in County Tyrone.
Inflation rises 0
FTSE down 4
The hundred shares index closed down four point nine at twenty-five, thrity-six point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar seventy-six, and up at two marks eighty-five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.35 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
And sadly, Olympic rowers aren't the only ones feeling the pinch…on the eve of a new international rugby season Gloucester's World Cup hero Mike Teague is seeking compensation from the sport's governing body Iron man Mike claims the shoulder injury he suffered while playing for England has stopped him from working as a builder and he's lost between three and five thousand pounds in earnings.
He's missing from the England team tomorrow of course but Gloucester will have a man playing for the Calcutta Cup…as skipper Ian Smith runs out with Scotland for the first time 
IAN SMITH/Gloucester Captain
Voice over
Captain Ian Smith has driven the Cherry and Whites into the championship race this season.
His leadership; his strength in the scrum, has helped make Gloucester into a real force once again.
Tomorrow comes the reward; a first international cap.
Ian was born and bred in Gloucester.
His dad, Dick who also captained the cherry and whites, had trials for England but Smith junior has Scottish grandparents and has chosen the thistle rather than the rose.
This week by way of preparation, its been weight training for Ian Smith down in the Kingsholm gym.
Tomorrow comes the real test of strength when he faces the giant England pack.
No problem.
This man, Smith is as tough as they come.
with international rugby this weekend…
Gloucester are playing tonight…they're away at Newport…weather permitting it's all go for football…
Oxford and Hereford are at home…
Swindon away 
Voice over
At the Manor Ground its Oxford against Port Vale.
They faced each other on the opening day of the season.
United lost with Martin Foyle scoring two goals to sink his old team.
Jim Magilton got one for United, but that was the start of a pretty miserable season.
Here's the team news.
Jim Magilton could be missing tomorrow he's doubtful Paul Wanless is standing by to take his place
The form card shows that both sides are struggling Port Vale are having a bad run.
They last won back in November.
Swindon Town go to Filbert Street, home of Leicester City.
Last season it was 2-all there.
Duncan Shearer scored the first and Town were two up, but went and threw things away.
City hit them hard with two late goals.
Team news.
Town are forced to make a change.
Fraser Digby is back in goal injury has ruled out Nicky Hammond.
Both sides are going for promotion of course.
Leicester have the better record over recent weeks; they've only lost two at home this season.
In the fourth division, Hereford United play their first home league match of the New Year.
Last time out at Edgar Street, it was Barnet.
United drew 2-all, thanks to goals from Heritage and Pejic.
Next game after this one is Forest in the cup, so every man will be playing for his place.
Manager, John Sillett, has named a squad of 14.
Looks like he'll keep the side that won against Woking in the cup on Tuesday night.
Goal of the week; it's a goal against I'm afraid.
It's the strike from Grimsby's Tony Rees that beat Oxford last Saturday.
Now one sport that always brings breathtaking action is moto cross…and the good news is they're opening a new track in Oxfordshire…today the top riders were testing it out…our man Mark Kiff was there 
DAVID THORPE/Triple World Champion
VIC ALLAN/Course Designer
PAUL CAUDWELL/Landowner
Voice over
Motocross riders are a tough breed…no amount of fog was going to stop them from checking out the sport's newest circuit this morning.
And there was no holding back on the power either…throttles fully open for takeoff.
Among the stars at Warren Farm in Culham near Abingdon was triple world champion Dave Thorpe, giving his new Honda bike a good airing.
Male speaker
It's a really good piece of land.
Voice over
Twelve months planning has gone into the course.
The first big meeting is next month; most of Britain's top riders have already entered.
The man who designed it is confident they've got it right.
Male speaker
I think we've got the balance right between spectacular jumps and making it still fairly easy for the beginner as well.
Voice over
For the man who owns this land, watching what used to be a wheat field turned into a race track has been an eye opener…although he's well aware of the problems the sport can cause.
Male speaker
Our first day is on 16th February.
We're going to make a lot of effort to ensure the noise is kept to as low a level as possible.
Voice over
Warren Farm will also be open to the whole community as well as the racers…and in a sport when they start as young as five year old Carl Stanton that's no bad thing.
The course is already drawing the fans and for action like this, it's no surprise.
there's a good weekend of sport coming up…what with international rugby and a test match for the England cricketers in New Zealand…that's where we start our weekly roundup 
Voice over
Gloucestershire wicket keeper, Jack Russell lines up behind the stumps in tomorrow's first test.
Fast bowler, David Lawrence was ruled out.
His rib injury is more serious than first thought.
It's Town against Gown tomorrow afternoon on the ice.
Oxford City Stars take on the city's University team.
Face off is at 5.00 p.m.
Henley rower, Steve Redgrave has been honoured for his outstanding achievement in the sport.
He received the award from a National newspaper at the annual Sports Writers dinner.
And Julie Bradbury from Bladon in Oxfordshire is on the victory trail in Japan.
With partner Jill Clark, she's won through to the quarter-finals of the Japanese Open after beating the world's number two pair from Indonesia.
People who devote their lives to looking after an elderly or disabled relative or friend are again demanding more support from the government.
One in three people will become a carer at some time in their life, and the figure's rising as a result of the Government's move to provide more care in the community.
So next week, a special conference takes place, aimed at developing services for carers.
Debbie Kelly reports.
OXFORD
BARBARA SMITH/Carer
PAT AYRES/Carer
SHEILA TAYLOR/Oxfordshire Carers Unit
Voice over
Matthew was born with water on the brain.
At 3 years old he contracted Meningitis.
He can't see, he's epiletic, he can't walk or feed himself.
For the past 7 years, his grandmother Pat Ayres and sister Barbara Smith have cared for him 24 hours a day.
At night, waking every 3 hours, to turn him in his sleep.
She says.
We feed him 8 or 9 times a day and then we have to help him with physiotherapy and bathe him.
Matthew spends 2 weeks with his gran, a week with his Aunt.
For 14 hours a week, a care assistant helps out.
They need her for longer, but there's no money available; because of a shortage of funds, they had to rely on a charity to provide a…until they had pit he was in hospital with a chest infection every 2 weeks.
Female speaker
We have to fight to get every piece of equipment.
It can take months or years.
Voice over
Often carers complain that they don't get enough support.
With council and hospitals not understanding their needs, Pat Ayres often has to make numerous calls just to get a new supply of syringes or nappies.
The conference held in Didcot today brought carers together with health workers.
Female speaker
Carers are often confused because they don't know which of the many agencies to go to.
It adds to their stress.
Voice over
The sisters need the reassurance that help is available.
Female speaker
We have both got arthritis in our hands and both our husbands are coming up to retirement age.
As Matthew gets older and larger, we may need more help.
Voice over
The sisters are among 60,000 carers in Oxfordshire.
Despite the pressures, they're determined to care for Matthew.
They just want to know help is there if they need it.
A tiny fragment of the Dead Sea Scrolls is causing a row between experts here and in America.
The argument comes just months after the ancient writings were finally opened up to scholars around the world, and it centres on a single phrase.
This report from Gargy Patel.
YARNTON/Oxfordshire
Prof GEZA VERMES/Oxford University
Rt Rev RICHARD HARRIES/Bishop of Oxford
Voice over
These ancient scrolls have caused a religious and academic storm.
They have provided a fascinating insigt into the origins of the Jewish and Christian faiths.
Few scholars have been allowed to see them since they were discovered but now they are being examined, one phrase is causing a heated arguement.
American scholars say it conforms that the idea of Jesus Christ was around almost 2,000 years before he was born on Earth.
But academics at Oxford are outraged and say it can only mean a Jewish Messiah.
He said’ It is possible to reconstruct this damaged passage in ways which completely alter the meaning of other passages.
I am sure they describe the traditional Jewish Messiah.
This part refers to killing but interpretation of it differs.
The Americans say they are surprised at the response because they don't think the difference of opinion is worth all the fuss it is causing.
The Bishop of Oxford, the Right RTeverand Richard Harries, is an expert on relationships between Jews and Christians.
Male speaker
I don't think that Judaism or Christianity will be altered by any of this — they have been around for too long for that.
Meanwhile the scholars are bracing themselves for more arguements.
Voice over
In part two: Blooming hard work: The Olympic hopeful who can't find a sponsor.
A blooming career: Gloucester's captain joins the Flowers of Scotland:
And bloomers away!
The passion killers come to end of the line.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
SIMON BERRISFORD/Olympic Rower
Voice over
For all sports; for all athletes, the Olympic arena is the biggest and best in the world.
Its the only time when nations gather under the same flag.
The world is one.
For the athletes it's about pain and perfection; determination and devotion to a sporting ideal.
But going for gold these days is more down to money than motivation.
Take rower Simon Berrisford from Henley on Thames.
His year; his life at the moment, is dedicated to rowing for Britain in Barcelona.
He's good enough; fit and fast enough, but financially is struggling to survive.
So much so, that he's taken an ad out in the local paper.
To pay for his Olympics, Simon is prepared to do any odd jobs.
He's also launched a one-man fund raising campaign around Henley…he's asking local businesses to back him.
The Olympic equation is a simple one.
Simon receives a sports aid grant of £5,000 this year, which is taxed.
On top of that he works part-time as a rowing coach for a local school.
He has to pay a £1,000 towards the costs of going to Spain, but because of training can't work full-time.
Now surely the Olympics is a festival a celebration of amateur sport, but if we want medals, we have to accept that professionalism wins.
Simon rowed in the last Olympics and has competed in 4 world championships.
He has a real medal chance so if Henley wants a local hero it's time to pay up.
Operation Screwdriver: Police crackdown on riot estate joyriders.
Mental patient deaths:Families told inquiry will consult them.
And five thousand years on: An unholy row over the Dead Sea Scrolls.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
The clampdown comes on the day a new law to stop joyriding went through the House of Lords.
MPs have welcomed the action, but some people on the Blackbird Leys Estate have accused the police of harassing youngsters.Mike Rowbottom reports.
1991/Oxford
Insp ROGER PICTON/Thames Valley Police
JOHN PATTEN MP/Home Office Minister
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
Voice over
Police have been battling against joyriders and so called hotters in Oxford for over two years.
Last summer saw violence at Blackbird Leys as things came to a head…with petrol bombs and bricks.
This weeks's crackdown, codenamed Screwdriver.
has led to eight arrests directly, and twelve on other auto offences.
Male speaker
We are targeting a particular area of Oxford and have made several arrests
Voice over
It follows two recent court cases which have resulted in custodial sentences.
Police are not saying where they are concentrating their activities but people on Blackbird Leys have mixed views.
Male speaker
It's fine if they're proved to be guilty, otherwise it's police harassment.
Male speaker
I think the police are doing a superb job
Voice over
Only today The Government's joyriding bill went through the House of Lords.
It's been pilotted by the Abingdon and West Oxford MP Home Office Minister John Patten.
Male speaker
The Police have received some unfair criticism but they are doing a good job.
Male speaker
I am certain the people of the estates affected by joyriders will be right behind this action.
The warning goes out to them; they must stop this murderous activity
Voice over
say they're continuing Operation Screwdriver indefintely
Relatives of seven mental patients who died after being discharged from hospital have been told that they WILL after all be consulted at an inquiry into the deaths.
They were furious when the inquiry launched last summer didn't ask for their views.
Now the health authority has relented.Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
GWEN WATKINS/Mother
Dr GORDON CLARIDGE/Psycholgist
Dr MICHAEL ORR/Mental Health Unit
Voice over
Gwen Watkins son Tristan was found dead in a pool in Oxford, after 20 years of mental illness.
His mother believes his death was brought on by lack of proper care and over prescription of drugs with dangerous side effects.
7 mental patients have died in the Oxford region.
Relatives like Mrs Watkins were hopeful when the Health Authority announced an inquiry, but despairing, when 5 months on, it still hadn't consulted them.
Now after fresh pressure, the inquiry leader has new instructions to talk to relatives, as well as concerned groups like the Community Health council and the charity MIND which welcomes the move.
They say Mind presumed an inquiry would involve the families and those advising them and we were astonished when it did not.
Pyschologist Dr Gordon Claridge is a friend of the watkins family.
He saw the side effects of drugs on Tristan…loss of balance and bluured vision…and believes this should now be investigated.
The health authority now says it'll listen to other views.
But mental health managers says the prescription of drugs known as neuroleptics isn't an issue.
Meanwhile parents like Gwen Watkins just want their voice to be heard and a clearer understanding of a tragic chain of deaths.
Three businessmen are being questioned about alleged financial irregularities at the now-defunct Gloucester and Severnside Co-Operative Society.
The society's former chief executive, John Perrin, is one of two men from Gloucester who've been arrested.
Mistakes by the big high street banks are costing small businesses thousands of pounds, according to a new report.
A computer survey has shown that over half are paying more interest than they should.
Simon Garrett reports 
SWERFORD/Oxfordshire
DAVID BARBOUR/Farmer
NORTHAMPTON
GRAHAM BOLDERSON/Phoenix Finance Management
PAULINE HEDGES/British Bankers Association
Voice over
David Barbour is diversifying on his North Oxfordshire farm.
Where once there were pigs, now there are holiday lets and small business units.
He's borrowed from the bank to finance the projects, but they wrongly calculated the interest due, charging him nearly £9,000 too much.
Male speaker
I just wouldn't normally check my statement.
You expect the bank to get it right.
I'll be more careful in future.
Voice over
Mr Barbour's bank's made good their error.
It was proved by feeding his statement into a unique computer programme designed to check for bank mistakes.
The software's called’ Bankchek’and its developers say their survey of over 100 small businesses reveals repeated slip-ups by bank staff.
Male speaker
Verbal agreements get forgotten, wrong interest rates are charged by mistake when personnel change.
It is a straw poll but our analysis suggests these problems are widespread.
Voice over
The banks say the Phoenix survey is too small to be representative but insist it's up to customers to check statements.
Female speaker
We have over 28 million current accounts.
Mistakes will be made.
Customers must check statements to be sure of their accuracy.
Voice over
So far in each case where an error's been proved, the banks paid back the money overcharged.
Killed by a volcano.
Top scientist dies in South American eruption
They'll stop at nothing:Police warning after two shops terrorised.
And Freefall USA…the Falcons that fly west for the winter.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Professor Brown was a world-renowned expert on volcanic activity.
His body hasn't yet been found.
Colleagues, who've been paying tribute to his dedication and exertise, say he'd always been aware of the dangers surrounding his work.Ian Maclaren reports.
Mt GALERAS/ColombiaSouth America
Prof CHRIS WILSON/Earth Studies Department
LIBRARY PICTURES
1991/Mount ETNA/Sicily
Voice over
Geoff Brown was killed when the 14,000 ft Mt Galeras erupted showering boiling ash and rocks from its crater.
Professor Brown had been in Colombia, training local scientists in pioneering techniques for monitoring volcanoes.
Mt Galeras is in the Andes mountain range near the Colombian border with Ecuador.
It's believed Professor Brown was working inside the crater when there was an explosion.
Eyewitnesses report seeing glowing rocks and ash spouting from the crater.
Rescue teams were able to reach some of the victims.
At least 6 people are believed to have been killed.
So far, Professor Brown's body hasn't been recovered.
The surrounding area near Mt Galeras has been evacuated.
It's the first time in its 500 years of activity that the volcano has claimed lives.
But there were fears that a town near the foot of Mt Galeras could be at risk.
Last year Professor Brown was called in by the Italian government shortly after Mount Etna erupted.
He was airlifted onto the mountain as molten lava threatened to swamp the village of Zaffarana.
Professor Brown had developed an expertise for predicting how much lava is stored in a volcano.
But he was always aware of the risk his job involved.
Professor Brown, who was 47, leaves a wife Evelyn, also an Open University tutor and 3 children.
They lived in Leicestershire.
He was head of the Earth Studies department at the Open University in Milton Keynes.
He'd helped set up a new research wing, which was due to be officially opened in a fortnight's time.
A shop manager who was beaten up and threatened with having his ears cut off is so badly traumatised that he's still been unable to describe his ordeal to police.
Detectives are hunting three masked raiders who they believe will stop at nothing.
Simon Garrett reports 
CAM/Gloucestershire
NAILSWORTH/Gloucestershire
Det Sgt COLIN PEAKE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Shop manager, Jim Willcock's been allowed home from hospital, but he's not well enough to go back to the co-op in Cam.
He was dragged around by wire flex wrapped round his neck, beaten and threatened with being strangled and having his ears cut off.
Only then, did the robbers get the keys to the shop safe from him.
Hours earlier they'd attacked the manager of the Kiosks newsagent in Nailsworth and robbed him.
He was back in the shop today, but didn't want to talk about the raid.
Detectives have been shocked by the ferocity of the attacks
Male speaker
Imagine having rope or flex wrapped round your neck and threatened with strangling or having your ears cut off.
They'll be mentally scarred for years.
It's the worst offence of this kind I've seen while working in South Gloucestershire.
Voice over
Police in Cam gave chase for a short distance but were easily shaken off by the robbers stolen Sierra Cosworth.
That car was found dumped and burnt out in Bristol and inquiries are centering around there.
The jewellery tycoon Gerald Ratner has been banned from driving for three weeks for doing more than a hundred miles an hour on the motorway.
He told magistrates he is using his car to search for new shops to relaunch his business career.
Mike Rowbottom reports 
THAME/Oxfordshire
GERALD RATNER/Businessman
Voice over
Gerald Ratner, as ex-Chairman of the Ratner Jewellery Empire, is used to life in the fast lane — too fast for Thames Valley Police.
They clocked him doing between 110 and 114 mph on the M40 at Waterperry last October.
His wife, Gail drove him to Thame Magistrates Court today where he was banned for 3 weeks and fined £160.
He said he was sorry and normally obeyed all the driving rules, but this time failed to keep his eye on the speedometer as he made his way to Birmingham.
He left his job as Chairman of Ratners in November and was busy searching up and down the country for another shop.
That involved doing 30,000 miles a year.
Gerald Ratner ran into trouble when he said some of the goods in his shops were rubbish, or words to that effect.
Sales plummetted and he was forced to quit.
But he plans to rise again.
Male speaker
This isn't the appropriate place to talk about my plans, but I will be going back into business.
I'm not too bothered about a 3-week ban.
It could have been a lot worse, it's not going to hold me up too much.
I am ambitious, you need to be.
Voice over
The plans will be delayed in the short term while he waits for his ban to end.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
At the County Ground, it was daylight robbery; a smash and grab raid by Charlton.
They had 3 attacks and scored 2 goals.
The alarms in the Swindon defence failed to ring.
Garry Nelson got the first goal for Charlton a real scramble, after Steve White had accidentally headed against his own post.
With Glenn Hoddle injured, it was left to Micky Hazard to drive Town on.
He did a good job, but Bob Bolder in the Charlton goal did it even better.
Craig Maskell has been good at stealing goals this season, but even he couldn't force a way through.
At the other end, Town left the goal unlocked again and Alex Dyer crept in to make it 2-0.
The County Ground fans were in despair but Swindon roared back with 2 goals in 6 minutes.
The first was made by Steve White and taken by Nicky Summerbee.
The second came from the head of Captain, Colin Calderwood.
Town looked a good bet for victory then.
Summerbee was so near to the 3rd goal just before half-time.
And after the break, it was all Swindon.
They deserved the win.
They was robbed, but at the whistle it was 2-all.
The biggest crime was Oxford's defeat at Tranmere.
The first blow came from a corner and a flying header by Dave Higgins.
That was 1-0.
Just before half-time, skipper, Andy Melville was caught red handed on his own goal line; a penalty for Rovers which John Aldridge crashed home.
Aldo was supposed to be carrying an injury, but it didn't stop him from running away to make it 3-0.
United took off skipper, Andy Melville for the second half, but they were down and out when full-backs Garry Smart and Mike Ford got in each other; s way and produced an own goal.
Tranmere 4 — Oxford 0.
and the Oxford players have been sentenced to a game in the reserves at Bristol City tonight…there's better news of Hereford United…they're the good guys this week after a three-one win at Rochdale 
Voice over
Hereford's 5 month wait for an away win in the league came to an end at Spotland.
Skipper, Derek Hall cracked them into the lead midway through the first half.
Rochdale came back with a wind assisted equaliser.
Shaun Reid the scorer.
United won it in the second half.
Simon Brain got the second.
They should call him burglar Brain, the way he pinched it.
Hereford usually crack or collapse in the dying minutes.
This time, though, they hit the jackpot with number 3 from Richard Jones.
Rochdale 1 — Hereford 3.
The Gloucester rugby men were weekend winners too…they beat Nottingham by nineteen points to three at Kingsholm…but victory came at a cost…a serious injury to hooker John Hawker 
Voice over
It was Nottingham who got the score rolling with a penalty from Guy Gregory…
Gloucester had missed four penalties…but made up for things with an opening try…as full-back Martin Roberts picked up a tap penalty and bulldozed his way through to score…
Roberts then found his kicking form with a super conversion the best touchdown came just before half-time…
Damian Cummins playing at fly-half sold Nottingham a dummy and then slipped through to touch down…
Paul Ashmead got a pushover try in the second half…but Gloucester were far from happy with things…hooker John Hawker broke a bone in his neck during a scrum…he was rushed to hospital…he's going to be OK but there's no more rugby for him this season
The biggest sporting crime reported today is that Olympic rower Steve Redgrave from Buckinghamshire may have to quit because of lack of sponsorship…all that glitters isn't gold 
STEVE REDGRAVE/Olympic Champion
Voice over
With 3 gold medals, Steve Redgrave is more than an Olympic hero.
He's Britain's most successful competitor and arguably our greatest champion.
Faldo, Mansell; they can't match the winning record of this man.
His life has been devoted to rowing.
The equation is simple; to be the best.
You have to work and train the hardest, which means there's no time for a career.
Redgrave's job is sport.
It's winning, but unless he can find a sponsor, he'll be forced to quit.
Steve Redgrave says he'll try whatever to find a sponsor, but there is a doubt over his future.
The price of success is around £25,000 a year.
That's how much sponsorship Steve Redgrave is searching for.
It may seem a lot to some folk, but in the mega rich world of sport and the Olympics its gold on the cheap.
An ancient priory is in danger of falling down for want of half a million pounds.
For centuries, it was one of the finest Augustinian priories in England.
But the building is gradually crumbling away, and the local council says it's powerless to do anything about it.
Robin Powell reports.
GLOUCESTER
JON HOLMES/City Councillor
JOHN RHODES/City Museums Director
Voice over
Llanthony Priory in Gloucester; a throwback to medieval England, surrounded by urban wasteland.
The City Council bought the site from a scrap merchant, but it can no longer afford to pay for restoration work and Llanthony itself seems destined for the scrapheap.
The council's already spent half a million pounds on renovating the priory, making safe the dilapidated tithe barn next door and landscaping the grounds.
But there's a long way to go.
That means another £440,000 — because of cutbacks, money the council claims it doesn't have.
And English Heritage, which is already working on Blackfriars Friary in the city centre, has refused to step in.
A spokesman said: English Heritage is not in a position to to take the priory into its own care.
We're still coping with a significant legacy of repair work to monuments around the country and only in very exceptional circumstances would we be able to take on additional monuments.
Llanthony Priory's future could now depend on the new National Lottery.
Since the 12th century, 4 Kings of England have stayed at Llanthony — if the money isn't found soon, there'll be no visitors in the 21st — not even tourists.
A dermatology hospital which has been called the best in the country has opened in Oxford.
The two and a half million pound building is in stark contrast to the old skin hospital which was based in a former Tuberculosis ward and a couple of temporary buildings.
Harriet Ryley reports.
OXFORD
GWEN KENT/Patient
SLADE HOSPITAL/Oxford
Prof TERENCE RYAN/Consultant
RICHARD JONES/Business Manager
Voice over
It's 43 years since Gwen Kent last came to the Churchill Hospital in Oxford for treatment.
Then she was having her first baby.
Now she's the first patient being treated at the hospital's new dermatology building.
Female speaker
Her last visit to the hospital was in 1950 when she had her first baby there.
Then it was surrounded by huts and all quite basic.
It's very different now.
Voice over
Until a few weeks ago skin patients had to go for their treatment to the old dermatology hospital in this old TB ward, while research was carried out in a couple of temporary buildings.
He says they were housed in an old infectious diseases ward.
The hospital carries out world-famous research into skin disease — but they used to have to work in a couple of temporary buildings.
There really is something to celebrate as the new hospital opens — its consultants say it is the best in the country — with a standard of care and treatment equalling that in private hospitals combined with the facilities to continue pioneering research into skin disease.
The hospital cost £2.5 million — a million of which was donated by an American-based drug company.
He says that the NHS system in this country means results from treatment on patients can be passed onto drug companies — whereas in America the private patient system means this can't be done so easily.
While dermatology is regarded as something of a Cinderella subject in medicine — in Oxford at least, skin patients are being treated in the most up-to-the-minute facilities.
In part two: Getting even.Swindon fight back for a share of the points.
Getting out: Redgrave threatens to quit over sponsorship.
And, getting down: A special report as the Falcons go Stateside.
Thousands of people who suffer from long-sightedness, have been given new hope of improving their vision, thanks to a new laser technique.
A hospital in Buckinghamshire is one of only two in the country performing the operation.
But although it only takes a few minutes, life without thick glasses has a cost.
The operation would set you back around a thousand pounds.
Erika Barnes reports.
GREAT MISSENDEN/Buckinghamshire
NICKI WARE/Long-Sighted
Mr LARRY BENJAMIN/Consultant Opthalmologist
JEANETTE ORTON/Short-Sighted
Voice over
There's a clear view in the distance…but life is a blur close to.
Until now, long-sighted people have to wear glasses or contact lenses to see the world in sharp focus.
Nicki Ware is looking forward to life without glasses.
She'll be one of the first people to receive new laser surgery to correct her long-sightedness, probably within the next few weeks.
Female speaker
I work on computers.
the light affects my eyes.
In daylight I can see better.
This would help.
Voice over
Here at the Chiltern Hospital in Buckinghamshire the laser centre has been perfecting a similar technique for short-sighted people for some time.
Male speaker
It's a day procedure.
It only takes a few minutes.
We use an anaesthetic…and use lasers to cut within one millionth of a metre.
It was used in industry.
Voice over
The aim of the laser is to re-shape the cornea which is responsible for bending light rays onto the eys's retina.
In short-sightedness, the focus point is in front of the retina.
Long-sighted people are unable to hit the right point in the eye too.
The treatment can correct the fault.
Jeanette Orton from Oxfordshire has already undergone surgery to correct a defect in her right eye.
An astigmatism has hampered her recovery…nevertheless today she's having more laser treatment to improve the sight in her left eye.
Female speaker
I'm very short sighted.
From the end of my nose, everything is out of focus.
I went to glasses and contact lenses and had all sorts of problems.
Voice over
After the check up, Jeanette is made ready for the treatment.
Anaesthetic is dropped into her eye and lid guards are used to keep her eyes wide open.
She sees everything in soft focus but feels nothing.
Female speaker
You get nervous.
Last time I didn't know what to expect.
This time I'm more worried.
Male speaker
You'll see colours across your eyes.
It'll get noisy when the laser starts.
Voice over
The laser beam is fired across the eye and alters the shape of the cornea.
The short-sightedness is corrected and within a week, the eye should be in good focus.
The treatment has good results but at a price.
Around a thousand pounds.
But it means a lifetime of problems have been cured in a few minutes.
The only visible sign of treatment is an eyepatch.
But when that's removed at the end of the week, Jeanette will literally have a whole new outlook on life.
The body of a missing woman has been found by a couple out walking their dog.
Marie Richards, who was fifty nine, disappeared a week ago.
She was a diabetic and hadn't taken any insulin with her.
Her body was found in a field at Cold Harbour Farm in Aylesbury.
Police say there are no suspicious circumstances.
A fourteen year old boy has been charged with wounding with intent after a boy of the same age was stabbed in the back.
The victim was confronted by a group of youths and stabbed four times as he walked home at Bletchley in Milton Keynes.
He's being treated for a punctured lung at the town's general hospital.
From today more Central South bulletins are being subtitled on Teletext for the deaf and hard-of-hearing.
In addition to our main programme at six twenty-five you can key page eight, eight, eight for captions at five to twelve, five past one and three fifteen.
We are hoping to be able to subtitle further bulletins shortly.
Conservationists have gone back to an ancient method of catching ducks, using a dog to lure the birds into a net.
The decoy system was once used to provide birds for the table.
Now it's helping to protect them, as Richard Barnett reports:
SLIMBRIDGE/Gloucestershire
RICHARD CHAPPELL/Decoy Man
LIZ LANCASHIRE/Wildfowl Trust
Voice over
For around 500 years, man and dog have pitted their wits against ducks to trap them in a decoy net.
The method is simple and it relies on the duck's instinct to try to chase away a threatening fox.
A dog looking like a fox walks along in front of a series of screens made from reeds.
The birds follow the dog and are lured down a wide tunnel made of netting called a pipe.
The ducks are then frightened into flying down the pipe which narrows at the end, enabling them to be caught.
The Berkeley New Decoy in the grounds of Slimbridge Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust was created in 1843.
It originally provided ducks to be eaten by the aristocracy at Berkeley Castle.
But now the decoy helps to preserve the duck population.
Female speaker
The birds are ringed so their migration routes can be traced.
Voice over
Just 2 mallard ducks; an adult male and female were caught in the decoy this time.
But decoy man, Richard Chappell wasn't disappointed.
Male speaker
The decoy can catch up to 1400 birds in a season.
It doesn't distress the birds too much, some are caught 5 times in a week.
Voice over
Hundreds of birds are trapped each winter in the Berkeley New Decoy and then ringed to monitor where they migrate to and how long they live.
For these birds, the brief indignity of being captured and ringed was soon over.
Then they were released to fly free.
A happier fate than ending up in the cooking pot at Berkeley Castle.
Now we're off to America and the desert of southern California for the first of a four part series featuring the RAF's parachute display team — the Falcons.
They left their base at RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire for their winter training camp across the Atlantic.
Nick Clark went with them.
Flt Sgt REX PRITCHARD Team Coach
Sqn Ldr MICKEY MILBURN Freefall Training
Flt Lt STEVE DARLING Falcon
Voice over
Think of jumping off a platform 3 miles up in the sky, dropping to earth at 120 mph and all the way down, performing the spectacular.
To the RAF Falcons it's meat and drink, but not without hard work.
Gruelling, intensive winter training is required and for that, they must travel.
Nearly 6,000 miles away from the fog and frost of Britain, the southern Californian desert just a few miles from the border of Mexico.
This whole area is actually below sea level.
It's winter, but it's warm; the conditions almost always ideal for freefall training.
Male speaker
The conditions here are ideal for training.
At home we'd be constantly waiting for windows in the weather.
Here, it's not a problem.
Male speaker
This is a very important part of our training programme.
Voice over
Each Falcon stays with the team for a 3-year tour.
Every 12 months, 3 or 4 new members join the team.
They're selected from the instructors at the Parachute Training School at RAF Brize Norton.
To all, being a Falcon is likely to be the pinnacle of their careers.
Male speaker
It's a tremendous honour being a Falcon.
Just wearing the Falcons' jumpsuit gives you confidence.
Voice over
Also here, are members of the military freefall training flight.
In a wartime situation, a special patrol could freefall into enemy terroritory at night undetected.
That skill is being taught here too and we'll be seeing more of it through the week.
We'll also focus on a very special display the Falcons put on while here in the States.
In front of a 65,000 crowd, they dropped into an American football game and they got some reception.
Male speaker
The parachutists from the UK — they're wonderful.
Voice over
And tomorrow night we'll see some of the more remarkable aerobatic feats our flying Falcs are capable of.
Allies bomb Iraqi missile defences
Allied planes, including RAF Tornados, have bombed Iraq again, this time attacking missile defences.
Iraq says twenty-one people were killed.
Protests in Iraq with more raids threatened
Anti-Western protests have been held in Iraq as the Allies threaten further bombings.
FTSE down 2
The hundred shares index closed down two points at twenty-seven, sixty-three point one.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-five at two marks, fifty-one 
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
An Oxford student has been sentenced to four months in a young offendors institute for supplying drugs.
Adam Partridge, who's nineteen and a first year Classics student at Christchurch College, supplied more than four thousand pounds worth of cannabis to his friends.
He's been suspended from the University until (1995) nineteen ninety five.
An artist's impression of a man who attacked a twelve year old girl has been released by police.
LITTLEMORE/Oxfordshire
The girl was assaulted on wasteground behind Peers School at Littlemore near Oxford last Tuesday.
Over the weekend she helped a police artist draw an impression of her attacker.
Anyone with information should contact Oxford CID.
A sudden increase in emergency patients has meant that some routine operations have had to be cancelled at the Princess Margaret hospital in Swindon.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
A spokesman said the workload is unusually high for the time of year.
Some patients have had to be transferred to the R-A-F hospital at Wroughton.
Three soldiers are in hospital with serious injuries after their car hit a motorway crashbarrier and flew over a hedge.
The accident happened on the M-Five near the Haresfield turnoff just south of Gloucester.
All the soldiers were from the Battlebury Barracks in Wiltshire.
A forth soldier in the car, who was not seriouly injured, managed to raise the alarm.
Now for the second in our series of reports on the RAF's parachute display team from Brize Norton in Oxfordshire.
The RAF Falcons have been training in the clear blue skies above the southern California desert.
Tonight Nick Clark follows the progress of some of the new members of the team.
Flt Sgt REX PRITCHARD/Team coach
Sqn ldr MIKE MILBURN/Freefall Training
Sgt JACK DILLEY/Third Year
Sgt PAUL FLOYD/Team Cameraman
Voice over
It's not even dawn yet, but breakfast is finished and it's time to get on the road.
Male speaker
Drop zone clear, weather conditions are good.
Voice over
For the Falcons the main aim of this free falling detachment is to blood the 4 new jumpers on the team, basically to make them good enough for the start of the display season in the Spring and there's no room for lack of concentration.
Male speaker
Yes, some people don't make the grade.
It is very tough.
Male speaker
They'll remember it as a tremendous part of their lives.
Male speaker
This is a dirt dive and this is how we'll do it in the sky.
No sir I didn't want you to move.
Why did you step back?
That's good.
Voice over
All the new Falcons get intensive sessions of instruction, there are briefs and de-briefs, their efforts in the skies are closely scrutinised and criticised.
Their teachers are their more experienced colleagues who've been through it all themselves.
Male speaker
It took me ages to get to grips, about 18 months in all.
But the new fellas will get there.
It's a brilliant sensation.
Male speaker
It's all a matter of confidence.
At the moment they're apprehensive, but they'll be alright.
Male speaker
You can liken it to sticking you hand out of a moiving car.
You're able to do all sorts of things in the sky.
Male speaker
You have a lot of air pressure against you and you can use that to manoeuvre in the sky.
Voice over
Most training jumps are done from a height of 12,000 feet; any higher and you need oxygen and you're in the realms of military freefall, which is just what we'll be looking at in part 3 of Free fall USA.
A carpet of snowdrops has made an early appearance in a Gloucestershire garden.
The flowers, traditionally the harbingers of Spring, have blossomed a month early, as Clare Lafferty reports.
PAINSWICK Gloucestershire
Voice over
The Rococo Gardens in Painswick are famous for their annual carpet of snowdrops.
They don't normally appear until mid February.
But a mild winter and plenty of rain means that this year the flowers have come into bloom a month early.
The snowdrops at Painswick have been a popular attraction for over a century.
The gates to the 18th century gardens will opened to the public this Saturday, a month earlier than usual.
8,000 visitors came last year.
And even more are expected throughout 1993.
Labour leader calls for a pause
FTSE down 25
The hundred shares index closed down twenty five point five at two seven three seven point six 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty four and down at two marks, forty nine.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
AD LIB 
A couple say they may move out of their house just two weeks after moving in because they've become the target of thieves.
Both their cars were stolen in the space of three days.
Ken Goodwin reports.
QUEDGELEY/Gloucestershire
KERRIE GILONIS
Insp WAYNE MURDOCH/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Kerrie Gilonis won't be driving her fiesta XR2 any more.
Thieves have seen to that.
The car was her and boyfriend Robert; s pride and joy.
But just a couple of days after they moved into their dream home in Quedgeley, it was stolen and torched.
Then, three days later, their other car, a mini, was also stolen.
It was found minus it's wheels, back windsreen and radio.
Kerrie says it's the last straw.
She says that she's gutted.
Kerry says neighbours have also suffered at the hands of thieves, but says that the police seem to be taking little interest.
He says that there IS a major anti crime operation going on in areas like Quedgeley, but what they really need is more officers.
Kerrie says she and her boyfriend had looked foreward to buying their home together.
Now they feel they're being driven out by thieves.
A couple whose bungalow has been put in the same council tax band as a mansion next-door are appealing against the decision.
An estate agent has valued their home at seventy thousand pounds.
But the local council has put it in the highest council tax band — for houses worth at least three hundred thousand pounds.
Gargy Patel reports 
SHIPLAKE/Oxfordshire
DAVID LLOYD/RACHEL LLOYD
BRIAN DOBEL/Landlord
CHRIS HUFFON-MARTIN/Estate Agent
Voice over
The 3-bedroomed bungalow is built of pre-cast concrete and is described as a modest family home.
David and Rachel Lloyd have lived there for fifteen years.
They thought it was worth around £100,000, until a valuation for council tax arrived putting in the highest band — band H — for properties worth more than £320,000.
The Lloyds believe the valuers must have looked at their address, Haileywood Farm and mistaken it for Haileywood House next door, a mansion owned by Ian Paice, the drummer with the rock group, Deep Purple.
Their landlord agrees.
A local estate agent carried out his own survey of the property and came up with a figure only about a fifth of the official valuation.
The local valuation office has declined to comment on the matter, although the Inland Revenue said mistakes were inevitable in such a huge valuation market.
The Lloyds plan to appeal.
More than fifty thousand pounds is being spent on a public inquiry to decide if a toll bridge can raise its charge by just FOUR PENCE.
Locals claim the increase is too much, but the bridge owners insist it's good value.
Only the inquiry can settle the row.
Gareth Furby reports.
PANGBOURNE/Berkshire
MIKE BECKLEY/Whitchurch Bridge Company
MICHAEL PEARSON/Shop Assistant
JOHN DARBY/Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
200 years ago, it cost tuppence to cross the Thames at Pangbourne.
Now the toll is 6 pence.
And the owners say allowing for inflation, that's not enough.
They want a rise to 10 pence a car.
But the locals aren't happy.
She says they already pay road tax.
They shouldn't have to pay a toll.
She says she uses the bridge often and its not on.
The row over the 4p increase has now led to a public inquiry.
It's costing a least £50,000.
And the bridge owners will have to foot the bill.
He says they're bound by the law and if someone objects, there has to be a public inquiry, even if it costs £50,000.
But for some local businesses an extra 4 pence is well worth fighting over.
This florist often delivers across the bridge.
The new toll could cost the shop an extra £5 a week.
He says there shouldn't be toll bridges in this day and age.
The bridge owners claim its falling down and they need to raise more than £1 million to build a replacement.
But council experts insist repairs will only cost half a million pounds and the toll should stay as it is.
He says the origninal plan was to raise it to 12p.
Just a few years ago, it was raised from 4p, so there's been quite a big increase already.
The decision won't be announced for 6 months.
And for the toll bridge owners it could prove an expensive gamble.
If they lose, it'll take about a year to recover the cost of the inquiry in 6 penny tolls.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
17 SEPTEMBER 1992/UPPER HEYFORD/Oxfordshire
NORMAN FRASER/Chairman/Ardley Parish Council
MARGARET MASON/Steeple Aston/Action Committee
MIKE GAINES/Flight International Magazine
Voice over
The American fighter crashed just short of the runway at Upper Heyford, killing both men on board.
Residents in nearby villages had watched as it plummeted to the ground, frighteningly near their homes.
But an Air Force investigation into the accident comes up with no clear cause for the crash.
No mechanical failure, no crew problem, no communications mistakes and draws no conclusions.
And he says if the plane had approached from Ardley, much closer to the runway, the consequences could have been disastrous.
In the village of Steeple Aston, people have long felt vulnerable.
23 years ago, a pilot narrowly missed crashing into the school.
Campaigners desperately wanted answers this time.
More information will be revealed in an internal safety report, being prepared for the air force, but that's not for publication.
Air experts say the F1-11, built in the 60's, is considered safe.
The full picture will not become public knowledge.
Villagers say that means no clear end in sight for their concerns.
A motorist and his family had a lucky escape after a brick was dropped on their car from an overhead bridge.
It smashed the car's sunroof showering the family with glass.
The police say someone could easily have been killed.
NEWPORT PAGNELL/Buckinghamshire
SIAN THORNTON/Grand-daughter
RAYMOND SHARROCK/SHEILA SHARROCK
Det Sgt MARK KEARNEY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The Sharrock family know they've had a lucky escape; any one or all of them could have been injured, or even killed, when someone threw a brick at their car from an overhead footbridge.
Raymond Sharrock was driving his wife, Sheila and their grand-daughter Sian, along Child's Way in Milton Keynes on their way to deliver birthday presents to their youngest daughter.
The car's sunroof was completely shattered.
Most of the glass landed on 7 year old Sian.
It happened so quickly, the Sharrocks barely had time to react.
Milton Keynes police say the consequences could have been fatal.
Sheila Sharrock saw a young boy running away from the bridge just after the brick was thrown.
Police are keen to hear from anyone who may have any information about the attack.
The heir to one of Gloucestershire's largest estates could be sent to prison after admitting a drink-driving offence.
Lord Apsley was nearly four times over the legal limit when he arrived for a function at an army barracks.
Robin Powell reports.
CIRENCESTER/Gloucestershire
APRIL 1989
SOUTH CERNEY/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Lord Apsley appeared before Cirencester Magistrates today and pleaded guilty to driving with excess alcohol.
The 31 year old peer lives in a mansion on the Cirencester Park Estate, to which he's heir.
Prince Charles regularly plays polo there.
His father, Earl Bathurst, was banned from driving after a drink-drive conviction 4 years ago.
The court was told that Lord Apsley was arrested by Ministry of Defence Police when he arrived in his Land Rover for a function at the Duke of Gloucester Barrcks at South Cerney on November the 30th last year.
Elizabeth Thomas, prosecuting, said Lord Apsley was nearly four times over the legal limit when he was later breathalysed at Cirencester Police Station.
Chairman of the Bench Kenneth Minshull said the offence was on the serious side of the drink-drive scale.
He's asked for pre-sentence reports and the case was adjourned until February 9th.
Lord Apsley was granted bail until his next appearance.
He now faces at least a heavy fine; perhaps even a jail sentence.
British airmen have been describing their experiences during forty days of relief missions to Somalia.
In that time they carried two and a half thousand tonnes of food and medical supplies saving countless lives.
Simon Garrett reports 
Flt Lt JOHN JONES/Pilot
Sqn Ldr SEAN CULLIGAN/Air Movements
Sqn Ldr PAUL COLLINS-HOWGILL/Medical Officer
Voice over
Even before American marines made their much trumpeted arrival in Somalia, crews from RAF Lyneham were securing inland airfields.
Aware of the constant potential threat from gangs of gunmen, their mission was to bring the food into the country and make sure it got through to the people most deserving of it.
Male speaker
First of all you're keeping them alive, then you see them getting steadily better and you know it's getting through to them.
Male speaker
Some of them who can speak English come up to you and give you a hug and say, Thank-you, you give us life.
Voice over
The greatest fear the airmen have is of what could happen to the people of Somalia after the international forces leave.
Also at RAF Lyneham today, the body of the first British soldier to be killed in Bosnia arrived back in Britain.
Lance Corporal Wayne Edwards was flown home on one of the Hercules transport planes which have been making regular relief flights into Sarajevo.
Death on the line.Hunters and saboteurs blame each other after hound is killed by a train.
Birch them:Wheelchair pensioner says no mercy for his attackers.
And, special delivery: The postman's bride…two and a half years late.
Good evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
RALPH BAUGHAN/Robbery Victim
BRUCE HENDERSON/Age Concern
Voice over
Battered, bruised and broken, Ralph Baughan is now back at home recovering from the vicious attack which saw him tipped from his wheelchair and repeatedly smashed with a wooden bar; all for £10.
The 64 year old is still groggy from the ordeal.
Male speaker
I told the robbers if they wanted my money, they should go upstairs.
They threatened to kill me if I didn't tell them.
Voice over
Mr Baughan has been confined to a wheelchair for 16 years.
He was awake in the early hours of the morning listening to the Test Match Commentary at his home in Summertown, Oxford.
He was disturbed when his 2 attackers crashed in through a back door.
He tried to get away in his wheelchair, but they caught him in the hallway.
Male speaker
I was screaming.
Voice over
After beating him, they ransacked the house, but could only find £10's worth of coins.
It's the third time in 2 years his house has been raided and the second in the space of a week.
This time the attackers were young and wearing crash helmets with visors.
Mr Baughan is an example of an elderly and disabled man at his most vulnerable, but Age Concern believes they are not a group most at risk in Society.
Male speaker
Most burglars prefer to go to an empty house and elderly people tend to be at home all day.
In fact elderly people are less likely to be attacked.
Voice over
Mr Baughan is in no doubt about what he would do to the attackers.
Male speaker
I would birch them like they do on the Isle of Man, and not give them time off for good behaviour.
Voice over
For the time being, he's nailed up the back door, just in case anyone feels like trying again.
A journalist who hid in a jail for fifteen hours to expose its lack of security has been accused of setting up a media stunt.
The reporter, from the Sun newspaper, spent a night inside posing as an inmate.
But the Home Office and prison reformers say his actions were mischievous and disruptive.
Clare Lafferty reports.
MIKE SULLIVAN/The Sun
LEYHILL/Gloucestershire
Sir JOHN COPE MP/Con Northavon
Sir CHARLES IRVING MP/Con Cheltenham
Voice over
It made the headlines in today's newspaper.
The story of how journalist Mike Sullivan broke into Leyhill Open Prison in Gloucestershire dressed as a prisoner, stayed there the night, and then escaped again fifteen hours later.
And all apparently with the greatest of ease.
Male speaker
I simply climbed over the eight foot fence, strolled over to the main accomodation block and mingled with all the other prisoners there.
Voice over
Open prisons like Leyhill house offenders who are coming to the end of their sentences.
They prepare prisoners for life back in the community by allowing them to work outside and occasionally take home leave.
The prison has to be convinced that none of its inmates are a danger to the public, but last week Trevor Hanson, a convicted rapist there allegedly attacked a woman while on home leave from Leyhill.
Mr Sullivan says it was this incident that prompted him to stage the break in.
Male speaker
We felt it was in the public interest to test security there.
My view is that the community could be put at risk by some of these prisoners.
Voice over
But Mr Sullivans actions have been condemned.
The local MP called it a press stunt.
Male speaker
It belittles the good work done by the prison in rehabilitating offenders.
Voice over
Supporters of NACRO, the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of offenders says his actions proved nothing.
Male speaker
That's what open prisons are all about.
People can go in and out very easily.
Voice over
No one at Leyhill Open Prison would comment on the break in.
The Home Office described it as’ a piece of mischief’, but said there would be an investigation into how it happened.
A registered child minder who twice slapped the face of a baby in her care has admitted causing the child actual bodily harm.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
The man hoping to become Britain's first black Tory MP faces more opposition tonight from his own side.
An independent Conservative candidate may stand against John Taylor at the General Election, and some local Conservatives say they will support him.
Tim Hurst reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
BOB MYATT/Association member
MONICA DRINKWATER/Association chairman
Voice over
When John Taylor was selected as Cheltenham's Tory candidate just over a year ago, the local Conservative party had to fight hard to heal divisions within its own association, about his appointment.
Just as they appeared to be succeeding, former Mayor Dudley Aldridge has hinted he might stand as an indepedent Tory against Mr Taylor.
Now another association member, who voted against Mr Taylor's appointment, has re-opened the row about the choice of candidate.
The chairman of Cheltenham Conservatives discounts any fears of an independent candidate splitting the Tory vote.
Tonight, Mr Taylor said holding Cheltenham for the Conservatives was much more important than what some people thought of him.
He called for the backing of his critics.
Junior doctors across the region are to ballot on industrial action in protest at working up to a hundred hours a week.
They're furious that a promised reduction in hours hasn't happened, although health chiefs say they're doing all they can.
Kim Barnes reports.
GLOUCESTER
Dr EVAN HARRIS/Oxford Region Junior Doctors
Dr ALEX GATHERER/Oxfordshire Health Authority
Voice over
Junior doctors are tired…tired of working up to one hundred hours a week, and tired of complaining about it.
Now they're stepping up their call for action.
This Oxfordshire junior doctors representative says many are working ninety hours a week or more.
A government deal to bring hours down to 83 hours a week was agreed last June…but nothing's happened yet.
Now doctors plan a ballot in March on 24 hour industrial action at selected hospitals.
Here in the region, the Oxford district health uthority has set up a working party on doctors hours…they're concerned about the effects on doctors and patients.
But the exhausted doctors say it's not enough…and they want the government to honour its promise…
Health minister Virginia Bottomley today called the threat of action disappointing.
Doctos are encouraged by a a government offer today increasing their overtime rate from one third of normal pay to a half…but they say the battle to cut their hours must go on.
Police are investigating the death of a foxhound on a railway line after a clash between a hunt, and a group of hunt saboteurs.Both sides blame each other for the animal's death.The dog was killed by an intercity train on a mainline track.
The hunt saboteurs say they were threatened after the incident.
British Transport Police say both the saboteurs and the huntsmen could face prosecution for trespass.
Mark Kiff reports.
SHRIVENHAM/Oxfordshire
Rev BERT JONES/Hunt Saboteur
LIBRARY PICTURES
MILES COOPER/Hunt Saboteur
EDWARD LEIGH-PEMBERTON/Old Berkshire Hunt
Voice over
This photograph, taken by a hunt sabotuer, shows two huntsmen from the Old Berkshire Hunt, trying to clear the intercity line near Shrivenham after their hounds had strayed onto the track.
Saboteurs say two hounds were killed in the incident on Saturday, the hunt maintains only one of its animals died.
The hounds strayed onto the line from adjacent farmland.
The track carries intercity trains from London to Wales and the West Country and it was a high speed 125 which killed the dog.
The Reverend Bert Jones, a minister in the United Reformed CHurch, and Miles Cooper were among a dozen hunt saboteurs who witnessed the scene and were invoved in a skirmish afterwards.
Male speaker
The
Voice over
The Old Berkshire Hunt, based at nearby Faringdon, has been hunting in the area since 1830.
Saboteurs from Oxford had been following them on Saturday for around five hours before the incident.
In a statement tonight, the Hunt said the hounds were not hunting at the time of incident and were not out of control.
They allege the hound's death was a direct result of the hunt saboteurs calling the hounds onto the line by using hunting horns and hollering.
These claims are denied by the saboteurs.
Male speaker
These allegations are untrue.
Voice over
British Transport Police say they've launched an investigation.
They said it's illegal for anyone to go onto a British Rail line without permission.
The huntsmen could be charged with trespass.
A postal worker has won a two-and-a-half-year battle to bring his Filipino bride to England.
The Home Office had suspected that it was a marriage of convenience, to get the woman in.
Now the couple want the law changed so that others don't suffer the same ordeal.
Robin Powell reports.
GATWICK AIRPORT
KEITH CAPON/Husband
MATTHEW CAPON/Son
NORTHAMPTON
MAE CAPON/Wife
GERALD KAUFMAN MP/Shadow Foreign Secretary
Voice over
It was the day Keith Capon had waited 2 and a half years for.
But he'd have to wait at least another 2 and a half hours — that's how long Mae Luz's flight from Manila was delayed.
Keith's 11-year-old son from his first marriage couldn't wait either.
The romance blossomed when Keith and Mae were pen friends.
Keith proposed and they married in the Philippines.
Mae was refused a visa and what looked like a short hiccup developed into a long-drawn-out campaign.
The Home Office doesn't comment on individual cases, but it's thought Whitehall was concerned that the Capons' marriage was one of convenience, which would break up, allowing Mae to stay here.
As time ticked by at Gatwick, Keith feared there were last minute problems in Immigration, but eventually Mae passed through customs.
At last the Capons' long wait was over.
For Mae it was almost all too much and only this morning — a day into her new life in Northampton — was she ready to express her feelings.
But Keith's happiness was tinged with anger.
The Shadow Foreign Secretary, whose intervention prompted the Home Office to let Mae in, says the law needs changing.
Meanwhile Keith and Mae are settling down to married life, making up for lost time.
In part two:Buy-out…the Maxwell share of Oxford United is about to be sold.
Knock-out: The last minute goal that kept United from defeat.
And, shake it all about: Meet Madge, the oldest rocker in town.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
What's being bid for Oxford United and more important who's doing the bidding no-one except the Manor Ground management knows…no statement…no facts…no figures will be released until a deal is done…contracts are signed and the money is in the bank…
What we do know is that two or three groups are involved and the sale could well turn into an auction…there's local and national interest and at least one very well known figure is in the market to buy…speculation has named Virgin boss Richard Branson again…but his office said this afternoon he wasn't in the running…
Balancing the books is going to be tricky…going on recent balance sheets around three million pounds will be needed up front to pay off debts and buy the Maxwell family shares…and then presumably more money will have to be invested to beat off losses of fifteen thousand pounds a week…the club's managing director Pat McGeough is hoping to do a deal within the next few days…its not simple…its not clear cut…but for the first time win weeks United are confident about the future
Whoever takes control of Oxford has got a job on to keep them in the second division…they're six points adrift at the bottom…but on Saturday United faired best of the three Central South sides…they drew while Swindon and Hereford both lost 
Voice over
thank heavens for Gloucester rugby club…they won at the weekend…well it was more a walkover as they ran in forty two points against Newport.
Voice over
And finally, a pensioner with a passion for rock music is trying to retire but can't find a budding impressario to take her place.
Madge Main bought an old building near her home to give a local band somewhere to practise.
Now she's selling, but nobody wants to carry on with the music.Debbie Kelly reports.
EWELME Oxfordshire
MADGE MAIN Pensioner
RUSSELL DIXON The Presumed
Voice over
3 months from her 80th birthday, Madge Main says the rocking has to stop.
For 8 years she's hired out the old gym near her home to local bands.
Now she wants to sell it, but the buyer must allow them to play on and as yet nobody's been prepared to.
Female speaker
Bands don't want to give up do they?
They've got nowhere to practise.
Voice over
Does she come to watch?
Female speaker
Yes I have been here until 1.00 a.m. or 2.00 a.m. in the morning when they have the gigs.
Voice over
To the bands Madge is a saviour; rehearsal rooms normally costs £8 pounds an hour.
Madge charges £2 provided she can be in the audience.
Male speaker
If this wasn't here we would have to practise for £7 an hour, so we would not have much money at the end of the week.
We would have to practise in a garage or something.
Voice over
Not everyone is a Madge fan.
5 years ago she was fined for a breach of planning laws after years of complaints about noise.
One room has since been sound-proofed, but a recent letter from South Oxfordshire District Council warns that not everyone is happy its working.
Madge has her own answer to the complaints.
Female speaker
The grown ups don't want to know, it surprises me.
I am really sad that nobody wants to do it like I have done it for them.
When I was a girl grown ups couldn't do enough for you.
Male speaker
If more grown ups were prepared to do it, it would be’ sorted’.
She is good.
Male speaker
She's a little cracker, she's great.
Voice over
Madge hopes to find a buyer before she reaches her 80's.
If she does, you never know, you could still find her at the old gym, this time in the Band.
Brooke offers resignation but stays on
Ulster Secretary, Peter Brooke is continue in his job.
He had offered to resign after singing on a TV chat show just after seven men had been killed by the IRA.
Major warns IRA killers will be hunted down
In Belfast the Prime Minister has warned that the bombers will be’ hunted for the rest of their days’.
700 police officers attacked over Christmas
Seven hundred police officers were attacked over Christmas.
The Police Federation wants to replace traditional truncheons with American-style batons.
FTSE up 8
The hundred shares index closed up eight point two at twenty-five, forty-four point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty and at two marks, eighty-six 
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
New President promises spirit of innovation
Bill Clinton has been sworn-in as President of the United States pledging a new spirit of innovation.
Bosnian Serbs back Geneva Peace Plan
Bosnian Serbs have backed the Geneva peace plan.
Man arrested over schoolgirl murder
A man has been arrested in connection with the murder of the schoolgirl from Kent, Claire Tiltman.
FTSE up 11
The hundred shares index closed up eleven point one at twenty-seven, forty-eight point seven.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-four and down at two marks, forty-eight 
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Now to the third part of our series following the RAF parachute team the Falcons.
Their winter training takes place in the skies above the desert of Southern California.
And as well as preparing them to take part in displays, there's an important military purpose, as Nick Clark reports.
Sqn Ldr MIKE MILBURN/Freefall Training Squadron
Voice over
If you jump high enough from an aircraft, you can actually travel miles over the ground as you fall; a good way for a special patrol to infiltrate enemy territory, especially if it's night-time.
But to be capable of jumping in formation in the dark with full equipment and a bundle of supplies and then landing together in the right place takes some doing.
Everyone here has various levels of experience.
The aim, even for the Falcons, is to become a qualified military freefall instructor.
For that, you must do night jumps at altitudes so high oxygen is required.
Once qualified, these RAF instructors teach the army's special forces how it's done.
Male speaker
Yes we do teach elements of the special forces.
They have to learn these techniques and xwe're the best in the world at doing it.
Voice over
It's easy to see how unstable the trainees will feel in the skies with full kit on, so on their first jumps, the instructors are with them all the way.
Once adept at jumping with kit, the next step is with oxygen, with the aim to exit an aircraft at 25,000 ft at night.
So that's the way men fly like birds at night for military advantage.
Tomorrow night we're back with the display team, this time in the city of San Diego where huge and hungry crowds built up for a game of American football.
Guess who provided the pre-match entertainment??
In just over an hour's time up to twenty million people are expected to be watching one television programme — the final episode of Inspector Morse.
After five successful years, the two stars John Thaw and Kevin Whately have decided to move on to new things.
Last night, the show received a gala screening in London, to honour all those who played a part in creating a television classic.
JOHN THAW CBE/Inspector Morse
ROBERT HARDY/Actor
INSPECTOR MORSE/Zenith for Central
BARRINGTON PHEOLUNG/Composer
COLIN DEXTER/Author
The dreaming spires, Morse's beat where you could be forgiven for thinking there are more murders per square foot than any other city in Britain.
But for once, the gentleman sleuth left home for the bright lights.
The West End on a night the world of showbusiness was toasting the success of the Chief Inspector who has a following of millions.
The stars, writers, musicians and leading lights of Oxford gathered at the headquarters of the British Academy of Film and Television.
John Thaw says he could never have guessed when he started that the show would become so popular.
He pays tribute ot the film crews.
Many stars have jumped at the chance to appear in Morse which is transmitted worldwide.
Robert Hardy says he re-arranged his schedule to make sure he could appear in the final episode of Inspector Morse.
Tonight's episode involves a cocktail of classical singing and murder.
If you listen very carefully to the background music, you might hear a clue to who has committed the crime, that's if you know Morse code.
Composer, Barrington Pheolung, says the show has been a major part of his life.
Indeed, many will miss the show, but one puzzle will live on.
Although we know his nickname at college was Pagan, it's still unlikely that we'll find out just what Morse's real first name is tonight.
John Thaw says he knows, but is sworn to secrecy.
Colin Dexter says he will reveal the name in his final book.
Although the series is at an end, the spirit of Morse will live.
The file is not quite yet closed, there could be a one-off episode sometime in the future.
This afternoon Bill Clinton was inaugurated as the forty-second president of the United States.
It's hoped he'll soon revisit old friends in Oxford whom he met in University days.
If he does, he may just come face to face with himself.
Simon Garrett reports 
MIDDLETON CHENEY/Northamptonshire
KEITH FULLER/Bill Clinton Lookalike
JULIE FULLER/Keith's Wife
Voice over
The Fuller family's neighbours felt they couldn't let such an auspicious occasion pass without applying a little bunting to the brickwork.
Keith Fuller has just been picked by the News of the World from 1,000 entries as THE British answer to the new President.
His prize is 16 days in America, but he's not certain about the likeness.
Male speaker
I didn't at first but since people have said I've looked at some pictures and seen some sort of resemblence…
I suppose I must look like him mustn't I
Voice over
Keith's mum thinks he's more like darts player Eric Bristow.
But Julie — that's no first lady, that's Keith's wife — reckons he's pretty convincing.
Female speaker
I do, I do, the eyes especially.
They're always half-closed, and the bags underneath
Voice over
The acid test is if people recognise Keith in the President's old haunts.
His old digs, or University College.
Could he stand in for Clinton?
Who does he remind you of?
Female speaker
Absolutely Nobody
Voice over
What if I was to say inauguration
Male speaker
Sorry?
Female speaker
No, noone at all 
Voice over
Can you think of an American president he looks like?
Male speaker
Rosevelt…not Clinton.
How many were in this competiton?
Female speaker
I suppose vaguely like Bill Clinton
Male speaker
The president of the United States
Voice over
Either way if there's an odd occasion where Mr Clinton wants a stand in…
Keith's the president's man
Clergymen and laity who are opposed to the ordination of women are discussing their future in the Church of England.
Among the most controversial options being considered is whether to form a union with the Roman Catholic Church.
Clare Lafferty reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
11 NOVEMBER 1992
Rev JOHN HEIDT
Rev VIVIENNE FAULL
Voice over
Around 30 members of the clergy and laity gathered for the meeting in Cheltenham.
Their common goal, to establish ways and means of worshipping in a church that last November, voted to allow women to be ordained as priests.
Among those at the conference, the Reverend John Heidt.
He's always been opposed to women in the church.
He hopes the meeting will help him and like-minded clergy who've found themselves in a religious dilemma.
The most controversial option being considered is a possible union between the Church of England and Roman Catholics.
Representatives at the conference said they couldn't give any details.
But clergywomen say there would be little value in that.
The Archbishop of Canterbury has expressed concern at the refusal of some clergy to accept the vote of the Synod.
But the rebels are unrepentant.
The conference will go on for 3 days.
The outcome could be as important as the Synod vote itself.
The first of more than a hundred special advice centres for carers has been opened by the Princess Royal.
It will offer help and advice to hundreds of people who care for relatives in their own homes.
The centres, which will eventually be opened throughout the country, were the idea of the Princess herself.
Graeme Bowd reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
ANITA DANCE/Carer
PETER BURROWS/Carer
JUDITH MARSH/Centre Manager
Voice over
Anita Dance has a husband who suffers from heart disease.
He can't walk and needs her constant attention.
The couple fought a long battle to get welfare benefits but they were unsucessful until Anita went to the new carers' centre in Banbury.
The centre's been set up specially to help people like Anita.
When staff took up her cases she got the money to which she was entitled.
Female speaker
We had to fight for twelve months.
The centre took up the case and now we have got the cheque.
Voice over
The Dances are typical of families where one person gives up his or her life to look after another.
But while the handicapped get the support they need the carers are ofrten forgotten and it was this which insprired the Princess Royal to set up a special trust.
Today she was in Baunbury to open the first of many carers' centres.
Some of the carers she met were themselves disabled.
The Princess said she thought their needs were often overlooked.
Female speaker
Special needs groups concentrate on the disabled.
It is also important to care for the carers themselves.
Voice over
Workers from the centre have already helped more than 50 people.
One of them was Peter Burrows whose wife has a degenerative illness.
He considered giving up his job to look after her.
The centre helped him to get professional help.
Male speaker
It is difficult to make things happen.
The centre gave me all the information I needed to get help.
Voice over
Many people don't even see themselves as carers.
Female speaker
If people realise there is help available we can do a lot for them.
Voice over
The Princess Royal Trust would like as carers' centre in each major town.
The Princess said this one would be as model for the others.
An MP has criticised the shopping centre in what he says is’ one of southern England's most beautiful market towns’.
The MP says the sixties built precinct is outdated and in urgent need of refurbishment.
Harriet Ryley reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JOHN PATTEN MP/Con Oxford West and Abingdon
DAVID HEAVENS/Vale of White Horse Council
Voice over
There is some civic pride in the buildings in the centre of Abingdon — the old county hall — now a museum — was designed with the help of Christopher Wren.
Townspeople are not so keen on the precinct; a row of concrete shops off an open walkway built in 1969.
She says it's old-fashioned, there's not enough room for mothers with push-chairs.
He says the precinct should have been covered over years ago.
She says it should be bigger with more shops.
She says it's going down the drain.
But the town's MP, John Patten says 23 years later, it's time it was updated.
He says although it's the most modern building off the market square, it's out of date as a modern shopping centre.
It's not roofed in, it's cold, it's wet, it's windy and compares badly with nearby shopping centres.
It needs improving.
Mr Patten has written to the precinct's leaseholder, Eagle Star, asking for it to be refurbished.
Eagle Star blame the Vale of White Horse Council which owns the right of way through the precinct.
The company wants the council to brighten up this walkway before it begins work on the shops.
The two have been talking about the refurbishment since 1984.
He says we are still talking — we have a meeting in February to try and agree on a final solution.
Shoppers in Abingdon must be hoping an agreement is reached some time before the next century.
In part two…
Into the night…
Freefalling in pitch darkness.
Morse meets his Maker…
The final reunion between author and actor
And meet the President…the Banbury lookalike prepares for office.
Why did they wait?…
Social Services are criticised for failing to report child abuse.
Dicing with drugs…
Police condemn rave board game
And who could do this?…
Savaged horse may have to be destroyed.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
IAN WHITE/Director/Oxon Social Services
Voice over
The girl is now 17 and is being treated for psychological problems at a mental hospital in Oxford.
Oxford Crown Court heard today that she'd been subjected to repeated indecent assaults by her mother's ex-boyfriend at their home in the Wantage area between 1985 and 1987.
They began when she was eleven.
She was extremely upset at what had happened.
She was told not to look at other boys because they'd think she was fat and ugly.
As a result the girl had become introverted.
She'd mutilated herself with razor blades.
She'd swallowed bleach.
And taken a paracetamol overdose.
Oxfordshire Social Services at Wantage were informed about the assaults in May 1990, after the girl broke down and told her mother.
But the Thames Valley Police weren't brought in until June 1992.
At Oxford Crown Court today Judge Harold Wilson said:’ What troubles me is that there is no reason why police shouldn't have become involved in this in 1990.
The accused's local social services people were informed in 1990 and he was completely frank with them, but they did not see fit to inform the police.
Why did social services let this lie until 1992?’
Today, the department said they couldn't answer that until they review the case.
Male speaker
The standard procedure is that if there are allegations of sexual abuse, the police and this department swing into action together.
That's what should have happened.
The review will show exactly what went wrong.
Voice over
Thames Valley Police are known to be furious about the case.
They said:’ As soon as we were informed of the complaint, we investigated the matter.
It was obvious that such matters should be brought to our attention as soon as possible.’
The man, who can't be identified, admitted three specimen charges of indecent assault.
The case was adjourned until January 28th after the Judge called for a full explanation of the social services delay.
A new board game featuring the so-called rave culture has been condemned for promoting drug abuse.
The game, called Rave, involves buying counters called 'E's — a name often given to the drug ecstasy.
The police say it shouldn't be on sale.
Robin Powell reports.
Sgt NEIL GAVIN/Gloucestershire Police
MIKE HARDY/Gloucestershire Probation Service
GLOUCESTER
Voice over
It may at first look like harmless fun.
But this trendy new board game is littered with connotations of drug use.
The police say it trivialises the rave drugs scene and shouldn't be on sale.
The idea of the game is to collect counters known as E's, another name for the designer drug Ecstasy.
A leaflet, known as a Flyer, tells you where the raves are — the aim is to get there, while avoiding the police.
At the rave, you sell the Es for points.
The winner's the player who amasses enough points to create what the rulebook calls a trance-like state.
But for some people who've dabbled in the real thing the effects have been fatal.
One of the shops that's been selling Rave is the O-H-M clothing store in Gloucester.
The manager declined to be interviewed though he did say he's no longer selling the game.
The game's designers and distributors — RAVCO — deny the charge that they're being irresponsible.
Meanwhile police advice is not to buy the game.
People who play it could be dicing with danger.
A horse may have to be destroyed following a vicious attack, the second in the same area within a month.
Now police are warning farmers and horse owners to step up security until the attacker is found.
Kim Barnes reports.
LACEY GREEN/Near Princes Risborough/Buckinghamshire
CHRISTIAN DAVIS/Horse Owner
4 JANUARY
PC BRIAN PRICE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Little Jay was found in agony by a stable hand.
She had a deep gash to her leg, probably inflicted with an axe and severe internal injuries, though these weren't noticed until the next day.
The sexual nature of the attack has led police to draw a clear link with another on a brood mare earlier this month.
This one was mutiliated on neighbouring property just 200 yards away.
Add to this a spate of attacks in Hampshire and police are very concerned.
And they're urging farmers and horse owners to step up security.
Christian Davis has already done that.
But he believes the attacker's someone who knows horses.
Police say the attacker's probaby disturbed and travelling, rather than a local person.
The future's not certain for Little Jay, but to prevent other animals going through the same agony police say owners must be extra-vigilant.
And finally, an animal sanctuary threatened with closure because of a cash shortage has been saved thanks to Central South viewers.
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
The Vale Wildlife Rescue Centre in Evesham was struggling to make ends meet because the recession caused donations to dry up.
Dozens of injured animals being cared for faced being put down.
But since a report on our programme two weeks ago, more than nine thousand pounds has been donated to the centre, securing its survival.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A doctor's receptionist has met the Norwegian woman whose life she saved when she donated bone marrow two years ago.
It wasn't a private occasion — the meeting was screened live on prime-time television.
Robin Powell reports.
NORWEGIAN TV PICTURES
JANET POPE/Bone Marrow Donor
VAL CLARKE/Anthony Nolan Trust
Voice over
This is 25 year old Mona Hortun from Norway.
She doesn't know it yet, but she's about to meet the Buckinghamshire woman who saved her life.
2 years ago Mona was dying of leukaemia.
An international search for a bone marrow donor led to Janet Pope, a doctor's receptionist from Princes Risborough.
Janet's marrow sample was flown to Oslo and given to Mona in a blood transfusion.
She's since made a complete recovery and Mona's consultant says she ows everything to Janet.
To mark the country's first successful bone marrow transplant involving an un-related donor, Norwegian television arranged for her to meet Janet for the first time in front of an estimated two-and-a-half million viewers.
Janet's Norwegian isn't what it could be and she hadn't understood the producer's instruction that for an English translation she needed an ear-piece.
But for Janet, who'd only exchanged latters with Mona before, it was an unforgettable experience.
Janet shared the stage with the pop group Slade, but next day it was her who made all the headlines.
Now the Anthony Nolan Trust, which made the transplant possible, hopes the success will encourage other potential donors to come forward.
So where does Janet and Mona's relationship go from here?
Friends for life, they're now looking forward to a cruising holiday together in the Fiords — all expenses paid by Norwegian TV.
A battle for power in the English shires has reached Westminster, where one MP has argued that his city at least should be allowed to govern itself without interference.
It was the opening shot in a fight that's going to run and run.
Tim Hurst reports.
FEBRUARY 1989
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con
MICHAEL HONEY/Chief Executive/ Glos County Council
Voice over
Beverley Lewis, a disabled woman who died in her mother's home in Gloucester three years ago might have had a better chance if the city and not the county controlled it's own social services.
That was one of the arguments put forward by the city's MP when he called for self government for Gloucester under the coming council shake-up.
Mr French also cited Gloucester's new courthouse, held up by a planning row between the city and county councils.
Gloucestershire county council is preparing it's own case for control, which will be submitted this summer.
A dog training scheme to help the deaf has been so successful that the organisers are having to open a second training centre.
Hearing dogs for the deaf have become increasingly popular over the past ten years — now the staff who train them say they can't cope with the demand.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
BEACONSFIELD Buckinghamshire
JULIE BROWN Hearing Dog Owner
CLAIRE GUEST Training Manager
Voice over
Floyd looks pretty laid back on his cushion, but don't be fooled.
He's watching and listening to everything around him.
That's why he's been picked because his mistress is totally deaf, and partially sighted.
The dog reacts to a ringing telephone and tells his mistress.
Female speaker
he's my best friend as well.
Voice over
Floyd was picked because of his unflappable nature.
Julie Brown is a social worker in a spastics home with lots of wheelchairs around.
Julie is just one example of the success of the Lewknor based Hearing Dogs For The Deaf.
She lives quite close to the centre, but others live much further away.
That's why they need to establish a new centre in the north.
They have trained hundreds of dogs at their Oxfordshire centre over the last 5 years.
They've come so far, they were giving daily displays at Crufts recently: they spend 16 weeks learning to recognise an alarm clock.
A cooker timer…
A smoke alarm…
And all the other noises hearing people take for granted.
Female speaker
The dogs have to be very bright and able to recognise all the sounds.
Voice over
Funds for the new centre in the north are raised entirely from charity and they're halfway towards their target of £500,000.
Female speaker
We're reaching our limit here and we need to expand.
We also need a base further north to make it easier for people in that region to get to us.
Voice over
There's a waiting list of a year for the dogs.
So the sooner they can double their capacity the better.
87 die in Airbus crash
Crash investigators have been sifting the wreckage of the French Airbus in which eighty-seven people died.
British Coal axes 1
British Coal is to axe up to eleven hundred jobs in four pits in Yorkshire.
Europe condemns quality of British water
A legal official in the European Community has condemned the level of nitrates in British drinking water.
Georgian ceasefire agreed
In Georgia, supporters loyal to the ousted President Gamsakhurdia and government troops have agreed to a ceasefire.
More GPs to manage own budgets
The Health Secretary has announced that more GPs are to be given leave to manage their own budgets.
FTSE down 1
The hundred shares index closed down one point five at twenty-five, forty-three point four.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty, and at two marks, eighty-six.
One man has died and another was seriously hurt when their lorry crashed on the M-forty in Oxfordshire in icy conditions.
FIRE SERVICE VIDEO
The driver, who was in his forties, died at scene of the accident near Banbury.
His forty seven year old passenger was taken to hospital.
13 JANUARY 1992
It's the second accident on the new stretch of the M-forty in just over a week.
Last Monday, one man died in a ten car pile up.
Headteachers have been lobbying against education cuts which they say will mean larger classes and fewer teachers.
In a unique demonstration they left their schools to sit in on a county council meeting discussing the cuts.Tim Hurst reports.
DAVID ABBOTT/Glos Assoc of Heads
RICHARD IZETT/Resources Chairman
Voice over
Teachers could lose their jobs and classes expand in Gloucestershire secondary schools if the County Council cuts education spending to avoid being poll taxed capped.
That's the argument of headmasters in the county who staged a unique demonstration by forsaking their classrooms and filing into a meeting of the county's spending chiefs.
The council must save £12m to avoid Government capping.
Some spending chiefs see cuts desirable, especially in school maintenance budgets.
The headteachers will have to wait until next month's meeting of the full council for an answer.
Spending chiefs decided to delay their decision until then, although they did discuss more council spending as well as less.
Disabled rail travellers are being forced to make an eighty mile detour to get to their nearest city thirteen miles away.
It's all because they can't cross from one platform to another…and British Rail says it can't afford to help them.
Richard Barnett reports:
LEOMINSTER/Herefordshire
CAROL PRICE/Rail User
SHREWSBURY/Shropshire
DAVE CURNOCK/Access Group
HEREFORD
Voice over
If you're able bodied, the thirteen mile rail journey from Leominster to Hereford is simple.You just cross the footbridge from Platform One to Platform Two to catch the train, which gets to Hereford in ten minutes.
Wheelchair travellers used to cross the track on boards laid down for mail trolleys.But now the disabled are being forced to make an eighty mile detour via Shrewsbury to get to Hereford because British Rail have taken up the boards for safety reasons.We joined the Leominster Disabled Access group on a trip to Hereford.
At 10:16 we boarded the Sprinter on platform one.Then we set off for Shrewsbury:
Female speaker
It makes you feel like a second class citizen to be disabled.
Voice over
It's now 1057, and the group has arrived in Shrewsbury.They have to struggle to get the wheelchairs off the train…and then cross the platform ready to catch the service to Hereford.At ten past eleven, we board the Hereford train.At 11:50 we arrive back in Leominster:
Male speaker
They'll be writing to the transport Minister.And if they get no joy they'll demonstrate outside the Commons.
Voice over
At last the final leg of the journey…and the train reaches Hereford at six minutes past twelve:
Female speaker
She's two exhausted after the long journey to go shopping.She just wants to go home.
Voice over
British Rail says it's sympathetic to the disabled.
But it can't afford to build a new footbridge with ramps at Leominster.
The disabled group have been told it could be ten years before a bridge with ramps is installed at Leominster.
So for wheelchair users it's definitely slower by rail.
While British Rail says it can't afford to help disabled travellers at Leominster, it has come up with the cash to improve a commuter line that's been plagued with delays and breakdowns.
BR are hoping the eighty million pounds spent on new Turbo trains will bring and end to the complaints.
Kim Barnes reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
ISAAC TESSAIOHANUES /Cherwell Rail Users Group
AUSTIN COPELEY/Cherwell Rail Users Group
NICK ILLSLEY/British Rail
Voice over
British Rail's new baby, the Chilterns Turbo, faces its most gruelling test from Banbury Commuter, Isaac.
He's hoping the £80m service is all its cracked up to be, although his aims aren't extravagant.
Isaac and Austin Copley set up the rail users group over 2 years ago to complain about poor service on the Banbury London line.
They're a bit disgruntled the turbos are late into service.
BR blames that on late delivery.
Season ticket holders pay £2,400.
They can't afford to be held up.
As the Turbo headed for Marylebone 5 minutes early, Isaac and Austin prayed for consistency.
Isaac says these are early days and we should look again after 6 months.
But BR insists lateness will be a thing of the past and gave a punctuality pledge.
They've doubled the Banbury to London service and say they're faster and more reliable.
The Turbo trains will be springing up on lines throughout the Chilterns and Oxfordshire, the next stop is Aylesbury, with passengers hoping they stay clean as a whistle and on time.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
AMATEUR VIDEO
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
LES BISHOP/Victim's Son
Insp MICHAEL CASSIDY/Thames Valley Police
IAN WHITE/Director/Oxfordshire Social Services
Voice over
Eighty-five year old Frank Bishop has plastic joints in his hips knees and spine and is deaf.
Even so the men who stole a hundred pounds from him at his home in Witney still felt the need to punch and kick him and beat him with a wooden club.
In recent weeks attacks on pensioners like mr bishop have escalated.
Two men have already appeared iun court accused of pouring acid in the eyes of seventy-four year old Joan Cooper at her home in Banbury two days after christmas.
Only yesterday in Oxford Frank Baughan called for the youngsters who beat him and broke his wrist to be birched. frank Bishop isn't today's only victim.
In Northampton a blind widow of eighty-two has been robbed of a thousand pounds at her home.
The two men who attacked mr bishop in witney are in their twenties or thirties…wearing scarves gloves and jeans…and most notably…distinctive trilby hats
A heroin addict who gave a friend a fatal injection of drugs has had his sentence reduced by the Court of Appeal.
He was jailed for five years for manslaughter but today it was reduced to three and a half years.
The family of the dead man has criticised the court's decision.
They say the original sentence wasn't long enough and they're appalled it's been reduced.
Mark Kiff reports.
MALVERN/Worcestershire
KERIS THOMAS/Sister
JULY 1991
Voice over
Jonathan Thomas was 21 when he died from heroin poisoning, devastating his family and leaving behind a 2 year old son.
Jonathan had gone to a flat in Malvern with three friends.
One of them, 26 year old Anthony Clarke, gave him an injection of heroin which proved fatal.
Clarke was jailed for 5 years for manslaughter and supplying drugs.
Today at the Court of Appeal his sentence was reduced to 3 and a half years.
That decision has angered the dead man's family.
After Clarke was sentenced, Jonathan's family held a press conference, begging others to stay away from drugs.
His mother said her son wasn't an addict, but was simply trying to keep in with his friends.
She warned that even the first injection of hard drugs can kill.
Mr Justice Turner, when jailing Clarke, said that deterrent sentences were called for.
At the Appeal today, Lord Lane said dabbling in heroin is dabbling in potential death, but Clarke, a machinist from Malvern, was not given enough credit for the fact that he had pleaded guilty.
Jonathan's sister says news that Clarke's sentence has been reduced will come as a great shock to her mother, who's ill…
A twenty eight year old woman who claims an overdose of radiation left her paralysed is suing a health authority for damages.
The woman was being treated for Hodgkins Disease — a form of cancer — when her spinal cord was injured.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
HIGH COURT/London
Voice over
A crackdown on speeding and aggressive driving will be the first step in a one-year-long police campaign to cut the number of deaths and accidents on motorways.
Its the first operation of its kind in Britain, and six police forces are pooling their resources to spread the net right across the Central region.
This report from Frazer Shepherd.
Police Video
Chief Supt BRIAN HUMPHREYS/West Mercia Police
Insp FRED RANKIN/Leicestershire Police
Big brother is watching you — and filming as well.
The unwitting star of this video is doing between 85 and 92 mph towing a trailer.
He starts’ tailgating’the motorist in front or driving too close.
The car in front brakes, the car with the trailer doesn't.
This Danish video system on an unmarked police car is used by the six forces taking part in the crackdown.
It not only records speeds, but evidence of other hazards.
Behind that smoke, there's a lorry.
The Midlands has the greatest concentration of motorways in the country — 350 miles which last year witnessed nearly a thousand serious or fatal accidents,
Chief Superintendent Brian Humphreys says’ Top of the league are speeding and tailgating.
Others include mechanical defects and driver fatigue.
Something happens to people when they get behind the wheel of a car.
We've all been overtaken by someone going too fast and too close to the vehicle in front.’
Inspector Fred Rankin says’ We're faced with aggressive driving, caused by a number of things — tiredness from work, commuter traffic, frustration.’
This joint operation will last for a year.
Police stress it's not the forerunner of a national’ highway patrol’.
They do admit, though, to an extra worry in 1992 — the appearance of more European traffic.
Mr. Humphreys says’ It is a fear, heavier loads on the motorways, people who don't know regulations.
But we have initiatives to deal with that as well.’
This summer will see a tougher approach towards heavy goods vehicles from home and abroad.
This lorry would quickly find himself with a police escort.
And although the police stress they want to educate bad drivers as much as land them in court, they say they won't hesitate to prosecute those who deserve it.
Before we go, a reminder that you can see a new look Central Lobby after our late news this evening.
Sir Robin Day is the new member of the Lobby team.
Sir Robin and Judy Laybourne will be providing news and analysis of the region's political scene.
And for the first time, I'll be presenting a section of the programme that focuses on political news from the Central South area.
That's Central Lobby, tonight at 10.40.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Immigration officials have allowed a twelve-year-old boy caught up in the war in Bosnia to enjoy a six-month holiday in England.
His foster parents say they're giving him a break from events back home.
Robin Powell reports.
BERKELEY/Gloucestershire
SEPTEMBER 1992
GLENYS NIX/Foster Parent
KENAN ARSLANAGIC/Aged 12
JOHN NIX/Foster Parent
Voice over
Rugby's not a game that Kenan Arslanagic has played before.
It's just one of the English traditions that unemployed security guard, John Nix is introducing him to.
Kenan's just been granted a 6-month visa, 4 months after the Nix's first tried to bring him out of Bosnia.
On that occasion, they returned to Berkeley with a coachload of other would-be foster parents empty-handed.
For Kenan, the saddest part of coming to England is leaving his mother and father behind.
It's hard to enjoy himself while fearing for their lives.
The Nix's say they thought long and hard before fostering Kenan.
They're concerned that some people fostering East European children aren't so conscientious and anxious that all potential parents are carefully screened.
Mr Nix's only concern is that Kenan doesn't wear him out.
It probably won't be long, before Kenan's nagging John to take him to see his favourite football team.
There's one thing, though, that Kenan wants more than anything else; an end to the war that's ravaging his homeland.
And now to the final part of our series — Free Fall USA.
Tonight Nick Clark follows the RAF Falcons as they make a spectacular descent into an American Football stadium in San Diego, where sixty five thousand people are waiting to greet them.
Flt sgt DAVE PAVELEY
Voice over
The Jack Murphy stadium in San Diego.
Tonight 65,000 people will watch a football game between the San Diego Chargers and the LA Radiers.
Before the match begins they're going to see the Falcons fly.
The new Falcons recruits won't be jumping, the team's made up by second and third years plus experienced guest jumpers.
Although some have done this display before, the tension's been building up all week.
Male speaker
If I'm honest, I'm very nervous.
Tension's been building up all week.
Male speaker
When I get on that plane, I'll just sit myself in a corner and concentrate on what I have to do.
Voice over
To the west in San Diego, the drop zone team are continually checking conditons.
The crowds are building up and doing things the American way.
Male speaker
We always do this before an American Football game.
It's called a tailgate party.
Female speaker
This is the only way to root for your team.
Male speaker
I'm doing what I've been doing all week really.
The winds seem to be coming in 3 separate directions, but I think we'll be alright.
Male speaker
Tremendous.
Better than I thought it would be.
Male speaker
Absolutely brilliant, just look at it.
Male speaker
Er yes.
Voice over
One of Britain's greatest athletes has taken up a new sporting challenge.
Olympic decathlete Daley Thompson has left the world of track and field and is gearing up for a new career in motor racing.
Erika Barnes reports.
SILVERSTONE Northamptonshire
DALEY THOMPSON Saloon Car Driver
ROBB GRAVETT Works Driver
Voice over
The man who was faster, stronger and went higher than most, has had enough of the pole vault pit.
From now on, he'll be hanging around the motor racing pits.
Daley Thompson is launching a new career in the fast lane at the Silverstone Race Track.
It's a new challenge for the ultimate competitor; saloon car racing for the Peugeot team.
Male speaker
It's warm and dry.
I don't have to spend several hours a day training.
It isn't life consuming.
To be honest, I'm off track and field.
I'm looking forward to racing.
It beats changing nappies, which is what I've been doing for the last 5 months.
Voice over
No longer can Daley rely on his muscle power.
Brain power and horse power is going to take him to the top of the sport.
Male speaker
These things go quite fast.
I'm doing 85 mph already.
God knows what it'll be like in a real race.
Voice over
But clearly he's still got a lot to learn.
Male speaker
Wow…that's the water.
Male speaker
Daley's got the commitment.
He's decided to come into motor sport and stands a good chance.
Voice over
For a world class decathlete it's something of a gear change.
Daley's driven by success and always wants to be first to finish.
Major disappointed by unemployment near three million
The Prime Minister has told the Commons that he is disappointed by the rise in unemployment nearly three million.
Labour says public are tired of feeble excuses
The Opposition said that the public are tired of what they called the Government's feeble excuses.
1
Meanwhile, British Gas has announced it's to cut twelve hundred jobs as part of restructuring the company.
Commons committee attacks pit closure plans
An all-party Commons committee has attacked the coal pit closure plans.
FTSE up 24
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-four point six at twenty-seven, seventy-three point three.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-two cents and down at two marks, forty-five.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GLOUCESTER
PAULEEN RODWAY/Witness
Sgt DAVE PITSTOCK/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
The aftermath of a car theft.
A motorcyclist, in hospital with severe injuries.
Children, trapped in the car of an innocent driver caught up in the crash.
The accident happened after a stolen red rover car accelerated away into King edwards avenue, when it's occupants realised they had been spotted by a police patrol.
Witnesses say the rover seemed to be travelling at high speed.
She says that it was spinning in the road.
POlice know a rover was stolen yesterday in Howard street, near the scene of the accident in King edwards avenue.
This afternoon, after being spotted by a patrol vehicle, the car collided with a motorcyclist, who in turn hit a car which in which some of the passengers were children.
They were trapped.
Police arrived at the scene just seconds after the accident had happened.
He says that the police were not chasing the car, but they had spotted that it was stolen.
The occupant of the stolen car was driving like a maniac.
Gloucestershire police are in the middle of a crack down on vehicle related and other crime, called operation Gemini.
It's not known if the patrol which spotted the stolen car was part of this operation.
Police have issued a description of the car they're looking for: It's a red rover 216, registration number K526 RBC
A report on suicides at Oxford University has called for ways to be found to reduce academic pressure on students.
The study found twenty-one students had taken their own lives over a fourteen year period, and more than two hundred and fifty others attempted suicide.Simon Garrett reports.
Dr KEITH HAWTON/Consultant Psychiatrist
ELSA BELL/University Counselling Service
Voice over
Award winning student Tracey Cole hanged herself days after arriving at Oxford.
Pamela Wray was found hanged just before she was due to start a new term.
Henry Skelton fell from a window days after writing his own obituary.
Today's report says the suicide rate among students is only slightly higher than young people the same age in the world outside.
But it does recognize the need for the educators to find ways of helping them cope.
Female speaker
This is a good university with a reputation because we do have to work hard but that does mean there's a lot of pressure on us
Female speaker
A lot of the people who come here put themselves under pressure too
Male speaker
Most universities do three or four essays a term here it's twelve or sixteen
Voice over
The university suicides have key factors in common.
Nearly half those who killed themselves were suffering from mental illness, most of those were being treated for those problems when they died.
In half the cases examined, students were experiencing relationship problems with family or partners.
But concern about academic matters figured in two thirds of cases.
Male speaker
It's not just institutional stress but also from students themselves.
They have high expectations when they come here and sometimes feel anything less than perfection is a failure.
Female speaker
This system of learning is very different for some students and it might help at the beginning of the academic year to introduce them to it in a more measured way and look at points of pressure during the year and see if they can be released without lowering standards
Voice over
More money's already promised for student counselling services.
But overall, the report says more information's needed and it calls for a careful record to be kept of all future suicides and attempts.
A workman has died and another was seriously injured after an underground water pipe burst.
They were working in a sewer at Baughton near Upton on Severn in Worcestershire when they were engulfed by a wall of water.
Two other men were taken to hospital suffering from shock.
Immigration officials have allowed a twelve-year-old boy caught up in the war in Bosnia to enjoy a six-month holiday in England.
His foster parents say they're giving him a break from events back home.
ROBIN POWELL/Berkeley/Gloucestershire
KENAN ARSLANAGIC/Aged 12
JOHN NIX/Foster Parent
Voice over
Rugby's not a game that Kenan Arslanagic has played before.
It's just one of the English traditions that unemployed security guard, John Nix is introducing him to.
Kenan's just been granted a 6-month visa, 4 months after the Nix's first tried to bring him out of Bosnia.
On that occasion, they returned to Berkeley with a coachload of other would-be foster parents empty-handed.
For Kenan, the saddest part of coming to England is leaving his mother and father behind.
It's hard to enjoy himself while fearing for their lives.
The Nix's say they thought long and hard before fostering Kenan.
They're concerned that some people fostering East European children aren't so conscientious and anxious that all potential parents are carefully screened.
Mr Nix's only concern is that Kenan doesn't wear him out.
It probably won't be long, before Kenan's nagging John to take him to see his favourite football team.
There's one thing, though, that Kenan wants more than anything else; an end to the war that's ravaging his homeland.
(Ad lib)
RUNS=0:05 
Two airman charged with starting a forty million pound fire at an RAF parachute packing centre have been released on bail, and given bodyguards.
LIBRARY PICTURES
Corporal Stephen Paterson had been kept in custody for his own safety, along with senior aircraftsman Douglas Bailey since the fire at RAF Hullavington in Wiltshire earlier this month.
The pair will stay at other RAF bases until their next court appearance.
Workers at Smiths Industries in Gloucestershire are to take industrial action after being refused a pay rise.
BISHOPS CLEEVE/Gloucestershire
An oil company has just started exploratory drilling in the west of the region.If they find enough oil and gas, production on a commercial scale could begin in five years time.Richard Barnett reports:
FOWNHOPE/Herefordshire
NIGEL CASTLE/Geologist
DEREK STEWART/Sovereign Oil
Voice over
The oilmen arrived in the Herefordshire hills a few days ago and they've already started drilling.
Sovereign Oil working with Mobil and Union Texas petroleum is hoping to strike lucky at its first well in the county.
The drillers on the 150ft high derrick, are working around the clock 7 days a week.
They're cutting through the rock at a rate of up to 40ft an hour and the drill has reached 1,200ft down.
If there's any oil or gas, they'll hit it in about a fortnight's time at 4,000ft — 5,000ft:
The Fownhope well is one of only 3 land based exploratory rigs in the whole of the UK.
The appeal of onshore drilling is its comparatively cheap.
Sovereign will spend £500,000 in Herefordshire.
A similar exploration in the North sea would cost £4m.
If they do strike oil, there will be another test well in about a year's time.
But the site won't come on-stream for at least another 5 years:
Down at the Green Man in Fownhope, most locals welcome the arrival of the oilmen
Only grey mud is visible on the drill pipes at the moment and that's being pumped into the well to bring up the rock fragments from below.
But if the mud suddenly turns oily brown, we could look forward to running our cars on Herefordshire petrol.
A garden tractor company has bounced back from the brink of bankruptcy to become a market leader…despite the recession.
They've doubled their workforce and have produced their five thousandth tractor.
Mike Rowbottom reports 
GREAT HASELEY/Oxfordshire
HARRY HANDKAMMER/Managing Director
ROBIN NETTLE/Tractor Dealer
MARK FRANKLIN/Economist
Voice over
It's a success story The Chancellor of the Exchequer must be praying will be repeated across the country.
A small firm on the brink of disaster two years ago cocking a snook at the recession by doubling its workforce and turning out garden tractors in the face of high demand…today saw number 5,000 roll off the line.
Male speaker
it's too easy to roll curl up and roll over in the recession.
If we hadn't made this tractor there are half a dozen other products we could have tried
Voice over
Countax used to make implements and parts for other companies until the orders dried up two years ago.
They were faced with bankruptcy but there was enough expertise within the company to take a gamble on a change of direction.
They designed and built a new tractor mower and turned their former customers into competitors.
Now they claim twenty per cent of the UK market, and a growing demand in Europe.
Their turnover has threbled to over six million and they employ ninety people, twice as many as last year.
Male speaker
teamwork is important, everyone gets along.
Female speaker
I was unemployed before.
Male speaker
It's looking good but it's down to us They've convinced dealers that they have something worth selling…even in a recession.
Male speaker
A good product will sell at the tight price…and this is
Voice over
The success may be something to do with the positive attitude.
A lot of people took risks to make the tractors sell and some economists feel it's that confidence which will eventually pull Britain back up out of recession.
Male speaker
confidence is very important
Voice over
But for now the company are content to be doing well by being a cut above the rest.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The operation was cancelled because of a shortage of beds in intensive care where he will recover from his surgery.
The hospital says it's sorry for the delays which health watchdogs say are appalling.
Mr Robson fears he could die before a bed is available.
Chris Moore reports.
BICESTER/Oxfordshire
FRED ROBSON/Heart Patient
KEITH TAYLOR/Community Health Council
ALEX CARLILE MP/Lib Dem Health Spokesman
TONY STAPLETON/John Radcliffe Hospital
Voice over
HOme again for Fred Robson, third time unlucky.
He was all ready to be wheeled into theatre at Oxford's John Radcliffe Hospital for an artery replacement in his heart when he was told this afternoon that the operation was off.The intensive care unit bed he would use to recover from after surgery had been taken by another, more urgent case.
Male speaker
Words can't describe what it's like to be all ready for your operation and then be told it's off again for the third time.It's beyond a joke.
Voice over
At 62, Fred is worried.
He needs the main artery to his heart replacing.
If it ruptures he could die.
The added tension of waiting is only making things worse.
Last week the hospital advised patients to check on the day of admission that a bed was avilable, because the bad weather has brought an influx of urgent chest cases and they take priority.
But health watchdogs say the latest delay is appalling
Male speaker
It's almost unbelievable that this has happened again.This poor man must be at his wit's end.
Male speaker
This is quite the worst case I have ever heard of.It's an outrage and proves that the government is quite wrong to claim that the health service is improving
Voice over
The hospital manager would like more intensive care beds, and he's sorry for Mr Robson.
Male speaker
We only have six intensive care beds and a wide area to cover.
We would like more beds in intensive care.
Even one delay is too much.
Male speaker
They've told me what to do if I am in pain.
I can be taken in by ambulance and bypass all these delays, but I could die on the way to hospital.
Voice over
So Fred goes back to the waiting.
He's been told it could be next week, but he won't believe it until he wakes up after his operation, in one of those six intensive care beds.Even then, he'll still be waiting.
He also needs a hip replacement
An eighty five year old man who was beaten up and robbed at knifepoint at his home has been talking about his ordeal.
Frank Bishop, who has plastic joints in his hips and knees, tried to fight back.
But his attackers threatened to kill him if he didn't hand over his wallet.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
OXFORD
FRANK BISHOP/Victim
HOME VIDEO
Voice over
Frank Bishop was hit on the head, neck and body with a wooden club by two men who pounced on him outside his home in Witney yesterday.
He suffered broken bones in his face and wrist and extensive bruising.
He's now recovering at hospital in Oxford.
Mr Bishop, who has plastic joints in his hips, knees and spine, is an ex-boxer and tried to put up a struggle, but they were too strong for him.
The two men left Mr Bishop lying in the kitchen after stealing just over £100.
Today, police issued a more detailed description of the attackers.
One was about 20, 5ft 8in tall and with long side burns.
He was wearing patched jeans and a dark brown jacket tied with string.
The other robber was about 40 and 6ft tall.
He was also wearing jeans, a trilby hat and a dark russet-brown jacket.
Homeowners are putting up barbed wire to keep out thieves in a city where burglaries have shot up by almost seventy percent.
Detectives have established a special squad to target known criminals, but they say many break-ins are committed by burglars already on bail for earlier crimes.
Tim Hurst reports.
GLOUCESTER
Dr MARTIN O'DELL/Resident
JEAN GIVENS/Neighbourhood Watch
Det Ch Insp MIKE HUMPHERIES/Gloucester CID
Voice over
It takes just two minutes for a burglar to turn a home into a nightmare — in the city of Gloucester police are being called up to twelve times a day by families finding scenes like these.
In one road, ten homes out of sixteen have been burgled in the last six months, one of them four times.
A doctor lost video equipment and jewellry worth fifteen hundred pounds when a burglar jemmied his patio doors, now he and a neighbour are surrounding their homes with barbed wire.
Burglar alarms are being installed in almost every home in the road, and some residents are installing steel grills over ground floor windows.
A neighbourhood watch scheme has been established linking each home, where every door and gate is permanently locked against intruders.
Police are targetting known thieves with a special burglary squad to catch the culprits, some of whom are still breaking into homes when out on bail.
Detectives tackling a sixty seven percent rise in burglaries in the last year want nine nine nine calls from anyone who has the slightest suspicion that something somewhere is not quite right.
Fears over potential crowd problems have forced Oxford United to make their FA Cup match with Sunderland an all-ticket affair…just three days before the game.
Sunderland's allocation of three and a half thousand tickets sold out in less than an hour.
Police feared many more might make the trip, making it impossible to separate rival fans.
Simon Garrett reports 
30 DECEMBER 1991
Supt RALPH PERRY/Thames Valley Police
MICK BROWN/Secretary/Oxford United
Voice over
When Sunderland came to the Manor in the league in December less than 2,000 Weirsiders saw them lose 3-0.
Since then while Oxford have continued to struggle Sunderland have sacked their manager and put together a winning streak which has brought the fans back.
It was fears about an invasion on Saturday which led the police to ask United to bring in the all-ticket ruling.
Male speaker
We only realised on Monday Sunderland were likely to bring 6,000 fans with them.
We had to make the game all-ticket so no-one came thinking they could get in on the day.
They would have been locked out in the street.
Voice over
At the Manor ground fans were queuing throughout the day for their big-match tickets.
Not all were satisfied that the last minute restrictions were necessary.
Male speaker
It's ridiculous that they've left it so long to tell us.
Male speaker
I've had to take time off work to get my ticket.
Male speaker
I'm a Sunderland supporter who lives down here, I've only had a day's notice.
Male speaker
If we hadn't taken this step we could've had fans from both sides mixing inside the ground and locked out on the streets.
That could've been disasterous.
Voice over
The one drawback for the club is that with no tickets on sale on the day they could lose out financially.
That's unless of course all 11,000 are sold out by Friday night.
An RAF base has said farewell to a plane which played a vital role during the Gulf War.
Buccaneers have been serviced at RAF Abingdon for more than twenty years.
But with the base set to close, the planes have flown out for the last time.
Harriet Ryley reports.
RAF ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Sqn Ldr DAVID BOLSOVER/Buccaneer Pilot
Flt Sgt PETE GILBERT/Buccaneer crew
Voice over
There was no royalty, no civic dignitaries being honoured as the 2 Buccaneers flew over at just 250 feet.
It was a thank you to the 70 maintenance crew who have serviced the planes at the base for the last 22 years.
The plane was the ultimate in air technology in the mid 60's — designed to carry out low level bombing missions over the sea.
But it took on an extra role during the Gulf War, when it was flown in tandem with Tornados.
The pictures of bombing in Iraq which became familiar viewing during the Gulf War were taken from Buccaneers.
The plane's pinpoint laser accuracy kit highlighted the targets which the Tornado then bombed — with neither plane having to fly over the target too low.
Squadron Leader David Bolsover has flown Buccaneers for 7 years and flew 15 bombing missions in tandem with Tornados during the war.
He admits to being nervous because it was the first time this kind of operation was carried out.
Male speaker
I was nervous for the first few missions — but once you'd done it you could cope.
And this is the best airplane to do that kind of mission.
It's a rock steady plane to fly — built to last.
It's a shame that because of time and money it's coming to an end.
Voice over
During the Gulf War the crews servicing Buccaneers at RAF ABingdon carried out the impossible; servicing a plane in just 10 days instead of the usual 84 days by working round the clock.
Male speaker
It brings the best out of technicians — hard work, long hours — the old technology — modern day aircraft aren't the same.
Voice over
The Buccaneers flew back to their base at RAF Lossiemouth in Scotland.
Like the Jaguar and lightning jets, they're being phased out of the RAF because they're considered too expensive to service.
Some of the crew will go on to work on Tornados; more are staying in the area for family reasons and will move to Brize Norton or Lyneham where they'll be working on VC10s.
But today belonged to the Buccaneers — with a final cheer as the planes left for the last time.
As athletes prepare for the Olympics, sporting organisations are looking for big sponsorship deals to pay for the trip to Barcelona.
But if some Olympic competitors are struggling to find the cash, their problems pale in comparison with the difficulties facing disabled athletes hoping to go to Spain for THEIR games.
Simon Garrett reports 
1988/SEOUL/South Korea
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
MARK TONG/British Olympic Team0
Voice over
When the minds of athletes like Linford Christie turn to Barcelona and the glory of top class competition, raising the cash to get there isn't something they view as a significant problem.
Although money doesn't exactly fall from the sky, major sponsors aren't too hard to find.
But Britain's disabled athletes more often have to depend on events like this disco to pay their fare.
The organisers, Body Shop raised £2,000 — enough to send one athlete to the games; like Mark Tong from Aylesbury, a regular in the British basketball team.
Male speaker
I was at the last Olympics and it was a tremendous experience.
It's an incomparable sporting experience.
Voice over
Mark trains every day as long and as hard as any able-bodied athlete.
But to fund him and the rest of the British contingent in the disabled competitors games in Barcelona, will cost £200,000.
Male speaker
There's about 300 of us in the team and the cash is very hard to come across.
There are so many other causes and sponsorships chasing the same money.
Voice over
There is growing recognition of the dedication of disabled athletes, but many feel their efforts are still thought of as somehow less significant than those of able bodied competitors.
The 2 are only likely to achieve equal funding when the distinctions which separate them are gone.
Male speaker
Hopefully we'll end up competing alongside able-bodied players.
That's our long term goal.
Voice over
The comedian Dudley Moore is in England for the premier of his new film.
The comic admits the heady days of starring with Bo Derek are a thing of the past…though he says there's still more to life than supermarket commercials.
He talked to our reporter Frazer Sheppard.
BLAME IT ON THE BELLBOY/Hollywood Pictures
DUDLEY MOORE
’ Good evening — welcome!’
I have a reservation here.
Could I have your name?
It's Orton…
Melvyn Orton.
Cuddly Dudley is back — as Melvyn, a character he describes as a small normal man fighting against the world.
Blimey.
Did I describe myself as that?
A normal small guy fighting against…no I wouldn't…maybe a normal small guy fighting against the world…but not that!
Any messages for me?
Mr Marshall called.
He say you are a useless waste of space.
He out of patience; you out of job.
Bravo.
Do you actually act in the films or are you Dudley Moore?
Nice question that.
Do I act.
I'm basically myself I suppose, or a part of myself.
Sometimes people think they and I think all actors are whether they're Robert De Niro or somebody else!’
You've found success on the small screen with a series of supermarket commercials.
Did you enjoy doing those?
’ It was okay…after doing’Ten’with the glamour and the Hollywood budget things come down a bit and I suppose things are less heady than in other days.’
Perhaps’ Blame It On the Bellboy’will recapture those headlines.
It opens all over the country this week.
A group of schoolchildren have formed their own Carribean steel band.
The instruments are made of old oil drums, and after months of practice, they've given their first concert.
Ken Goodwin reports 
HEREFORD
MAIRION JONES/Music Teacher
Voice over
A sound that conjures up the balmy shores of the Carribean.
It's a million miles away from a cold wet evening in Hereford, but that doesn't dampen the enthusiasm of the Holmer School Steel Band.
The school bought the instruments, made out of oil drums, second hand.
The idea was to boost the children's interest in music and it's certainly worked:
He says it's hard at first because the notes are in different places.
Teacher says children have to learn to let sticks bounce against drums.
She says she likes the instruments because they're so different.
He says the music makes him feel good.
She says the music makes her want to dance.
Lamont announces March 10 as Budget Day
The Chancellor, Norman Lamont, has announced that Budget Day will be March the tenth.
Pundits predict April General Election
The move has prompted renewed speculation that a General Election will be held in April.
Top Ulster spy admits murder plot
A top British intelligence agent in Northern Ireland, Brian Nelson, has admitted plotting to kill five men.
Calls for changes in primary education
An inquiry into primary school education has concluded that fundamental changes are needed in primary school education.
Haughey denies phone-tapping claims
The Irish Prime Minister, Charles Haughey, has strenuously denied phone-tapping allegations made by his former Justice Minister.
FTSE down 21
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-one point four at twenty-five, twenty-two point zero.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-one and at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
SPEEN/Buckinghamshire
CHRISTINE HUNEBERG/Owner
KEVIN CARLYON/Witchcraft Expert
Insp MIKE CLANFIELD/Thames Valley Police
Dr HENRIETTA BULLARD/Forensic Psychiatrist
Insp DAVID HOBBS/RSPCA
Voice over
Ragtime Blues, an eight year old mare, was attacked in her field.
She was stabbed around the genitals…and needed six stitches.
She says it's horrific.
The attacker must be sick.
Its the third attack in three weeks on mares in the Princess Risborough area.
And nationwide there've now been more than 30 similar incidents.
One theory is it's linked to a Satanic cult.
He says it could be a person who's removing animal parts to make up a potion.
Today the couple, who claim they're white witches cast a spell to try to stop the attacks.
But the police aren't convinced.
He says if it was Satanic there would be signs of a ritual and there haven't been any.
A forensic psychiatrist beleives the Princess Risborough attacker is a sadist from a poor background.
She says normal people will find it hard to understand.
The motive is secual and sadistic.
It'll be ten weeks before Ragtime Blues has her stitches removed.
It's believed the attacker used the public footpath that crosses her field.
He says no one knows what animal could be next.
Today many horse owners contacted the police asking for advice on how best to protect their animals.
Detetives still haven't been able to build up a description of the attacker but they believe he may have worked with horses in the past.
The man convicted of murdering pregnant housewife Marie Wilkes says he hopes to get bail so he can be set free.
Eddie Browning says he wants to apply for bail before his case goes before the Appeal Court later this year.
Keith Wilkinson reports.
Eddie Browning was jailed for life for the murder of Marie Wilkes from Worcester in 1988.
The body of the pregnant housewife was found near the M-50 motorway after her car broke down on the hard shoulder.
Eddie Browning's case has now been re-opened with a police inquiry.
And last October it was announced that his claims to be innocent would be heard once again by the Court of Appeal.
Inside Whitemoor prison near Peterborough, he's still awaiting a decision on when that hearing will be.
In an interview with Central News he says he wants his lawyer to seek a court hearing to apply for bail granting him his release before the Appeal takes place.
Eddie Browning says he's angry over long delays facing other prisoners seeking appeal hearings.
Like the men jailed for the murder of Carl Bridgewater in 1979.
West Mercia Police which carried out the original murder inquiry said it would have no comment to make about the case before the conclusion of Eddie Browning's appeal hearing.
Labour's defence spokesman has expressed fears that a missile system being developed in the region could fall into the hands of Iraq.
The Rayo system is likely to be sold to Chile which has in the past supplied arms to Saddam Hussein.
This report from Graeme Bowd.
WESTCOTT/Buckinghamshire
GEORGE FOULKES MP/Labour Defence Spokesman
CHRISTOPHER FOSS/Jane's Defence Weekly
Voice over
Ground launched missiles were used to great affect by the Allies during the gulf war.
But this Am, erican system is very expensive and needs several men to operate it.
Now Britain's Royal Ordnance Company has been asked to build a cheaper one man version for the Chilean army.
The new system, called Rayo is now being developed at Westcott.
But in the past Chile has been one of Iraq's main suppliers of arms and there are fears that the new British missile could be sold on to Saddam Hussein.
Male speaker
There is a loophole.
This is a deadly weapon and it could be resold to Iraq without our knowledge or consent.
Voice over
Mr Foulkes is seeking Government safeguards to prevent Rayo from falling into the wrong hands.
In reply to a Commons question the Defence minister Jonathanj Aitken told him the project would receive’ very careful scrutiny.’
But defence analysts say it's unlikely that Iraq would acquire the new missile.
Male speaker
’ Iraq has a wide-range of rocket systems.
Some are more effective than Rayo so it's unlikely they would want the British system.’
Voice over
Royal Ordnance would not discuss likely buyers for the new rocket which could go into production next year.
But the company says hundreds of jobs could depend on the project.
The body of a seventy six year old man has been found in a shop in Northampton.
Detective say they're treating the death as suspicious.
NORTHAMPTON
The body was found in a pet shop on the Wellingborough Road.
The man, who hasn't been named was a member of staff.
A post mortem examination is being carried out to find the cause of death and forensic officers have searched the surrounding area.
Police say it's too early in the investigation to say what happened.
A twenty-seven thousand name petition, protesting at cuts at the Stoke Mandeville Hospital, has been presented to Parliament.
WESTMINSTER
Hospital staff handed over the petition to the MP for Aylesbury, David Lidington.
They're angry that seventy jobs and fifty one beds have been cut.
STOKE MANDEVILLE/Buckinghamshire
They want the Government to step in to safeguard the hospital's future, at a time when staff are pushing for a multi million pound redevelopment of the site.
ooh aah Cantana…that's the chant that rings around football grounds at the moment…in honour of course of the French striker Eric Cantona…
Now rugby union has come up with a rival…
Cheltenham have just signed…a flying French centre…
Bertrand Ventura…so Vive Ventura 
BERTRAND VENTURA
MIKE BURTON
Voice over
Only a few days after watching his countrymen beaten at Twickenham, Bertrand Ventura was at his new desk in Gloucester this week.
He's come to this country to work for the former England star, Mike Burton, who runs a local sports agency.
In his spare time, Bertrand will be playing for Cheltenham.
Some signing — he's been with first division, Avignon in the French league and is used to playing with the best.
Bertrand says he wanted to come to this country to learn English and play Rugby.
Mike Burton says he came for a trial touched the ball 3 times and scored 3 tries.
The French Flyer makes his debut for Cheltenham's United team tomorrow, so On y vas.
At Kingsholm, it's Gloucester against Rosslyn Park.
Last season, the cherry and whites or black and reds as they were scored 12-9, thanks to this winning try from Paul Ashmead.
and good luck tomorrow to the rugby folk of Tredworth and Stow on the Wold who play each other in the quarter final of the Provincial Cup…here's the rest of the action 
Voice over
British international skier Roger Walker of Witney is back winning
My lords ladies and gentlemen…we now come to our Friday Feature…the main event…we're proud to present the area novice boxing championships from swindon 
MICKY PRICE/Penhill Trainer
RAY LYONS/Amateur Boxing Association
PAUL ROGERS/England International
RALPH STANTON/ANTHONY YON
MIKE TURNER/Penhill Club
TOMMY KNOWLES/Malmesbury
Voice over
So you want to be a boxer; you want to be a champ; you want to live one of the great sporting dreams.
From rags to the riches of the ring.
The fight game is like no other when it comes to chasing fame and fortune, but for every Bruno or Lewis, there are hundreds, thousands of lads who glove up and take guard.
This is the real heart of boxing, the area amateur novice finals being fought out at the Penhill Royal British Legion in Swindon.
A night of excitement, a packed hall, a ring of chance.
Animal rescuers are standing by to return to the Shetlands.
They went to give emergency help during the height of the oilspill disaster and have only just returned after setting up an animal hospital.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
LES STOCKER Animal Rescuer
Voice over
The fight to save wildlife still goes on in the Shetlands.
Les Stocker, the animal saviour from St Tiggywinkles Wildlife hospital at Haddenham has just returned from the islands after a fortnight's hard work.
He may yet have to return.
Male speaker
If anything happens, we'll fly back up there.
There's still a lot of oil around Scalloway.
Voice over
Les helped to convert an old barn into a wildlife hospital on the islands and he recruited locals to learn how to treat the animals.
Seals and otters were his main concern, but he also did a lot of work with distressed birds.
Male speaker
When an animal is brought in, especially an otter which is very nervous, we've taught them the basic techniques of how to save them.
There's a vet up there who's volunteered to go in if needed.
Then they've been taught how to feed them and eventually how to release them.
Voice over
The St Tiggywinkles Team spent £12,000 on the expedition and they're wondering how to get it back.
But at least they can be reassured that their efforts paid off.
They managed to save all the sick otters and seals on their part of the island, the cost counting can come later.
Plans unveiled for rail sell-off
The Transport Secretary, John McGregor, has revealed plans to privatise British Rail.
They include setting up a new track authority and consumer committees to safeguard the interest of passengers.
New report says pit closures are reasonable
A report by an American company claims that British Coal's pit closure programme is reasonable.
US plane fires at Iraqi air defence site
An American warplane has fired at an Iraqi air defence site, but their missiles missed the target.
Clinton's Attorney-General candidate steps-down
Zoe Baird has withdrawn her nomination as President Clinton's Attorney-General after admitting hiring illegal immigrants to work at her home.
FTSE up 7
The hundred shares index closed up seven point nine at twenty-seven, eighty-one point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-three but down at two marks, forty-four.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
Two youths have been arrested after a motorcyclist was seriously injured when he was hit by a stolen car.
GLOUCESTER
The motorcycle was thrown into the path of a car carrying four children at King Edward's Avenue in Gloucester.
They had to be cut free.
The motorcyclist is in a critical condition in hospital.
The car was later found abandoned in Henley Place.
The Foreign Secretary is urging local firms to step up their efforts to sell their products abroad.
He's been telling businessmen and women that Britain's prosperity depends on their export success.
It's a message that one entrepreneur in the region has already taken up…in the nick of time.
Kim Barnes reports.
KINGHAM/Oxfordshire
GRAHAM SALE/In Your Own Time Ltd
JULIA SALE/In Your Own Time Ltd
DOUGLAS HURD MP/Foreign Secretary
Voice over
The time is always right for a good idea, even if it's not your own.
The success of these personalised clocks mean business is ticking along nicely for Graham and Julia Sale, but it was their daughter who got them going.
The first was made by hand, but now it's all computerised, with sales going like clockwork, with orders from Germany Holland America and Malta.
The couple had no business know how, having spent 15 years working for charities in the third world.
They say help from the department of trade and industry was invaluable.
Today, Graham Sale was a speaker at a top level conference in Oxfordshire aimed at encouraging more firms in the region to step up their export effort.
And true to form Graham Sale lost no time in capitalising on an opportunity presenting Douglas Hurd with his own clock.
The message to other businessman is the market is enormous.
If you've got the time, they've got the money.
Thousands of longsighted people are now being offered a complete cure.
Their eyesight can be corrected in just a few minutes by the use of a lasers.
A hospital in Buckinghamshire is one of only two in the country performing the new operation.
Erika Barnes reports.
GREAT MISSENDEN/Buckinghamshire
NICKI WARE/Long-Sighted
Mr LARRY BENJAMIN/Consultant Opthalmologist
JEANETTE ORTON/Short-Sighted
Voice over
There's a clear view in the distance, but life is a blur close to.
Until now, long-sighted people have to wear glasses or contact lenses to see the world in sharp focus.
Nicki Ware is looking forward to life without glasses.
She'll be one of the first people to receive new laser surgery to correct her long-sightedness, probably within the next few weeks.
Female speaker
I work on computers.
The light affects my eyes.
In daylight I can see better.
This would help.
Voice over
Here at the Chiltern Hospital in Buckinghamshire the laser centre has been perfecting a similar technique for short-sighted people for some time.
Male speaker
It's a day procedure.
It only takes a few minutes.
We use an anaesthetic and use lasers to cut within one millionth of a metre.
It was used in industry.
Voice over
The aim of the laser is to re-shape the cornea which is responsible for bending light rays onto the eys's retina.
In short-sightedness, the focus point is in front of the retina.
Long-sighted people are unable to hit the right point in the eye too.
The treatment can correct the fault.
Jeanette Orton from Oxfordshire has already undergone surgery to correct a defect in her right eye.
An astigmatism has hampered her recovery; nevertheless, today she's having more laser treatment to improve the sight in her left eye.
Female speaker
I'm very short sighted.
From the end of my nose, everything is out of focus.
I went to glasses and contact lenses and had all sorts of problems.
Voice over
After the check up, Jeanette is made ready for the treatment.
Anaesthetic is dropped into her eye and lid guards are used to keep her eyes wide open.
She sees everything in soft focus, but feels nothing.
Female speaker
You get nervous.
Last time I didn't know what to expect.
This time I'm more worried.
Male speaker
You'll see colours across your eyes.
It'll get noisy when the laser starts.
Voice over
The laser beam is fired across the eye and alters the shape of the cornea.
The short-sightedness is corrected and within a week, the eye should be in good focus.
The treatment has good results, but at a price.
Around £1,000.
But it means a lifetime of problems have been cured in a few minutes.
The only visible sign of treatment is an eyepatch.
But when that's removed at the end of the week, Jeanette will literally have a whole new outlook on life.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Have goals will travel striker, Imre Varadi is coming to the Manor on loan from Leeds.
He's also seen action at both Sheffield clubs, United and Wednesday; Everton, Newcastle, West Brom, Man City and Luton where he scored last season.
Tomorrow, United face Cambridge at the Abbey Stadium.
Oxford won the first University challenge back in September.
Their starter was a 3-goal victory.
Here's the team news.
New boy, Varadi will be on the bench to start with.
There's a chance top scorer, John Durnin will get a recall.
Both teams are finding it hard to hit the winning trail at the moment and Oxford need at least a point from this one.
In the third division, Hereford are at home to top of the table, Barnet.
Hopefully United could have found their form just at the right time.
Last week, they cracked 3 past Rochdale.
Greg Downs is making changes tomorrow.
Gareth Abrahams, signed on a free transfer from Cardiff, makes his debut at the back and Leroy May plays upfront.
Goal of the week comes from Swindon who've got tomorrow off.
Nicky Summerbee's strike against Charlton.
A one million pound appeal has been launched by Oxfam which hopes to cash in on the fact that 1992 is a Leap Year.
As Oxfam celebrates it's fiftieth anniversary, the charity wants people to give time or money on February the twenty ninth to help needy across the world.
Julie Dolphin reports.
OXFORD
DAVID JONES/Associate Director/Oxfam
Voice over
More than a quarter of the world's population; that's one and a half billion people, have no basic health care or clean water.
Each night one in six go to sleep hungry.
As Oxfam enters its 50th year, it's as determined as ever to improve their quality of life.
Today in Oxford, the charity launched Leaptime, a fund-raising campaign with a target of £1m.
The star of the campaign is LeapFrog.
He's encouraging children to take part in sponsored events on February the 29th.
And Oxfam is giving away special action packs to get the youngsters started.
If the campaign goes as well as today's Oxford launch, by the end of February the charity should be little more than a hop, skip and a jump away from its target.
In part two: Licensed to kill.
Britain's last hangman tells all.
And hasn't she grown?
Once she was just a village…
now she's the fastest growing town in Europe: Happy birthday Milton Keynes.
Welcome back:A man who executed more than thirty convicted criminals will speak at the Oxford Union tonight in favour of the death penalty.
Syd Dernley was a public hangman before the capital punishment was abolished in nineteen sixty-five.
But he says it's never lost him a night's sleep, and he'd happily take up the rope again if called.
Simon Garrett reports 
SYD DERNLEY/Former Hangman
Voice over
The question of whether society has a right to take a life for a life is one guaranteed to raise heated debate.
That's what's expected tonight at the Oxford Union, when former hangman, Syd Dernley speaks in favour of capital punishment.
From 1949 to 1953, he took part in the execution of more than 30 people.
Even in those days there were protests, but Syd Dernley had applied for the job willingly — even keenly.
Male speaker
There's many definitions of the word kill.
I helped along people who'd been caught by the police, sentenced by the court and had their death warrant signed by the Home Secretary.
It was an interesting job.
Voice over
Today though, long retired Syd still retains the trappings of his trade.
Hangmen weren't full time.
Syd worked in the Nottinghamshire coalfield and reported to prisons for duty as asked.
Executioners were proud of their speed and efficiency.
From first seeing the prisoner to the moment of death could take as little as 8 seconds and was instantaneous.
Male speaker
Have the faces of the dead ever come back to haunt you?
Have you ever lost sleep over them?
Voice over
No, never.
But I have twice dreamt of being led to the noose, the second time I got closer than the first, I hope I never have a third!
Syd is proud of his past and as his audience will find tonight, adamant it was right.
Male speaker
I'm certain.
From 1965, when hanging was abolished to 1987, thirty-??????? people have died at the hands of men who've killed before, served a prison sentence and been released.
Had they died for the first crime those thirty-???? people would still be alive today.
Voice over
Out of all my customers, satisfied customers, all of them went quietly and bravely to their death.
A quarter of a century ago planners decided to create a brand new city for England.
The city of the future would combine the best of the town and the country…where people could live, work and enjoy life without traffic and congestion.
Since then Milton Keynes has been called a brilliant success, and a place with no heart or soul.
Gargy Patel reports on the city that's twenty five years old today.
PETER KENT/Villager
WALTER BOR/Consultant Planner
DAVE THOMAS/Resident
JOAN THOMAS/Resident
PROMOTIONAL VIDEO
FRANK HENSHAW/Development Corporation
DR BYRON MIKELLIDES/Architectural Psychologist
Voice over
Milton Keynes…the biggest and most controversial project ever undertaken by the country's planners…to create a brand new city…a suburban city…a business city…a city of dreams…planned in the boom era of the sixties…the perfect answer to the problem of London overspill…
After a quarter of a century, the old village is much the same…but for some the development killed off a way of life.
Peter Kent was born here, the youngest of eleven children.
The planners say Milton Keynes has brought country living into the town…
Peter says the town has invaded the country.
He says you need guns to protect yourself in cities.
He protested against the idea of the new town twenty five years ago.
It was a whole new concept…roads built on a unique grid system…to keep traffic moving…and create small communities.
Officially Milton Keynes is still a town, those who live there think of it as a city.
The founding fathers have no regrets.
He says he would like to see it in another twenty five years time.
It will be even better still.
The lasting image many have of the city is the concrete cows, a tongue-in-cheek parting gift from a local artist.
A symbol perhaps of a manufactured city…but the Milton Keynesians, if you can call them that, say life here couldn't be better.
He says they've grown up with it and become part of the community.
She says there's so much going for it, especially for the young.
On the business side, it has been a huge success…home to two and a half thousand firms, one in ten of them from abroad…unemployment is below the national average…the high tech city has attracted high tech firms from Japan…bringing a new community and culture.
Milton Keynes say the developers is definitely working.
He says it has good networks for communication and is very attractive for business.
The other face of Milton Keynes…a young population…many feel isolated…crime and vandalism is high…homelessness a growing problem…ironic in a city that boasts a high standard of housing…low rise building with low costs…fuel conscious homes surrounded by green and pleasant land.
But critics call it a faceless environment…a paradise for cars not people.
He says it has no character.
It's very easy to get about but there's no sense of being in a city
Milton Keynes is still growing.
It's predicted another seven thousand jobs will be created this year…the population will number a quarter of a million by the end of the century.
It hopes to be granted official city status this year.
The latest addition to the modest skyline…the ecumenical church.
Hailed as a success story for the planners, for some this new town will remain an old joke.
As Milton Keynes celebrates it's jubilee, the arguments will continue long into the next century.
Now, have you ever fancied yourself as a bit of a cowboy?
Well you don't have to go to the wild west, just head for’ them thar hills’and a riding school where you can learn all the skills you'll need to feel completely at home on the range.
Clare Lafferty reports.
MALVERN/Worcestershire
SHEILA WHELAN/Western Riding Instructor
Voice over
Sheila Whelan prepares herself for another day's work.
Spurs, Chaps and a Stetson are all she needs out on the range.
But on the trail Sheila rides there isn't a long horn or rattler in sight.
This isn't the OK Corral, but the Avenue Riding Centre in Malvern where she teaches city slickers how to ride Western style.
The American Quarter horses used in this type of riding have long tails and manes.
And their saddles are far more ornamental with a horn that cowboys use to tie up their lassoos.
Sheila's lessons have attracted alot of interest from fans of traditional Western films.
But she's keen to point out that at her school you'll learn to ride like a real cowboy and NOT like John Wayne.
Western Riding is becoming more and more popular with horse lovers of all ages.
But thanks to Sheila, now you don't have to go all the way to Dodge City to win your spurs.
And finally, a heartbroken goose is pining for her best friend, who's disappeared from an animal santuary.
In the wild, the pair would be natural enemies.
But since the disappearance of Lucky the fox, Gussie the goose has been inconsolable.
Llewela Bailey reports 
HOPWOOD/Worcestershire
JOAN TRAINER/Owner
Haughey may resign within next two weeks
The Irish Prime Minister, Charles Haughey, could resign within the next two weeks according to Fianna Fail party sources.
The future of the Yarrow shipyard in the North-East looks more secure with the announcement of an order worth four hundred million pounds.
FTSE up 3
The hundred shares index closed up three point three at twenty-five, twenty-five point three.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty and at two marks, eighty-six.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A one million pound appeal has been launched by Oxfam which hopes to cash in on the fact that 1992 is a Leap Year.
As Oxfam celebrates it's fiftieth anniversary, the charity wants people to give time or money on February the twenty ninth to help needy across the world.
Julie Dolphin reports.
OXFORD
DAVID JONES/Associate Director/Oxfam
Voice over
More than a quarter of the world's population; that's one and a half billion people, have no basic health care or clean water.
Each night one in six go to sleep hungry.
As Oxfam enters its 50th year, it's as determined as ever to improve their quality of life.
Today in Oxford, the charity launched Leaptime, a fund-raising campaign with a target of £1m.
The star of the campaign is LeapFrog.
He's encouraging children to take part in sponsored events on February the 29th.
And Oxfam is giving away special action packs to get the youngsters started.
If the campaign goes as well as today's Oxford launch, by the end of February the charity should be little more than a hop, skip and a jump away from its target.
In part two: Licensed to kill.
Britain's last hangman tells all.
And hasn't she grown?
Once she was just a village…
now she's the fastest growing town in Europe: Happy birthday Milton Keynes.
