1
FTSE up 44
The pound is down at one dollar, forty five and down at two marks, thirty seven.
What's the point?
Anger as God's Wonderful Railway goes private.
End of the line: Hundreds of jobs at stake in Leyland DAF crisis.
And, barking mad: Nine hundred pounds for a dog with no lead.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
Intercity routes into London Paddington are among seven sections of the rail network to be offered out to private tender.
WESLEY SMITH
JIMMY KNAPP/Transport Union Leader
PETER SEMMENS/Railway Magazine
JOHN MacGREGOR MP/Transport Secretary
GEORGE WALDEN MP/Con Buckingham
PHILIP WHITE/125 Commuters Club
Voice over
Intercity services between Paddington and the West Country carry 16 million passengers each year.
The region runs at a profit and it's also one of the most self-contained parts of the British Rail network, factors which the Government believes will make it attractive to investors.
Privatisation will be the most radical change since Brunel's Great Western Railway began operations in the 1830s.
The track itself will belong to a new body Railtrack which will charge new the new private train operators to run services on it.
But the plan, announced in a stormy Commons, has opponents on both sides of the house.
The big question is how the interests of the lines many long-distance commuters, travelling to London from towns like Swindon and Didcot will be protected.
In recent years fare rises on the line have outstripped inflation and it's not yet clear whether the new private operators will be forced by law to contain their prices, as were the newly privatised phone and gas companies.
Outside the Commons the rail unions protested at today's announcement.
Their leaders said the Government was asset stripping British Rail.
R01/31/93 21:11 pah 0:15 hhh-train ad
Three hundred and fifty jobs at the sales headquarters of truck makers Leyland Daf are in doubt tonight after news that the company is in financial crisis.
The news came as a complete surprise to workers at the Oxfordshire base.
The Government says it will work to salvage a long term future for the company.
But Labour call it an industrial disaster.
Erika Barnes reports.
THAME/Oxfordshire
LEYLAND/Lancashire
TERRY DAVIS MP/Lab B'ham Hodge Hill
MICHAEL HESELTINE MP/President/Board of Trade
DON BUTLER/Mayor of Thame
Voice over
Already workers at Leyland Daf are fearing the worst.
Union leaders call it a disaster of a mammoth nature.
It's been a difficult time for the sales and marketing team at Thame in Oxfordshire.
An uphill battle trying to promote the latest trucks.
Now it's clear the company couldn't rise about the recession.
Now 350 jobs here and more than 5,000 at production bases in Birmingham and Lancashire are on the line.
The crisis comes after the parent company in Holland called for court protection from its creditors.
It has losses of £300 million and just can't pay its bills.
At Westminster — deep concern for the crisis it's created.
But what of the future for the town of Thame.
Still reeling from the closure of the Ross pizza factory in 1991, when 500 jobs were lost.
The demise of Leyland Daf would be devastating.
The crisis has come too quickly for the company, which only this morning was due to launch a new truck.
The event was cancelled and now it seems we may never see what Daf Leyland had planned for the future.
Anti Nazi campaigners have demonstrated outside a salesroom where a painting by Adolph Hitler was being sold.
They say that relics of Hitler's reign should be destroyed, not sold for profit.
But the portrait, together with an easel were bought by a businessman for more than three and a half thousand pounds.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
CATHY SMITH/Anti Nazi League
ROGER SULLIVAN/Collector
Voice over
A portrait drawn by the young Adolph Hitler when he was aged 25, together with an easel he used, on sale at a Gloucester auction.
But the event attracted more than just the curious and those wanting to buy.
Outside, the Anti Nazi league staged demonstration.
The organsation says that memorabilia associated with Hitler could encourage interest in the far right:
She says that it should not be sold.
Back inside, and the auction had begun.
Retired businessman Roger Sullivan was up against a telephone bidder…
Mr Sullivan also bought the easel, for one thousand nine hundred pounds.
Afterwards he said it was his first foray into the art world — but denied a particular interest in Hitler.
He says that he's got no interest in Hitler, it's just a historical picture.
But there were others at the auction who thought the picture should never have been sold.
He says he would have burnt it if he could have afforded to buy it.
But perhaps those who most objected to Hitlers painting being put on sale can take some consolation from the fact that it will not be taking pride of place in Mr Sullivans living room:
He says he'll hang it in the toilet.
And Mr Sullivan says he has no plans to sell the painting…for at least the time being.
The age of the plastic card has finally reached that most traditional of haunts, the local pub.
The brewers Whitbreads, say the new’ Cashcard’is safer for landlords and more convenient for the customer.
Claire Lafferty reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
ANDREW DAVIES/Whitbreads Brewers
Voice over
A lonely nine-year-old has found herself a new granny and grandad by advertising in the local paper.
Gwendolen McEwen had always felt left out when her schoolfriends went to see their grandparents, because she had none.
But now a couple have volunteered themselves for Gwendolen to adopt.
Here's Richard Barnett.
GLOUCESTER
BARRY MCEWEN Adopted Grandad
JANET MCEWEN Adopted Granny
GWENDOLEN MCEWEN Grandaughter
Voice over
This was the moment Gwendolen McEwen had longed for; the chance to greet her granny.
She so wanted grandparents, that she appealed for a couple in the local paper to act as adopted granny and grandad.
The couple who took up the challenge have no grandchildren of their own.
And they even share Gwendolen's surname.
Male speaker
They are looking forward to having a lot of fun together.
Female speaker
They have no grandchildren of their own.
Voice over
So was it all worth it?
Female speaker
Her new grandparents are very nice.
Voice over
Now Gwendolen's met her new grandparents, she's looking forward to getting to know them better.
Patten in hospital with heart trouble
FTSE down 17
The hundred shares index closed down seventeen point two at two eight three four point four 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty four and down at two marks, thirty seven.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A man who allowed his dogs to walk around without collar and lead says he'll appeal after being ordered to pay almost nine hundred pounds.
Officials say it could have been worse, the maximum fine is now five thousand pounds.
Tim Hurst reports.
GLOUCESTER
DAVID PAPPS/Dog Owner
NEIL TAPPIN/Gloucester City Council
Voice over
David Papps walks his dog Champ around his home at Matson in Gloucester on a lead, after being ordered to pay what dog wardens believe is the stiffest fine so far for breaking new laws on dog control.
He admits both his dogs have strayed in the past, after callers let them out of his garden.
That was enough for magistrates in the city who imposed fines and costs of almost £900.
Gloucester City Council is enforcing law dog control laws, in effect since October.
Officials believe the latest fine is the heaviest in the country so far.
Some residents of Matson say stray dogs are a problem, but the fine is too much.
Others disagree.
Meanwhile, David Papps says he'll appeal.
He's out of work and finding £900 is out of the question.
People who claim that a noisy motorway has ruined village life are planning to carry on their campaign, despite accepting government compensation.
They say more needs to be done to reduce the noise level from the new section of the M-Forty which was only opened two years ago.
Kim Barnes reports.
FENCOT/Oxfordshire
IAN CHARLESWORTH/Chairman/Fencot Parish Meeting
ARTHUR GODDARD/Villager
16 JANUARY 1991
ALAN HOWARTH MP/Con Stratford on Avon
JAMES BRADLEY/Department of Transport
Voice over
Ian Charlesworth and Arthur Goddard live just a few hundred metres from the busy M40 in the village of Fencot.
They say noise from it has dramatically changed their lives.
After a lengthy campaign they've been offered compensation for drop in value of their homes.
They'll accept, but only because they feel they've reached the end of the line.
Arthur has lived in Fencot all his life.
He believes his house has been undervalued, affecting his compensation offer.
The Birmingham to Oxford section of the M40 was opened in January 1991.
Residents had to wait a year before they could put in claims and it's only now that they're getting their offers through, based on the district valuer's assessment of the value of their homes.
If owners are unhappy they can appeal through a lands tribunal.
Local MPs have lobbied successive transport ministers.
They say it's only right compensation should be paid.
But the Department of Transport says there's very little they can do to make the motorway quieter.
200 out of 2,000 claims have been dealt with.
Payments in Fencot range from 3 to £20,000.
In all, it'll add around £10 million to the bill for the M40.
In part two: Days of Glory…a new generation serving with the Glosters.
Your flexible drinking partner…the plastic revolution hits the pub.
And a dream come true…
The advert for grandparents that came up trumps.
Welcome back: Next year the Gloucestershire Regiment celebrates its three hundredth birthday.
The anniversary falls just before the regiment is due to amalgamate with the Duke of Edinburgh's Royal Regiment as part of the defence cuts.
Tonight in the first of two reports, Richard Barnett looks at the traditional family links that have sustained the regiment down the centuries, in The Glosters…
Days of Glory.
CHRISTINE BERESFORD/Curator/Regimental Museum
Capt SIMON DUTTON/Gloucestershire Regiment
Sgt Major MARK BOON/Gloucestershire Regiment
JULIE CLARKE/Army Wife
Voice over
The men of the Glosters in action during their recent 2-year tour of duty to Northern Ireland.
The county's soldiers have a fierce reputation as a fighting force, with more battle honours than any other regiment.
On the streets of Northern Ireland, or on the battlefield over 3 centuries, the Glosters have a special bond to unite them.
As the joint author of a recent book on the regiment explains.
Female speaker
Many soldiers can trace back 3 or 4 generations who've served in the regiment.
Voice over
At Catterick camp in North Yorkshire, a group of Glosters take part in a leadership exercise.
They're being judged by Captain Simon Dutton.
His father Terry was a Colonel in the regiment.
His grandfather and great grandfather served in the Glosters too.
Male speaker
The family links are important to hold the regiment together.
Voice over
Also running the exercise, Sgt Major Marc Boon.
He's followed in his father's footsteps too.
Sgt Bill Boon joined the Glosters in 1926.
Male speaker
He's proud to have 80 years of family tradition behind him.
The family bond is important in time of war.
Voice over
Behind the officers and soldiers is the backing of Army wives.
In the early days of the Glosters, life for the wives was extremely arduous.
A display in the Regimental museum gives some indication of the conditions they lived under.
Female speaker
Life for the wives could be very tough.
They had to follow on foot during campaigns.
And were subject to military discipline, so they could be flogged.
Voice over
Nowadays, life is much improved.
Julie Clark has been a Glosters wife for 14 years.
Her husband, Steve is a Sergeant Major.
Female speaker
Being an Army wife can still be difficult.
She's had 8 quarters, so it's hard to put down roots.
And she worries about Steve when they're in Northern Ireland.
Voice over
Tomorrow night, we meet the old soldiers and talk of war and the trenches and peacetime life in India over half a century ago.
That's the glory of the Glosters.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
It's no fun standing on the relegation trapdoor, but United brushed aside their problems and worries and hit Newcastle where it hurt; in the net.
First half was pretty tense though, until skipper, Steve Foster broke the ice with a goal after 40 minutes.
It was Fossie's first game after 9 week illness.
Some recovery.
The second goal came on 6l minutes; the Newcastle defence; the worst in the entire league lived up to its reputation as John Durnin raced through to score.
Easy.
That's what Oxford thought and they were very nearly punished, as the Geordies hit back with 2 goals in 4 minutes.
The first, a Scott header from a Brock corner looked bad.
The 2nd was a penalty.
United were panicking as Newcastle went on the attack.
The result Kelly too a tumble and Gavin Peacock slammed home the kick.
Justice was done with 2 goals in 2 minutes.
A scorcher of a free kick from Paul Simpson made it 3-2 and the fourth; well if you were Newcastle manager, Ossie Ardiles what would you be saying to goalkeeper, Tommy Wright after this?
Blow me, what a mistake to make.
Good for goalscorer, Trevor Aylott though.
Somewhere out there was Paul Simpson and with 4 minutes to go, he floated in a corner for Steve Foster to head in.
That was it.
2 for Fossie, 5 for United.
What a win.
and that win brought new hope to Oxford…they're only three points behind Brighton and Newcastle and have a game in hand
and lets hope the words of another American president ring true…we ain't seen nothing yet…no stars or stripes for Swindon Town this weekend they lost out at top of the table Blackburn…two-one the score 
Voice over
Swindon were fired up for victory.
Ewood Park is a lucky ground for them and in the first half they went for Blackburn with all guns blazing.
Only one team has beaten Rovers at home and for some time Swindon looked a good bet to become the second.
The luck was running for them.
Watch how they escaped here as Digby was drawn off his line and Speedie shot just wide.
Town took the lead after 40 minutes.
Blackburn cracked under the pressure, as Kerslake and Jones lined up for shots and David Mitchell cleaned up.
It could have been 2-0 at half-time.
A goal here would have killed Blackburn off.
A great shot by Jones.
Shearer inches away from the rebound.
All change in the second half.
2 goals in the last 15 minutes finished Swindon.
Colin Hendry turned well to make it 1-0.
That got the home fans singing.
They were celebrating with just 8 minutes to go when Rovers hit the winner.
David Speedie scored.
Good goal for a striker, bad one for a defender.
But they all count the same.
Blackburn 2, Swindon 1.
There are midweek games for both Swindon and Oxford…tomorrow Town are at home to Bristol City…
On Wednesday at the Manor its United against Sunderland in the FA Cup…both matches are all ticket…
Gloucester play in the Pilkington Cup on saturday…they warmed up at the weekend with a twenty six to ten win over Pontypridd 
Voice over
lets finish off with a roundup of the rest of the news…starting over at swindon speedway…the robins will be singing…roaring again this season…the team has been re-instated to division one 
Voice over
Swindon were facing financial ruin after being relegated from the first division last season…
The speedway fans started a campaign which was backed by the local MP and raised a petition signed by over five thousand names…today the speedway rulers decided to reorganise the first division and keep Swindon in it…
Gloucester City Football Club have done an about turn too…they've got Brian Godfrey the man they sacked as manager three months ago back in charge…the chairman says he made a mistake…three cheers for him…
Down the road at the Gloucester leisure centre it was a weekend for table tennis fans…over 300 players were competing in the Cotswold Junior championships…the boys title went to Surrey…the girls to Yorkshire but local boy Ray Powell raised the roof by fighting his way through to the semi-finals
Five firms facing charges over the death of a Gloucestershire workman on the Severn Bridge are expected to be dealt with by a Crown Court.
SEPTEMBER 1990
Forty-four-year-old Robin Phelps from Brockweir was one of two men who died after the gantry they were working on collapsed and fell more than a hundred and fifty feet into the Severn in September (1990) nineteen-ninety.
The prosecutions are being brought by the Health and Safety Executive.
Victims of the Maxwell pensions scandal have set up an action committee to press the Government for compensation.
They also plan to campaign for new laws to protect other workers by preventing firms from raiding their pension fund money.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
OXFORD
DUDLEY HOOPER/Pensioner
ANDREW SMITH MP/Oxford East
ROBERT KNIGHT/Graphical
ALAN FISHMAN/Clay and Partners
Voice over
A campaign has started to try to cut the rising number of children dying from solvent abuse.
The hard-hitting television advertisements will be shown regularly from tomorrow, and have been welcomed by parents of children who've died as a result of sniffing glue or lighter fuel.
But some experts fear the advertisements could actually make the problem worse.
Simon Garrett reports.
BERNADETTE DOWNES/Victim's Mother
DAVE CAMERON/Drug Dependents Anonymous
Voice over
The government's new campaign is stark and brutal.
But to parents who've lost a child through solvent abuse the message can't be tough enough
Bernadette's fifteen year old son Patrick died a year and half ago after sniffing lighter fuel.
One of the more than a hundred and thirty children who die that way every year.
The aim of the tv campaign is to get parents to wonder what their children are doing.
Professionals say it's not enough…they want more training for shopkeepers…teachers and health workers…and they say there are dangers
The bare statistical truth of solvent abuse is that one in four of the children who die from the habit do so the first time they ever sniff glue or lighter fluid.
Young people themselves are remarkably aware of the dangers and the availability of solvents…it's the mothers and fathers who are most ignorant.
It's them the commercials are aimed at
Fifty Russian orphans will soon be enjoying a three month stay in the region.
The youngsters are living in dire poverty in their home country.
Now a group of schools with close links to Russia is planning to give them a holiday to remember.
Richard Barnett reports.
MALVERN WELLS/Worcestershire
DAVID ARROWSMITH/Organiser
Voice over
The West has only recently been allowed to see into Russian orphanages, as English charities have provided food for the children there.
Under the Communist regime, orphans were treated as mentally handicapped and given little help.
Scenes like these have lead schools in the Malvern area to invite a group of orphans aged from 10 to 12 to take a break in the English countryside.
In April, 50 Russian orphans will arrive at the Wells House School, where they'll stay for 3 months.
They'll be encouraged to relax by using the facilities at the nearby Abbey International College in Malvern Wells and the Downs School in Colwall:
Male speaker
The orphans will be able to enjoy the marvellous countryside and 75 acres of grounds and sporting facilities.
Voice over
A group of Russian teenagers are studying at the Abbey International College; they'll help to show the orphans around:
The organisers of the visit hope to raise enough money to help the orphans when they return to Russia.
So hopefully the trip to England won't just be a holiday, it will be the beginning of a new life.
Suspended sentence…granny who tried to rob bank escapes going to prison.
Family's fire ordeal…mother rescues twin daughters from burning house.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
MARLOW/Buckinghamshire
PAMELA FITCHEW
Grandmother of 5, Pamela Fitchew was preparing this morning for her day of reckoning, sentencing by a judge and possible time in prison for a crime she still claims she didn't commit.
In December last year though, a jury at Aylesbury Crown Court had found her guilty of attempting to rob the Midland Bank at Lane End, in Buckinghamshire last May.
She had pulled a stocking over her head and threatened a cashier with a toy cowboy gun.
When the cashier refused to hand over any money, Mrs Fitchew walked out, apparantly laughing.
The court had heard Mrs Fitchew's travel agency business had failed and her home was about to be repossessed.
The judge postponed sentencing for pyschiatric reports but warned the normal punishment for attempted robbery was at least 7 years in prison.
Before returning to court this morning the 60 year old was contemplating the prospect of a possible jail sentence.
Female speaker
I know I might go to jail, but I've prepared myself for it.
Voice over
Mrs Fitchew arrived at court with her husband Terry.
The judge was reminded by her counsel that the offence was an act of sheer desperation.
It was, he said, an offence of quite astonishing incompetence.
In delivering sentence, Judge John Slack said Mrs Fitchew was still pig-headedly continuing to deny involvement, despite the clearest possible evidence.
It was quite clear, he said, that Mrs Fitchew caused the woman cashier considerable terror.
But the judge was prepared to accept that due to extreme financial problems Mrs Fitchew behaved out of character.
In the event she left court with a 2 year suspended sentence.
Female speaker
My legs have turned to water.
Voice over
Mrs Fitchew said she was extremely relieved not to have been sent to prison.
Female speaker
It's so good to see the sunshine.
Voice over
A father risked his life to save his twin babies from a fire which had engulfed the childrens' bedroom.
The four month old girls were treated in hospital for smoke inhalation but later allowed home.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
MARK BETTINSON/Father
PAULINE COVE/Mother
MARK BURFORD/Gloucestershire Fire
Voice over
This is all that's left of the bedroom in which four month old twins Bethany and charlotte were sleeping.
It's thought a fault in an electric fire set light to the downstairts bedroom — when the twins father Mark Bettinson smelt smoke flames had already begun to creep towards the twins cots.
He says that when he got into the room the double bed was alight, he picked up the babies and got them out as quickly as he could.
Ironically the couple had been discussing putting smoke detectors in all the rooms just the day before the fire happened.
Now they're appealing to other families to install detectors — and say they're lucky that they and their children escaped alive.
She says that she screamed for help — another two minutes and the twins would have died because of all the smoke and flames.
There's praise tonight for the way the twins father quickly got the children clear of the smoke and flames:
He says that getting the children out quickly was a priority — fires in houses tend to spread very fast and he did the right thing.
The couple and their children have been rehoused by the local council — they say that they are definately going to fit smoke alarms to their new home.
A notorious Australian criminal is behind bars again eight weeks after walking out of an open prison.
Murray Stewart was tracked to a house in a London suburb where a man and wife were arrested on suspicion of hiding him.
Simon Garrett reports 
GRENDON UNDERWOOD/Buckinghamshire
Voice over
Murray Stewart's escape from Springhill Open Prison near Aylesbury 8 weeks ago, caused severe embarrassment.
Questions were asked of the Home Office as to how a man with a 30-year record in organised crime could be given such a low security classification.
Thames Valley Police were criticised for not effectively alerting ports and airports to watch for him.
In the end he was captured in London.
Officers surrounded a house in Argyle Avenue, Hounslow less than a mile from Heathrow.
Murray was traced there after his phonecalls to Australia were tapped.
It seems police failure to raise a national alarm may have fooled Stewart into lying low rather than making a run for it.
Male speaker
The police in Sydney, believe Stewart was confused by the lack of publicity surrounding his escape.
He thought police were playing some elaborate game of cat and mouse and waiting to trap him.
Voice over
Stewart's now at Wormwood Scrubs and will stay in secure prisons for the rest of his 5 year sentence.
The man and wife arrested with him have been bailed but probably face further questioning about suspected harbouring of an escaped prisoner.
A driver who towed another car at a hundred miles an hour on a motorway has admitted reckless driving.
Thirty eight year old Martin Barnes from South Wales was captured on police video in the fast lane of the M4 west of Swindon.He'll be sentenced next month.
Ozzie Griffiths, in the car behind, was being pulled by a thirteen foot long tow rope.
The oldest trout farm in Britain is up for sale.
The thirty-four acre farm is expected to fetch more than a quarter of a million pounds.
There's already been interest from as far away as Japan.
Ken Goodwin reports.
NAILSWORTH/Gloucestershire
VICKY DAVIS/Owner
SAM BUTLER/Chartered Surveyor
MICHAEL YATES/Manager
Voice over
25,000 tiny trout.
Each wriggling little fry will eventually grow into one of these, a fine 2lb rainbow trout.
They grow to adult size in a series of ponds which are fed by a natural spring, which, claim the farms owners, gives the fish a delicious natural flavour.
The Midland Fishery trout farm has been on this site at Horsley near Nailsworth since 1883; now its present owners have decided to sell.
She says her husband has another business — which takes up a lot of time.
The fish farm has enough work to keep two people very busy.
But isn't the middle of a recession a bad time to try and sell a business?
Not if it's a trout farm, apparently.
The company in charge of marketing the farm says there's been a lot of inquiries.
He says that there has been a lot of overseas interest, from as far away as Japan.
It could be a good investment because there are also buildings on the property.
Whoever takes on the trout farm will have their work cut out.
The farm hatches about 200,000 trout a year and they need a lot of looking after.
He says the trout start life in the hatching tanks, and are then moved outside.
It's hard physical work, but rewarding.
So if you're a fish fancier, a frustrated trout tickler, or just want to try something completely different, this could be the business for you; provided of course you have at least £280,000 to spare.
A survey of sweet-toothed voters could provide a pointer to the result of the next general election.
A baker is asking his customers to choose between doughnuts made with blue, red, yellow and green icing.
Political pundits are keeping a close eye on the sticky survey.
Gargy Patel reports.
MILTON KEYNES Buckinghamshire
STEPHEN ORT Master Baker
MAGGIE COSIN Labour
PETER BUTLER Conservative
ALAN FRANCIS Green
PETER GASKELL Liberal Democrat
Voice over
A taste of things to come.
Doughnuts, the latest ammunition in the pre-election race.
Red icing for Labour, Blue for Tory and so on.
Doughnuts being sold for charity.
The sales then marked up in a Gollop poll.
But it's not always easy to tell which of the parties is ahead.
The Ort brothers are planning to make and sell 10,000 political doughnuts.
Alongside, the usual jam and sugar coated variety.
For the first time in 5 generations of bakers, they're dipping into the unsavoury world of politics and selling their wares in 3 constituencies.
There's always the danger of biting off more than you can chew.
But for the 4 prospective parliamentary candidates…the proof of the pudding has to be in the eating.
Not so much political hot potatoes, as political sweeteners.
Worries about the effect of the colour on people's buying habits are swept aside.
And the special Gollop poll is changing by the minute, with the usual sprinkling of don't knows, or in this case, doughnut knows.
So does the colour make any difference?
It could turn out to be one of the stickiest issues facing the parties, but for once, everyone is having their cake and eating it too.
Major calls for clean election campaign
The Prime Minister has called for an end to smears and personal attacks in the run-up to the election with a focus on policies and issues.
Labour MP blames Tories for break-ins
Meanwhile, the Labour MP, Peter Hain has blamed the Conservatives for a series of break-ins to Commons offices of Opposition members.
Ashdown calls for 50p petrol price rise
The Liberal Democrat leader, Paddy Ashdown, has called for fifty pence rise in petrol prices to be phased in to cut levels of carbon dioxide emissions.
Father of five shot dead in Ulster
A father of five has been shot dead in Ulster.
FTSE down 11
The hundred shares index closed down eleven points at twenty-five, sixty point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty and down at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A round the world yachtsman has been telling tales of the sea to a group of schoolchildren who've been supporting him on his latest adventure.
They've been charting the progress of Rob Coles throughout the British Steel challenge…possibly the toughest seafaring test he'll ever experience.
Erika Barnes reports.
WALTERS ASH/Buckinghamshire
ROB COLES/Yachtsman
Voice over
They say all the nice girls love a sailor.
And Rob Coles has certainly won the hearts and minds of the girls and boys at the Naphill and Walters Ash School in Buckinghamshire.
Rob has recently completed the first leg of the Round the World Yacht Race.
Before he sets off for the next stage, he's sharing his seafaring experiences.
Male speaker
When I was feeling really low, I could have quit if it hadn't been for everyone who'd been following me, and that comes down to everyone here at the schools.
Voice over
It's been a treacherous journey.
Starting in the Solent last September, across the Atlantic to Rio.
Then round the notorious Cape Horn to Hobart in Tasmania.
Male speaker
Apart from the awful seasickness, the most frightening part was Cape Horn.
There were storm for 10 winds.
I was frightened.
Voice over
The schoolchildren have been plotting Robs progress.
A computer programme allows them to plan the food he'll have to take for the 12 man crew on the Group 4 yacht.
Others follow regular bulletins to chart his course.
And even the very young children have been captivated by Rob's stories of the sea.
Male speaker
I was quite surprised about how they get dressed.
And how big the iceburgs were.
Female speaker
It must have been very cold and freezing.
Male speaker
The dangers of falling overboard and falling into the water.
I don't want to go on the challenge.
Male speaker
You're constantly on your back.
You're on the water 24 hours a day.
You live and sleep it.
Voice over
Rob begins the homeward bound trip next week.
From Hobart to Cape Town and then in May he should be sailing up the Solent.
After 28,000 miles perhaps winning or losing takes on less significance.
But clearly for the schoolchildren who've been watching every move.
It's the taking part that counts.
A racing stables looking for warm and healthy bedding for its horses has found the answer in yellow pages…quite literally.
Old phone books apparently make an ideal alternative to straw, and they're far cheaper.
Tim Hurst reports.
TEWKESBURY Gloucestershire
BRIAN JOHNS Farmer
FRED WOODWORTH Waste Officer
Voice over
There's nothing like it, after a morning's exercise, relaxing on a good book, several books, of old telephone numbers.
As thousands of new telephone directories are delivered to homes around Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire, the old ones are being collected at recycling points in the town.
From there, the old listings join millions of others who's number is up, shredded at Highfield Farm stables into highclass bedding for highclass horses.
Yellow pages it might once have been, but no-one would let their fingers do the walking when it comes to mucking out, that's still done at arms length.
But it does rot down as fine compost, solving the heavyweight problem of what to do with old phone books.
The stables get through tons of yellow pages each month turning it into billions of bits; surely the ultimate nightmare for anyone called JR Hartley.
Government saves two regiments
The Defence Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, has revised plans for defence cuts, two regiments which were to be merged will be saved, but there will be no u-turn on the merger of Gloucester Regiment.
No appeal for Bridgewater convicts
The three men convicted of the murder of the paper boy, Carl Bridgewater, have had their leave to appeal rejected.
Bomb explodes on train
A bomb has exploded on a train in London, there were no injuries.
Union leaders meet to discuss Leyland Daf
Union leaders have been meeting to discuss how to cope with the threat of fifteen thousand redundancies.
FTSE up 39
The hundred shares index closed up thirty-nine point four at twenty-eight, seventy-three point eight.
It's been another hard day for the pound, it closed down at one dollar, forty-three and down at two marks, thirty-six.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Angry motorists are protesting at a one hundred and fifty percent rise in charges on a busy toll bridge — from tuppence to fivepence.
The bridge carries eighty thousand vehicles a week.
The owners say they need more cash for essential repairs.
Simon Garrett reports 
JOHN DARBY/County Bridge Engineer
MICHAEL HAWLEY/Owner's Agent
ARTHUR GILES/Ward Councillor
Voice over
At its busiest, Swinford toll bridge carries 50 cars a minute between Eynsham and Oxford.
Few realise the toll erosion's taken on the 200 year old structure.
Built by the Earl of Abingdon in 1777 carts paid a penny a wheel.
There's been no increase in the intervening years.
Now the owners want the 2 pence charge raised to 5 pence.
Male speaker
Bloody ridiculous.
We already pay road tax
Male speaker
I think it's a disgrace.
It's time the bridge went it causes chaos with the traffic
Female speaker
It's a shame the council hasn't bought it and preserved it properly
Male speaker
They won't put it up, two pence, that's what I'm paying
Voice over
The owners blame acid rain and substantially increased traffic over the past few years for the bridge's sorry condition.
Repairs will cost three quarters of a million pounds.
Male speaker
There is quite a lot of erosion, water gets into the cracks and it will get worse if work isn't done
Voice over
The owners say the increase is essential if repairs are to be done.
They insist most drivers don't see it as a toll too far.
Especially as to go round the bridge would use another 50 pence of petrol.
Male speaker
The toll collectors are already being offered five pence by people who think the price is already gone up.
Drivers will accept it when they see the reason for it
Voice over
But some would like to see the department of transport refuse the increase forcing the owners to sell.
Male speaker
If the bridge ceased to be economical as a business the owners would have to come to an arrangement with the council
Voice over
The result of a public inquiry's already awaited at Whitchurch in South Oxfordshire where bridge owners want tolls raised from six to ten pence.
A similar debate's expected at Swinford.Even if the repair work's not done and the bridge falls down the charges will still apply however.
The law states the owners would have to put in a ferry, an interesting thought for the rush hour.
Well, as you heard earlier, there's to be no reprieve for the Gloucestershire Regiment.
The Glosters celebrate their three hundredth birthday next year, but shortly afterwards will merge with another regiment as part of the Government's cutbacks in the armed forces.
In his second feature looking back on the regiment's finest hours, Richard Barnett talks to the men who were proud to have served with the Glorious Glosters:
Capt NORMAN EDWARDS/Veteran
Cpl JOE SELWYN/Veteran
Capt GEORGE DEAN/Veteran
Voice over
The heroism of the Glosters over 2 centuries had already won the regiment more than 30 battle honours by the time the First World War broke out.
But nothing could have prepared the troops in the trenches for the carnage that was to follow.
8,100 men from the County regiment were slain; thousands more were wounded.
Norman Edwards was aged twenty when he joined the Glosters at the outbreak of war.
Now aged 99, he still has vivid memories of the slaughter.
Male speaker
He went into battle and saw the field littered with British dead.
If anyone talks of the glory of war he remembers that.
Voice over
Captain Edwards was a machine gunner during the battle of the Somme in 1916.
He was wounded when the Glosters launched a dawn attack.
Enemy machine guns were firing from all directions.
It was pure hell.
In that battle, he was shot.
He still has the bloodstained fragment of sleeve showing where the bullet went through his arm.
The War over, many of the Glosters found themselves serving in India.
Joe Selwyn joined the Glosters in 1932 at the age of 18 and spent over a decade in the land of the Raj.
The 1930s were a time of religious upheaval on the sub continent and Corporal Selwyn and his fellow Glosters were put on riot control duties in India and Burma.
Male speaker
Hundreds of rioters were throwing sticks and stones and shooting.
The troops weren't allowed to fire.
It was very frightening.
Voice over
George Dean was 17 when he joined up in 1921.
He too served with the Glosters in India for many years.
When stationed at Mhow in Central India, his camp was right next to the sacred site where the Parsee sect left bodies to be picked clean by vultures.
Male speaker
The vultures were a nuisance swooping down if you were carrying food.
They were quite forbidding.
Voice over
After many years in India, all the troops longed for the boat from Bombay, the troopship back to England.
Captain Dean voices the sentiment of centuries of colonial soldiery.
Male speaker
The soldiers used to say the best sight of India was Bombay from the back of the boat.
Voice over
There is one sentiment all the Glosters share from the soldiers of today to the troops who fought for their country 80 years ago.
They say: They are proud to be in the Glosters.
A new superbike has just been launched that recaptures the style and performance of classic British motorcycles of the past.
It has a price tag of twelve thousand pounds…and its maker hopes to sell up to a hundred machines a year.
This report from Richard Barnett.
SIMON GOODMAN/Goodman Engineering
HONEYBOURNE/Worcestershire
SIMON EASTHAM/Development Engineer
Voice over
Even in the distance, you can hear the rumble of the 1200cc engine, then the Goodman HDS bike thunders into view.
In the saddle Simon Goodman, the man who's spent every waking hour of the last 2 and a half years creating a machine to recapture the excitement of classic British motorcycling.
But however good the design may be, it's what it feels like on the road that matters:
Male speaker
It's exhilarating to ride.
And with no fairing you really feel the speed.
Voice over
Simon's engineering factory is at Honeybourne near Evesham.
It's here that he worked on the painstaking part by part design of the bike on a computer.
His aim, to reproduce a traditional motorbike to compete with the flashy Japanese machines Simon calls plastic missiles:
Male speaker
The aim was to build a classic bike.
But it's fitted with modern parts to cope with changing traffic conditions.
Voice over
Simon Goodman has an impeccable pedigree for designing a modern classic, his grandfather Percy Goodman founded the family Velocette motorcycle company, in 1907.
In the mid 1980s, Simon helped to reform the BSA motorcycle company at Blockley in Gloucestershire.
It was here he started making frames for re-building the Manx Norton motorbike.
This was the machine that took the motorcycle racing world by storm 40 years ago.
In the 1950 Isle of Man TT the first year the new bikes had competed.
Manx Nortons came 1st, 2nd and 3rd.
The bikes were so comfortable to ride the frame became known as the’ featherbed’.
150 Manx Norton featherbed frames have been sold and a steady demand continues from enthusiasts.
But now the Honeybourne factory is pinning its hopes on the Goodman HDS 1200.
The ultimate production target is 100 of the new machines built to order every year.
Sadly, although the bike is designed and manufactured here, the Harley Davidson engine comes from America and most of the parts come from abroad too.
Male speaker
British industry no longer supports motorcycle manufacture so you have to buy parts from Germany and Japan.
Voice over
The team at Honeybourne are confident they've succeeded in building a bike that recaptures the charisma of British bikes of old:
Male speaker
The reaction to the new bike by enthusiasts has been excellent.
It looks like a classic.
Voice over
It's taken 85 years for the Goodman family name to appear on one of their motorbikes, but looking at the HDS 1200 on the road, the wait has been well worthwhile.
Five young men with a passion for music are all set to become the darlings of the pop world.
Collectively known as Bedazzled, they've signed a million pound contract with one of the biggest record companies in the world.
But they're promising not to let the fame and fortune go to their heads.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
LAURENCE WINDO/Singer
DARRIN STEVENS/Drummer
DAMIEN KINGSCOTT/Bass player
RICHARD GOBEY/Guitarist
PAUL FIELDHOUSE/Guitarist
Voice over
Finally some football news — Swindon Town are making one change in their side for the match with Bristol City at the county ground tonight.
Three die in Ulster gun attack
Three people have been killed in a gun attack on the Belfast offices of the IRA's political wing, Sinn Fein.
Thousands march against Ulster violence
Meanwhile, thousands of people have marched against the violence in Ulster.
Artist's impression of Slater kidnapper
The Police have issued an artist's impression of the man they believe kidnapped the estate agent, Stephanie Slater, and murdered Julie Dart.
BAe not to repay
British Aerospace has been told it will not have to repay more than forty-four million pounds in sweeteners from the Government given as an incentive to clinch the Rover purchase deal.
Labour pledges no classes larger than 40
Mr. Kinnock has pledged to limit classes to a maximum of forty pupils if Labour wins the General Election.
FTSE down 3
The hundred shares index closed down three point four at twenty-five, fifty-six point eight.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty, and down at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodbye.
A public inquiry has opened into Oxford United's plans to build a twelve million pound football stadium.
The club's facing opposition from residents living near the site and a council, which says it would devastate a green belt area.
Oxford United say their survival depends on moving to a new ground.
Gargy Patel reports.
GARSINGTON/Oxfordshire
WINNIE CRAWFORD/Oxford United Supporter
PAT McGEOUGH/Managing Director
BASIL TOWNSEND/District Councillor
Voice over
For Oxford United, a new stadium is the only hope of survival.
The Manor ground has been home to the club for the last 67 years.
Now it's cramped and outdated.
Plans for a £12m complex including a hotel, cinema and bowling alley, have drawn fierce opposition, but supporters at the start of today's public inquiry say the club has no future without a new ground.
Eighty two year old Winnie Crawford says they deserve it.
The Taylor report, following the Hillsborough disaster, called for all seater stadiums.
In order to comply and to clear debts following the Robert Maxwell scandal, the club says it has no option but to relocate.
But the idea of a 20,000 seater stadium on 79 acres just outside Oxford, has angered local people.
The land was set aside 10 years ago, but since then the plan has grown and South Oxfordshire District Council recently turned it down.
Critics say it's encroaching on the green belt and would devastate local villages.
The inquiry will hear evidence from both sides over the next 5 days.
The Environment Secretary is then expected to make a decision next year.
A small company is leading the way in using lasers to create three-dimensional models from computer images.
The department of industry is so impressed its organised a conference so that other businesses can see the process in action.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
JIM BLENKINSOP/Director
TIM PLUNKETT/Director
ELFED ROBERTS/GEC
Voice over
These objects were produced using a revolutionary new process which until recently, was unavailable in Britain.
It's called steriolithography and works like this:
A manufacturer wants to design a new casing for, say a radio-paging device.
3-dimensional plans are drawn up on a computer.
This image is converted into a series of laser beam pulses, which trace the shape of the image layer by layer into a vat of resin.
The resin hardens when the laser comes into contact with it, gradually producing a perfect three dimensional model.
This can be produced in less than 12 hours, when previously designing and producing molds for prototypes could have taken weeks, if not months.
Formation engineering services of Gloucester, which has introduced the system to Britain, was formed by 2 ex-Dowty workers; Tim Plunkett, who was made redundant by Dowty's and Jim Blenkinsop.
He says it's much faster, clients can watch as their prototypes are moulded by the laser before their eyes.
He says that at first clients refused to believe it could be done so fast — some need to be convinced that it's not just science fiction.
Customers of the firm include the Aerospace giants GEC.
He says that the technique has meant they can speed up research time, helping to stay ahead of the field.
The Department of Trade and Industry are organising a conference this weekend, where businessmen will be invited to see the new technology for themselves.
With their order book already bulging, Formation engineering look set to break the mold as a company that's expanding in the recession.
Women students at an Oxford College are vowing to fight plans to admit men.
The Governing body of Somerville College has decided to admit both men and women from next year.
But many female students are angry they weren't consulted and today hundreds attended a protest meeting.
GARETH FURBY/Oxford
ELIZABETH LLEWELLYN-SMITH/St Hilda's College
CATHERINE HUGHES/Somerville College
ESTHER RANTZEN/Somerville Old Girl
Voice over
For 113 years Somerville College, Oxford, has limited its entry strictly to women only.
Today, many of it's current students made it clear they like it that way.
She says give us a reason why you are doing this.
Staff who attended the meeting said they'd listen to the augments.
But some students say if the college had been mixed, they wouldn't have applied.
She says Aisian parents won't allow girls to go to a mixed college.
She says it will mean that women's representation at Oxford will be reduced and it's not even equal at the moment.
The college authorities have decided to admit men from next year.
They say mixed colleges attract more applicants and find it easier to retain academic staff.
The decision means there'll soon be just one all-female college in Oxford, St Hilda's.
And its principal has no plans to follow Somerville's example:
She says there's a need for women-only education.
But the principal of Somerville stands by the college decision.
She says girls nowadays seem to want mixed education.
The students say their campaign against the decision will continue.
They may be hoping to enlist the support of Mrs Thatcher, one of a long list of famous old girls.
Today at least she stayed silent.
But another ex student thinks the decision was inevitable.
She says it's peculiar nowadays to go to a single sex establishment and she's glad that men will now be able to go to Somerville
A group of parents has won a battle to get a new primary school at Corse in Gloucestershire.
COLEFORD/Gloucestershire
The parents paraded with placards outside the Forest of Dean District Council offices as members turned up for a planning meeting.
Councillors had twice rejected proposals for a new village school, but this afternoon they changed their minds and approved it.
Voice over
A man has been charged with wounding following a fight at a house in Oxfordshire.
SHIPPON/Oxfordshire
One person was stabbed in the incident at married quarters at Shippon, near RAF Abingdon.
He's said to be in a stable condition at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.
Police have charged a seventeen-year-old youth in connection with the incident.
The owners of a nursing home which was closed by health inspectors are planning to turn it into a guest house.
The home had been shut down following complaints of poor hygiene.
Russell Trott reports.
GLOUCESTER
British Aerospace WON'T have to repay almost forty-five million pounds which the Government paid it as an inducement to buy the Rover car company.
Experts say it's good news for Rover, which could have been sold off if today's European Court ruling had gone the other way.
But Labour, which is blaming the Government for gross incompetence, says it's wrong that the public should foot the bill.
Robin Powell reports.
AUGUST 1988
GEOFF EDGE/Economist
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
Voice over
They called it the deal of the decade.
British Aerospace's £150m buyout of Rover was seen as a lifeline to the ailing car industry.
But the optimism of workers at Rover's Cowley plant in Oxford and the Stratton St Margaret site in Swindon turned to anger 18 months ago, when the European Commission announced that sweeteners worth almost £45m that helped clinch the deal, were illegal and would have to be paid back.
Today that judgement was rejected on a technicality by the European Court in Luxembourg, which said the Commission had acted incorrectly.
Economists say the ruling may have saved Rover.
British Aerospace is expected to announce next month that its losses for 1991 were around £85m.
Added to the sweeteners they'd have to pay back, that would mean a deficit of nearly £130m.
Shares were expected to plummet, and with Aerospace ripe for takeover, Rover would have been the first to be sold off.
LBut Labour says the ruling just means the taxpayer's footing the bill for the incompetence of the Former Trade and Industry and Secretary Lord Young.
One Opposition MP, whose constituency includes Cowley, is calling on Aerospace to invest in car-making the money it would have spent on paying back the Government.
EC Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan is said to be considering an appeal against today's ruling.
Rover and Aerospace hope it won't come to that; they want an end to the episode and won't be happy until it's business as usual.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
SWERFORD/Oxfordshire
PC ARCHIE BULLARD/Local Police Officer
POLICE VIDEO
Ch Insp BARRY PRENDERGAST/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The man who kept dozens of armed police at bay for more than 11 hours, was finally driven away in the early afternoon.
Cain Macdonald had threatened to shoot himself and anyone who came near, when he called police at 2.00 a.m. this morning.
He was believed to have been badly affected by the death of his wife last April.
Male speaker
He became a loner.
He appears to have given up steady work.
Some locals had trouble believing his stories
Up to 40 armed police and marksmen using semi-automatic weapons and rifles surrounded the remote house at Swerford in North Oxfordshire.
Police were first alerted when Mr Macdonald called Oxford Police Station with his threat.
The sound of a shotgun being fired was then heard.
Mr Macdonald had also been charged with a drink driving offence the previous evening.
The 45 year old stockman had moved to the area only a year before.
Police used the now familiar softly softly approach with a trained negotiator.
An inspector spoke through a megaphone while the armed squad kept watch.
The Thames Valley Police Helicopter provided additional information.
Traffic was kept well away from the area.
Eventually a telephone line was established and Mr Macdonald broke his silence and asked for a friend.
Shortly after the friend appeared, he gave himself up.
Male speaker
We gained his confidence and he came out under our guidance.He was depressed just before he came out
Some weapons were recovered from the house including a shotgun.
Mr MacDonald has been taken to Banbury for questioning and scenes of crime officers have been searching his house this afternoon.
Police have described it as a text book operation and are delighted with the result.
The Marquis of Blandford has been given a conditional discharge for possessing a twelve-bore shot-gun without a licence.
His defence accused the police of’ throwing the book’at the Marquis after they found the gun at his home on the Blenheim Estate in Oxfordshire.
Police deny the accusation.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
CHIPPING NORTON/Oxfordshire
8 OCTOBER 1991
Insp JOHN ANSELL/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The Marquis of Blandford arrived at Chipping Norton magistrates court to face a charge of possessing a shot gun without a licence, only weeks after he was released from Oxford prison.
He served 38 days of a 3 month sentence for driving whilst disqualified.
The court was told that in July last year, police were called to Jamie Blandford's home on the Blenheim Estate after a break-in.
The Marquis was away on holiday at the time.
They searched the premises and found a twelve-bore shot gun in the basement of the house.
The Marquis pleaded guilty to posessing a shotgun without a licence.
In his defence, Mrs Susan Rodway said that the Marquis had a number of guns, all with licences, which he kept locked in a cupboard in the basement of his home.
This, she said, showed a man with a responsible attitude to guns.
The fact that he had no licence for this particular gun was, she said, an oversight.
It had been brought to the house by a friend only a few weeks earlier for shooting rabbits on the Blenheim estate.
The Marquis, she said, had fully intended to amend his licence to include this gun.
But, she said, he had simply forgotten.
She said the case hads been handled in a heavy handed way.
The police must have carried out a very thorough search of the premises and she said, threw the book at my client.
In response to such claims, the police said that had Blandford pleaded not guilty, more details about the case would have come out.
Male speaker
Having pleaded guilty, a solicitor can say what they choose in mitigation.
Voice over
Question: What do you say to suggestions made by the court that had it been any other man you would have simply warned them?
Male speaker
I deny that.
Firearms offences are extremely serious.
It's up to the CPS to decide whether to prosecute.
Voice over
The marquis was given a 12 month conditional discharge.
He refused to comment as he left the court.
Fifteen people have been arrested at a joyriding display with stolen cars in Oxford.
OXFORD
Police were called to the city's Wood Farm estate last night.
Thirteen people were arrested but released without charge.
Two others were questioned by police earlier today but have since been released pending further inquiries.
Police have issued a photofit of man they say stabbed a teenager several times in an unprovoked attack.
BICESTER/Oxfordshire
An inquest has failed to establish how a twenty six year old barman came to be found dead in his flat.
A coroner recorded an open verdict after hearing that pathologists couldn't decide why Brian Hawkins had died, and that a charge of manslaughter against another man had now been dropped.
Clare Lafferty reports.
APRIL 1992/STROUD/Gloucestershire
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
JIM HAWKINS/Brian's Father
Voice over
Brian Hawkins, was found dead in his flat in Chapel Street last April.
He'd suffered wounds to his head and chest.
But 4 post mortem examinations have failed to establish the cause of his death.
The only witness to give evidence at today's inquest at Cheltenham County Court was 23 year old, Jason Rigglesford from Stroud.
He told the hearing that the night before the body was found, he'd been to visit Hawkins with another man Michael Talbot.
Rigglesford said Hawkins seemed depressed and had been crying.
He said within minutes Hawkins and Talbot started to argue and then a fight broke out.
Michael Talbot was initially charged with Hawkin's manslaughter, but that charge was later dropped.
He was called to give evidence at this morning's hearing, but, although he appeared at the witness stand he exercised his right to remain silent.
Summing up the evidence, the coroner Lester Maddrell said that despite a full and searching investigation, there was no definite cause of death.
He recorded an open verdict.
Hundreds of jobs are being axed at the government's listening station GCHQ.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
The reasons for the job cuts are a classified secret, but volunteers for redundancy and early retirement are being urged to come forward at the base in Cheltenham, where seven thousand people work.
GCHQ's trying to cut staffing levels within the next two years, but won't specify how many people must leave by then.
Detectives have seized around five hundred suspected pirate videos in a joint operation with copyright investigators.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
The operation, at Milton Keynes, came after a series of complaints from residents and shopkeepers in the city.
Videos worth around forty thousand pounds were seized from a mobile home rental business and a number of vehicles.
A toy knife that lets out a scream when the blade is pressed-in, could encourage children to play at murder, according to Trading Standards officers.
The plastic weapon has been condemned as tasteless and at least one shop has withdrawn it from sale.
Many parents say it should be kept away from children.
Erika Barnes reports.
GLOUCESTER
MIKE HEMBRY/Gloucs Trading Standards
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Voice over
A blood curdling scream provokes crys of protest amongst trading standards officers.
But the painful squeel and blood tipped blade apparently provokes smiles and laughter amongst the cartoon characters advertising the plastic weapon.
Male speaker
It's in pretty bad taste and encourages children to nasty games.
Voice over
The Taiwanese knife was on sale in Cheltenham.
This retailer has now taken it off the shelves whilst Gloucestershire's Trading Standards Department investigates.
Meanwhile parents confronted by the sight and sound of the screaming knife have strong views about its potential as a play thing.
Female speaker
I don't like that.
It's disgusting.
Where did you get it from?
Female speaker
Some shops have taken it off the shelves.
Do you agree?
Female speaker
I'm surprised they have things like that.
I don't want my children to have one.
Male speaker
I wouldn't mind my chappy having one.
It's a bit of fun.
It's a novelty.
They know the difference between right and wrong and plastic and the real thing.
Female speaker
Jesus.
No, I wouldn't buy it.
He's got guns, toy ones because of his father.
Do you like it?
Male speaker
No it's horrible.
I don't want to have a go.
Female speaker
He doesn't like it, see what I mean?
Voice over
Trading Standards officers have no powers to ban the knife, unless it proves to be a physical danger.
So it'll be left to parents to consider whether or not the screaming knife is a potential emotional dangers for their child.
A new centre for the families of children with cancer has been opened by the Duchess of Kent.
The residential home has been funded by the charity CLIC — the Cancer and Leukaemia in Childhood Trust.
It will offer advice and support to relatives of terminally ill children.
Kate Garraway reports.
ADSTOCK/Buckinghamshire
JIM VYSE/Francis's Father
JANE VYSE/Francis's Mother
OXFORD
CECILIA NEWARK/Cancer Victim's Mother
BOB WOODWARD/CLIC Trust Founder
Voice over
In 1989, Francis Vyse was found to have Cancer.
In the 3 years before she died, her family did everything they could to support her, but it was a struggle.
Her parents spent weeks sleeping on a hospital floor, while her sister, Caroline was being cared for by friends.
Male speaker
We had to commute for miles — never saw Caroline.
Female speaker
The stress on the family is unbelievable.)
Voice over
The Duchess of Kent today opened a centre in Oxford which could ease these difficulties.
Funded by charity it offers relatives support and a place to stay while they're children are being treated.
(Clic person says what it'll offer…
Relatives say how marvellous it'll be…)
This year up to fifty children are expected to be referred with cancer to Oxford's hospitals.
At any one time the centre can only help the families of five.
But the organisers hope today's royal visit will raise the interest and money needed to provide the support for many more.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
LEINTWARDINE/Herefordshire
FREDA GARGET/RSPCA
MARGARET HUGHES/Farmer
NORTON LINDSEY/Warwickshire
SUE PIKE/Glenda Spooner Trust
WESTON under PENYARD/Herefordshire
Voice over
Only a few animals remain on Ryelands Farm at Leintwardine in north Herefordshire.
More than 100 have been rescued.
The rest will be collected over the next few days.
The RSPCA was called to the farm after someone reported seeing a lame horse.
Officials couldn't believe what they found.
6 horses were in such a bad state they had to be shot.
One of the horses put down, a stallion, was living in this tiny shed, standing 3ft deep in manure.
Nearby were several rotting goat carcasses blocking feeding troughs.
Most of the stock on the farm was half starved.
Female speaker
It was appalling.
Those animals put down had a merciful release.
The others will take a long time to recover.
Voice over
The owners of the farm returned while we were filming.
Mr Alverley George tried to throw us out.
Female speaker
The animals were well fed.
Voice over
An animal rescue charity is looking after goats and horses saved from Ryelands Farm.
35 Angora goats have been taken to Warwickshire.
The animals are so woolly, it's hard to appreciate just how undernourished they are.
Female speaker
The animals will take a lot of care.
Some have had pneumonia and others need veterinary attention.
Voice over
Meanwhile the charity's centre in Herefordshire is waiting to take 26 rescued horses.
This colt nbamed Bart is the first arrival.
He's so underfed, his weight is three hundredweight below normal.
The charity is hoping that with love and care, the animals from Leintwardine will be able to put their past behind them.
The mother of a boy on a life support machine has attacked the House of Lords ruling that Hillsborough disaster victim Tony Bland can be allowed to die.
Tony has been in a coma for almost four years.
But Anne Rogers whose son James has been unconscious for six years says the ruling just puts pressure on her to do the same thing.
She's been backed by the Life Cares organisation, which says killing patients is never in their best interests.
Anne Nankivell reports.
est
ANNE ROGERS/Mother
James Rogers is 23 and needs round the clock medical attention.
Six years ago a road accident left him severely injured.
Like Hillsborough victim, Tony Bland, James was left in a coma.
But his family persevered with his treatment and brought him home two years ago.
They no longer believe the original diagnosis.
’ Two years after James's accident he was diagnosed as being in a persistent vegetative state.
Because of the case, of going to court to claim compensation for James, we had to have neuroligists to come and look at James and assess him for thes claim and they have said that James is not in a persistent vegetative state.’
’ What improvement have you seen?’
’ A greater awareness, a greater love of life, really, he seems to respond to people, to his environment and to the people that care for him in particular.
He responds to us all in different ways, to his sister, Amanda, he's always smiled at her and we say that he looks at her at her in his cute way.’
’ You're going to the House of Commons tomorrow, what message are you taking there?’
’ I hope that we will be able to protect families in our situation.
I hope that we will be able to give some protection to people like James, people who are in a very weak position.
I hope that we will be able to give them some sort of relief from the distress that I know that they will be feeling at the outcome of this case today.’
A man who was beaten and stabbed while out jogging patrolled city streets until he found one of his attackers.
An eighteen year old's been convicted of violent disorder after his victim identified him in the street.
Simon Garrett reports 
PAUL LANIGHAN/Victim
Voice over
Paul Lanaghan suffered 3 stab wounds when 4 youths attacked him.
He was running across Donnington Bridge road in Oxford last summer.
He bumped into the youths and there was a fight.
Mr Lanaghan returned to the scene to look for his attackers about 10 times…because he felt the police had little chance of success.
Male speaker
The initial police response was good but after a few days I could see they were getting swamped with other cases and I had to do something.
I could see without action my case would just be forgotten about
Voice over
After 5 weeks searching he spotted one of the youths and called after him.
When the youth ran off, he called the police on his mobile phone.
18 year old, Leigh Spencer from Cowley was found nearby and arrested.
At Oxford Crown court Mr Lanaghan denied he could have been mistaken in identifying Spencer.
He said’ I'm 100% certain.
You don't forget someone who threatens to kill you.
Spencer denied having been at the scene when the attack took place but the jury took just less than twenty minutes to convict him.
Members of Spencers family began shouting and had to be restrained.
They said their lives had been ruined, but Mr Lanaghan says it's his family who've really suffered
Male speaker
My children don't like me going out after dark in case I get stabbed again.
My daughter won't let go of my wife's hand when she takes her to school.
It's all because I got stabbed
Voice over
The case was adjourned until Thursday when Spencer will be sentenced.
Mr Lanaghan says he'll continue the search for his three other attackers
One of Britain's best loved childrens' characters is making an appearance back at his birthplace, several decades after he and his chums were dreamed up.
Mister Toad Of Toad Hall has been treading the boards by the River Thames only a stone's throw from his magnificent ancestral home.
Mike Rowbottom has been tracing his lineage 
WHITCHURCH Oxfordshire
PETER MOTTLEY Play Director
Sir JULIAN ROSE Hardwick House Owner
Voice over
rehearsal.
Hello Toady.
Hello you fellows, how are you?
So so!
It's only right that Toad Of Toad Hall, together with the rest of his entourage from Wind In The Willows, should be reincarnated by the Thames in Oxfordshire: that's where they were born, and that's where they probably still live in the hearts and minds of all who grew up with them.
(We've just been talking about you.
Ah well the penalty of fame.
One is talked about, one is discussed, one is speculated about)
And they almsot certainly lived at Hardwick House.
Right by the river.
The very model for Toad Hall.
(You must come up to Toad Hall, it's a jacobean residence with a bit of Tudor thrown in.
You'll love it.)
It's certainly how the Riparians Drama Group from Whitchurch think of it.
That's why they're putting it on this week.
Male speaker
just look at the book.You have the wier, the new iron bridge, Church Cottage in Pangbourne, even a monument with a book on it
Voice over
Not only is Hardwick House the the environment for Kenneth Graham's imagination, Toad himself may well have been based on one of the old inhabitants.
(My great grandfather lived here and he was a larger than life character.
He liked yachts, fast cars and horses.
Kenneth Graham did come to visit quite a lot between 1880 and 1910.)
But in the end it's probably best not to know who and where it all was.
Toad and his pals have their own magic world and maybe they should stay there.
Lord King steps down
But he says the two are not linked.
Major rejects New Statesman apology
FTSE down 3
The hundred shares index closed down three points at two eight six two point nine 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty four and up at two marks, thirty nine.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
TIM RUSSON
BRIAN HORTON/United Manager
JOEY BEAUCHAMP
MIKE TEAGUE
JAN TURNER/Race Director
HUGH JONES/British International
JUSTIN SCOTT/Cirencester
PATRICK ROBINSON/Oxford
Voice over
hello there…today we've come east to the far east for our Central South sport…we're in Nepal with some local pioneers who are setting off on the first ever Kathmandu marathon…before we run we have join our football parade…
its action all the way this week…and here's our star…
Joey Beauchamp…
Oxford United's boy wonder…two more goals against Millwall won the headlines last saturday and the queue of premier league clubs coming to watch is growing longer…
Brian Horton says that Joey is a proven scorer…he's scored goals in the youth team…the reserves and hopefully keeps scoring for the first team…he's exciting…and people love to watch wingers…
Joey says that things are going very well…the team is playing well and he's managing to get lots of chances…
Brian Horton says that Joey has signed a three year contract and he's sold enough players to last him a lifetime…
STING
its Bristol Rovers away tomorrow…
United will be unchanged so Jon Narbett gets another chance to make the number 11 shirt is own…under big Malcolm Allison…
Rovers have lifted themselves off the bottom of the table…but United can win…
Swindon Town are off to Sunderland…they beat the wearsiders one nil down here…the winner from Glenn Hoddle was one of the goals of the seasons…
STING
Town have injury problems…
Hazard is out so Nicky Summerbee comes in and at number nine there's a recall for Dave Mitchell…top scorer Maskell is ruled out
Sunderland made Terry Butcher their manager this morning…they'll want to win for him…lets hope Town do the carving…
in division three its Hereford against Scarborough…
United kicked off the season against them and scored one of their best goals
First football news on goals extra tomorrow tea-time…now its time for rugby news in our weekly review…
Training at Kingsholm could be all ticket in future if the crowds for this week's visit of England is anything to go by…
They poured in to watch Will Carling and his men preparing for the big match…in Cardiff its England against Wales…at Gloucester they were only warming up…
The biggest cheer was for the local hero…
Mike Teague…
Mike Teague says he was amazed at how many people turned out to watch…and it just goes to show how much Gloucester people enjoy their rugby…he says his comeback is going well but there's a lot of pressure to keep winning and England want is a third grand slam…
What else is going on or coming up…its all in our action round up…
The bravest man of the week has to be grand prix driver Martin Donnelly…he was back in a formula one car for the first since a near fatal crash in Spain…
Silverstone was fog bound and slippy but Donnelly a quest of the Jordan team won the day…
Martin Donnelly says…
More brave men at Swindon tomorrow…the area's top fighters are in the ring in Penhill for the Senior Championships…
Tonight in Wantage Oxfordshire cricketers will be chasing runs…its the finals of the indoor six a side championships…
Bad news for Oxford speedway fans…former World Champion Hans Nielsen wants a transfer
Good news and bad news for local jockey Richard Dunwoody he reached his century of winners this week but now leads the championship by just six
and finally they're off and running for the point to point season tomorrow…266 horses will be racing in the South Midland meeting near Chopping Norton…first race is at 11
And so to Nepal…we're in the walled city of Bhaktapur…this is the place where many adaventures start from…the great climbing expeditions pass through here on the way to everest…we're here for a sporting first…the first ever Kathmandu marathon
For most the biggest sporting quest in Nepal is to climb…to conquer the peaks of Everest…
Annapurna and K2…
But its the Kathmandu valley which lies in the shadow of the great mountgain cathedrals that the world of sport has brought a new challenge…
Marathon running…for the first time ever Nepal is having a big race…
And treking down the streets of downtown Kathmandu is Jan Turner…
From Oxford he's travelled the world on a lifetime of adventure…
For the past two years he's been dreaming of bringing the marathon to Nepal…now he's planning the big day…
Jan Turner says that he helped organise an evererst marathon a few years ago and one sad thing about that was the local runners could not afford the right equipment or didn't have the money to tarin…so he's here to help them
That's the theory…here's the practical…first the course…they've mapped out the 26 miles…the beauty of the route lies in the cobbled squares of ancient towns like Bhaktapur…the beast is the city…traffic and smoke is a major problem…the other unknown factor is altitude…
Kathmandu is over four thousand feet high…that's why race favourite Hugh Jones…the first Brit to win the London Marathon has been out here for a week training…
High Jones says that this an unknown race because of the altitute…he doesn't know how it will affect runners…his guess is that the times will be slower
Jones and another top Brit Ieuan Ellis have been flown in…the rest of the field has to be recruited…the New York marathon started with only 20…but when they gather for the pasta party on the eve of the race…150 have been signed up…18 nations will be running
we've two runners from central south…
Justin Scott's from Cirencester…
Justin says he was signed up while in a local resturant the other day and has never run a marathon before but has always wanted to…
and Patrick Robinson of Oxford is out here working…
Patrick says his last marathon was in Gloucester in 1985…he's a lot older now
On the morning of the race…
Durbar Square…one of the holiest most precious parts of old Kathmandu is alive…
For Jan Turner there's one last problem…
Jan says the bus bringing the runners has failed to turn up and he might have to start without them
The runners roll up on time and take their marks on the start line…143 have made it…
For most of course whether they're here for fun or fame the aim is to make it all the way…
No records will be broken that's for sure as the sun begins to boil…
In the cramped and crowded city everyone is out to watch the runners battle away…
For the locals life goes on until the race approaches…over 100 police are on duty…they've managed to close the city centre for the leaders but for the tailenders there's a real old jam…
For Kathmandu the marathon is one of the biggest…grandest sporting events of the year and what a welcome there is for Ieuan Ellis as he races down the straight of the national stadium to win in a time of 2 hours 24 minutes and five seconds…
Jones is second…a russian third…and then there's a procession of local runners some of whom are feeling the pace…
out on the roads the last of the runners are walking home…
Justin says he ran for the first bit and now has a big blister
Another runner says its the worst run of his life
Patrick says the last time he ran was in Gloucester was in driving wind and rain
Jan Turner says he's delighted with the way the race has gone and Kathmandu will now be the race everyone wants to run in…
and it will take some of those runners…a few days…a few weeks to recover but believe it or not they're already talking about and planning next year's race
Medical researchers believe they could be close to pinning down the cause of hereditary asthma.
They've found a gene which they think could be passed on by parents to their children.
MIke Rowbottom reports 
Voice over
Scientists have been studying hundreds of asthma sufferers to see if there's a family link.
The illness causes the sufferer to fight for every breath when they're having an attack.
Now researchers at the Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine in Oxford say they have found what they call a candidate gene which they think is likely to make someone vulnerable to asthma.
Their results are published this weekend.
They already believe the illness can be inherited through a complex pattern of genetic relationships.
However they're quick to point out that these are early days and they may not even have the right gene.
If they did, it will be at least 10 years before a cure is developed.
A teenager who refused to believe doctors when they said he'd never walk again may be about to prove them wrong.
Six years ago Stephen Dent was paralysed in a freak accident.
Now, after three months' intensive therapy at a Russian clinic, he's on the verge of achieving the miracle that only he and his mum had expected.
Robin Powell reports.
LYDBROOK/Gloucestershire
STEPHEN DENT/Aged 16
RUTH DENT/Stephen's Mother
Voice over
6 years ago, Stephen Dent's life dramatically changed.
A fit and healthy 10 year old, he was playing in the lounge with his brother when he fell on a knitting needle, which pierced his neck and punctured his spinal cord.
He was paralysed instantly.
Doctors said he'd never walk again, but Stephen didn't believe them.
Ruth's just returned with Stephen from Moscow, where he underwent three months' intensive therapy at the pioneering Valentine Dikoul Clinic.
It was hard work, but for the first time there are signs of movement in Stephen's legs and clinic staff are hopeful he may soon be able to walk.
Next step for Stephen — GCSEs at Bishop's School in Hereford in the summer.
He's keeping himself so busy, he'd quite forgotten that this weekend is the 6th anniversary of the accident.
The important thing, he says, is not to look back.
Stephen admits he's unlikely to realise his lifelong ambition of playing for Aston Villa.
There again, he's already proved that with willpower like his, almost anything is possible.
In part two: Challenge of the Miles…the first-ever Kathmandu marathon.
And was THIS Toad Hall?
The secret of the house by the river.
Exposed: The black hole that hides forty years of pollution.
Jailed.
The teacher who allowed drugs and underage sex in his home.
And against the odds: They said he'd never walk…but he's fighting.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Environmental health officers were alerted by pot holers, who discovered oil slicks four hundred feet underground.
The caves have now been closed because the air inside is unbreathable.
Our reporter Ken Goodwin has been investigating.
SLING/Gloucestershire
CLARE BISHOP/Caver
OWEN GARRIGAN/Environmental Health Officer
RAY WRIGHT/Clearwell Caves Owner
BRIAN RUCK/Company Director
Voice over
Caves — 400ft below the Forest of Dean.
The last place you'd expect to find pollution, but the evidence is here in these photographs.
Underground streams, once clear, now glisten with oil.
Central can't film here because since these photographs were taken the air's become too poisonous to breath.
Cavers like Clair Bishop, who came into contact with the chemicals, have been told if they suffer ill effects see their doctors.
She says that in retrospect, she wonders why she allowed herself to wade through it.
It smelt and made it hard to breath.
The caves are near the bottom of the New Dunn shaft, in an old iron ore mine.
The top of the shaft is in a yard at Watkins engineering at Sling near Coleford.
For the last 40 years the firm's been using the shaft to dump waste oil, solvents and even raw sewage from its toilets.
Most of the material remains in the shaft.
But when water levels rise, after heavy rain, the caves flood, bringing water into contact with the pollutants.
When the water drops, the substances drift back along the passageways and soak into the water table.
Environmental Health Officers say they don't yet know whether cavers are in danger.
He says that any cavers worried for their health should get a medical check up.
They don't yet know the full extent of the pollution.
Ray Wright owns Clearwell caves, which are open to the public and not affected by the pollution.
But he's had to close some of the deeper galleries which only pot holers use, because of the build up of toxic gasses.
And he's worried that the pollution could spread.
He says that below the Forest of Dean lies one of Britains largest natural reservoirs.
Shafts lead into it, therefore any pollution put down those shafts is bound to get into the water.
Watkins engineering makes and refurbishes storage tanks.
When old tanks are brought in, some are still part full.
Normally they'd pay to have the contents safely removed.
But Watkins saved money by using the shaft instead.
The fact that they were creating a possible environmental hazard, didn't enter into it.
He says that they have been using the shaft for dumping substances.
Didn't anyone at the company realise they might be causing pollution?
They hadn't really thought about it, untill the complaints from the council.
Sewage was dumped down the shaft too and no, it was not an environmentaly friendly thing to do.
Watkins says it has now stopped dumping in the shaft and will pay to have it cleared.
But questions remain.
Just what chemicals make up the cocktail in the mine shaft.
Is there danger to those who've come into contact with them?
How far into the water table have they seeped?
And how many other shafts have been used by companies or individuals as free dumps?
Samples being analysed by Environmental Health Officers and the National Rivers Authority may provide some answers.
A teacher who allowed schoolchildren to have under age sex and drug sessions at his home has been jailed for a year.
The court was told that youngsters also used his home to watch pornographic videos and drink alcohol.
David Crabtree reports 
KIDDERMINSTER/Worcestershire
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
The Crown court in Kidderminster heard that 46 year old, Andrew Tracey had once been a member of the paedophile information exchange.
He taught English at the Bredon Hill Middle School near Evesham, but was suspended from his duties when the allegations were made about his dealings with youngsters, who were not from the school.
The court was told that Tracey had allowed a 13 year old girl and a 15 year old boy to use his bed to have sex.
The girl became pregnant, but later suffered a miscarriage.
Other youngsters of a similar age went to his home in Northwick Road, Evesham.
They drank whisky and cider, watched pornogrhapic videos that the teacher had brought back from a holiday in Germany.
They smoked cannabis.
He even gave one youngster some money to pay-off a drug dealer.
Judge Michael Mott said Tracey had shown a complete lack of concern for young people.
He called it a disgraceful situation for a man in a position of trust.
He said the young people obviously thought they had some measure of adult approval.
The court was told that there was no evidence that Tracey had interfered with any of the youngsters.
But he admitted allowing under age sex and the smoking of cannabis in his home and was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment on each charge to run concurrently.
A husband has appeared in court accused of murdering a friend of his wife.
He's also charged with attacking his wife and his son.
The court was told that the accused man was also injured.Tim Hurst reports.
31 JANUARY/GLOUCESTER
Voice over
The court appearance follows the stabbing to death in Gloucester last weekend of a Swindon man, Paul Kempster.
He was found dead by police at the home of Mrs Marilyn Lundberg.
She was also injured as was her son Ziggy, who's 19.
At Gloucester magistrates court, Mrs Lundberg's estranged husband was accused of murder.
The dead man was described in court as a recent friend of Mrs Lundberg.
She's still being treated for injuries to her legs at Gloucestershire Royal Hospital.
Anorexia tragedy…husband calls for more research after wife's death.
Cracking up…bridge closure causes traffic chaos.
And taking charge…the parish run by a woman deacon.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
QUEDGELEY/Gloucestershire
ROGER HOPES/Widower
TINA LEIPER/Daughter
Voice over
When Jacqueline Hopes married her husband Roger in 1966, her face was full of happiness.
But behind the smile there were deep psychological scars.
She had been sexually abused as a child; an incident that made her attempt suicide.
And there was more heartbreak ahead when she gave birth to a brain damaged son.
Her husband believes the anorexia stemmed from these experiences.
The symptoms began 10 years ago:
Male speaker
She used to vomit up her food and take laxatives.
Jacqueline's weight dropped from 10 stone to just over 4 and a half stone by the time of her death on December 23rd last year.
But she would never admit to being anorexic and refused help:
Male speaker
She was adamant that she was not anorexic.
When she died, she was just skin and bone.
Voice over
The family now say more research is needed into anorexia to prevent future tragedies:
Female speaker
If more research had been carried out, my mother could be alive today.
JOHN HEVESI/Anorexics Anonymous
Voice over
A nine mile stretch of motorway has been closed because of serious structural faults in a thirty four year old bridge.
Engineers discovered cracks in two supports of the bridge taking the M50 across the River Severn in Gloucestershire.
Diverted traffic has been causing chaos on roads.
Nick Clark reports.
M50/Gloucestershire
BILL WADRUP/Department of Transport
MIKE WINNEY/New Civil Engineer Magazine
Voice over
Normally twenty two thousand vehicles a day cross the River Severn here on the Gloucestershire Worcestershire border.
The closure was ordered last night after an engineer discovered one of two vertical pins holding up one of the bridge supports had developed a six inch crack.
Male speaker
If both had gone part of the bridge would have dropped down.
Voice over
Further cracking in another support pin has been discovered, and engineers are still checking the structure.
The Department of Transport say the damage occured yesterday while a routine inspection was actually being carried out.
Male speaker
It was fortunate there were experts on the bridge at the time.
This is a unique design.
There shouldn't be similar problems with other bridges around the country.
Voice over
It's believed the problems were brought on by wear on tear.
The bridge was built in nineteen fifty eight.
Experts say this shows the benefit of regular inspections.
Male speaker
It's important bridges of this age are regularly checked.
Voice over
Meanwhile the closure has led to severe traffic congestion in the area.
Motorists passing through Tewkesbury have been badly hit.
Male speaker
It's terrible.
Traffic's heavier than ever.
Female speaker
it's dreadful.
Voice over
The engineers say the bridge will be relatively easy to make safe.
They hope contra-flow traffic will be back on the motorway within four days with the whole section opening as normal inside three weeks.
The widow of publisher Robert Maxwell has given her first in-depth interview since leaving her home in England.
Elizabeth Maxwell was said to have left the country after her husband's death.
But she's recently been seen in the region.
Gareth Furby reports.
OXFORD
FRED PAINE/Eyewitness
ANN HAWTIN/Former Maxwell Employee
JOHN ARNOLD/City Estates Officer
Voice over
Elizabeth Maxwell was reported to have moved to France after her husband's death, leaving behind the family mansion, Oxford's Headington Hill Hall.
But an article in the new edition of Vanity Fair magazine claims she is still living in Britain.
And one eyewitness says he saw her at Headington only last week.
He says he's convinced he saw Mrs Maxwell going out in a small car.
The interview is the first since Robert Maxwell's death last November and was conducted in secret by an American journalist.
He says she showed up at London's Dorchester Hotel dressed all in black, nobody knew she was there at all.
In the interview Mrs Maxwell says she had no involvement with her husband's business.
And she adds:
But Alan Govier from Oxford hasn't received a penny in pension payments.
And Ann Hawtin who dealt with Mrs Maxwell on a daily basis, fears she's lost her pension as well.
She says it's wrong to say that only Mrs Maxwell lost her pension.
Perhaps she was misled.
The freehold for Headington Hill Hall is owned by Oxford Council.
But as long the rent of £10,000 a year continues to be paid, council officers aren't bothered if Mrs Maxwell lives there or not.
He says as long as the terms of the lease are complied with the council won't be concerned.
For the moment Elizabeth Maxwell's wherabouts, like the circumstances of her husband death, remain the subject of speculation.
One of Britain's most famous cheese shops is facing closure.
Wells Store started from humble beginings in the early nineteen fifties and helped persuade the public that there was more to life than English cheddar.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
HUGH RANCE/Owner
RAYMOND BLANC/Chef and Hotelier
Voice over
Wells store in Abingdon is a mecca for cheese lovers, stocking around two hundred different varieties.
It started in 1953 as a village grocers in Streatley, but expanded to become Britain's most famous cheese shop.
Hugh Rance took over the Store from his father, Patrick, in 1985…and moved to Abingdon two years ago.
But, despite a hugh increase in demand for different types of cheese, the shop's facing closure.
Wells store has helped expand the British cheese market by actively encouraging many small dairy farms to produce speciality cheeses.
Mary Hale supplies the store with North Wiltshire cheese from a small farm near Swindon.
Wells is one of her largest customers, and its closure would have a damaging effect on her.
And on top restaurants, like Le Manoir aux Quatre Saison at Great Milton.
Hugh Rance says his father, who's the author of many best-selling books about cheese, would be heart broken if the shop were to close.
Work has started on cutting back a group of two thousand year old lime trees at one of the country's oldest arboretums.
It's being carried out by foresters using an ancient technique which will ensure the trees survival.
Richard Barnett reports.
WESTONBIRT Gloucestershire
TONY RUSSELL Superintendent
JOHN WHITE Forestry Commission
Voice over
There have been small leaved lime trees at Westonbirt in Gloucestershire for 6,000 years.
Trees like this once covered most of the south of England.
This clump is reckoned to be 2,000 years old.
The limes have survived that long because of the technique of coppicing.
It involves cutting down the main trunk to encourage new growth from the edge of the stump.
Remarkably this clump of limes which is 60 feet across, started as one tree which was coppiced by woodmen in Neolithic times.
The trees are being re-coppiced this week for the first time in more than 50 years to keep them healthy.
Male speaker
Coppicing is one of our most ancient ways of managing woodland.
Without it the trees would have died out long ago.
Voice over
It will take 2 days to cut down all 80 trunks and clear away the wood.
It would have taken our ancestors considerably longer to do the same job 2,000 years ago.
Male speaker
Neolithic man would have used an axe to cut the trees.
He wouldn't have been able to cope with the larger trunks.
Voice over
The last record of the bark being used for rope-making was in the First World War, when the German army used lime bark ropes to tow their guns.
But the timber is still much prized and Westonbirt arboretum hopes all the felled trunks will be put to good use.
One woodcarver plans to make a rocking horse to sell in aid of leukaemia research.
So the coppicing at Westonbirt arboretum may help to ensure the survival of more than just the trees.
Man arrested over Ashdown documents
A man has been arrested in connection with the burglary in which documents relating to Mr. Ashdown's private life were stolen.
Former lover deplores press coverage
Tricia Howard, Mr. Ashdown's former lover, has said she deplores the press coverage of the affair.
PM invites Ulster leaders to talks
The Prime Minister is to invite the leaders of the four main parties in Northern Ireland for talks on the crisis there.
Stephanie kidnapper denies Julie Dart murder
A man who claims to be the kidnapper of the estate agent, Stephanie Slater, has written to the Police to deny the murder of teenager, Julie Dart.
Hospital in cancer scare
North Staffordshire Royal Infirmary has revealed that nearly a thousand cancer patients have been wrongly treated there in the past nine years.
Gay rights protestors arrested near Parliament
Dozens of of Gay Rights campaigners have been arrested for marching too close to the Houses of Parliament whilst it was in session.
FTSE down 12
The hundred shares index closed down twelve point eight at twenty-five, thirty-four point three.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-two and down at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A female deacon has made history by becoming the first woman to be put in charge of a parish in the Gloucester Diocese.
The Reverend Patricia Pinkerton now looks after two churches and more than two thousand parishioners.
But she still doesn't have the same powers as her male peers.
Clare Lafferty reports.
ST BRIAVELS/Gloucestershire
Rev PATRICIA PINKERTON/Minister in Charge
Voice over
Hundreds of people crowded into St Briavels church last night to see the Reverend Patricia Pinkerton installed in her new parish.
It's the first time the Gloucester Diocese has ever allowed a woman to take charge of a church.
Reverend Pinkerton thinks she'll be readily accepted.
She may live in a vicarage, but because she's a woman Reverend Pinkerton can't be called a vicar.
Instead, she's a Minister in Charge.
And as a woman she's not allowed to absolve or bless people or bless communion wafers.
She admits she finds this irritating.
On her first day out and about in her parish there was no doubting her popularity.
Reverend Pinkerton will conduct her first service on this Sunday.
She's hoping the novelty of a woman at the altar will attract a few more sheep into her flock.
In part two: one of the lucky ones…treatment in the womb saves a baby's life
Cheesed off…the shopkeeper who could be forced to sell up.
And rooted in history…the ancient art of coppicing.
Doctors treating a blood disease which kills a hundred unborn babies a year, say they need new equipment if they're to save more lives.
They've launched an appeal for a scanner to help in the treatment of Rhesus babies while they're still in the womb.
Kim Barnes reports.
HIGH WYCOMBE/Buckinghamshire
TINA BOWLER/Mother
TONY KERR/Father
OXFORD
MARK SELLINGER/Oxford Rhesus Therapy Unit
MARK SELLINGER/Oxford Rhesus Therapy Unit
Voice over
Tina Bowler and Tony Kerr have a happy family life, but at a price.
Tina runs a huge risk of having a rhesus baby and this, her third pregnancy has been very difficult.
The treatment they've had at the Oxford Rhesus therapy centre has saved her unborn baby's life.
Home for much of Tina's pregancy has been the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.
Every 3 weeks her baby needs a blood transfusion.
But first they must test his blood.
The doctor hunts for the umbilical cord on the ultra sound scanner to take a sample.
It's tested.
Within minutes it's proved the baby is anaemic.
The transfusion must go ahead.
Now the doctor has to try and locate a suitable place to inject the blood.
He chooses a blood vessel.
It's hard work.
The blood is deliberately strong and thick to give the baby the most benefit.
But it's got to pass through this delicate needle.
The baby's heart slows down slightly; they stop before all the blood's in; there's enough.
The problem arises when the mother is rhesus negative and her baby is rhesus positive.
If some rhesus positive blood leaks into her bloodstream, she will produce antibodies, which could attack her next baby making him anaemic.
The risk gets higher with each pregnancy.
There are about 200 at risk rhesus babies each year and when it comes to treating them, ultra sound scanners have made the difference, making it much easier to carry out accurate safe transfusions.
There are only 5 centres in the country doing this work and the Oxford Rhesus Therapy Unit is trying to raise £40,000 to buy an up to date scanner.
At the moment they have to share one.
It means vital transfusions carried out at the earliest stage, rather than when the child is born, when it may be too ill to survive.
The treatment has saved Tina's baby; even if it is a little uncomfortable.
Just a few days later baby Joe was born, weighing just four and three quarter pounds, but healthy; living proof that rhesus babies now have the chance they deserve.
Sport and Oxford United's biggest crowd in three years of just under ten thousand packed into the Manor Ground last night for the FA cup tie with Sunderland.
But their support wasn't enough to inspire an Oxford victory…
United ended up losing by three goals to two.
Tim Russon reports.
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
Swindon now know who their opponents will be in the fifth round of the FA Cup.
Two in court over Ashdown theft
Two people have appeared in court charged in connection with the break-in at the offices from where papers referring to Mr Ashdown's private life were stolen.
Man arrested over theft is Tory Association member
One of the people charged, Simon Berkowitz, is a non-active member of the Hove and Portslade Conservative Association.
The group said it deplores the alleged theft.
2
Nearly two and a half thousand jobs are to go in the motor industry, the majority at Ford, the remainder at Vauxhall.
Boxer involved in fatal crash
The boxing champion, Chris Eubank, has been involved in an accident in Sussex in which a man died.
Eubank sustained cuts and bruises.
FTSE down 17
The hundred shares index closed down seventeen point one at twenty-five, seventeen point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-three and at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
six gold medals in seventy years is Britain's record at the winter olympics…let's hope our luck changes in France…and let's also hope for some goals from our three central south sides tomorrow…
Swindon and Hereford are at home…
Oxford away 
Voice over
Let's kick-off with a football cliche.
Now we're out of the cup, we can concentrate on the league.
That's what Brian Horton and his Oxford men will be saying to themselves tomorrow, when they face Leicester City at Filbert Street.
They were beaten 2-1 by City at the Manor — Wright; Thompson; Simpson.
Brian Horton has more injury problems.
Les Robinson is back, but Foster and Aylott are both out, which means Dave Penney will lead the attack.
United have the worst away record in the second division, while Leicester have ambitions of 1st division or premier league football next season.
Swindon could do thesmelves and Oxford a favour tomorrow, by beating struggling Brighton.
Down at the Goldstone Ground.
Town won 2-0 with Duncan Shearer hitting them both.
Brighton are in the relegation battle; Town back in the promotion race.
The only problem facing Glenn Hoddle, is whether to bring back Fitzroy Simpson after suspension in place of Tom Jones.
Mickey Hazard meanwhile, has been charged with misconduct by the FA for making gestures at the Cambridge crowd.
He's going to fight the case.
Form fancies Swindon, with 50 goals this season, they're the top scorers in the 2nd division.
In the 4th division, Hereford United are back in action after a 2 week lay-off.
Chesterfield at home tomorrow, they lost 2-0 up there, so revenge tomorrow.
United have named a squad of 14.
Richard Jones is back in the reckoning at last after a long injury lay off.
Goal of the week came at the County Ground on Tuesday night; the scorer Tom Jones.
It's cup day in rugby tomorrow…the big match is at Kingsholm…
Gloucester the only unbeaten team in the first division take on London Scottish who've won all of their games in the second division 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
Voice over
London Scottish may have been out of top league rugby for a few seasons, but they're a real threat to the cherry and whites.
The 2 sides met at Kingsholm last season.
Gloucester won 17-10; could this be their year to win the cup?
The cherry and whites have a full squad to choose from.
The first 15 are out tomorrow.
Scottish; The Exiles are on high, but Kingsholm on a big day can be a killer.
good luck to Gloucester and good luck to all our other Central South sportsfolk competing this weekend…here's what's coming up in Mark Kiff's round-up 
Voice over
Oxfordshire's Julie Bradbury defends her English badminton title this weekend at Torbay.
Despite her success last year, Julie is unseeded.
If all goes well, she should meet Commonwealth Champion Fiona Smith in the quarter finals.
Oxford University's Matthew Syed has got off to a flying start in the Olympic Qualifying tournament in Italy, winning both his opening matches.
He now looks a good bet to go through to the next stage of the competition tomorrow.
Oxford City Women's cross country team has struck gold.
They've just won the Southern Women's Championships for the second time.
Many of the best women tennis players from home and abroad will be competing in Swindon for the next 7 days.
They'll be in action at the Delta Tennis Centre, battling it out for £5,500 in prize money.
And finally, the going should be perfect at Kingston Blount near Thame tomorrow as the point to point season gets into it's stride.
More than 200 riders have entered the 10 races, which begin at 11.30 a.m.
A company which pioneered a scheme to mark horses to stop them being stolen has been awarded a Royal warrant.
The horses are freeze-marked instead of the traditional heat branding.
As Gargy Patel reports, it's kinder to the horse, and it's an effective way to deter the growing number of horse thieves.
SOUTH NEWINGTON/Oxfordshire
VIVIAN BURNHAM/Horse Owner
MARY AWRE/MMB Farmkey
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
Voice over
It takes just a few seconds, but it gives horses better security for life.
Freeze marking is used by a growing number of owners to give animals their own serial number and put off thieves.
More and more horses are falling prey to rustlers who often sell them for slaughter abroad.
For the owner, it can mean heartbreak at the loss of a family pet.
Despite publicity there's little chance of finding the animal.
To avoid the same thing happening to her other horse, Vivian is using specialists company MMB Farmkey from Banbury.
Using a combination of alcohol and dry ice, the firm has pioneered a safe and effective system to deter thieves.
The super chilled marker kills the pigment cells in the hair, which then grow back white to show a distinct code.
The system using freezing instead of hot branding has been working for 12 years and the firm has now won a Royal Warrant.
Details of the animal are registered on a certificate.
The information is then entered onto a National Security register at the firm's headquarters in Banbury.
It's available to police forces around the country.
With a sharp rise in the number of horse thefts in the region, owners see marking as vital protection.
Union leaders and business experts say they're shocked by the sacking of a council executive who brought thousands of new jobs to an unemployment blackspot.
But the council is defending its decision…it says it has to find savings to balance its budget.
Gargy Patel reports.
SWINDON
TONY MAYER/Council Leader
JOHN O'KEEFE/Galileo
PETER STRATFORD/Chamber of Commerce
Voice over
The decision to axe the post of Swindon's Economic director has led to anger and protest.
The Local Government union NALGO calls it an infamous act of betrayal to Jamie Robertson, who helped bring in thousands of new jobs to the area following the closure of the railway works in the mid nineteen eightees.
The council says it had no choice…jobs are being cut to help maintain services as they struggle to balance the budget.
Tonight Jamie Robertson, the man at the centre of the row, is keeping a low profile.
He spearheaded Swindon's revival as a boom town in the late eightees, helping to attract major firms like car makers Honda and one of Europe's leading information distribution firms Galileo.
Business experts in the town are now increasingly worried about Swindon's future without a development focus.
The council denies betraying Mr. Robertson.
It says committment to business in Swindon will be as strong as ever.
Meanwhile NALGO is considering whether to take industrial action over the issue.
An MP is calling for an investigation into supermarket pricing, claiming high prices are to blame for keeping inflation from falling further.
And a
Central South investigation has revealed that prices on the continent can prove cheaper than Britain.
This report from Gareth Furby.
CALAIS/France
LAUREN DUNLOP-HUMPHREY/Cross-Channel Shopper
RICHARD JACKSON/Cross-Channel Shopper
MICHAEL MORRIS MP/Con Northampton South
Voice over
At a hypermarket in France today, scores of British customers, including a couple from Oxford, on day trip they said to take advantage of cheaper prices:
She says it makes sense to go to France.
He says they have more aggressive pricing there.
According to the Conservative MP for Northampton South supermarkets on the continent make less profits…than their British couterparts.
He says the increase in food prices is one of the largest items fuelling inflation.
But Tesco insists its prices are cheaper.
Today Central went to France to check out the check-outs, with a visit to this hypermaket in Calais.
So fresh from France a basket of groceries.
Nine items that a freely available on both sides of the channel.
The cost, at today exchange rate on the ferry, eleven pounds seventy three pence.
Similar groceries were then purchased in Tesco's at Abingdon in Oxfordshire.
The total bill: thirteen pounds seventeen pence.
So shopping in Calais could bring a saving on two pounds 32p.
Some of today's cross channel shoppers say that's typical:
The price savings in our basket of French food.
A cheese and tomato pizza…thrity three pence cheaper.
Semi Skimmed Milk…four pence cheaper
Ariel Ultra…a saving of 25p.
And uncle ben's rice…55p less.
But some producets were more expensive in France…for example Maxwell House instant coffee…cost an extra 37p.
Tonight Tesco insisted its own survey's had shown its prices to be constitently cheaper than on the continent.
The company says some surveys do not provide a wide enoough sample to give a balanced picture.
But the fact remains…at at least one French hymerkaet…
British shoppers who want the best prices may be better of shopping cross-channel.
In part two: Icy determination: Downhill all the way for Olympic skiing gold.
Icy nerves.
Ed and his mates just bobbing along.
And, ice and easy…
Royal approval for a new brand of horse marking.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
GRAHAM BELL
ED HORLER
Voice over
The winter games will bring us 2 weeks of snow and ice.
A spectacular sporting show of skill and style, of high speed daredevil displays.
The first test of courage comes on Sunday in Val d’ Isere with the downhill.
The blue riband of ski-ing.
Our man racing is Graham Bell from Henley on Thames.
He's been to the last 2 olympics, skied in world cups, faced the steepest and fastest of runs.
Graham spends all winter on the slopes.
2 or 3 days at home in Oxfordshire is a luxury, even when he does get the chance to relax, he watches re-runs and readies himself for the next race.
The downhillers will win the headlines, but this might win more hearts; free style ski-ing.
It's included in the games for the first time.
Mogul racing, ballet and aerials; absolutely breathtaking.
But one of the biggest challenges for the skiers is the cross country, racing up and down over and across mountains.
John Read from Gloucester goes in this, while Jason Sklenar from Cheltenham faces an even tougher ordeal in the biathlon.
It's cross country ski-ing combined with rifle shooting; they race for 12 miles and along the way have 4 targets to shoot at.
The fastest Brit on skis is likely to be Jonathan Elabor from Worcestershire.
He's competing in the speed event; this time around it's a demonstration sport, but anyone who's got the guts to fly down an ice run at 100 mph deserves a medal.
The speed skaters go about half that speed, but danger slides at you from every corner.
Our girl here is Debbie Palmer from Swindon.
She's the British champ.
Finally the Swindon Gym and Fitness centre is where you'll find one of the strong men of the British olympic team.
RAF sergeant Ed Horler has been reporting for training here.
His job requires explosive power, he'll be riding on the 4 man bobsleigh.
Health service tells patients family they must pay for her own life support equipment.
Charges dropped against Gulf War charity founder who says he was smeared.
And checking out claims that shoppers are better off abroad.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
WOOTTON/Nr Woodstock/Oxfordshire
FAMILY VIDEO
SHIRLEY ARMITAGE/Daughter
FEWCOTT/Oxfordshire
Voice over
Shirley Armitage doesn't give up easily and when it comes to vital care for her elderly mother, she's prepared for a battle.
She's been writing to the Health Minister, her local MP and Norma Major every day for 2 weeks and plans to continue.
Her mother Mary Butler, seen here before a serious stroke which left her unable to swallow, now needs a tube and pump system to get food directly into her stomach.
Now she's being asked to pay for it herself.
Mrs Butler came to live here at Fewcott House after a month's stay in hospital.
Because it's a registered nursing home, according to the rules its owners are liable for the cost of medical supplies.
That means equipment which would be free if you were in hospital or even in your own home is costing Mrs Butler £116 a month.
The Health Authority declined to be interviewed but said tonight, the law says medical equipment and treatment is the responsibility of the nursing home.
Mrs Armitage says she's fighting for other families too.
So far, Tony Baldry has promised to look into Mrs Armitage's campaign, while Norma Major has said she can't help.
William Waldegrave is yet to reply.
She zsays her postal battle goes on.
A man accused of stealing money from a Gulf War charity has had all charges against him dropped.
Barry Lloyd, who set up the Gulf Families Association, and still counsels soldiers and their families, says he was the victim of a smear campaign.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
WITHINGTON/Gloucestershire
BARRY LLOYD/Gulf Families Association Founder
DOUG MORRIS/Crisis Line Co-founder
Voice over
Barry Lloyd was about to make his fourth court appearance next week.
Now ths charges of taking money from the charity he founded, have been withdrawn.
Great News for him and a relief for his colleagues.
Barry is forty two this week, he's still recovering from a heart attack, but the stress of the last four months have kept him smoking.
He believes the people he was was working with did not know how he was running the organisation.
Male speaker
The people who reported me were overzealous in thinking I had done something wrong
Voice over
The former Royal Artillery man had been accused of stealing three hundred and forty three pounds from the Gulf Families Association which he founded in Gloucester.
There were four charges including one specific one of taking ninety six pounds.
He insists this was for petrol expenses incurred in promoting a fund raising record.
Male speaker
A young lady wanted to help by making a record.
We had to pay transport costs for her to come to recording sessions
Voice over
The Gulf Families Association has now wound up but Mr Lloyd still takes an active role in the Gulf Crisis Line…a counselling charity for servicemen and their families.
His colleagues admit while the charges were hanging over his head they had trouble getting funding.
Male speaker
We had trouble attracting money from peopleBarry Lloyd thinks people did not understand his health problems.
Male speaker
I think I was the subject of a smear campaign.
I think people believed I let them down
The Crown Prosecution Service in Gloucester is saying only that the charges have been withdrawn because their wasn't enough evidence.
A deer has had to be put down after its leg was ripped off in an illegal snare.
The RSPCA official who rescued the animal said it was one of the most sickening scenes he had ever witnessed.
Now the society wants all snares to be made illegal.
Clare Lafferty reports.
Pictures/GLOUCESTERSHIRE ECHO
MISERDEN/Gloucestershire
Insp ALVER POWELL/RSPCA
JERRY BROOKES/Gloucestershire Badger Group
KEVIN McNAMARA MP/Lab Hull North
Voice over
It's believed the deer had been struggling in the snare for more than two days before it was found.
The wire had cut so deeply, it had ripped off one of its legs and badly damaged another.
The RSPCA official who rescued the animal described the scene as horrific.
To see a deer with one hind leg removed and another damaged was sickening.
The type of snare that trapped the deer is mainly used to catch rabbits and foxes.
But Jerry Brookes of the Gloucestershire Badger Group has seen all too often what it can do to other animals.
Although it's illegal to use these snares it isn't illegal to make, sell or buy them.
Animal welfare groups want them outlawed all together.
They're backing a private members bill, that's the Wild Mammals Protection Bill, which has been introduced by the Labour MP Kevin McNamara.
The bill will get it's second reading in the House of Commons next week.
Animal lovers are hoping the law is changed before too many other creatures suffer agonising deaths.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Sunderland had a new manager to show off…a big crowd to shout them on…and the bounce of the ball…but Swindon still came out on top…mind you when Shaun Taylor gave away a penalty in the first half…things looked a bit dodgy…
Fraser Digby came to the rescue with a flying save from Armstrong's kick…
The winner came just after half-time…and for the third game running it came from the shooting boot of defender Paul Bodin…when was the last time a full back scored three goals in a row…who cares…this one was good enough to give Swindon victory…
Late on the Roker Roar encouraged Sunderland to make a charge…
The Swindon goal held out and even survived another penalty…in injury time the referee guided by the linesman blew for hand ball against Bodin…
A penalty…never in a month of sundays…swindon were fuming…but justice was done when Kevin Ball blasted the kick wide…
Sunderland 0 Swindon 1…the right result…
STING
It was the right result at Twerton Park too…not the right scoreline…
Oxford should have had a hatfull against Bristol Rovers…they were on top all the way through…three or four nil would have been a fairer reflection…
The United goal never really looked in any great danger…this was about the only lapse…
United seem to have found their confidence…if they find the finishing touch they can really go places…
One goal was good enough…it came midway through the second half…skipper Andy Melville ran it in and ran off to celebrate…
Bristol Rovers nil Oxford one
and Oxford go chasing their third win in a row at Sunderland tomorrow…in division three Hereford are just chasing anything they can get…they were out of luck again at scarborough on saturday 
Voice over
Most folk enjoy a day at the seaside…but Hereford's hopes went out with the tide…they were washed away after only three minutes when Lightbourne made it one-nil…
Hereford are a real hard luck story this season…nothing seems to go their way…they could have been 2-1 up at half-time…surely Leroy May couldn't get any closer to scoring…
oh yes he could…just before half time United had an even better chance to make something of the game…
an expensive miss…was followed up in the second half by an even more expensive mistake…as Tommy Mooney was presented with a chance to make it two nil…
short on goals this week…but big on tries…
Gloucester ran in seven against Newport at Kingsholm…to knock up their biggest win of the season…it finished 42…7 
Voice over
Not every Welshman was singing in the valley.
The cherry and whites kept the flag flying for English rugby with this run away win.
Newport were understrength, but Gloucester were on full power as they piled up the points.
Winger Derrick Morgan scored the first try.
The second was more about pressure than pace, as the pack bulldozed through for Paul Ashmead to score.
In the second half, Gloucester pushed even harder.
Newport were in shreds as Marcus Hannaford cleaned up for the third try.
And then, for the next 10 minutes, it was the Tim Smith show.
He scored 3 tries; one after the other from his new position on the wing.
He lost his regular berth at full-back earlier in the season, but seems to have found a new lease of life.
He's the first Gloucester player to score a hat trick this season and has now scored over 2,300 points for the first team.
It used to be the Smith boot that did most of the scoring from penalties and conversions, but against Newport his handling was superb.
Turn of speed was devastating and the final touchdown was true showmanship.
Paul Ashmead went over for try number 7. 42-7 the final score; perfect preparation for this week's crunch game against Bath and even the coach is smiling.
Keith Richardson says it was an excellent Gloucester performance and with Wales beating England it just goes to show that the formbook can be beaten and Gloucester could well beat Bath on Saturday if they run and tackle as hard as they did in this game.
The RSPCA has returned to the farm where six horses had to be destroyed last week because they were in such bad condition.
This time they had to round up more horses which had been living almost wild.
One vet called in to treat some of the animals has described the farm as a house of horrors.
KEN GOODWIN/Leintwardine
JOHN FERGUSON/Vet
Insp CHRIS SIMPSON/RSPCA
Voice over
These horses have been running wild since they were born.
They live on Rylands farm at Leintwardine in north Herefordshire.
Last Thursday central tv showed animal rescue workers at the farm taking away 35 goats suffering from emaciation. 6 horses were in such a bad condition they had to be shot.
Some of the horses have been living wild on a hillside overlooking the farm.
It was the RSPCA's intention to try and sedate the animals before taking them to a sanctuary.
But the horses proved so wild it couldn't be done.
He says that the tranquilizers didn't work.
The horses were too frightened…
The RSPCA says they will now try different tactics, attempting to gain the animals trust so they're not so frightened of people.
He says they'll bring food to them every day to build up trust.
The vet brought in to treat the animals says he's never encounted so much neglect.
He says it was a house of horrors.
The 2 people who run the farm have signed over ownership of the animals to the RSPCA.
No decision has been taken on wether prosecutions will arise from the case.
An airman who helped destroy evidence after a twenty million pound arson attack has been fined fifteen hundred pounds.
His colleague who started the fire, at a parachute store at RAF Hullavington, has already begun a five year jail sentence.
ERIKA BARNES/Swindon
January 1992/RAF HULLAVINGTON/Wiltshire
Voice over
Corporal Stephen Paterson had been drinking with his friend, Senior Aircraftsman Douglas Bailey, before the catastrophic fire at RAF Hullavington.
Swindon Crown Court heard they'd consumed some 17 pints of beer.
It was Bailey who'd started the fire, but Paterson who'd helped wash Bailey's jeans which had been stained with blood from the break in at the parachute hanger.
Damage from the fire was put at £20 million.
Half of the armed forces parachutes stock was destroyed.
Bailey was jailed for 5 years for starting the fire.
Paterson was found guilty of helping to destroy evidence and was sentenced today.
Corporal Paterson is now based at RAF Leuchars in Scotland.
His future career with the service is being carefully considered.
Five paintings by a mass murderer, once withdrawn from auction because they were thought to be in bad taste, have been bought by a collector.
He describes them as an investment, but critics describe the paintings as worthless rubbish.
TIM HURST/Tewkesbury
MARCUS HILLARD/Buyer
BEN HEEKS/Artist
GILES HEEKS/Artist
Voice over
5 paintings by mass murderer Dennis Nilson, painted in a cell at Parkhurst jail, turned up in a shop at Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire.
They were offered for sale by an antique shop in the town after being rejected by a charity auction as bad taste and bought by a local man as an investment.
Nilson is serving a life sentence after he admitted killing 15 or 16 men.
Critics say his paintings are worthless, but the buyer doesn't agree.
Mr Hillard also dismisses criticism that such items shouldn't be bought or sold.
Students studying art criticism as Gloucestershire College of Arts and Technology say the paintings have no merit, show no talent and are worthless.
If the paintings do have a value, it may only be for what they have to teach criminal psychologists.
(WES AD LIB BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, Swindon Town keep their promotion challenge alive.
Last year two thousand people in Great Britain needed bone marrow transplants — but only about two hundred of them were matched up with donors.
An appeal has now been launched to encourage more donors to come forward — without them some patients will die.
HARRIET RYLEY/Chinnor
PAUL HIGHFIELD/Bone Marrow Recipient
CLAIRE HIGHFIELD/Wife
DIANE HOWE/Anthony Nolan Trust
Voice over
3 years ago, Paul Highfield was diagnosed as having chronic Leukemia and given between 2 and 10 years to live.
His only chance of survival was a bone marrow transplant.
He says he had a fifty-fifty chance of surviving the operation but it was better than no odds at all.
She says she was devastated — they were a young family with everything to look forward to and it could all have been taken away from them.
Luckily for Paul a donor was found and he's now made an almost complete recovery.
He says you're not allowed to meet your donor until at least 1 year after the operation.
It can be terrible for the donor if the patient dies — the donor can feel they're a failure which is completely wrong.
They have the gift of life which is so important.
Paul's donor was found by the Anthony Nolan Trust, a register of donors set up by Shirley Nolan when her 7 year old son died from a rare bone marrow disease before a donor could be found.
She vowed if it was humanly possible, no other patient would suffer a similar fate through lack of a suitable donor.
She says we always need more donors.
Everyone has the gift of life — and for the sake of just a little pain over a week it's a wonderful opportunity to take.
The Round Table, which has always worked closely with the Trust has organised thirteen clinics in Oxfordshire over the next fortnight.
They're especially keen for young men and people from ethnic groups to come forward to add a wider selection of tissue types to the register.
The more donors, the greater the chances of people like Paul recovering.
Male speaker
It's absolutely wonderful — to be given a new lease of life.
you're given a second chance.
Voice over
Now, the most famous little girl from the world of fiction is starring in her own exhibition this week.
Photographs depicting scenes from Lewis Carroll's classic’ Alice in Wonderland’are on show, and they're all by a photographer who's made Alice his life's work.
KATE GARRAWAY Oxford
ROGER DAVIS Photographer
GILL DAVIS Exhibition Organiser
Voice over
’ Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank and of having nothing to do; once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in it' and what is the use of a book' thought Alice, 'without pictures or conversation? '.’
It's the desire of little girls everywhere to have pictures with their stories that's inspired a’ Wonderland’of images at the Museum of Oxford.
Roger Davis fell in love with photography when his gave him a box camera nearly 50 years ago.
But he's never found a better subject, than Alice's underground adventures.
He says it makes a change from the blood and gore on television.
Starting 100 years ago as a way of entertaining a bored little girl on a picnic in Oxford Lewis Carroll's story still fascinates.
She says every little girl wants to be Alice.
He asks a young girl if she would like to be Alice in Wonderland.
Roger Davis's quest to find the perfect Alice to photograph won't end when the exhibition closes at the end of February.
He says he'll keep going because this is his greatest adventure.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Britons killed in Bosnia
Two British mercenaries have been tortured and executed in Bosnia.
Police incompetence over Beck
A report claims Police incompetence delayed the capture of the child abuser, Frank Beck in children's homes.
Father charged with murder
Derek Fleming, the father of Linda Fleming found battered to death in West Yorkshire, has been charged with her murder.
Plane crash kills 132
More than a hundred and thirty people have been killed in an Iranian plane crash near Tehran.
NatWest axes 4
The National Westminster Bank is to axe four thousand jobs.
British Gas price freeze
British Gas has announced a price freeze from April the First.
FTSE up 7
The hundred shares index closed up seven point one at twenty-eight, seventy exactly.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-four and down at two marks, thirty-eight.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
In Central News Tonight.See you in court.
Student paper repeats claims in John Major libel row.
(WES) House of Horrors.
RSPCA go back to cruelty farm.
(ANN) And an investment…or a load of rubbish?
The art of a mass murderer.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The writer ends the column with the words, See You in Court John.
The publishers have apologised, and stressed it does not reflect their views.
But, a rival student newspaper claims the article is irresponsible and is part of a circulation war.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
PAUL KINGSNORTH/Editor
Voice over
It's the talk of Oxford University.
An article in the Oxford student newspaper repeating allegations about John Major and caterer Clare Latimer.
They've all read the Magpie column but arrive at differing conclusions.
Male speaker
I think it's completely harmless.
It's provocative.
It's just a bit of student fun.
It's not making any serious allegations.
It doesn't deserve to be taken seriously.
Male speaker
If it gets sued, we'll end up paying for it.
It doesn't represent my views.
It's unfortunate it had to happen.
Voice over
The paper's student rival — the Cherwell newspaper — believes the Oxford Student had an ulterior motive when it published the article.
Male speaker
It does seem like scandalmongering.
They've been involved in a ratings war with us.
They're trying to draw attention to themselves.
It could be a publicity stunt gone wrong.
Voice over
The Oxford University Students Union, which publishes the paper is now licking its wounds.
A statement issued today said they regret any offence caused by the Magpie Column.
Adding that they're the publishers of the Oxford Student, but that the paper is entirely editorially independent.
They're urging the editors to publish a full apology.
But that didn't satisfy Mr Major when he decided to sue the New Statesman and Scallyway for their reports.
His solicitors are now studying the latest allegations.
And if the Oxford Student does face a court battle…the Cherwell says it'll back it all the way.
Male speaker
Thge article is pretty silly, but having said that, if it is sued, I'd back it all the way.
I'd say it's a dodgy political issue.
We'd take their side if they are sued.
Voice over
The proctors who are in charge of University discipline are investigating the article.
The Oxford Student laid down the challenge —’ see you in court, John’.
They may live to regret the brave words.
The jury in the trial of four men accused of running a drug smuggling ring have been sent to a hotel for the night.
After almost six hours they failed to reach verdicts on any of the defendants, who are said to have used language students as couriers.
GRAEME BOWD/Isleworth Crown Court
OXFORD
Detectives hunting the murderer of an old age pensioner say they're convinced that someone in his tiny village community is shielding whoever is responsible.
Police have been looking for the killer of seventy year old Jim Eggleton since his battered body was found five weeks ago.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM Russell's Water
Det Insp PHIL GULLIFORD Thames Valley Police
Voice over
It's been five weeks since Seventy year old Jim Eggleton was found dead at his home in Russell's Water.
He had head wounds and his throat had been cut.
Today police brought in mounted officers to search an estate in Nearby Christmas Common.
And they believe someone in the local community is hiding the killer.
Male speaker
we want people to come forward with any information.
We think someone in the community is protecting the killer and we want to be sure we've spoken to everyone
Voice over
People in the tiny Russell's Water Community believe there may be something in that.
Male speaker
We have our suspicions
Female speaker
Jim wouldn't have let anyone in umless he knew them.
I wouldn't be surprised to find it was someone local
Female speaker
It could be someone from the village.
I certainly don't feel safe at the moment.
You feel you have to batten the house down for the night
Voice over
The mounted police section have spent the day searching the expansive grounds of a national Trust Estate at nearby Christmas Common.
They're hoping to turn up a piece of bloodstained clothing or a weapon.
Male speaker
We're looking for any trace of clothing, it's a big area with a long wall and the mounted police can cover it much more quickly than officers on foot
Voice over
Many people in Russell's Water think they know what happened to Jim Eggleton, and think the killer could be being protected locally.
Two people have been arrested and released on police bail.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
MPs warning over Army cuts
An all-party group of MPs has warned the Government that its planned cuts in the armed services will lead to resources being chronically overstretched.
Rifkind saves Royal dockyards
The Defence Secretary has announced that the Royal dockyards at Devonport and Rosyth are to remain open.
Magazine to fight libel action
The New Statesman magazine is to fight the libel action brought by the Prime Minister.
Sun to fight Queen
And, the Sun newspaper has said it intends to fight any High Court action brought by the Queen over the advanced publication of her Christmas broadcast.
Soldier dies after Armagh bomb
A soldier has died after a triple bomb attack in Northern Ireland.
FTSE down 38
The hundred shares index closed down thirty-eight point seven at twenty-eight, thirty-one point three.
The pound fell heavily on the foreign exchanges to close down at one dollar, forty-three and down at two marks, thirty-six.
That is all for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
County councillors look set to take on the Government tomorrow, when they set a budget for the next year way above Whitehall limits.
They say if they stuck to Government guidelines, it would mean teaching cuts, library closures and redundancies.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
Sunday/GLOUCESTER
JOHN SEWELL/Liberal Democrats
DAVID ABBOTT/Glos Assoc School Heads
Voice over
Council spending might as well be another foreign language to younger pupils at Pitteville School at Cheltenham in Gloucestershire, but decisions taken by county politicians at tomorrow's crucial budget meeting could effect every school in the county.
Education, Day Centres, libraries and jobs could all be cut if the hung council ignores local pressure and sticks to Government targets.
That however, seems unlikely.
All 3 political groups are pitching for increased spending, Labour is likely to propose a budget around £320 million, the Liberal Democrats around £314 million and the Tory group up to £310 millions, all of them well above Government guidelines of £306 million.
Such low spending, say critics, will mean cuts in day centres, or charging those who use them; reductions of manpower in the emergency services, the police and fire and rescue; but above all a drastic cut in the countty's education budget.
Even so, asking to be charge capped is surely asking for trouble.
So many are expected to attend tomorrow's budget meeting that it's open to ticket holders only, among them senior teachers.
If Gloucestershire County Council does set a budget above Government limits, tomorrow will mark the start of round two between Whitehall and County Hall.
(WES AD LIBS BACK REF)(ANN) Still to come on Central News, the debate over how to help children with cerebral palsy.
Welcome back.
(ANN) Teachers of the pioneering Peto system for children with cerebral palsy have hit back at the suggestion it may be a waste of money.
It's understood a new report will say there's no evidence it works better than traditional methods.
(WES) But those who've worked with conductive education say it's helped hundreds of families, and that the research on which the report is based is flawed.
KIM BARNES/Dinton
HEATHER LAST/Director
PHIL ROBSON/Spastics Society
Voice over
4 year old Ross Cubbage is an ideal candidate for conductive education, according to the staff at the Pace Centre.
They say the integrated way it treats the needs of a cerebral palsy child gives each one a chance.
But it is understood that a new report is critical of the system developed at the Peto institute in Hungary, finding no difference with conventional therapies.
It won't affect the Pace Centre.
And The Spastics Scoiety says Peto isn't a miracle cure, but has helped many people.
Both the Society and Heather Last are concerned that the report compares traditional methods with a Peto school in Birmingham barely up and running.
The Birmingham University report commissioned by the Department of Education is published in May.
It'll be essential reading for hundreds of parents pinning their hopes on Peto.
The work of paramedics in Oxfordshire could be used as a model to improve ambulance services across the country.
Paramedics have extra training to help them to administer on-the-spot treatment to patients.
Now the government hope to have a paramedic on every emergency ambulance by 1995.
IAN MACLAREN/Oxford
PAUL GEORGE/Paramedic
KEN BARRETT/Heart Attack Victim
TOM SACKVILLE MP/Health Minister
Voice over
Paramedics have been travelling on emergency ambulances in Oxfordshire since the 1970s.
Crews, here, were among the first in the country to be taught the additional medical skills that can save lives.
They are capable of administering drugs and operating resuscitation equipment.
On Christmas Day 1991, Ken Barrett suffered a major heart attack.
Now able to resume his job as a postman, he owes his life to the paramedics.
Health Minister, Tom Sackville's been inspecting the Ambulance Training Headquarters in Oxfordshire, as an example to follow.
He believes the extended use of paramedics will be a major step forward.
The aim is to have a paramedic on board every emergency ambulance in the country by 1995.
Canoeists and surfers have been riding one of the biggest Severn Bores that will be seen this year.
Crowds lined the river banks to watch more than twenty water sport enthusiasts brave the six foot tidal wave.
RICHARD BARNETT/Minsterworth
OVER/Gloucester
Voice over
Canoeists and surfers waited in the deceptively calm waters of the Severn for the big wave to arrive.
A high tide had led to predictions of one of the largest bores of the year.
And there was a good turn out of onlookers on the river bank.
Then in the distance, the 6ft wave could be seen for the first time roaring up river at 10 mph.
Canoeists, surfers and support boat skippers braced themselves as the wave hit.
For the surfers, it was a supreme challenge keeping upright on top of the torrent of water and avoiding the danger of being dashed against the river bank.
Some managed to ride the bore; others were less lucky.
Just over half an hour later, the tidal wave swept up to the Over bridge on the outskirts of Gloucester.
Soon it would all be over and for the water sport enthusiasts, this was the final opportunity to ride the crest of the wave until the next bore in March.
Lord Apsley, heir to the Cirencester Park Estate, has been placed on probation after admitting driving while nearly four times over the alchohol limit.
He escaped a prison sentence after magistrates heard he was seeking help for his drink problem.
KATE GARRAWAY/Cirencester
Voice over
Lord Apsley appeared before Cirencester Magistrates Court for sentencing.
At an earlier hearing, he'd pleaded guilty to driving with excess alcohol in his blood.
The 31 year old peer lives in a mansion on the Cirencester Park Estate.
Prince Charles regularly plays polo there.
The court was told that Lord Apsley was arrested last November when he arrived for a function at Gloucester Barracks in South Cerney.
He was asked if he'd been drinking and he said he'd a glass of wine.
Mrs Rita Crane, prosecuting, said Lord Apsley was nearly 4 times over the legal limit when he was later breathalysed at Cirencester police station.
The court heard he'd spent the day hunting and had been drinking to keep up his body warmth.
Mr John Bartholemew, defending, said he was generally a responsible man taking charge of his father's 14,000 acre estate.
The Chairman of the Bench said Lord Apsley could have been imprisoned for the offence.
But they accepted he was seeking help with his drinking problem and sentenced him to 18 months probation with a 3-year driving ban.
A file of evidence containing allegations of indecency against the Bishop of Gloucester has been forwarded to the Crown Prosecution Service.
It's the result of two months of inquiries by detectives.
Library Pictures/TIM HURST/Gloucester
Voice over
The Bishop, the Right Reverend Peter Ball, has been resting on orders of the Archbishop of Canterbury, since being questioned by police before Christmas.
The allegations of indecency concern a complaint by a 17 year old trainee monk.
The file of evidence, hundreds of pages thick, has been delivered to the Crown Prosecution Service in Gloucester after an eight week investigation by detectives.
The file will be forwarded immediately to office of the Director of Public Prosecutions in London, for a decision about whether or not to prosecute the Bishop.
The DPP will face one of 4 choices, not to proceed because of lack of evidence, not to proceed because it's deemed not to be in the public interest, to issue a caution, or to sanction a prosecution.
A number of people have been interveiwed following the original complaint, in an investigation which has covered Gloucestershire, the east Midlands and the South Coast.
Staff at Church House, the Bishop's headquarters in Gloucester, say the Bishop is still resting on sabbatical leave.
They intend to make no statement at the moment because they are still awaiting the outcome of the police investigation.
Meanwhile, the Bishop has been fined three hundred pounds by Forest of Dean Magistrates for a speeding offence.
He was caught by a police radar in Lydney.
The campaign to save the Gloucestershire Regiment received a boost today when a cross party group of MP's published it's report on army cuts.
The Defence Select Committee recommends that the planned merger of the Glosters with another Regiment should be halted.
ABI DONALD/Reporting
ROGER KNAPMAN MP/Con Stroud
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Col ROBERT DIXON/Former Glosters Commander
Sir NICHOLAS BONSOR/Committee Chairman
Voice over
The last two years have been uncertain ones for the Gloucestershire regiment.
After three hundred years of playing a part in every major war, it was told it was to merge with The Duke of Edinburghs Royal Regiment.
Then last week there was renewed optimism that the Glosters could be saved.
The Defence Secretary announced that two regiments would be reprieved…but no such luck for the Glosters.
Theres concern from backbenchers that the Government didn't wait for todays report before making last weeks announcement.
The Commons Defence Select committee urges the government to halt all plans to merge infantry regiments.
The group says they 'consider it inappropriate and ill advised to carry through the prposals for the restructuring of the Army in their entirety, and that they recommend the Government cancel all amalgamations or disbandments’
The report is welcomed by Gloucestershire MP's who hope that it will help their campaign to save the regiment.
CLIP…
KNAPMAN 13 secs
CLIP…
FRENCH…11 secs.
The report makes the recommendations in light of recent committments abroad…and its felt the Glosters can play an important part.
CLIP…
DIXON.
But campaigners for the Glosters are being advised not to give up their fight
CLIP…
BONSOR.
Its not known if the Government will take on any of the reports recommendations but as far as the campaigners are concerned the battle is far from being lost.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GRAEME BOWD/Heathrow
Library Pictures
OXFORD
DAVID CHESTERS/HM Customs
Voice over
Thames Water say they want to build the second biggest reservoir in England on land in South Oxfordshire.
It would cost hundreds of millions of pounds, with work beginning by the end of the century.
The detailed plans were unveiled after a two year study, but local people say they've been misled, and councillors say it would be an environmental disaster.
HARRIET RYLEY/Reporting
JOHN SEXTON/Thames Water
LADY BULLARD/CPRE
NEIL WALKER/Farmer
TERRY COX/Vale of White Horse
Voice over
The planned new reservoir would cover an area of 4 square miles and be the second biggest in the country after Keilder Water in Northumberland.
It would be surrounded by an 80ft high embankment and be 120ft deep in the middle.
To build it on the site between East Hanney and Steventon, Thames Water would have to buy up 4 farms and 16 houses, divert the road between the two villages, landscape the area around the water and build a tunnel connecting it to the Thames.
To cut down disturbance during construction, the company says it would have a railway siding built off the main BR line.
The cost would be several hundred million pounds.
Thames Water say the growing demand for water means the reservoir is vital.
He says we predict that a reservoir of this size will be essential if we're to supply our customers with the water the need.
During their 2 year study of the site, Thames Water have been at pains to co-operate with local action groups, but environmentalists say they've been misled about the plans for the reservoir.
She says we are very concerned that the size off the reservoir and the height of the embankment are much bigger than we were originally told.
Half of Neil Walker's 1,700 acre farm will disappear under water if the reservoir goes ahead.
He says he's resigned to it coming.
He says effectively half my farm will disappear — we'll have to replan our business to take that into account.
hames Water have promised to buy up the affected land and properties at their current value and are keeping that offer open until plans are finalised.
But while residents might be resigned, the District Council is furious about the latest proposals for the resevoir.
He says it's an environmental disaster — covering land between 3 villages with water, and a Roman road — it's awful.
Thames Water say they'll no carry out further studies of the site over the next two to three years.
Building on the proposed reservoir won't begin until the end of the century at the earliest.
The daughter of a pensioner who was beaten to death has made an appeal for help in the hunt for her father's killer.
She said he didn't have an enemy in the world and that his murder had left the whole family devastated.
Meanwhile the police have produced new evidence which they hope will lead them to the killer.
BHARAT PATEL/Northampton
SUSAN MOSS/Daughter
Rev MICHAEL JACKSON
Det Supt BOB THOROGOOD/Northants Police
It's now 3 weeks since Arthur Brumhill, who was 76, was found battered do death the pet shop in Northampton where he worked.
At a news conference today police confirmed that they were still no nearer to solving the case.
The victim's daughter, who's been comforted by the Minister at her local Methodist Church, said she could think of no reason why her father should have been attacked, but she was convinced someone must know the killer.
Please if you know anything please come forward, because we can't get on with our lives until this is sorted out.
Until the killer can be found, none of us can get on with our lives.
We can't even lay him to rest.
Around 50 police officers are on the case.
They're still looking for the murder weapon, believed to be a tyre lever.
Today they unveiled a new clue.
From imprints found near the murder scene, they've found the type of shoe the killer may have been wearing.
We want to trace the person who had this sort of fashion shoe on.
It was probably bloodstained.
So far, the police have checked out dozens of leads, many provided by phone calls from the public.
But they've failed to find any suspects.
Tonight they're hoping their latest lead will help them find the killer.
A pet lover with a passion for hamsters has let the furry creatures take over her terraced house.
At the last count she had two hundred and forty of them.
Now she fears that if they breed any faster, she'll have to move to somewhere bigger.
Robin Powell reports.
WANTAGE Oxfordshire
LORRAINE HURST Hamster Breeder
DAVE CLEMENTS Lorraine's Boyfriend
Voice over
Wherever Lorraine Hurst is in her Wantage home, she's never far from a hamster.
This is just the kitchen.
It all started when she saw a hamster in a pet shop and decided to get another to keep him company.
Now she has about 240 of them.
It's a wonder Lorraine finds the time.
She travels to hamster shows nationwide, as a competitor and a judge and edits a magazine on, you've guessed it, hamsters.
And while she deals with yet another enquiry about the Hamster Club, her long-suffering boyfriend makes one more trip to the shed for hamster food.
They get through about three dustbin-fuls every week.
Also sharing the house, a fox terrier called Leo.
He's had to be kept apart from the hamsters ever since one bit him on the nose.
All the more reason for Lorraine to look for a bigger home.
So for the forseeable future the hamsters are staying put.
But breed any faster and the self-styled Queen of Hamsters has a real problem on her hands.
Game wardens deny murdering Julie Ward
FTSE up 21
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-one point two at twenty-five, thirty-eight point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-two, and down at two marks eighty-six.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
TONY WRIGHT/Gloucestershire Captain
GORDON BOSWORTH/Physiotherapist
Voice over
David Lawrence could be heard screaming from 80 yards away.
Many players said they'd never seen anyone suffer so much pain.
He'll undergo surgery tomorrow morning and if it is more than just a simple fracture, it could mean an early end to his cricketing career.
He says obviously there's now a question mark over his future.
He says Lawrence is a big man and it may be too much for his knee to take.
Lawrence was on his first senior overseas tour and was thrilled to be picked for the final test.
One theory is his 17 stone frame simply crushed his knee when he landed awkwardly, even though in the past, Lawrence has always seemed light on his feet.
This physiotherapist, from the Bisham Abbey National Sports Centre near Marlow, says, given time, he could make a full recovery.
But it all depends on the extent of the injury.
He says if its just a simple fracture he could be playing cricket again in just three months.
But if it's complex it could take much longer.
Another Gloucestershire player, wicket keeper Jack Russell, was accused of assaulting a television cameraman who was trying to film Lawrence as he was carried out of the ground.
Russell was later told he hadn't been selected for the world cup.
And Lawrence was also due to ommitted.
But before he's even fit enough to be flown home, doctors say he'll have to spend at least a fortnight in hospital.
Back home…back to the winter game…the weekend brought wins for Swindon and Hereford but another defeat for Oxford United…seven goals were scored…here's the action 
Voice over
Now on form Swindon should have walked this game against Brighton and that's just what they were doing…strolling when the seagulls went flying into the lead after just six minutes…good goal for Mark Gall he took the chance well.
Town played some stylish football just watch the build up here.
Great passing; good running, but they lacked a knockout punch.
Not even Duncan Shearer could find the net.
The best chance Town had in the first half came from this corner and it came from skipper Colin Calderwood.
But Town were mighty lucky not be two down at half-time.
Thank heavens for goalkepeer Nicky Hammond.
He saved the day here.
They nearly blew it at the start of the second half too as Brighton closed in for the kill.
Swindon finally found their touch after 70 minutes.
It was Colin Calderwood of all people who joined in the attack to make and take as good a goal as you'll see anywhere.
That got them going and back came Captain Calderwood with the winner 9 minutes from time.
Town 2 Brighton l.
Oxford United lost out again on Saturday, again by the odd goal.
Leicester took the lead on 28 minutes.
Paul Kitson the scorer.
United came back with an equaliser with fifteen minutes to go.
Andy Melville was up with the attack and took his chance well.
They were level for just two minutes though.
That's how long it took Leicester to find a winner.
Tommy Wright hit the shot which kept United planted on the bottom of the table.
Leicester 2 Oxford 1.
In the fourth division Hereford scored their first league win of the year.
This was the winner against Chesterfield scored by Simon Brain after 12 minutes and this should have been the second goal.
Brain was through again.
A clear foul by keeper, Leonard who's been sent off twice this season already.
He was lucky to stay on and saved the penalty from Greg Downs.
Hereford 1 chesterfield 0, but it should have been more.
Hereford's next game is on Wednesday…home to Crewe…the big match is on Sunday of course Swindon against Aston Villa in the FA Cup…the County Ground will be packed…all sixteen thousand four hundred and thirty two tickets have been sold…
Now rugby union's cup…the Pilkington has reached the quarter final stage…here's the draw…tough one for Gloucester…
Orrell are top of the first division…but then again there aren't many easy matches to be had when you look at the other ties 
the cherry and whites won through to the last eight by beating London Scottish at Kingsholm on Saturday…the score twenty…to seven 
Voice over
On marched the pipers, up came Scotland the brave to welcome.
London Scottish the Exiles, to Kingsholm on Saturday.
Gloucester were roared out and that was where the hospitality finished.
From there on, the cherry and whites took complete control and were 10 points up in the first 14 minutes.
First try came as Hannaford and Smith opened up London Scottish to send John Hawker over to score.
Second try came minutes later.
Smith and Hannaford teaming up again with fly half, Neil Matthews diving in.
The Exiles had 5 Internationals in their team, but they only managed one try.
This was it scored by Damien Cummins.
Paul Ashmead got another try for Gloucester and the cherry and whites just kept piling forward.
The Exiles are top of the 2nd divison, but the difference is class and was evident on Saturday.
It finished 20-7.
Here's what the coach thought about it all.
and another Gloucestershire winner this weekend was racing trainer David Nicholson…
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
A hospital burns unit is trying to raise half a million pounds for resesarch into new techniques of plastic and micro-surgery.
The appeal was launched with the help of former patients whose recovery from terrible injuries has been helped by such treatment.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
1983
ROY TAPPING/Microsurgery Patient
PAUL SCARLE/Microsurgery Patient
SUZANNE DUGUID/Mother
ANTHONY ROBERTS/Unit Director
Voice over
Former farmworker, Roy Tapping became the most famous microsurgery patient in the country, after his arm was severed in a work accident.
He picked it up and carried it a mile across a field for help.
Surgeons at nearby Stoke Mandeville Hospital were able to put it back on and have restored some movement.
Male speaker
I have about 50% grip but I can't turn it.
I've been told it's about as good as it will gfet for the time being.
Voice over
Maybe the future holds even more developments.
That's what a new appeal from the Stoke Mandeville Burns Unit aims to find out.
They want half a million pounds to fund a 10 year research programme.
Plastic surgery has made great strides since the pioneering techniques of the Guinea Pig Club during World War II.
Then RAF pilots and crews were treated with new skin grafting ideas.
The Stoke Mandeville Burns Unit built on these and later added microsurgery.
Their expertise was able to save Northamptonshire print Industry worker, Paul Scarle after a paper guillotine chopped off all 4 fingers of his left hand.
Male speaker
The blade came down at an angle on my first finger, but chopped straight through the rest.
I can now move them quite well although they'll never be perfect.
Voice over
He spent 13 hours in surgery.
7 year old Oliver Duguid has undergone 25 operations after a car fire; there are still more to come.
Female speaker
It was terrible, he didn't look like a child at all.
Voice over
The problem facing surgeons is that they don't have the time to devote to research.
So they're looking for some money to finance a research fellow at the Hospital.
They're hoping Industry will contribute.
Male speaker
We've developed our treatments pretty well, but they're not perfect.
We need to be able to return people to normal and put them back into society.
Voice over
That may not be too far off if the progress of the last 50 years is anything to go by.
A motorist involved in a crash on the M-four motorway in which ten people died has been found guilty of careless driving.
MARCH 1991/M4/Wiltshire
Forty-six vehicles were involved in the accident on the eastbound carriageway near Swindon last March.
Thirty-five year-old Anthony Southon from Swindon, whose Volvo crashed into the wreckage was fined (150) a hundred and fifty pounds with (100) a hundred pounds costs by Newbury Magistrates.
He was also given five penalty points on his driving licence.
The price of a pint of cider could double if Eurocrats in Brussels have their way.
They say cider should be taxed at the same level as wine.
That would put the price of a pint up to about two pounds fifty.
Clare Lafferty reports.
HEREFORD
JOHN RUDGARD/Bulmer Cider
Voice over
In Britain we drink more than five hundred and sixty million pints of cider each year.
At the moment it costs around one pound twenty a pint.
But if Eurocrats in Brussels get their way, a pint of scrumpy could cost as much as two pounds fifty.
They say that cider is essentially a fermented fruit juice like wine, and therefore it should be taxed like wine.
That would mean an increase of four hundrd per cent.
The biggest cider makers in the country, Bulmers, who are based in Hereford, say that would be disastrous for the cider industry.
Lunch time drinkers in Hereford say if a pint of cider did hit the two fifty mark, they'd simply stop drinking it.
Officials at Bulmers are now having talks with Euro MPs in the hope that together they can stop the tax increase from going through.
In the meantime cider drinkers are hoping their lunchtime tipple doesn't become a luxury.
Boatmen are calling on local authorities to clean-up an historic section of a two hundred year old waterway.
They say the canal is a big tourist attraction, and has been neglected for too long.
Nick Clark reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
BARRY MORSE/Boatbuilder
TONY BALDRY MP/Environment Minister
GRAHAM HANDLEY/Cherwell District Council
Voice over
(Opened in 1790 as a vital route of Industry between Coventry and the south, the Oxford Canal is now the busiest in England.
Now of course its traffic is wholly tourism-based.
But some canal users are disappointed with the way the waterway presents its public face, especially in the town of Banbury.
Male speaker
Unfortunately Banbury has got a bad reputation among boat users in the past and the council is doing little to dispel it.
Voice over
Mr Morse points to the ageing and unpleasant sanitary point where boat users dump their waste next to the town's bus station.
Local authorities acknowledge the problems.
This morning a special meeting was held to look to the future.
It was addressed by Canals Minister and Banbury MP, Tony Baldry.
Male speaker
We've taken the canal for granted in the past, but now we're looking forward.
Male speaker
Things will improve from now on.
Voice over
There's currently a programme underway to improve the state of the canal towpath.
And by 1994, work should have started on a development which will transform the bus station site.
Male speaker
On the whole the meeting's a good idea, but it's all so late.
Voice over
Changes for the better may be in the pipeline but it's clearly going to take some work to convince the sceptics.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
FAMILY VIDEO
BICESTER/Oxfordshire
SHIRLEY ARMITAGE/Mrs Butler's Daughter
HARRIET HARMAN MP/Labour's Health Spokeswoman
STEPHEN DORRELL MP/Junior Health Minister
Voice over
Mary Butler, seen here before suffering a stroke, needs round the clock nursing care.
Her life depends on medical equipment to get food to her stomach.
She was told she'd have to pay a £116 a week for it because she's in a private nursing home.
Her family was shocked.
They say she was forced out of the National Health service because of no long term care beds.
Tonight, after the case was taken up by Labour's health spokeswoman, the Health Authority has agreed to foot the bill.
Since Mrs. Butler's story was told on Central News South, she's received calls from dozens of people with similar cases.
It's the second health issue in recent weeks in Oxfordshire to be raised at national level.
Fred Robson had vital surgery to replace an artery postponed three times because of lack of intensive care beds.
Labour says both cases are growing proof of the Government's plans for creeping privatisation of the NHS.
Oxford Regional Health Authority explained why it went back on the original decision saying,’ We understood that the law said quite clearly the health authority could not provide treatment in private homes.
Now we understand that exceptions can be made on humane grounds and we have decided to exercise that discretion in the case of Mrs Butler.’
And tonight Junior Health Minister Stephen Dorrell defended the Government's position.
Health authorities would be encouraged, he said, to use discretion to ensure medical care is free.
Shirley Armitage is relieved her struggle is over, but she says there are still too many others having to fight for health care.
Forestry workers say joyriders who steal cars and set them alight in isolated woodland risk causing a devastating forest fire.
A dozen cars have been stolen and set ablaze in the past six weeks — the last incident nearly led to hundreds of acres of trees being destroyed.
Ken Goodwin reports.
LITTLEDEAN/Gloucestershire
PETE RALPH/Forestry Commission
Insp DAVID SMITH/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
This is all that remains of a stolen van, dumped on an isolated track in the forest of dean, then set alight.
It's a scene that's becoming depressingly familiar to forestry comission workers; they've seen 12 burnt out cars left in the forest in the past 6 weeks.
He says it's a problem because they have to clear up the mess; he thinks those responsible are a pest.
The Forest of Dean covers an area of 27,000 acres.
It's criss crossed by a maze of tracks and bridle paths.
The perfect hidden racetrack, it seems, for car thieves to speed rally style, along miles of dirt tracks.
But at this time of year the bracken and undergrowth is tinder dry.
The Forestry Commission says there's the potential for disaster when the dumped cars are set alight.
He says that at this time of year the undergrowth is tinder dry.
If it hadn't rained the night before the car was burnt, there could have been a major forest fire.
The police are aware of the problem but admit there's little they can do.
He says with such a huge area to cover the simply don't have the manpower to police every track and trail through the forest.
Forestry workers will clear up the mess made by this latest incident; relieved that the fire didn't spread to the trees, but worried that the next one might.
Good evening.
(WES NEXT)
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
Voice over
Hundreds protestors gathered outside shire hall in gloucester — their message was clear: No cuts.
Black balloons were released with the same message, and at one point there was a shoot out, purely symbolic, of course.
Protestors were worried that government spending limits on the county councils budgets would mean hundreds of jobs going in education and social services:
They say that they're fed up of cuts…they want more money for education and social services.
The labour group wanted to overspend the governments limit by eleven million pounds.
The conservatives surprised everyone by agreeing to defy the government and overspend by almost as much…ten million.
The liberal democrats wanted a more modest overspend…seven million.
But in the end all three parties joined forces and voted for a budget of three hundred and sixteen million pounds…ten million over Governemnt spending limits.
The council now risks charge capping, a penalty imposed for overspending…but it will appeal.
The news for council tax payers is it looks like they'll pay more.
(ANNE AD LIBS QUESTION TO LIVE LINKS)
RUNS=2:15 
KEN GOODWIN/Live from Gloucester
Cllr FRANK THOMPSON/Labour Group Leader
MAGGIE MANSELL/Parents Action Group
Meanwhile figures for Oxfordshire's council tax have also been set after a meeting which lasted into the early hours of this morning
The average householder will face a county demand of four hundred and sixty-six pounds.
When district totals are included
South Oxfordshire householders will pay five hundred and fifty pounds.
In West Oxfordshire the figure is four hundred and ninty-one pounds.
It's four pounds lower in
Cherwell at four hundred and eighty seven pounds.
The total figures for the rest of the county aren't yet known.
A father has won an important legal battle in his bid to prove his son's death during parachute training was NOT an accident.
Russell Ferrante has been given permission by the High Court to ask for a second inquest into his son's death.
He claims Simeon Ferrante was suffering from concussion from a previous drop when he made the parachute jump that killed him.
RICHARD BARNETT/Brize Norton
BRISTOL
RUSSELL FERRANTE/Father
Voice over
21 year old, Marine Simeon Ferrante died after a parachute jump in August 1989 at RAF Brize Norton on a training exercise similar to this one.
On a previous jump just 3 days before he'd hit his head during a hard landing.
His family claim he was badly concussed and the RAF were guilty of negligence when they allowed him to make the second jump.
His father says the symptoms of concussion were obvious.
Male speaker
He was vomiting, slept for 15 hours and had difficulty dressing.
Voice over
The Oxford Coroner recorded a verdict that Simeon's death was accidental.
The High Court has now given his father permission to ask the Attorney General for a second inquest.
Male speaker
All he wants is for the RAF to make sure it doesn't happen again.
Voice over
The Ministry of Defence has denied negligence, although Mr Ferrante has been told that RAF rules governing training at Brize Norton have been changed.
As his legal fight for a second inquest goes on, Mr Ferrante remembers the son he believes should still be alive today.
Male speaker
He was a good son and proud to be a Marine.
Voice over
Welcome back.
(ANNE) Football now, and Oxford United say the referee sent off the wrong man in their two-nil defeat at Sunderland last night.
It happened after a shot was handled on the line, and left United with only ten players for most of the match.
(WES) The club have today been studying Central's tape of the incident.
Manager Brian Horton says he'll be lodging an appeal against the player's three match suspension.
CHRIS MOORE/Roker Park
The weekend win forgotten, Oxford's problems began after just 4 minutes, when John Cahoun's shot was saved by Andy Melville.
A clear handball, as the replay shows and sure enough a penalty, but then Oxford's Mike Ford was mysteriously sent off for the offence.
Goodman took the penalty.
1-0 to Sunderland.
20 minutes later they had the chance to strretch the lead.
Cahoun's cross turned goal-ward by Terry Butcher, but cleared by Mickey Lewis.
Then on the half-hour the lack of a player began to show.
A cracking shot from Michael Gray and it was 2-0.
Jim Magilton provided United with this chance just before half time.
The free kick fell to Imre Varadi, but some determined goalkeeping kept him out.
Straight after the break Varadi was through again, but once more the shot was turned away.
Oxford were really trying.
Paul Reece stopped this one from Gray and a few minutes later, he prevented Goodman getting his second and Sunderland's third.
At the other end, Durnin missed out for Oxford in the dying minutes, but it was new Sunderland player manager Terry Butcher's night.
Sunderland look to have found their form after a lean period, as United found to their cost.
Children from all over the country who've triumphed over adversity met the Princess of Wales today.
She presented them with the annual Child of Achievement awards, given to children who've overcome extraordinary difficulties just to live a normal life.
HARRIET RYLEY/Cam
ANDREW O'DONNELL/Award Winner
GAVIN O'DONNELL/Father
WOLVERCOTE/Oxfordshire
CHRISTINA JAMES/Mother
MYFANWY JAMES/Award Winner
Voice over
Andrew O'Donnell is lucky to be alive.
He suffered horrific burns to 65 per cent of his body while on a family holiday in France.
His younger sister, Kirsty didn't survive the fire:
He says he can remember he was burnt in the fire and that his sister died in the fire.
In hospital Andrew suffered serious side-effects when he was given a drug to prevent infection.
That left him with severe deafness.
Now aged seven he's undergone numerous skin-graft operations.
He says unless you know what goes on in his daily life you don't realise what he goes through.
Just getting up at the start of the day without complaining, is an achievement.
For Andrew, the trip up to London to the awards ceremony attended by the Princess of Wales, was almost overshadowed by his excitement over his first journey on a train up to the capital.
Also at the awards, Myfanwy James, a 15 year old, who spends much of her time helping her mother, Christina who's partially blind.
She says when she goes shopping she can't read the labels and prices on goods; her daughter is always ready to come and do that for her.
Myfanwy is also an active member of the Red Cross and helps organise holidays for the disabled.
She manages all this, despite suffering from congenital abnormalities herself.
She also has asthma and has undergone 50 operations since birth.
She says she gets bad asthma and can't swallow very easily, which means it takes her ages to eat her meals.
Often she can't do PE at school and can't walk very far.
For both Myfanwy and Andrew O'Donnell — simply living a normal life is an achievement in itself — something which was recognised at today's award ceremony in Westminster.
A railway station which has flowers to greet the passengers and where the trains always run on time…well almost…has been judged the Best in Britain.
The tiny station at Stoke Mandeville in Buckinghamshire is run by just two people, and both are dedicated to keeping the long suffering rail traveller happy.
ERIKA BARNES/Aylesbury
ALEX MITCHELL/Station Clerk
SARAH PAGE/Station Clerk
Voice over
British Rail is cleaning up its act.
Stoke Mandeville station is a little oasis; clean and bright and friendly.
Old fashioned criticism of BR's standard of service is a thing of the past.
Alex Mitchell has been at the station for five years.
Not only is he the gardener, he's the cleaner too.
We saw him earlier.
He's also the ticket collector and good friend to the passengers.
Alex works alongside Sarah Page.
Together they've made the station the Best in Britain, beating 2,500 others to the title.
And that means keeping the place looking good and smelling sweet.
It's the little touches that count, going above and beyond the call of duty.
It may be a small station and a small team, but when you're very small yourself, it's definitely the best station in Britain to be a train spotter.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Government asserts juice safety
The Government has insisted that apple juice is safe to drink following the scare linking it with cancer.
Tebbit urges anti-Maastricht vote
Lord Tebbit has urged rebel Conservatives to vote with Labour in the hope of wrecking the Maastricht Treaty.
30 years for IRA terrorist
The IRA terrorist, James Canning, has been jailed for thirty years for conspiracy to cause explosions.
He had enough of the explosive, Semtex, to make eighty bombs.
Bentley pardon appeal allowed
The sister of Derek Bentley, executed for his alleged role in the killing of a policeman forty years ago, has been given leave to take court action to secure a posthumous pardon.
FTSE down 15
The hundred shares index closed down fifteen point one at twenty-eight, sixteen point two.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-three and down at two marks, thirty-six 
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A verdict of suicide has been recorded at an inquest into the death of a twenty one year old Oxford University student.
It was the second suicide connected with the university in the space of a few months.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
JOHN WRAY/Father
Voice over
Pamela Wray was making good progress at St Hilda's College at Oxford University and she had the full support of her family.
But she was still found hanging at her home in the city a month ago, the second suicide at the University within a few months.
But her father John today told an inquest he is certain it wasn't pressure of work.
Male speaker
She was doing well at college, all her work was up to date and she didn't seem at all under pressure.
Voice over
Pamela was in her 4th year at St Hilda's she was a devout member of the 7th Day Adventist Church and had planned to become a missionary in Japan after completing her University studies.
She was due to return for the new term when she died.
Pamela Wray's father found her body hanging from an attic beam.
He told the Coroner's Court she had showed signs of uncertainty since she returned from spending a year in France as part of her University course.
She's sent a letter to her sister Bernadine talking of her feelings of inadequacy.
It made her worried and she actually called at the house on the day Pamela died.
Later another letter was found inside a book addressed to her parents.
It wasn't read out in court, but it lead the Coroner to record a verdict of suicide.
One month after Pamela took her life, her family is still searching for a reason.
Male speaker
She may have been doubting her faith, or at least questioning it.
She was very religious and may have been considering the best approaches to make.
Voice over
Mr Wray had a warning for other parents.
He advised them to keep in touch with their children, because they can never be sure what's happening beneath the surface.
Two children and two adults were injured when a school minibus collided with a pick-up truck and a car.
ASHCHURCH/Gloucestershire
The accident happened on the (A438) A Four Three Eight at Ashchurch in Gloucestershire.
The minibus was on its way to Bredon school near Tewkesbury.
The children, aged (10) ten and (8) eight and two men were treated in hospital for minor injuries.
A teenager who kidnapped his former girlfriend and her stepfather at gunpoint last year has admitted making more threats.
Thomas Rennie has been released from a twenty one month jail sentence, imposed last year, after he abducted his pregnant ex-girlfriend Marita Brown and her father in law Richard Loren from their home in Gloucestershire.
Today, Rennie admitted making more threats to Mr Loren in a park in Cheltenham.
He was bound over to keep the peace by magistrates.
Cases of contaminated apple juice are on the increase because apple growers are under pressure to use fewer chemicals, it was claimed today.
The Ministry of Agriculture has revealed that high levels of a contaminant were found in several samples of apple juice.
Experts say that could be because many orchards no longer use fungicides.
GRAEME BOWD/Hereford
Professor BASIL JARVIS/Technical Director
Dr ANDREW LEA/Reading Scientific Services
NICHOLAS SOAMES MP/Agriculture Minister
PAUL MARLAND MP/Con West Gloucestershire
Voice over
Two workshops for the disabled could be closed to save a council nearly half a million pounds a year.
Their fate will be decided at a meeting tomorrow.
But disabled people who use them say the workshops provide them with a sense of dignity as well as permanent paid work.
IAN MACLAREN/Swindon
Dr RAY JONES/Social Services Director
DAVID CARVER/Works Manager
Voice over
The Enterprise Workshop in Swindon provides employment for 54 disabled people.
The business is subsidised by the Department of Employment and Wiltshire County Council.
By selling its products and services, the workshop's expected to earn £300,000 this year.
For the workers it's a vital lifeline.
The Social Services committee on Wiltshire County Council is being asked to consider closing the workshops in Swindon and Salisbury, saving around £400,000 a year.
The council is overbudget and points out that the workshops are facing difficult trading conditions during the recession.
David Carver, the Works Manager in Swindon hopes the council will opt for his suggestion of a merger with the Hobbs Unit; an assessment and training centre for the disabled.
Disabled workers will be staging a demonstration outside the County Council in Trowbridge before Councillors meet to decide their future.
(WES AD LIBS BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, a football who-dunnit.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
NORTHAMPTON
VANESSA HILL/Mother
Playing in a park in Northampton this afternoon, it's hard to believe that 6 year old Natalie Hill is desperately sick.
She's full of smiles, full of energy and seems to be full of life.
But this is her remission.
Natalie is dying from a rare form of cancer that has attacked her nervous system and is spreading to her bones.
Her mother has been told that she cannot be cured in this country, so with family and friends she's launched an appeal to try to raise thousands of pounds to take Natalie to the Hoxey Clinic in Mexico City for specialist herbal treatment.
She knows time may be running out.
Female speaker
They've told me that they treat all forms of cancer and that there is hope.
I have got to have hope and when I look at Natalie.
I have lots of hope.
Voice over
2 months ago, doctors told her mother that Natalie has only months to live.
After an extensive course of chemotherapy, Mrs Hill decided to tell her eldest daughter the truth about her illness.
Female speaker
I didn't want to tell her because I thought she'd give up.
When I did she cried with fear and said she didn't want to die.
I told her if it was up to me, she wouldn't.
Then after a while she got an inner strength and asked me what Heaven was like.
Voice over
Doctors in Northampton and at Birmingham Childrens Hospital won't comment on Natalie's case or the treatment that's available in Mexico.
Mrs Hill doesn't know if it will work, but says she'll try anything to try to save her daughter's life.
Female speaker
I'm very positive that Natalie will be cured.
If it isn't in Mexico I believe someone will cure her.
There's no way we're giving up.
I have faith healers coming in twice a week and somehow she's just carrying on.
Voice over
She's such a sweet little girl and has so much energy.
It's just so unbelievable that she's so poorly.
Two men have gone on trial for the murder of a police informer, whose body was found weighted down in a lake three years ago.
The prosecution claimed in its opening address that one of the men accused of the killing had broken down in front of his wife and confessed to the murder.
This report from Tim Hurst.
WINCHESTER CROWN COURT/Hampshire
Voice over
Car crime in the region is running way above the national average.
Thefts of and from vehicles are up by over a third according to figures just revealed.
They coincide with the launch of a Home Office campaign to cut car crime.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
HOME OFFICE CAMPAIGN VIDEO
Supt DAVID HODGES/Thames Valley Police
JOHN PATTEN MP/Home Office Minister
ANDREW SMITH/MP Oxford East
GLENN WALKER/Car Dealer
Voice over
Britain is facing a carcrime epidemic…and the Thames Valley is amoung the worst hit areas.
The situation is so bad the Home Office has started a campaign to combat car theft…using TV ads.
The Thames Valley has a lot to worry about.
So called hotting and joyriding around some of the Oxford Estates with stolen cars has contributed to a massive increase in carcrime.
While the country as a whole had a a rise of twenty two per cent last year.
The Thames Valley went up by by thirty six per cent in the same period.
Carcrime has nearly doubled in the area over the last three years.
1989 34,812 1990 46,528 1991 62,926
A new law setting out tough penalties for car theft goes through its final stages today.It was put through by Oxford West MP John Patten, Minister of State at the Home Office.
His constituency is close to the infamous Blackbird Leys estate and he's also running the new campaign…
It's not something the local MP totally agrees with.
Car security systems are becoming increasingly sophisticated.
The latest Rover luxury models can be locked by electronics…including automatically closing the windows.
Even brief air disturbance will set off the alarm.
And buyers are becoming increasingly interested.
But while gadgets improve so do the techniques to crack them.
So today's message is that constant vigilence is the key.
A lecturer at a further education college has won a grant worth more than a third of a million pounds to study volcanos.
His two-year study could prove that volcanos will have an explosive part to play in fighting global warming.
Simon Garrett reports 
MOUNT ETNA Italy
BILL MCGUIRE Volcano Expert
Voice over
The explosive power of volcanos is proof if ever it was needed, of man's lack of control over the environment.
But new research suggests the very damage caused by humans could itself be countered by violent volcanic activity.
Now a lecturer at Cheltenham and Gloucester College of Further Education has been awarded a european commission grant of £380,000 to see if volcanic activity is linked to sea level rise.
If so it may save the planet from overheating.
Male speaker
We could be in for some dramatic sea level changes because of climatic change; volcanic action could have quite a bearing on that.
Voice over
The theory is that as the climate warms and the ice-caps melt sea level surrounding volcanic land rises.
The action of the water on the sides and base of the volcano causes it to erupt.
That eruption throws tonnes of ash and soot into the atmosphere which causes a dust shield, blotting out the rays of the sun.
Without the suns warming action.
The ice-caps re-freeze and sea level falls again, so the volcanos stop erupting.
Male speaker
If the sea rises around a volcano the water may erode away some of the surface away.
Volcanos will start popping off around the world throwing up tonnes of dust.
Then the ice caps will be able to freeze again; it's a fail-safe mechanism.
Voice over
Bill McGuire's studies will take him to various volcanos around the Mediterranean and Indian Oceans.
By looking at the links between sea level rise and volcanic activity over the last million years, he hopes to be able to predict whether our heating of the atmosphere today could earn us a fierce and violent reprimand from the planet in years to come.
Euro MPs vote on tobacco ban
FTSE down 1
The hundred shares index closed down one point three at twenty-five, thirty-seven point one.
The pound is down two cents at one dollar eighty, and down at two marks eighty-six.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
One of Britain's biggest foxhunts has launched a campaign to stop the sport being outlawed.
The hunt says it plays a vital role in the county's conservation, and warns that if foxhunting is banned, foxes could become extinct.Chris Moore reports.
ROBIN SMITH-RYLAND/Master of the Hunt
BILL ANDREWS/Campaign for Hunting
NICK DE SILVA/Warwickshire Hunt
RALPH MANKEE/Master of the Hounds
Braille Hill on the Oxfordshire Warwickshire border.
It's a haven for foxes, and huntsmen, made so by preserving the sort of landscape a fox likes for breeding, and for hiding.
Copses and woodland which farmers might destroy if they weren't subsidised to keep it this way.
Male speaker
The farmer won't keep 8 acres of thorn in the middle of a wheatfield.
The taxpayer won; t subsidise his loss of income.
The Warwickshire nature trust is tiny when you compare it to the total amount of woodland managed for sports use.
Voice over
The hounds are sent in to flush out the fox from its haven.
The hunt is on.
But the hunters have become the hunted.
The McNamara Bill calls on Parliament to outlaw foxhunting.
Huntsmen know that convincing opponents they are ecologists is a tough job.
Male speaker
People who live in towns donlt understand what goes on in the countryside.It's hard for us to explain why this great tradition should be preserved, but it isn't the barbaric activity it's made out to be.
Voice over
Conservation can be expensive.
The hunt recently fenced off 6 and a half miles of the M40 to stop foxes getting onto it.
Male speaker
It's had a terrible effect on the hunt territory.
We have a long narrow area and the motorway has cut it in half.
Voice over
Whatever the ecological arguments, the Warwickshire Hunt killed 200 foxes last year.
The kill is pulled apart in a way most people would find unedifying, despite assurances.
Male speaker
The death is very quick.
It takes half a second or so in one bite.
The carcass is then pulled apart, but that is a natural thing for hounds to do.
Voice over
The hounds have followed the fox to this copse.
We are told that the animal had at some time been shot and wounded, so today it had been put out of its misery.
They call it survival of the fittest, although it's their own survival they are now worried about.
Britain's newest prison will be opening its doors this weekend to give the public a chance to see how prisoners will be treated.
The first inmates are due to arrive next month, and they'll benefit from some of the best facilitites in Europe.
But as Wesley Smith reports, the new building's staff quarters are less than ideal.
ARNCOTT/Oxfordshire
JOHN THOMAS-FERRAND/Governor
RON ADAMS/Prison Officer
Bullingdon Prison near Bicester in Oxfordshire is designed to be an answer to overcrowded cells and primitive conditions for Category B inmates, those serving sentences of up to 20 years.
Bullingdon's structure is based on a traditional Victorian tiered system which has proved most effective for observing inmates.
But that's where the Victorian age ends.
Bullingdon will house 635 prisoners, many in single cells, all with toilet facilities, ending slopping-out.
All good for prisoners, but the Governor wants more to be done to help officers.
The Governor, John Thomas-Ferrand explains how the prison was designed at a time when women did not work in all-male prisons, now 20% are women, yet they do not have their own shower facilities, for example.
Changes will have to wait until the money is available.
Nevertheless, up-to-date facilities for inmates should also help staff.
An electronic system's been introduced to alert them to any emergency.
Each cell is designed to prevent suicide attempts, there's no glass or potentially dangerous objects.
There are also temporary cells for mentally ill patients in the hospital wing with padded floors and walls.
It will see a new way of working for most staff.
Ron Adams has come to Bullingdon from Liverpool.
He originally trained as a plumber and used to give classes to inmates in his local jail before taking up prison work full-time.
Prison Officer, Ron Adams, explains how he has worked at Risley and Strangeways and hopes past trouble there will not be repeated at Bullingdon.
The emphasis here is on education and recreation, so it is bound to make some people ask whether or not it is too soft for criminals.
The Governor counters this argument saying we must look ahead if a new-style prison system is to work.
The Governor is keen to involve the local community in Bullingdon's work.
The prison is holding several open days for visitors including a public open day at the weekend.
Building work's on schedule and inmates are expected in March.
One of Britain's biggest foxhunts has launched a campaign to stop the sport being outlawed.
The hunt says it plays a vital role in the county's conservation, and warns that if foxhunting is banned, foxes could become extinct.Chris Moore reports.
ROBIN SMITH-RYLAND/Master of the Hunt
BILL ANDREWS/Campaign for Hunting
NICK DE SILVA/Warwickshire Hunt
RALPH MANKEE/Master of the Hounds
Braille Hill on the Oxfordshire Warwickshire border.
It's a haven for foxes, and huntsmen, made so by preserving the sort of landscape a fox likes for breeding, and for hiding.
Copses and woodland which farmers might destroy if they weren't subsidised to keep it this way.
Male speaker
The farmer won't keep 8 acres of thorn in the middle of a wheatfield.
The taxpayer won; t subsidise his loss of income.
The Warwickshire nature trust is tiny when you compare it to the total amount of woodland managed for sports use.
Voice over
The hounds are sent in to flush out the fox from its haven.
The hunt is on.
But the hunters have become the hunted.
The McNamara Bill calls on Parliament to outlaw foxhunting.
Huntsmen know that convincing opponents they are ecologists is a tough job.
Male speaker
People who live in towns donlt understand what goes on in the countryside.It's hard for us to explain why this great tradition should be preserved, but it isn't the barbaric activity it's made out to be.
Voice over
Conservation can be expensive.
The hunt recently fenced off 6 and a half miles of the M40 to stop foxes getting onto it.
Male speaker
It's had a terrible effect on the hunt territory.
We have a long narrow area and the motorway has cut it in half.
Voice over
Whatever the ecological arguments, the Warwickshire Hunt killed 200 foxes last year.
The kill is pulled apart in a way most people would find unedifying, despite assurances.
Male speaker
The death is very quick.
It takes half a second or so in one bite.
The carcass is then pulled apart, but that is a natural thing for hounds to do.
Voice over
The hounds have followed the fox to this copse.
We are told that the animal had at some time been shot and wounded, so today it had been put out of its misery.
They call it survival of the fittest, although it's their own survival they are now worried about.
Britain's newest prison will be opening its doors this weekend to give the public a chance to see how prisoners will be treated.
The first inmates are due to arrive next month, and they'll benefit from some of the best facilitites in Europe.
But as Wesley Smith reports, the new building's staff quarters are less than ideal.
ARNCOTT/Oxfordshire
JOHN THOMAS-FERRAND/Governor
RON ADAMS/Prison Officer
Bullingdon Prison near Bicester in Oxfordshire is designed to be an answer to overcrowded cells and primitive conditions for Category B inmates, those serving sentences of up to 20 years.
Bullingdon's structure is based on a traditional Victorian tiered system which has proved most effective for observing inmates.
But that's where the Victorian age ends.
Bullingdon will house 635 prisoners, many in single cells, all with toilet facilities, ending slopping-out.
All good for prisoners, but the Governor wants more to be done to help officers.
The Governor, John Thomas-Ferrand explains how the prison was designed at a time when women did not work in all-male prisons, now 20% are women, yet they do not have their own shower facilities, for example.
Changes will have to wait until the money is available.
Nevertheless, up-to-date facilities for inmates should also help staff.
An electronic system's been introduced to alert them to any emergency.
Each cell is designed to prevent suicide attempts, there's no glass or potentially dangerous objects.
There are also temporary cells for mentally ill patients in the hospital wing with padded floors and walls.
It will see a new way of working for most staff.
Ron Adams has come to Bullingdon from Liverpool.
He originally trained as a plumber and used to give classes to inmates in his local jail before taking up prison work full-time.
Prison Officer, Ron Adams, explains how he has worked at Risley and Strangeways and hopes past trouble there will not be repeated at Bullingdon.
The emphasis here is on education and recreation, so it is bound to make some people ask whether or not it is too soft for criminals.
The Governor counters this argument saying we must look ahead if a new-style prison system is to work.
The Governor is keen to involve the local community in Bullingdon's work.
The prison is holding several open days for visitors including a public open day at the weekend.
Building work's on schedule and inmates are expected in March.
A peregrine falcon, one of Britain's rarest birds of prey has been illegally shot.
It's the third such incident in the region this year.
Vets have performed a two hour operation to save the bird.Richard Barnett reports:
STROUD/Gloucestershire
GREG SIMPSON/Vet
NEIL FORBES/Vet
Voice over
It was touch and go when the peregrine falcon was brought into the Clockhouse veterinary hospital in Stroud, whether the bird would survive.
It had been found shot in Oxfordshire and X rays revealed four pellets of lead.
One had shattered the wing; another was lodged in the jaw.
Vets spent 2 hours operating to reset the wing.
Today they were busy removing the bandage body stocking that had been used to help the wing to heal.
And the bird was given concentrated feed through a tube to build up it's strength.
Male speaker
The wing fracture is a bad one, and he'll have to be certain it has healed properly before the bird is released.
Voice over
The peregrine is listed as an endangered species and the penalty for injuring or killing one of these birds is a fine of up to £2,000.
It's recognized as our most magnificent falcon, diving at up to 200 mph to capture its prey.
3 peregrines have been shot in the region this year, despite their status as a protected species:
Male speaker
Some birds are shot intentionally by gamekeepers which is unforgiveable.But some are killed accidentally by pigeon shooters.
Voice over
If all goes well, the peregrine could be released back into the wild in 3 months time.
And the vets at Stroud hope they won't have to deal with any more victims of senseless shooting.
The Serious Fraud Office is considering investigating the Lewis's store group's pension fund.
1991/OXFORD
A man has appeared in court in Northampton charged with murder.
AUGUST 1991/NORTHAMPTON
The body of fifty-one-year-old Matthew Farmer was found at a house in Nursery Lane last August.
He'd been stabbed to death.
Edward Fakeney, who's forty-seven and from Northampton, pleaded not guilty to murdering Mr Farmer when he appeared at the Crown Court.
The case was adjourned for trial.
Doctors in New Zealand have told Gloucestershire and England fast bowler David Lawrence he could be playing again in six months.
Lawrence himself revealed today he had originally thought his broken kneecap would put him out of the game for ever.
Now he's saying he'll be aiming to recover even earlier than the doctors say.
This report from Haig Gordon.
DAVID LAWRENCE/England Bowler
HILDA LAWRENCE/Mother
Voice over
It felt like somebody had put a gun to his kneecap, said David Lawrence today as he came from his bed at the hospital in Wellington to meet reporters.
He was relatively cheerful and uncomplaining for a man who had had a 40 minute operation to join his fractured kneecap and a severed tendon together again.
Relieved perhaps that the surgeon's prognosis is more encouraging than the cricketer's first thought as he crashed to the ground in agony.
There were no problems today with the photographers, unlike yesterday when England officials publicly clashed with a New Zealand TV crew trying to get close-ups of Lawrence suffering.
Today he was shown a play-back of the TV coverage.
The gruesome pictures were indeed seen back home in his mother's Gloucester living-room.
Lawrence will set off for England on Sunday.
In the meantime, a slight disagreement between doctor and patient on the period of recovery.
The medics say 6 months before we see him like this again.
The cricketer himself seems intent on something earlier; back on the ball by June.
The Atomic Energy Authority is giving some of its protective equipment to the Ukraine to help with the continuing clean-up operation at Chernobyl.
The closure of some of Britain's nuclear facilities means the equipment isn't needed here any more.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES
HARWELL/Oxfordshire
GORDON BURNS/AEA Technology
Dr JOHN GITTUS/British Nuclear Forum
It's nearly six years since the worst accident in the history of nuclear power happened at Chernobyl, in the Ukraine.
Scores of people died…towns in the immediate vicinity were evacuated…but thousands more, living in areas hundreds of miles away, were contaminated with radiation.
After the accident, the Chernobyl reactor was encased in concrete to protect the enviroment.
Since then, teams of scientists have been entering the site to test and remove contamination.
Now scientists at the Harwell Laboratory in Oxfordshire are sending three tonnes of protective clothing to Chernobyl to help the clean-up operation.
The equipment was kept at Harwell in case of an emergency…but it's not needed anymore since the reactor was shut down two years ago.
Male speaker
the equipment is very very good.
It'll mean the clean up operation will be much safer.
Voice over
Six years on, the massive clean up operation is far from complete.
Scientists are still examining the extent of the contamination both in and around the reactor.
Male speaker
the problem is that the radioactive material has a half life of about thirty years…this means that it'll be three decades before the material becomes half as radioactive as when it was first leaked…and a century before it is safe to humans.
Voice over
Although it'll be decades before the reactor can be made completely safe, experts say it's unlikely that any more major damage will be caused.
A hospital has turned itself into a charity to prevent the Health Authority closing it down.
Local people have raised more than half a million pounds to keep the hospital open.
And today staff and patients have been talking about their victory over the health service bureaucrats:
RICHARD BARNETT/Tetbury
JOHN WATERS/Trust Chairman
BILL WRAGGE/Hospital Manager
Voice over
Tetbury Hospital re-opened this week, confounding health service experts who decided 4 years ago, it should shut down.
They said cottage hospitals were a thing of the past and uneconomical.
But the people of Tetbury were determined to keep their local hospital.
They didn't want to have to travel 20 miles to Gloucester for treatment.
With backing from Prince Charles, who was once treated at the hospital for a cut hand, a campaign was launched.
And in 9 months, local people raised £600,000 and set up a charitable trust to run the hospital.
This week it reopened after a 6-month refit.
Male speaker
It was vital to keep the hospital open to serve a scattered community.
Voice over
The hospital treats around 2,500 patients a year in casualty and another 1,000 a year on the wards.
Male speaker
Small is beautiful and it's a very happy atmosphere at the hospital.
Voice over
Patients are delighted their local hospital has been saved from the axe.
Not everyone seems to appreciate the benefits of treatment at Tetbury.
But 5 year old Amy Harding would have found the trauma of having a surgical collar even worse if she'd had to make the long trip to Gloucester.
And now for the baffling case of the two pubs with the same name.
Two landlords in Gloucester have both called their pubs’ Baker Street’, the address made famous by Sherlock Holmes.
The customers say you'd have to be a detective to make sense of it.
KATE GARRAWAY Gloucester
ALAN KELLY Landlord
GARY GARDINER Landlord
Voice over
The problem is elementary — 2 pubs, one name and a battle that would have even Baker street's most famous resident seeing double.
Lining up on one side is the Baker Street pub in appropriately, Baker street.
The owners say they came up with the idea first.
Male speaker
I walked in and Jerry Rafferty was playing, so we thought Baker Street and then it went from there.
Voice over
But just a mile across the city, their rivals say they're the originals.
Male speaker
We were first and we're the originals.
Voice over
For the customer it's all very perplexing.
Male speaker
It's all very confusing.
Male speaker
I'm confused and i'm only drinking orange juice.
Voice over
But while the feud hots up, so does the trade, so it's unlikely either landlord will call time on this bitter battle.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Queen to pay income tax
The Queen is to start paying income tax from April.
Hijacked plane goes to USA
A Lufthansa jet with more than a hundred passengers on board hijacked by a gunman in Frankfurt has flown to New York.
Couple murdered at home
A couple have been found murdered at their home in East Sussex, there's no apparent motive.
Staff warned against strike
The truck makers, Leyland DAF, have warned that all staff jobs will be at risk if workers strike over threatened job losses.
Britons in Thai court
Two British people have been remanded in court in Bangkok charged with smuggling twenty-four thousand pounds worth of heroin.
FTSE up 17
The hundred shares index closed up seventeen point nine at twenty-eight, thirty-four point three.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-two and down at two marks, thirty-five.
That's it for now, but I hope you'll join me later for tonight's Central Lobby when we'll be taking a look at the history of Oxford Prison.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Scores of disabled workers are to lose their jobs after a council decided to stop subsidising their workshops.
TROWBRIDGE/Wiltshire
A demonstration outside a Wiltshire county council budget meeting wasn't enough to save the workshops, at Swindon and Salisbury, from closure.
The move will save nearly half a million pounds.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
But over ninety disabled workers say they feel they have been abandoned by the council, and that without the workshops they have no hope of other employment.
New figures show the burglary rate in the region has risen five-fold in some areas since the Conservatives came to power in nineteen seventy nine.
The Labour Party says the Tories have lost the right to call themselves the party of law and order.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
ELIZABETH CHENG/Burglary Victim
TONY BLAIR MP/Shadow Home Secretary
Det Con BOB KEYLOCK/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Elizabeth Cheng looks at the space where her mantlepiece clock used to be…it was stolen in a burglary a few days ago.
She's just one victim of the burgeoning burglary business Which has seen one county Police force dealing with a near five times increase over the last thirteen years.
Female speaker
You have this feeling of your house having been invaded and your things gone through
Voice over
It's meant all the locks have had to be replaced and the family is left with a feeling of uncertainty.
Female speaker
The financial upset is about six thousand pounds, but it'; s the emotional upset that is the most disturbing thing
Voice over
It's a story mirrored in thousands of homes throughout the region and highlighted by the Labour Party's Home Affairs Team.
They're fighting the Conservatives on their own ground…
Law and order.
Labour's figures cover the thirteen years since the Topries returned to power.
In that time burglaries in Gloucestershire have increased by four hundred and forty four per cent, the second highest in the country.
The West Mercia Force wasn't that far behind with 273 per cent.
Everywhere in the region suffered: Thames Valley went up by 212 per cent and even rural Wiltshire rose by 205 per cent.
Male speaker
This amounts to a breakdown in society and is every bit as serious asd trhe unem, loyment issue and the economy
Voice over
The Thames Valley Police has formed special Burglary squads to deal with the problem.
Male speaker
It's an attack on them mentally.
They're left to think about it all the time
Voice over
But Off the record detectives refer to the burglary boom as one of Britain's few growth industries.
(WES AD LIBS BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the little girl fighting back after being savaged by dogs.
Welcome back.Doctors say a four-year-old girl who suffered dreadful head wounds when she was savaged by two great danes may soon be completely healed.
Becky Palk was attacked fifteen months ago, and was left requiring extensive plastic surgery.
(WES) She still needs to return to hospital regularly for treatment, but doctors say she's made an excellent physical — and emotional — recovery.
8 November 1991/SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
OLGA SENIOR/Radcliffe Infirmary
KAREN PALK/Becky's Mother
BECKY PALK
SUE BYLES/Play Specialist
Voice over
15 months ago, 3 year old Becky Palk was bitten round her head, arms legs and back while staying with her grandparents in Oxford.
4 operations later, doctors at the Radcliffe Infirmary have managed to conceal many of her scars.
Her head is mishapen because of balloons of salt water put underneath her scalp.
By stretching the good skin, surgeons will be able to cover the bad.
Female speaker
It may take several operations.
One of the problems is sometimes the balloons become infected, because it's hard to keep little hands away from them, but I'm hopeful this year we may be able to get a good result.
Voice over
At home on the Isle of Wight, Becky is more interested in her 5th birthday coming up this Saturday.
Her whole family is grateful to the surgeons for remarkable work.
Female speaker
I'm quite pleased with what they've done already.
Any more is a bonus because she looks so much better and I'm really pleased.
The doctors have been fantastic.
Voice over
Becky's not only made a good physical recovery, but a good emotional one as well.
At school now, she says everyone helps her out.
Female speaker
Yeah, cos people all help me out.
Voice over
Becky has to make several more trips to the Radcliffe Infirmary before she's finished.
But it's more familiar now and she has friends to welcome her back.
What sort of a patient is Becky?
Female speaker
She's very good, good fun to play with.
Voice over
You've got to say that haven't you?!
Female speaker
Yes.
Voice over
The dogs who attacked Becky were destroyed the same day.
Great Danes are not affected by the Government's dangerous dogs legislation.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
LEIGH SPENCER
PAUL LANIGHAN/Victim
Chief Supt DAVID LINDLEY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Leigh Spencer walked free from Oxford Crown court facing 150 hours of community service.
He was one of 4 youths who attacked jogger, Paul Lanighan because he accidently bumped into them in the street.
Surrounded by family and friends, Spencer was delighted with his sentence for violent disorder.
Male speaker
Just happy, man, that's it.
Voice over
Although convicted of taking part in the attack no evidence was brought linking him to the knife.
Spencer was only caught after his victim went scouring the streets of the city looking for him and the other attackers.
Still searching for his other 3 assailants, Paul Lanighan is disgusted by the sentence.
Male speaker
Absolutely gutted I can't believe such a lenient sentence has been given.I don't know what's going through the judge's mind.
If one of his family had been in the same position surely he'd expect a stiffer sentence than the one given today
Voice over
The sentence has caused shock among police officers in Oxford.
Male speaker
Well what am I supposed to feel?
This was a vicious unprovoked attack on an innocent man which could easily have had more tragic consequences.
Is it surprising that my offcivers are losing faith in the criminal justice system.
The whole point of the Criminal Justice Act was to enable the courts to take a strong line with those who harm members of the public.
Here was an opportunity and it wasn't taken
Voice over
In court, Judge Francis Allen said:’ This sort of mindless attack happens in other parts of the country, but I find it more in Oxford.’
He said it demanded an immediate custodial sentence, but as Spencer was of previous good character and had already spent a week in custody on remand awaiting sentence, he made the community service order.
Male speaker
I'd have felt so much better if this person had at least a year's sentence.
I'm sure he would have learnt something by it.
He's shown no remorse, he's laughing at me, at the public in general 
Voice over
Mr Lanighan wants people who disagree with the sentence to write to their MP or to the Judge, Francis Allen, demanding a tougher policy.
Meanwhile he says todays news has been a major setback in his own recovery.
An elderly woman who had been missing and feared dead is recovering in hospital after a helicopter search found her.
She was lying in a freezing ditch, still with her pet dog, four days after she left home to take it for a walk.
Police and her husband agree she's lucky to be alive.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
DANNY LENIHAN/Husband
PC DAVID VALSLER/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Danny Lenihan can hardly believe his wife is still alive…
She was found, frozen, in a ditch beside the busy A 34, after going missing for 4 days and nights.
She'd told her husband she was going out for a walk with their pet dog, Kirsty, when she was found the dog was still clinging to her.
Isabel Lenihan, who's 77, was found by a police helicopter.
It was the second time they'd searched for her, following sightings in North Oxford.
They used a thermal imaging camera which gives a picture like this of bodies on the ground.
Mrs Lenihan was very cold, but alert.
Mrs Lenihan, who suffers from dementia is now said to be comfortable in hospital in Oxford.
Her husband knows how lucky she's been.
His wife's likely to be in hospital for a day or so.
Her husband's just grateful she survived her ordeal.
The Prime Minister has warned Gloucestershire County Councillors that he won't hesitate to chargecap them if they go ahead with the illegal budget set yesterday.
The council is planning to spend ten million pounds more than government guidelines next year.
Now a local Tory MP is demanding that Shire Hall be sold to pay off the authority's massive debts.
CHRIS MOORE Reporting
PAUL MARLAND MP Con
Cllr JOHN SEWELL Lib Dem Leader
Voice over
While county councillors were in the chamber yesterday discussing how much to overspend in Gloucestershire next year, protestors outside were breathing down their necks demanding an end to the threatened cuts that would result if the budget was brought in on target.
In the end, the three main parties compromised on a ten million pound overspend.
But today in the Commons came the backlash…
Male speaker
Is the Prime Minister aware that Gloucestershire has debts of 125 million pounds.
Wouldn't the money be better spent on education?
Male speaker
I agree, and I hope Gloucestershire will eventually bring in a legal budget.
We will not hesitate to charge cap such authorities.
Voice over
Paul Marland blames Gloucestershire's problems on the LIberal Democrats.
He accuses them of running up a hundred million pound debt during their years in control, and says the Tories are wrong to go along with them.
But he has a radical solution in mind.
Male speaker
I would like to see a list drawn up of all the council's assets.
They could then be sold off to the tune of a hundred million pounds to pay off debts.
After all, they don't really need Shire Hall.
Voice over
But the Liberal Democreats aren't willing to take any blame.
Male speaker
My message to Mr Marland is that he should tell the government that Gloucestershire actually needs this extra money to provide much needed services
Voice over
Paul Marland is still hoping to defuse the crisis.
He and fellow Gloucestershire MPs are meeting councillors this weekend to see if a solution can be found.
Bush announces bid for re-election
FTSE down 13
The hundred shares index closed down thirteen point four at twenty-five, twenty-three point seven.
The pound is down at one dollar seventy-eight, and down at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Oxford United Football Club have announced losses last year of nearly one million pounds.
United's chairman says that short of selling players, the only way to save the club is to find new backers.
Robin Powell reports.
PAT McGEOUGH/Managing Director/Oxford United
VIV PETO/Editor/Raging Bull
Voice over
Times are so hard at the Manor Ground that even the manager has had to return his club car.
The annual club accounts made public today point to a loss of more than £900,000 during 1990.
Chairman Kevin Maxwell, who's already withdrawn all his financial support for the club, has told shareholders United need new backers.
A rumour that Oxford were on the verge of takeover 3 weeks ago came to nothing, while Richard Branson and the boxing promoter Frank Warren have both denied they're ready to buy.
The Chairman says the only alternative to new backing is selling players.
Lee Nogan's already joined Watford.
Winger, Paul Simpson has been classed in the £1m bracket.
His strike partner John Durnin could fetch up to half that.
But with United still bottom of the Second Division and staring relegation in the face, the editor of the club's fanzine says this isn't the time to be selling star players.
If United are to avoid relegation against all the odds, they'll need more performances like this 5-2 win over fellow strugglers Newcastle, a result which prompted the Tynesiders to sack the manager and call for Kevin Keegan.
Right now, Oxford are looking for a Messiah of similar proportions.
An 'A'-Level Art student has invented a new style of sculpture…by wrapping himself up in chicken wire.
Now his lifesize copies of himself can be seen clambering over the school buildings.
Simon Garrett reports 
CHURCHDOWN/Gloucestershire
CHRIS OAKEY/Sculptor
JOHN GOULD/Art Teacher
Voice over
When Chris Oakey decided to create a set of life size figures for his A Level Art project, his teachers feared he'd bitten off a bit more than he could chew.
He was having problems until he hit upon the idea of chickenwire.
Male speaker
I thought if I wrapped myself up in chickenwire and cut myself out again I would be left with a realistic shape.
Voice over
Luckily for Chris his A Level assessor will come TO the school to look at his work, rather than expecting his project to arrive in the post.
Before he developed his wrap around technique a full figure took 18 months to make.
Now he's got it down to as little as a couple of weeks.
Male speaker
He came back to school after Christmas with 4 of them stuffed in the back of his mini and it just went from there.
Voice over
Staff and pupils at Chosen Hill have been impressed not just by Chris's imagination and creativity but also by his hard work.
It's not been cheap either.
Already he's spent more than £100 on chicken wire and spent hours collecting up the various fillings.
But the result is definitely life-like.
The local police were informed of the whereabouts of the statues, just incase anyone mistakenly reported an attempted break-in.
Some who weren't told were fooled.
Male speaker
The rumour is one of the caretakers was happily waving at them for 5 minutes before somebody told him they weren't real.
Male speaker
Does the chicken wire hurt?
Male speaker
I am covered in scars; I do have to suffer for my art?
Voice over
Although he's only seventeen Chris is committed to art in one form or another as something he intends to stick with for life.
Chris will be happy just so long as the examiners like his work.
However, if any wealthy patron out there wants to commission him to create lifesize figures of them.
The extra cash wouldn't go amiss for the chickenwire fund.
A snake breeder says he wants to improve the reptiles image.
He says horror films and books often portray snakes as monsters; now he wants people to get to know his reptiles so that they stop fearing them.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM
CHRIS MARTIN/Snake Breeder
Voice over
Visitors to Chris Martin's house in Cheltenham might be forgiven for shivering at all the slithering going on among the selection of snakes which share his semi.
But they needn't worry.
None of the reptiles are venomous, although some of these boa constrictors could give a nasty squeeze.
Chris and his wife have been collecting and breeding snakes for the past 16 years: there are 34 in the house at the moment, but during the breeding season there can be as many as 200.
He says they're safe in the right hands but you still have to be careful.
He says they have 2 kinds of bite: a’ go away’bite and the bite they give when they think you're food.
And yes, he's been mistaken for food a few times!
Chris believes in teaching children about snakes, showing them that they aren't the horrible slimy things they're sometimes portrayed as.
But you'd expect, when he unpacks a python, there's pandemonium.
But the children soon settle down and gather round for a closer look at Caesar a 12ft long Burmese python.
The children say that the snakes aren't as slimey as they thought they'd be.
The skin is dry.
It's changed one girls view of snakes.
She says they're not half as horrible as they look!
Chris always ends his visits by asking children not to disturb or try and touch snakes they may find in the wild.
But for now at least, this is one group of children who've definitely been charmed by snakes.
A coroner has warned of the dangers of blocked chimneys and flues at an inquest on a woman who was suffocated by fumes from a boiler.
27 NOVEMBER 1991/TOOT BALDON/Oxfordshire
Teacher Judith Seecoomar collapsed and died from carbon monoxide poisoning at her father's home in Toot Baldon in Oxfordshire last year.
She'd been looking after her father, who'd become ill, probably because of the fumes.
A heating expert said the boiler had not been serviced for twenty five years, and the flue was blocked.
Oxfordshire Coroner Nicholas Gardiner recorded a verdict of accidental death, and warned people with solid fuel boilers to keep the flues clean, and the machinery in good working order.
Commital proceedings have started against a 14-year-old boy charged with the manslaughter of a schoolgirl.
15-year-old Joanna Hughes died last August after suffering severe burns to her chest and neck.
Nick Clark reports.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
Voice over
The incident that led to Joanna's death happened outside a children's home in Cheltenham.
Joana died in a Bristol hospital 11 days later.
This morning her mother, Mrs Susan Webb, here on the right, was at Tewkesbury magistrates court to hear the start of committal proceedings.
The accused, as a juvenile cannot be named.
He appeared in court to hear the charge read out to him, that he did unlawfully kill Joanna Hughes in August last year.
Defence and prosecution lawyers are giving details of the case before a bench of 3 magistrates who will have to decide if there is sufficient evidence for the accused to be committed for trial to Crown Court.
The proceedings are expected to last 2 days.
Health watchdogs fear the Government's NHS reforms could mean hundreds of hospital patients will have to travel long distances for treatment.
They also warn that some leading hospitals may face an uncertain future if they lose patients to outside bidders.
But managers say the reforms offer patients the best deal, and no hospitals are threatened.
Gareth Furby reports.
OXFORD
DAVID EVANS/Patient
TOM RICHARDSON/Community Health Council
COLIN JONES/Nuffield Centre Chief Executive
STEVE MANNING/Oxfordshire Health Authority
Voice over
The Nuffield Orthopedic Centre in Oxford specialises in bone surgery.
Its treatment is among the best in Britain.
For major cases like this leg reconstruction, there's little competition.
But under the Government's health reforms, routine surgery like a knee replacement, can easily be referred elsewhere.
This patient is from North Oxford.
The Nuffield is his local Orthopedic Centre.
But his back problem is routine.
It's the kind of operation the Community Health Council believes could soon be transferred out of the county:
He says he could mean patients won't have any visitors.
He says it could mean treatment is of an inferior quality in hospitals outside the county.
Under the Government health reforms money now follows the patient.
The Nuffield has been treating about two and a half thousand routine cases every year.
If those patients start to go elsewhere the hospital will loose funding.
And the worry is its viablity as a centre of excellence could then be threatened.
He says if it happens consistently it will have a detrimental effect.
But tonight Oxfordshire Health Authority insisted there were no plans for a major increase in spending outside the county.
Only about £500,000 out of a total budget of £160m was involved.
He says they are in a long term partnership with our local hospitals and they want to do all they can to support them.
But health watchdogs and hospital managers may to seek further assurances when contracts are discussed at a meeting next week.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
JANUARY 1989/HEATHROW AIRPORT
Voice over
A man who suffers excruciating back pain claims his life has been ruined by a drug injected into his spine.
He says the substance, which is used to make internal organs show up on X-Rays, brought on an incurable condition which affects the nerves in his back.
He's joining thousands of other people across the UK who are considering legal action against the pharmacutical company Glaxo.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
JOHN DEAKIN
ANNE ALEXANDER/Solicitor
Voice over
John Deakin suffers from a back complaint called arachnoiditis.
It's a disease of the fine cobweb-like membrane of nerves at the base of the spine.
15 years ago Mr Deakin was treated and cured of a spine tumour.
During the treatment his back was x-rayed and this involved injecting an oil based substance into his spine to help show up the nerves.
The substance, called Myodil, is now believed by many to be responsible for causing arachnoiditus.
Mr Deakin says he's in permenant agony.
He says that the pain is so great that it brings tears to his eyes, makes him grumpy, and means he's sometimes confined to his armchair for days on end.
Many arachnoiditis sufferers are now taking legal action against Glaxo, which manufactured Myodil.
Mr Deakin's solicitor alone is handling 400 other similar cases.
She says that between three and four thousand people in the country have so far registered complaints about the drug with their solicitors — they will have to be examined before any action is taken to get expert advice on how probable it is that their problem was caused by the Myodil injections.
A statement issued by Glaxo says:’ The company has consistently denied it has been negligent in any way in relation to the supply of Myodil, it voluntarily withdrew the product in 1987, as it had been superceded by new products and technology.’
But that's of little consolation to John Deakin.
He says he can't even play with his grandchildren because he's in so much pain.
What's the illness done to his life?
Shattered it.
A pub landlord in Oxford has been charged with allowing his customers to smoke cannabis on his premises.
Kenneth Siret, who has run the Carpenters Arms in Nelson Street for 12 years, was arrested along with eleven other people.
Haig Gordon reports.
OXFORD
CHARLES ELD/Morrells Brewery
Insp DAVID ROGERS/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
It was here at the Carpenters Arms in the Jericho area of Oxford that some 20 drugs squad officers arrived last night and arrested 12 people, including the landlord.
They'd been watching the premises for several months.
When the swoop finally came.
however, it was a shock.
Being a University City, Oxford is an obvious target for the drugs pushers.
Young people with curiosity and a rebellious streak are only too ready to experiment.
Oxford police recently reported their concern to the city's magistrates and their determination to crack down.
That means, among other things, plain-clothes officers pretending to be customers.
The landlord of the Carpenters Arms will appear in court on March the 12th.
Meanwhile, landlords throughout Oxford
The body of a sixty year old man has been discovered in a council flat, almost three months after he died of natural causes.
Neighbours, who reported the man as missing to the local council, say more should have been done to see if he was in need of help.
Nick Clark reports.
WORCESTER
Sgt MIKE NICCOLLS/West Mercia Police
Cllr BOB PEACHEY/Worcester City Council
Voice over
The body had lain inside this council flat since November.
The kitchen undisturbed presumably since the day the man died.
The discovery was made yesterday.
Male speaker
A neighbour saw the door open and found the body inside and alerted us.
Voice over
A post mortem has revealed the man died from natural causes, there are no suspicious circumstances.
Police are almost certain it's the body of unemployed Irishman Michael O'Neil who was housed in the flat by the council in nineteen eighty eight.
The man was a regular in a nearby pub.
Neighbours and people who drank there say they noticed he was missing and told the council.
The council wrote to him.
Male speaker
We did try and get in touch with him.
Voice over
But people who knew the man say they think the council didn't do enough to find out if he was in need of help.
Male speaker
It's terrible he wasn't found sooner.
Female speaker
You would have thought someone would have found him.
Male speaker
I'm satisfied we did all we could.
Voice over
West Mercia police are still trying to trace any relatives.
Meanwhile detectives are still questioning two men in connection with a break-in at the property, but they emphasise there are no sucpicious circumstances in connection with the man's death.
One of the biggest Central South crowds of the weekend will be at Kingsholm tomorrow…what a match Gloucester against the old enemy Bath 
Voice over
Bath are going for the championship…
Gloucester still fighting for survival…its the game of the season for the cherry and whites…its the game they want to win more than anyother…last season at Kingsholm they pulled it off…they squeezed home by two points…it was 14-12 to Gloucester and win or lose there'll be nothing in it tomorrow
STING
There are two changes in the pack…
Pete Jones returns to the front row and Andy Deacon is called back as the other prop
Last league match out the cherry and whites beat London Irish 18-6…they're not worried about the score tomorrow…they just want to win
now taking us off on our action round-up tonight is Chris Symonds of Oxford…he's going for gold…he's going on the scariest sporting ride of all 
Voice over
This is how Chris Symonds earns his sporting glory…riding in the british bobsleigh team…he's the number two man…and has just won himself a gold medal in the world cup competition…this weekend he competes in the world championships…he's been back home to get ready to train for his rollercoaster ride on ice…
chat with Chris Symonds who says its the biggest adrenalin rush you can get…it is sometime scary
travelling even faster than Chris…is rally champion Colin Mcrae he's got the Banbury prodrive team into second place in the Swedish rally…
back on the winning trail is Gloucester modern pentathlete Richard Phelps he's won the Sydney Open Championship down under
Oxford speedway fans are meeting tonight…they've five days left to save the cheetahs…
ice hockey this weekend…
Milton Keynes and swindon are at home on saturday its Oxford on sunday…
and over in Gloucester tomorrow seconds are out for the western counties schools championships at the Beaufort School in Tuffley
Now if you're a horse racing fan…the brain will be galloping…the mouth watering…at the thought of what's to come over the next few weeks…
The Cheltenham Gold Cup is a month away…the Grand National a few furlongs further…
On top of that the new point to point season is off and running and that's where we're going for this week's Friday Feature 
NICK PRICE/Club President
JON TRICE-ROLPH/Champion Jockey
PATRICIA MAGUIRE/Gloucestershire
GRAHAM PIDGEON/Winning Owner
DAVE SMITH/Bookie
Voice over
Point to Point…racing folk will tell you this is the true home of steepelchasing…the foundry where runners and riders are forged for the future…
From now until late spring they'll be racing across the fields…far and wide…
They ride…they race…they watch for fun…and they roll up in their thousands…the South Midlands Area Hunt Club got the new season underway at Heythrop near Chipping Norton with a bumper card of 158 horses and 11 races…
Nick Price says that point to point is just like the cheltenham gold cup…its run under the same rules as the grand national…the big difference is that this is amateur…totally amateur…but its a boom sport and very popular in this area
For most point to point is a good day out…an afternoon of country sport…the competition is keen…the racing hard and winning isn’ t the be all and end all…for some horses and riders though this game is the first hurdle…a fence they have to jump to make the big time
Nick price says there is a horse called Rushing Wild that was point to pointing last season and is now one of the favourites for the gold cup…and this is a nursery…
Peter Scudamore and Richard Dunwoody both started here
Its not every jockeys dream to want to ride at Cheltenham…take Jon Trice-Rolph from Moreton In Marsh in Gloucestershire…he's been point to point champion twice in the last four years and just enjoys himself
Jon Trice-Rolph says he's like to win a few more races…but enjoys coming out on a saturday afternoon for three or four rides
Its a strange love affair for the jockeys…they take all the knocks and falls like the pros…but at the end of the race there's no bounty just the bumps and bruises
Patricia Maguire from Gloucestershire says the falls are not too bad and she enjoys racing…she wouldn't come if she didn't
its all worth while tho when your luck's in and your horse is a winner…
Graham Pidgeon who's horse has won a race says you only have w inner once in a while and its worth waiting for
point to point may be amateur but there's a few pounds to be won by following the form…the bookies are here of course…lets face it a race meeting without them is like a bottle of champagne with no bubbles…
David Smith a bookie says there's money to be won and it's just as well he managed to eat when he was a youngster…
The bookies always end up smiling don't they…but at point to point everyone it seems enjoys the crack of a day of country racing
The man who saved The Roses Theatre from closure twelve years ago has lost his fight to stay in control.
Former Crossroads actor Stan Stennett has been told that his licence will not be renewed, and that the theatre is to be handed over to a trust.
It may now be turned into an arts centre 
KATE GARRAWAY/Tewkesbury
STAN STENNETT/Former Licensee
Cllr PETER RANDALL/Tewkesbury Borough Council
JENNY TURNER/Manageress
STUART TURNER/Theatre Assistant
Voice over
For twelve years Stan Stennett's put the Roses theatre in the lime light…staging everything from ballet to bawdy pantomimes and Ben Elton.
But now Tewkesbury Borough Council which owns the theatre has decided its time for a change in managment…and this means Stan Stennett has to go.
He says not going to fight the decision.But will always want to be in the theatre.
The council says the theatre's a major drain on their resources and to avoid shutting it down completely they had to make the change.
HE says we want a more modern approach.
For staff who've worked alongside Stan Stennett it's the end of an era
She says we'll all miss him.
But some are welcoming the change.
He says he thinks the theatre should be more a part of the community.
The theatre could now be handed over to one of two local groups.
The aim is to attract as wide a range of uses as possible to make the theatre a bigger part of the Tewkesbury Community.
Cancer specialists are investigating a new drug, derived from fish oil from the Outer Hebrides, which could help women with breast cancer.
The research is still in the early stages, but it seems the drug could help patients withstand higher doses of radiation, or might itself kill cancer cells.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
CHRISTINE TWEDDLE/Cancer Patient
CALLANISH/Outer Hebrides
HELEN ELPHICK/Research Nurse
Dr CHRIS ALCOCK/Consultant Radiotherapist
Voice over
The misery of radiotherapy.
A necessary evil for patients like Christine Tweddle.
She was told she had breast cancer five months ago.
Female speaker
Having had cancer in the family two times, I was actually calm.
I know that stress is one of the main factors.
And getting in a tiss and shouting won't make it go away.
Voice over
Christine has just been given the all clear…but only after an intensive five weeks of radiation treatment.
Female speaker
I didn't have soreness, some tightness perhaps.
I felt sick.
On the whole it was painless.
Voice over
During her treatment, Christine was taking these jelly like capsules.
It was part of a study on cancer treatment taking place here, at Oxford's Churchill Hospital.
Half of the patients are taking dummy capsules…the other half are taking a drug made from fish oil.
An acid derived from the oil is produced at an unlikely location on the Outer Hebrides.
This old fish-drying plant has been revived to manufacture the drug, which is sent south for use in the trial.
Female speaker
If they agree, they start taking capsules straight ; for 12 weeks, sometimes 14 or 15 weeks.
Then we follow up while they're having radiotherapy.
Voice over
It'll take around a year to see if the drug does help reduce the side effects of radiotherapy.
If that's the case, there's hope for other cancer sufferers.
Male speaker
It means we might be able to give higher doses, with less side effects.
And maybe able to cure more cancers.
(cut to) It might also have a cancer killing effect.
Voice over
It's early days yet…but it seems this fishy find from the outer Hebrides could bring fresh hope and health to many thousands of people.
(WES AD LIBS BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News…fun at the gallop.
We go point to pointing…the true home of amateur racing.
Welcome back to Central News.
Still to come tonight, the British ducks that face being shot because they're endangering the survival of another species.
But first, here's Tim with our Friday sports round-up.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
PAUL BODIN/Swindon Town
Voice over
Swindon Town have a new goal ace to cheer these days…
Paul Bodin's the name…three goals in three games…from his unlikely birth at left back he's hit the winner…the only goal…in the last two matches…
Paul Bodin says he's been lucky…he's been in the right place at the right time and has managed to take the chances…
He says his goal against Wolves was the best one because that's the first header he's scored
Tomorrow Town play Millwall at the County Ground…on the big game scale this one rates at 10 out of 10…down at the Den swindon lost 2-1…
Millwall have scored more goals at home than any other team in the first division but away their record is one of the worst…
Oxford put three past them a couple of weeks ago…but Swindon know what to expect
Paul Bodin says that Millwall are the best team they've played this season
STING
And for the biggest test of the season Town are missing three regulars Micky Hazard…is recovering from a minor knee ooperation…and with Craig Maskell still out Steve White has the task of leading the goal hunt
Nothing much between the two teams on form…they're two places and eight points apart…both are in the frame for the play-off places but the promotion race has a long way to go yet…
in division three Hereford are at home to Northampton…the last time these two met it was a demolition derby United had four sent-off…it finished one all on goals lets hope its 11 all on players tomorrow
Anne Dawson
Gun club arms theft.
Police say security mistakes WERE made.
Wesley Smith
More to come…warning as the jobs axe falls at Leyland DAF.
Anne Dawson
And breast cancer breakthrough.
Is fish oil a prevention or cure?
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The thieves removed part of the roof to get into the building, and made off with sixteen handguns.
A reward has been offered for their recovery, but an MP is calling for a full inquiry.
He's worried that the guns may be used against the police.
KIM BARNES/Abingdon
Insp STEPHEN WAGSTAFF/Thames Valley Police
ANDREW YOUNG/Browning UK Ltd
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
Voice over
Guns like these could be devastating in the wrong hands.
Sixteen pistols and 150 rounds of ammunition were stolen from the Dunmore Shooting Centre.
They were taken from a restaurant area, not the high security shop.
Police say a mistake meant weapons were where they shouldn't have been.
The raiders removed tiles to climb into the roof space.
Security's now been stepped up.
The weapons include 5 Browning point 22s like this, mainly used for target shooting, and 1 Browning 9mm, as issued to the police.
There's also 2 Smith and Wesson revolvers and a Beretta semi-automatic.
But gun experts say without certificates it'll be hard to get hold of ammunition.
Now there are calls for a full inquiry…
Hungerford gunman Michael Ryan was a Dunmore member…now the club's offering a reward for any information which helps get these pistols worth 7,000 pounds back under lock and key.
At least seventy five workers at the sales headquarters of Leyland Daf are to lose their jobs.
The redundancies are part of a nationwide package aimed at saving the van and truck company which went into receivership last week.
And the official receiver has warned that more job losses could follow if threatened strikes at other plants go ahead.
GRAEME BOWD/Thame
Voice over
Since the collapse of Leyland-Daff the only entrance to its sales headquarters has been partly blocked by heavy trucks.
It was done on the receivers orders to stop disgruntled workers taking demonstration vehicles from the site.
But so far the work force of 330 white collar staff have shown no sign of militant action.
Today 75 workers here learned they will lose their jobs, along with sixteen hundred from other plants around the country.
They'll get just one week's pay per year of service — the state minimum.
He said he had been made redundant.
It was a great company with a great product and a great workforce.
Others feared there would be more job losses.
He said there was a lot of gossip and speculation but no-one would tell the staff what was going on.
Because there are no unions here staff have not been involved in the strike ballot which has been held at the other four British plants.
Workers at Glasgow have voted to come out, at Leyland itself they voted against.
A lot now depends on the Birmingham result which will be known on Monday.
The receiver has said a strike will mean total closure of Leyland Daff in Britain.
Without it there's a chance that a buyer can be found for the new slimmed-down company.
Meanwhile the 250 workers who remain at Thame can do little to affect the outcome.
OVER:
Fears of an outbreak of legionnaires disease at one of the region's biggest hospitals has led to patients being transferred to an RAF hospital for surgery.
Three operating theatres at the Princess Margaret Hospital have been closed after an equipment failure, so to ease the impact on waiting lists, the air force has offered to help.
IAN MACLAREN/Wroughton
PAUL VAN den DAELE/Associate General Manager
Flt Lt HELEN WARLEY/RAF Ward Sister
Sister CAROLE BEZER/Princess Margaret Hospital
Air Commodore JIM GREIG/Commanding Officer
Voice over
Patients are wheeled into the operating theatre at the Princess Alexandra RAF Hospital in Wroughton.
They've been transferred from Princess Margaret Hospital in Swindon, where hospital managers have been forced to close three operating theatres.
Tests are being carried out for the bacteria that causes legionnaires disease after humidifying equipment failed…
An operating team from Princess Margaret is using a spare theatre at the RAF Hospital.
They plan to treat around fifty patients a week, for the next month.
Beds are also being provided on the wards at the RAF Hospital where services and civilian staff are working in partnership…iv
The operating theatres at RAF Wroughton were built last year…but only three of them are in regular use.
The RAF believes the current emergency could point to even more co-operation between the two hospitals in the future…
The medical team from Princess Margaret Hospital will continue to carry out surgery in Wroughton for the next four weeks.
By then it's hoped the operating theatres in Swindon will be back in commission.
Anne Dawson
Gun club arms theft.
Police say security mistakes WERE made.
Wesley Smith
More to come…warning as the jobs axe falls at Leyland DAF.
Anne Dawson
And breast cancer breakthrough.
Is fish oil a prevention or cure?
Ducks from Britain are being blamed for driving a species in Europe to the verge of extinction.
Amorous males which have escaped from these shores are now likely to be shot in Spain, all in the name of conservation 
SIMON GARRETT Slimbridge
KIM STILES Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust
Voice over
This is the male Ruddy duck.
And he's being called a lot worse things than that in Spain.
A native of North America several Ruddys escaped from the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust at Slimbridge and other collections in the fifties.
His aggressive nature and dazzling courtship display…that's it…is having the desired effect on female white-headed ducks.
The resultant hybrid offspring is interbreeding even more, and the white-headed ducks face extinction
Female speaker
Worldwide there are about nineteen thousand Ruddy Ducks and there are 3,500 White-headed ducks in Britain and rising, so it's a very serious threat
Voice over
The government's gathered together knowledgable bodies like the trust into the Ruddy duck Working Group to find out if the two species can be kept apart.
If not, some male ruddy ducks and hybrids may have to be killed
Female speaker
We would need to control enough in Britain to stop them flying off into Europe.
In Spain they're shooting them already and other countries may soon follow.
No one wants to shoot birds, but we must balance the survival of an entire species against that of a few individuals
Voice over
Such tough action's called for because while Ruddy Duck numbers world wide are enormous White-headed ducks are seriously threatened.
Even so the research group has no illusions.
However logical they know a mass killing of Ruddy Ducks is likely to ruffle a few feathers 
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Inflation down to 1
The inflation rate has fallen to its lowest in twenty-five years to stand at one point seven per cent.
Interest rate cut rejected
The Chancellor has rejected any idea of an immediate cut in interest rates.
1
The Government has limited public sector pay rises to one point five per cent, although teachers will receive a rise of just above half of one per cent .
1
Sixteen hundred workers are to be made nationwide by the truck-makers, Leyland DAF.
They include seventy-five in Oxfordshire.
Settlement in Major libel case
Both the Prime Minister and the caterer, Clare Latimer, have won a public apology and undisclosed damages in the first round of their libel battle.
FTSE up 9
The hundred shares index closed up nine points at twenty-eight, forty-three point three.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-two and up at two marks, thirty-six.
Television celebrity, Leslie Crowther has been allowed home from hospital, four months after his car crashed off a motorway.
October 1992
He suffered serious head injuries in the accident on the M five in Gloucestershire last October.
He's had a number of operations to remove blood clots from his brain, but staff at Frenchay hospital in Bristol say they're delighted with his progress.
(ad lib)
A new film based on a romantic Victorian painting has become part of a GCSE English syllabus…and all thanks to a sponsorship deal.
The film company which made’ The Bridge’is sponsoring a school's English department in this unique arrangement.
But the school insists that it isn't selling out to commercial interests 
THE BRIDGE/City Screen
COMPTON/Berkshire
LYN GOLEBY/Producer
STUART JARVIS/Head of English
Voice over
’ The Bridge’is the imaginary story behind a Victorian impressionist painting by Philip Steer of a man and a woman standing on a bridge.
It stars Saskia Reeves as a frustrated wife who feels stifled by her demanding husband, played by Anthony Higgins.
She escapes by falling in love with a young artist while on holiday in Suffolk.
It was made by City Screen who own the Phoenix Cinema in Oxford, where the film was premiered this month.
Last Sunday 200 GCSE students from Down's School in Compton saw it at the cinema as part of their coursework.
They're studying the book the film is based on and also have to write essays on the film.
The school's English Department is sponsored by City Screen through a set-up called Film Education which aims to encourage students to regard films as more than pure entertainment.
Female speaker
Film is seen as an accessible medium.
Everyone enjoys going to the cinema and it would be nice if it could also be taken seriously.
Male speaker
It was interesting the way the film was brought over from the picture.
Female speaker
I wouldn't go out of my way to watch it, but it as it was a school thing it was OK.
Female speaker
With studying the film it was alot more interesting than just reading the book.
Voice over
Producer, Lyn Goleby was on a visit to the school to answer questions on the film, which ranged from how much say the author had in shooting the film, to whether’ The Bridge’might have had to have a happier ending if it had been made with American money.
The sponsorship deal between the school and the film company was set up by a former Downs School pupil, who now manages the Phoenix Cinema.
The school denies there's any kind of conflict in the deal;
Male speaker
The company which owns the cinema never puts any pressure on us to go and see anything.
If anything arises we think would be beneficial, we approach them.
They can't make any profit out of us as they charge us a very reasonable rate.
Voice over
Mr Jarvis says he's delighted with the coursework pupils have produced on the film, but that the scheme can only continue for another couple of years.
After that, GCSE courses are set to become much more exam based.
At least by then some of his pupils might be converted to the idea that there's more to the cinema than the Addams Family and Terminator 2.
Two teenagers have chosen to bed down for the night in a freezer as part of their training for an expedition to the Artic Circle, They hope that a good night of shivering in sub-zero temperatures will prepare them for the trip.
Gareth Furby reports.
CRICKLADE Wiltshire
JON PENHALE Young Explorer
JAMES GROVE Young Explorer
MARK SWEET Freezer Owner
Voice over
Today was pretty warm for February.
But these two weren't dressing up for the great outdoors.
Their challenge lay inside, a night in a giant freezer.
For James Grove from Cirencester and John Penhale from Cheltenham it's a warm up, or should that be a cool down, for this: an expedition to the edge of the Artic Circle.
He says he's going numb already.
He says they want to find out what feeling cold is really like.
The temperature inside…minus twelve and falling fast.
Later tonight it'll reach minus twenty.
He says he wouldn't like to do it.
The metal will freeze and so will the tent.
And after just a few minutes the cold was starting to get through.
He says he can't feel his feet even though he's got all the right gear.
He says it should be alright once they snuggle down into their sleeping bags.
And tomorrow, if they haven't gone cold on the idea of an expedition, at least they'll be well prepared.
Six die as storms batter California
FTSE down 1
The hundred shares index closed down one point one at twenty-five, twenty-two point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-seven and up at two marks marks, eighty-seven.
The Wyvern theatre in Swindon is looking for a canine to fill the role of the Queen's corgi.
They want a corgi for the production of the Big Friendly Giant which is a sell out success on its present UK Tour.
The corgi must have a regal air, be docile and reasonably well behaved.The fee for the show…as many dog biscuits as they can eat!
The author of the Thomas the Tank Engine stories has dismissed a new tv series based on his characters as’ rubbish’.
The Reverend W.Audry says many of the episodes lack the authenticity of the books, which were based on real incidents on the railways.Richard Barnett reports:
STROUD/Gloucestershire
Rev W AWDRY/Author
THOMAS THE TANK ENGINE/Britt Allcroft
Voice over
The Reverend W Awdry has lived and breathed Thomas the Tank engine ever since he wrote the first book about the lovable locomotive in 1945. 25 more books about Thomas and his friends followed Mas well as popular TV series.
But the latest TV version of the stories has the 80 year old author fuming.
He's just seen an advance video of the programmes which will be shown from later this month.
And he describes some of the new episodes as rubbish:
Male speaker
He was furious when he saw the rubbishy episodes.
Voice over
The Rev Awdry is proud that railwaymen have written to him, praising the accuracy of the Thomas the Tank engine books.
And he says that is why he finds it so galling that one episode in the new series has trees growing right up to the line, which would never happen and describes how one of the engines used to stop to enjoy the view.
He says if trains stopped like that, the whole network would grind to a halt:
Male speaker
His stories are all based on real life episodes on the railways.
Voice over
Britt Allcroft, who made the new series, says that the Reverend W Awdry always left the boundary between reality and magic undefined in Thomas' world.
He says the new films are better than ever.
However the author has written a strong letter to Britt Allcroft voicing his criticisms.
And he hopes future programmes will be on the right lines once again.
In part two: The Italian Job: New international honour for Hoddle.
View from the bridge: English exams get the sponsorship treatment.
And cold comfort.
Chilling out in the warm-up for the North Pole.
