Welcome back: After less than a year in football management, Swindon Town boss Glenn Hoddle has been chosen to take charge of a Football League team for a top match in Italy.
The League says the appointment is in recognition of Swindon's attractive style of football.
Robin Powell reports.
APRIL 1991
GLENN HODDLE/Swindon Town Manager
Voice over
Glenn Hoddle raised more than a few eyebrows when he took over at the County Ground last April.
Though a successful player with Spurs and England, many doubted his ability to repeat the achievement of Ossie Ardiles by earning a place in the First Division.
But in just 10 months Hoddle has made Swindon one of the most feared teams in Division 2, playing a style of football more attractive, than the rather pedestrian long ball game that many teams prefer.
Now his success has been recognised by the Football League, which has chosen him to manage a Second Division Select 11 to play an equivalent team from the Italian League — at Caserta on the 4th of March.
The League says Swindon's football has earned them widespread admiration this season and Hoddle is a suitable and exciting choice.
It hopes his experience of continental football will be particularly valuable.
Hoddle says he expects the Italians to be a highly skilled team, but says his own side will contain some talented players.
One of them could be Swindon's own Duncan Shearer, who's been scoring goals this season as though they were going out of fashion.
Oxford's Paul Simpson must also be in contention for a place, while his team-mate Andrew Melville, seen here scoring against Swindon, already has international experience with Wales.
But it's Glenn Hoddle who's likely to be the focus of attention.
In the past, similar games have been used to groom club managers for greater things and Swindon Town might just have a future England manager in their midst.
The Gloucester and England rugby player Mike Teague has received compensation from the Rugby Football Union for the injuries he sustained during the World Cup.
Teague, who's thirty-two and a self-employed builder, claims to have lost five thousand pounds in earnings because of the injuries.
He's received a lump sum payment — believed to be a few thousand pounds.
Hereford United slumped to a home defeat in the Fourth Division last night.
They went down two-one to Crewe Alexandra at Edgar Street.
Martin Graham-Scott reports.
HEREFORD
Armed raiders have escaped with several thousand pounds from a bank in Worcestershire.
BROADWAY/Worcestershire
Two masked men burst into into the Midland Bank in Broadway, near Evesham, and threatened two female cashiers with what appeared to be a shotgun.
A female customer was knocked to the ground during the raid.
The robbers escaped with several thousand pounds in cash.
They drove off in a grey transit van which was found abandoned soon after the raid.
OXFORD
And in a second armed raid, this time in Oxford, a man walked into the Co-Op bank in Bond Square in the city centre and threatened staff with a black handgun.
Police say he escaped with a considerable amount of money.
He's described as white, in his early twenties and about six feet tall.
He had short fair hair and was wearing a black sweat shirt with a hood and blue jeans.
A film about an estate agency specially set up for squatters has been criticised for promoting an unacceptable activity.
The ten minute film, to be shown on Channel Four tonight says councils who block squatting are making homelessness worse.
The producers are themselves squatters.
Nick Clark reports.
HOME OF OUR OWN/Filmit Productions
'PAUL'/Squatters' Estate Agency
HOME OF OUR OWN/Filmit Productions
'ROB'/Producer
Cllr PHYLLIS STARKEY/Leader/Oxford City Council
Voice over
A Home of Our Own will be screened later tonight at eight o clock on Channel Four's Free for All.
It's been produced by squatters living in Oxford.
Male speaker
If you want somewhere to live why not squat.
Voice over
The film was made with the help of the so-called squatters estate agency run from this office in Oxford.
Here information is given out to potential squatters detailing empty and derelict homes suitable for squatting.
Tools are even provided for making legitimate entry…as long as there is no criminal damage to the property itself, and as long as no-one lives or intends to live there, the squatters can change the locks and stay put until a court order forces their eviction.
Male speaker
We provide details of places where people can squat.
Voice over
The film comes at a time when Home Secretary Kenneth Baker is considering making squatting a criminal offence.
Currently eviction must follow lengthy proceedings in the civil courts.
Meanwhile the producers hope the film will correct what they call a public misunderstanding about squatting and the law.
Male speaker
People have a very bad view of squatters but we're very misrepresented.
Voice over
But the film has received a cool reception at city hall where calls to licence empty council properties out to squatters are denounced as way off beam.
Female speaker
They don't seem to realise they're stopping other homeless people into council accomodation.
Voice over
Squatters have long felt they're at the receiving end of a bad press and have have welcomed tonight's opportunity to express their side of the story.
Whether they have a right to squat is an argument that will doubtless run and run.
Thousands of people turned out at the Royal Showground today to protest against a private members bill which aims to abolish blood sports.
MP Kevin McNamara wants wild animals to have the same protection as domestic pets but pro-hunters say if the sport's outlawed it will affect rural jobs and the conservation of the countryside.LLewela Bailey reports.
STONELEIGH/Warwickshire
COLIN CULLIMORE/Campaign for Hunting
KEVIN MACNAMARA MP/Lab Hull North
AMATEUR VIDEO
It had all the colour and pagaentry of the Royal Show, seen each year at the same venue.
But today's rally in Stoneleigh in Warwickshire had a different theme.
Over 10 thousand hunt supporters travelled from as far away as Scotland and Norfolk to protest against Kevin Macnamara's bill, which is to be debated in the House of Commons tomorrow.
It seeks to abolish blood sports including fox hunting.
’ I can't see how any democratic member of Parliament can vote for such a sloppy bill, which would be the thin end of a very dangerous web.
Country sports are not social evils.
They are suggesting that you put country sports with child abuse and drink driving, to make it a criminal offence.
Now are we going to let Parliament do that’.
Pro-hunters also say that 16,000 people will lose their jobs if hunting and field sports were to cease, a claim which is denied by MP Kevin Macnamara.
’ My God it's going up day by day.
There's no evidence for that at all.
The figures are suspect.
In 1983, the figures were 750.
Of course there is no need for anyone to be unemployed at all.
We can drag hunts.
There is no need to send dogs which are trained to exhaust a fox and then rip out it's belly’.
But to the protestors who turned up today hunting is more than just a sport.
They say it's a more humane method of killing than the gun or the trap.
’ It's not like they say.
They're so wrong’.
’ People think it's a cruel way of doing it but it isn't really, because there'll be shooting snaring and gasing, which is worse that the way we do it’’Foxes have to be controlled, fox hunting in the last 250 years have controlled the numbers beautifully’
Whatever the outcome of the Macnamara bill, if the attendence figure and the level of feelings heard today is anything to go by, than this will be one piece of legislationp which will face fierce opposition.
Serious flaws.New report condemns social services over Beverley Lewis case.
Welcome to your new home.
Row over the estate agency just for squatters.
And a load of rubbish.
Thomas the Tank Engine author attacks new TV show.
Serious flaws in 
ANNE DAWSON
PEARLEANE WEBB/Beverley's Sister
DERYK MEAD/Social Services Director
Voice over
It's almost exactly three years since twenty three year old Beverley Lewis was found dead in conditions of total squalour at her home in the Coney Hill area of Gloucester.
Physically and mentally disabled Beverley was deaf dumb and blind and weighed just four stone when she died.
Now a report into how she slipped through the net of all the care agencies has made it clear they were found wanting in many departments.
It's something the Gloucestershire Social Services Department recognise…but insist was brought on by lack of support and funding.
The Report looked at nine case studies in Gloucestershire as a direct result of Beverley's death.
They found:
No policies or guidance for the Disabled had been drawn up.
Authorities put a low priority on helping the disabled and could not cope in complicated situations.
Management was not built around care plans and reviews…and there was little involvement at senior level.
And they said they were concerned and disappointed by the lack of progress made since Beverley died.
An inquest into Beverley's death found she died of natural causes but had slipped through the net of caring representatives like her GP and social worker.
Beverley had been in the care of her mother, herself a mental patient.
Now The social services say they have it under control: the report referred to the situation a year ago.
The publication of the report has been welcomed by Beverley's sister Pearlene Webb who feels it may do some good.
Everyone concerned is now hoping the conditions which led to Beverley's death will never occur again.…
A short time ago our political editor Jon Lander spoke to Douglas French, the MP for Gloucester.
He asked him if he was satisfied that Gloucestershire Social Services had enough money to do its job properly 
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Voice over
A man's been found guilty of kicking his ex-girlfriend's dog to death at her home.
The twenty year old salesman claimed he'd just pushed the animal away with his foot after it had messed all down his clothes.
Simon Garrett reports 
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
MAXINE WEBLIN/Rosie's owner
MALCOM WEBLIN/Owner's Father
Insp TERRY WINSTONE/RSPCA
Voice over
Twenty year old Ken Hughes from Barford Saint Michael near Banbury told the court he'd picked up his ex-girlfriend's Pekinese Rosie…but the dog had made a mess all down his clothes.
He dropped it and pushed it away with his foot.
It skidded against a table leg.
He turned to wash himeslf down at the sink, and it was minutes later when he and former girlfriend, Maxine Weblin, realised Rosie was dead.
Female speaker
I'm devastated about the loss of the dog.
Now though I've got to just get on with the rest of my life
Voice over
Minutes after the incident Miss Weblin and her mother tried to give the dog mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart massage but to no avail.
Banbury vet, Clifford Butler, said the dog suffered multiple injuries unlikely to have been caused by just one kick as Hughes claimed.
Hughes was found guilty of causing unnecessary suffering and fined seventy-five and ordered to pay fifty pounds towards the RSPCA's costs in bringing the case.
The actual cost of the legal action to the society was over a thousand pounds
Voice over
The three year old pekinese had been an eighteerth birthday present to Maxine Weblin from her parents; she says the little dog can never be replaced
The trial of two people accused of the murder of a man described as a police informer has been halted on the orders of the judge.
After a day of legal argument, the judge said it would be necessary to start the case again with another jury.
Tim Hurst was in court.
1989/COTSWOLD WATER PARK/Gloucestershire
WINCHESTER/Hampshire
The trial concerns the death of Alan’ Chalky’White, described by the prosecution as a Police informer.
His body was found weighted-down in a lake near Cirencester in Gloucestershire in 1989.
He had been stabbed fourteen times.
Daniel Gardiner, from Stroud in Gloucestershire, who was driven to court in a prison bus, and Simon James, from Minchinhampton near Stroud, pleaded not guilty to his murder when the trial began at Winchester on Tuesday.
This afternoon, the trial was halted when the Judge, Mr. Justice Auld, called in the jury after several hours of legal argument and told them,’ I apologise for the long delay.
I am afraid that, in your absence, a problem has arisen which makes it impossible for you and I to try this case together.
It will have to start again with another jury.’
The Judge made it clear that there will be a re-trial of the case.
In Court Number One at Winchester Crown Court, legal arguments were continuing this afternoon which will determine the date and form of that trial.
The Judge will give his answers tomorrow.
(1)
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
NEWENT/Gloucestershire
JULY 1991/KELLY GOOD
JIM JONES/Deputy Headmaster
Voice over
Kelly Good has suffered from cystic fibrosis since she was a baby.
It's lead to chronic lung damage.
Over her nine years of life there's been a serious build-up of fluid on her chest.
It's made her breathless.
For two years Kelly's been waiting for a heart and lung transplant, the only cure for her condition.
Without it doctors said she'd only live till she was about eleven or twelve.
Recently Kelly explained how her parents carry a special bleeper which would go off when a suitable transplant donor was found.
Female speaker
I hope it goes off one day.
Voice over
And yesterday, while Kelly was at junior school, that bleeper finally went off.
Male speaker
Kelly's mum came to the school and took her away.
We were delighted.
Voice over
Surgeons the Great Ormond Street children's hospital in Lonmdon carried out the operation overnight.
This evening the nine year old's condition is reported as stable.
Everyone's hoping she'll be back at school before too long, hale and hearty.
Male speaker
As she left she said I'm looking forward to seeing you all in about six weeks.
No doubt she thinks it's going to be a success.
Voice over
One of the region's most important electronic engineering companies has announced big job cuts, just a day after the Government revealed that the national unemployment level had also risen again.
A hundred and ninety four jobs are to go at Smiths Industries: the company says cuts in production of aircraft at the Boeing factories in America are to blame.
This report from Ken Goodwin.
LIBRARY PICTURES/BISHOPS CLEEVE/Gloucestershire
KEITH BLYTHE/AEU
TONY BURLEY/Economic Development Unit
Voice over
A hundred and ninety four worker from Smiths industries in bishops cleeve are joining britains jobless total which this week rose for the twenty second consecutive month.
Smiths make instruments for civil and military aircraft, and has already been hit hard by cuts in defence spending.
Many of those affected are members of the engineering workers union the AEU, where news of the job cuts was greeted with despondancy.
The redundancy announcement was made by Smiths in a short statement.
It said that the company regretted the job losses, which were made following a reduced demand for certain products, due primarily to lower production rates of civil aircraft.
No one from smiths would agree to be interviewed, but the references to civil aircraft are believed to refer to the drop in the production in america of boeing 737 jets, for which Smiths make cockpit instruments.
The redundancies come on top of five hundred already announced by the firm over the past eighteen months, mostly as a result of cutbacks in defence spending.
It's been a gloomy time in gloucestershire for industry in general, with more than a thousand jobs dissapearing from the Dowty group, the counties largest engineering employers, over the past twelve months.
Gloucestershire county councils economic development unit, which tries to attract jobs to the area, says it's facing an uphill struggle against the recession.
Little consolation for those made redundant.
As for those remaining at Smiths they can only hope that the recession has done it's worst — and that further job cuts are not on the horizon.
And there has been more bad news for employment in Oxfordshire:
HARWELL/Oxfordshire
It's been announced that seventy jobs are to go at two research establishments — A-E-A Technology is laying off forty maintenance staff at Harwell, and thirty engineers at nearby Culham.
The company blames cuts in Government funding for its work into nuclear fusion for the job losses.
A thirteen-year-old school boy has been charged with a series of motoring offences after a stolen car crashed into a row of parked vehicles.
OXFORD
Seven cars were damaged in the crash in Apsley Road in Oxford.
It happened after police in an unmarked car had been following a stolen Maestro for several minutes.
The boy's been released into the care of the social services.
A fireman and his girlfriend are tonight engaged after he proposed to her forty feet off the ground.
He put a ladder up to her office window to pop the question as she sat at her desk.
As Richard Barnett reports, it was all just part of St Valentine's Day fever.
CHELTENHAM Gloucestershire
CATHERINE WILSON Secretary
KEVIN POTTINGER Fireman
SLIMBRIDGE Gloucestershire
Voice over
St Valentine's Day started out like any other morning for Catherine Wilson.
She's a secretary for Linotype Hell in Cheltenham and was busy working at her computer.
But outside, things were far from normal.
The Black Watch from Cheltenham Fire Station had turned up, including Catherine's boyfriend, Fireman Kevin Pottinger.
The first task, to put the ladder up to Catherine's office on the 4th floor.
As Kevin reached her office window 40ft up, Catherine spotted him.
The onlookers in the office and on the ground joined in the applause.
Then Kevin popped the question:
Female speaker
She was very embarassed but very happy.
Male speaker
If she had said no he would have had a long way to jump.
Voice over
The proposal of marriage proffered and accepted, the couple set off in style.
Meanwhile romance was in the air down the road at Slimbridge Wildfowl Trust with feathered flirting everywhere you looked.
The Caribbean flamingoes filled the day with courtship displays.
And a hummingbird was building its woolly nest with some material from a visitors hat.
St Valentine was certainly weaving his magic:
Inflation annual rate falls to 4
FTSE down 8
The hundred shares index closed down eight point seven at twenty-five, thirteen point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-six and up at two marks, eighty-seven.
And finally…if you're in the Didcot area of Oxfordshire tonight, take a look up at the Power Station.
DIDCOT/Oxfordshire
Giant Valentine messages from employees of the Power Station to their loved ones are being projected on one of the cooling towers.
The messages will be there until around ten o'clock tonight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Five hundred NHS patients waiting for plastic surgery are to be treated at private hospitals, as part of a Government initiative to cut waiting lists.
The operations will cost a quarter of a million pounds.
Labour claims it's just an election bribe.
And health watchdogs think the money could be better spent on more urgent cases.
The Government denies the charge.
This report from Gareth Furby.
LONDON
RICHARD GOODSELL/Patient
STAN BELKEVITZ/Father
MARY ANNE SINCLAIR/Royal Masonic Private Hospital
KEVIN SMITH/Patient
HARRIET HARMAN MP/Labour Health Spokeswoman
JENNY HUNT/Community Health Council
Voice over
For more than 2 years, Richard Goodsell, from Henley, has been waiting for an operation on an arthritic finger.
Today, at last, it was going ahead, but at a private hospital in London:
He says he's been in terrible pain and he's glad the operation is going ahead.
This couple come from Milton Keynes.
For their 6 year old son, a 3 year wait is finally over.
He says it's a bit far to come but he thinks they pay expenses, so it's nice.
In total, 500 NHS patients are to have private operations.
They've all been waiting for more than 2 years for plastic surgery at Stoke Mandeville hospital near Aylesbury.
Some may now be given private rooms.
This would normally cost 275 pounds a day.
And for one private hospital, the contract could be worth up to 180,000 pounds.
She says they treat all patients they same, as long as they pay.
The money has come the Government's waiting list initiative.
It means Aylesbury Vale Health Authority will now be able to comply will the new patients charter, which says a 2 year wait for treatment should be the maximum.
But some patients are suspicious about the timing.
He says the election is coming up soon and he thinks it's politically motivated.
She says the Government has starved the health service, and now close to an election it comes up with money.
Many of the operations are to correct broken noses and skin problems, or for breast reduction.
Aylesbury community health council questions whether the money could not have been better spent.
She says she knows people who need hip and elbow replacements.
Tonight a spokesman for the Department of Health said people on waiting lists, even when they're not emergency cases, are often in considerable pain and need to be treated as quickly as possible.
The spokesman added:’
It's hoped all 500 operations will have been completed within just 6 weeks.
One of Robert Maxwell's former companies has made eleven of its employees redundant.
Although some of them have clocked up nearly forty years service, they'll get no redundancy pay from the company, and their pensions have disappeared.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
OXFORD
SYLVIA HINTON/CYNTHIA HINTON
BOB KNIGHT/Print Union Secretary
Voice over
Identical twin sisters, Sylvia and Cynthia Hinton, are the latest victims of the Robert Maxwell affair.
They'd been at the Nuffield Press in Oxford all their working lives until this week.
Now they are on the dole with no compensation, or redundancy and their pensions have been lost in the Maxwell maze.
Female speaker
We haven't got anything after all those years.
It's awful.
Voice over
Now 53 the twins have worked for Nuffield Press since 1953 when they left school.
They were among 11 workers from the Bindery section of the company who were told this week that they no longer had a job.
They would have tom apply to the Government for compensation and redundancy payments.
According to the twins, they were called in immediately after their lunchbreak and pointewd to a pile of brown envelopes.
Female speaker
They called us in told us some information about there being no work, then left a pile of envelopes on a table telling us we had been made redundant.
Voice over
The twins have based their entire lives around the Nuffield Press, a place they enjoyed until Robert Maxwell took it over.
Now the company is in the hands of administrators.
Their union secretary says there are questions to be answered.
Male speaker
This management is looking to buy the company, but they're acting like Maxwell clones.
Voice over
It's left them at a loose end at home.
13 years ago they were each given gold watches to mark 25 years service.
Now they're a reminder of other times
Female speaker
We don't wear them now, there isn't any point.
Voice over
A spokesman for the administrators, Andersons, said:’ It's regrettable that the redundancies had to be made.
But it was necessary for the company to keep going.
TIM RUSSON
NICKY HAMMOND/Goalkeeper
DAVID KERSLAKE/Full-Back
JOHN GORMAN/Coach
COLIN CALDERWOOD/Town Captain
GLENN HODDLE/Town Manager
MADELEINE CAMPBELL
MICK WAKELY/Coach
Voice over
Football fans were dancing in the streets over in Hereford too…
United hit the jackpot at last with a 3-2 win over Northampton Town…their first win in four weeks 
Voice over
Here we go again.
That's what the Hereford fans must have thought, when they watched their side go one down to Northampton towards the end of the first half.
Stuart Young was the scorer…
But before the visiting supporters could sing come on you cobblers.
United had nailed in an equaliser.
Within a second, it was 1-1, as skipper, Derek Hall ran in to head his 5th goal of the season.
In the second half, Hereford took over.
Winger, Max Nicholson led the charge he played a blinder, but was luck going to go against them again.
That's the way it looked.
Until the second goal.
It is about time fortune smiled on United and the way they went into the lead was to be honest a bit of a fluke.
A pass of hit and hope bounced just right for Nicholson.
The keeper nearly took his head off, but the ball landed perfectly in the back of the net.
Number 3 started out on the left wing with Nicholson again.
Top scorer, Owen Pickard had 2 goes at scoring.
Second time around, they were well on the way to a win.
In the very last minute.
Hereford lost their grip just for a second, but that was long enough for Phil Chard to get one back for the cobblers.
Hereford 3; Northampton 2.
Now Gloucester rugby fans won't be looking back on this season for any misty eyed memories…
On Saturday they lost to Bath by 20 points to nil…and here's a fact to blow your socks off it was the first time in 16 years and 420 games that the cherry and whites have failed to score at home 
Pictures BBC SPORT
KEITH RICHARDSON/Coach
Voice over
Kingsholm was full to bursting…but where was the passion…where was the pride as Bath bulldozed their way to victory…the Gloucester faithful fell silent as their side were well and truly beaten…there was only one try…that was scored by Tony Swift early on…
after that it was down to penalties…
Gloucester missed some chances but they were never in with a shout…they were on the retreat for most of the game as Bath piled forward…
England full-back Jon Webb had some game…he joined in the attacks when he could and kicked five out of five penalties…
Here's the damage for Gloucester…the bottom of the table…four go down…there are four matches left and two wins are needed for safety…so what about the worry of relegation…
coach keith Richardson says they are very worried…they have to be but there is no panic…the team spirit is good and they need to find more passion…
we're going to finish on a high…we've time to say congratulations…to three local sports 
Voice over
On the icy roads and tracks of sweden the prodrive rally team from Banbury were flying at the weekend…at the end of day one Colin McRae was in the lead…on day two he dropped back…on day three broke a wheel on a boulder but came in third just 28 seconds behind the winner…
The Nicholson racing team from Temple Guting are really galloping away…on Saturday Waterloo Boy was a winner again…at Hereford this afternoon they were first past the post with Barrica…that's seventy winners this season an all time personal best…
Winning and losing…
Oxford University Basketball player Jodi Evans…she became…the first women to play for the mens team…but they lost to Cambridge in the varsity games
Another record has been broken at the Silverstone racing circuit…but this time there wasn't a sign of Nigel Mansell.
Two women went around the famous Grand Prix circuit…on roller skates.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Silverstone
LEE ABBS/Roller Skater
LEOMA NEEDHAM/Roller Skater
Voice over
Silverstone, scene of so much excitement in recent years.
The noise, the crowds, the expectancy as yet another Formula One car hurtles at 200 mph down the Hangar straight.
Not so today.
It was a cold and wet morning, but Lee Abbs and Leoma Needham were going too slowly to need wet tyres on their roller skates.
Female speaker
We like roller-skating and this is nice and flat with not too many cars to get in the way.
It's also a personal ambition to go around the circuit.
Voice over
The 2 Bicester women were the first to go around Silverstone on roller skates.
They were also raising money for the Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Appeal and making a dream come true at the same time.
Mind you, the sound of Formula One engines wasn; t far away.
The Maclaren and Benetton teams had hired the circuit for testing.
So they knew they had to get a move on.
Female speaker
That's why we have to get off the circuit quickly.
Voice over
In the end, they got away with one pit stop to tighten a loose nut on the adjustable skates.
They got so warm they removed their sweatshirts for a final surge home.
They crossed the line with an average lap time of 30 minutes.
28.5 minutes slower than Nigel Mansell.
And another £500 had been raised for the appeal.
Another trader is leaving a prestigious docklands shopping centre because she says it hasn't been advertised enough.
When the scheme began it was described as a new concept in retailing.
But some traders believe they've been let down.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
DEBBIE PITMAN/Retailer
PETER WHITWORTH/Tennants Association
Voice over
Debbie Pitman, who runs the Reebajaz clothing company is moving out of her shop in the Gloucester docks because she claims that, even after 2 years, hardly anyone knows she's there.
So she's decided to move her business to Cheltenham.
She's the forth business to move out and claims there hasn't been enough promotion of the site.
This, coupled with the recession, has spelt disaster for her business.
She says that even some people who live in Gloucester don't know about the shops.
Right up until the 1960s, the inland port of Gloucester had a thriving docks.
But a decline set in and many of the 200 year old warehouses became derelict.
Then Pearce developments launched a scheme to revitalise the docks, with plans for a hundred new shops, 2 pubs, 6 cafe's and restaurants.
But as work on the first phase was completed, Britain was heading into a recession.
As the Chairman of the docks traders explains, it was hardly the best start.
He says that the recession caused major problems for some businesses — he thinks they are now being slowly resolved.
Some of the shopkeepers, including Debbie Pitman, have issued writs against the developers, claiming that they failed to carry out agreements to promote the docks.
Pearce Developments have refused to comment, but docks management company, Ash and Co, say in a statement that promotion remains a key element and adding that there are many retailing successes in the docks.
In case you didn't know, it's National Chip Week.
The Potato Marketing Board wants to give its best selling product a better image.
But the campaign hasn't won the approval of the medical profession, which still believes chips do us no good at all.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
BOB GRIFFITHS/Potato Marketing Board
JACQUELINE BOORMAN/Dietician
Voice over
(WES AD LIBS BACKREF)
(ANNE) Still to come on Central News…
Bodin strikes again.
Swindon Town's new scoring machine hits the bullseye once more.
Believe it or not…this is supposed to get rid of ear wax 
Welcome back to Central News.Still to come, the medical benefits of a burning candle in your ear, but first here's Tim with the sport…
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
GLENN HODDLE
STEVE WHITE
Voice over
Swindon Town players reckoned this game was going to be the toughest test of the season so far, so it was 10 out of 10 for them.
They made most of the running; created all the chances and had Millwall in all sorts of trouble.
The red and white army were on the attack all the time.
The Millwall goal was shot to pieces.
The first hit came just before half-time.
The ball couldn't have bounced better for Steve White, who took aim and and hit the target with some style.
And then in the second half, Town turned on their new scoring machine to make sure of victory.
Paul Bodin's his name.
This was his fourth goal in 4 games.
Not bad going for a full-back is it.
Once again the inspiration the sheer skill of Hoddle shone through.
First he tried a free kick from 35 yards out.
And then he was in the thick of things again.
Why don't England give him another chance he may be getting old, but oh boy, he can still play.
Town wrapped it up with just 6 minutes to go number 3.
Came from a corner and was drilled home by Shawn Taylor.
For Swindon it's all smiles.
Manager, Glenn Hoddle, says it was a very good performance, one of their best and they've managed to keep 3 clean sheets in the last few games, which represents a lot of hard work.
Here's the top of the first division.
The top 2 go up; the next 4 fight it out in the play-offs.
What about the verdict from the dressing room.
Here's goal-scorer, Steve White.
Steve White says its the first stepping stone of a month, where they have all the top teams and it's very much in their own hands.
There's old adage; one game at time, but for once when the pressure's been on Swindon have done the business and they are looking very solid.
They're in the pack and happy to be there.
Anne Dawson
In Central News tonight.
Manslaughter trial after aerosol fire death.
Wesley Smith
On the run.
Has the blood sports lobby lost the argument?
Anne Dawson
And, had your chips?
Well have some more…they could be good for you.
Good evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The court has been told that the girl had stolen the aersol she was using to inhale.
The trial judge has ruled that neither she, nor the boy, who denies her manslaughter, can be identified.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
Voice over
The girl was injured in an incident eighteen months ago in London Road in Cheltenham.
She died in hospital a week and a half later.
Judge Peter Fallon has ruled that neither she, nor the 14-year-old defendant, can be identified.
Bristol Crown Court was told that the girl had gone to the shops with a friend and stolen two cans of body spray.
As she inhaled, her T-shirt was covered in flammable deodorant.
Ian Dixey, proscuting, said the boy approached the two girls as they sat on the pavement, and demonstrated with a match how an aerosol can be used as a flame-thrower.
He then flicked another match into the girl's lap.
Her T-shirt caught fire and she ran off screaming.
She was eventually wrapped in a wet blanket and taken to hospital suffering from severe burns to the upper part of her body.
A woman who knew her told the court the girl had been abusing solvents for some time.
On the day she died, she said, she was in a giggly mood.
The boy denies manslaughter, and the case continues tomorrow.
The RSPCA has condemned a new video promoting the cause of hunting.
It's been produced by the British Field Sports Society, a year after a private members bill to ban hunting narrowly failed in the Commons.
The RSPCA says the video proves that the pro-hunting lobby is losing the argument.
Field Sports Society Video/IAN MACLAREN/Reporting
LUDOVIC KENNEDY/Video Narrator
Chief Insp DOUGLAS DAVIDSON/RSPCA
SIDNEY BAILEY/Huntsman
BIBURY/Gloucestershire
BILL REID/Joint Master of Hunt
Voice over
A fox on the run, seconds before the leading hound moves in for the kill.
It's part of a promotional video, that claims to give the facts about fox-hunting.
The British Field Sports Society video, fronted by broadcaster, Ludovic Kennedy, is part of a determined campaign, designed to improve the public image of hunting.
But opponents of fox hunting say the video says nothing new and the publicity launch suggests the Hunt Supporters, themselves, are on the run.
The hunt followers deny the sport is cruel.
When the fox is caught, they say, it's killed swiftly with a single bite to the back of the neck.
And it's a myth that foxes are torn to pieces while still alive.
It's claimed that the fox is a predator, killing lambs and free range chickens and must be controlled; an argument not accepted by the RSPCA.
The Vale of White Horse Hunt maintains a centuries old tradition.
The followers say the exhiliration and the spectacle of horse and hounds is a vital part of country life, providing jobs and helping with the management of the countryside.
But couldn't all this be done without hunting the fox.
The British Field Sports Society is preparing to defend itself against another attempt in parliament to impose a ban on hunting.
The anti-hunt lobby says its campaign will continue until the law is changed.
A man's appeared in court charged with murdering a mother and son.
WORCESTER
The bodies of thirty one year old Pauline Turner and two year old Jamie, were found at a house in Worcester.
They'd been strangled.
Mrs Turner had also been stabbed.
Twenty four year old Darren Gale from Worcester was remanded in custody for seven days.
And a former Foreign Legion paratrooper has appeared in court charged with murder.
PRINCES RISBOROUGH/Buckinghamshire
The body of twenty four year old Martin Ingram was found in Princes Risborough on Friday with multiple wounds to the face and head.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
Twenty-six year old Paul Ferguson was remanded in custody for his own protection by Aylesbury Magistrates.
Now, they say, You get an’ ology’…and you're a scientist.
But in medical science, the trend is now more and more away from modern methods, and towards the so-called New Age treatments.
So a new centre has opened which specialises in holistic health…with a touch of the cosmos thrown in.
IAN MACLAREN Stoke Mandeville
CARON VETTER Therapist
PENNY UPCHURCH Masseuse
NADINE FOLLETT Therapist
Voice over
Welcome to the New Age.
Beauty therapy has moved on a pace.
In the 1990s it's fashionable to concentrate on healing the inner self, to soothe away the stresses and rigours of modern life.
The Belmore Centre in Stoke Mandeville offers a bewildering combination of alternative treatments for the body, mind and soul.
This is the Hopi Ear Candle.
They claim it can relieve migraine and sinusitis and not so surprising, remove ear wax.
On demonstration here is Indian Head massage, designed to relieve tension and improve the scalp.
Some treatments have already become almost mainstream.
Aromatherapy for instance, osteopathy and traditional beauty treatment.
On the other hand, in the lilac room, is palmist, John Harrison.
And way out in New Age territory is Nadine Follett.
So is this really a new panacea or a just a passing craze for crazies.
Convert or sceptic, the philosphy seems to be if it works for you, it's worth paying for the privilege.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
James attacked then hit by train
It's been confirmed that murdered toddler, James Bulger, suffered what police describe as,’ horrific injuries’before being left on a railway embankment where he was hit by a train.
Parents warned after toddler's death
Parents on Merseyside are being warned that the Police cannot guarantee the safety of children until they have more information about who killed James.
Hurd assures Commons on Maastricht
The Foreign Secretary has told the Commons that the Government will not by-pass Parliament over the Maastricht Bill.
Queen accepts Sun apology
The Queen has accepted a Sun newspaper apology over the premature publication of her Christmas broadcast.The paper is also giving £200,000 to charity.
Rise in smoking death risk
The latest research shows that smokers are three times as likely to die in middle age than non-smokers.
FTSE up 2
The hundred shares index closed up two point nine at twenty-eight, forty-five point nine.
The pound is unchanged against the dollar at one dollar, forty-two and down at two marks, thirty-five.
Finally a look ahead to tomorrow's programme when we'll be following a detachment of airmen from RAF Lyneham who've spent the last two months flying food to the starving in Somalia.
They're taking in flour, grain and oil on Hercules transport planes.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Mombasa
Wing Cmdr TONY MAINE
Voice over
Four thirty in the morning and at the Joint Forces Airbase in Mombasa in Kenya, the airmen of RAF Lyneham load another batch of food onto one of their Hercules transport planes.
It's a ritual that's been going on ever since the first detachment fom Lyneham came out here last December.
Their task…to fly food to the starving people of Somalia.
Tomorrow night we watch the team from Lyneham at work…and see the results of their efforts in the refugee camps.
One of England's most important country houses is half way through a radical refurbishment, aimed at restoring the buildings and grounds to their former glory.
When Waddesdon Manor reopens to the public next year it'll boast one of the finest collections of furniture, porcelain and carpets anywhere in the world.
SIMON GARRETT Waddesdon
ROSAMUND GRIFFIN Keeper of Waddesdon Collection
TONY CRAWFORTH Administrator
CHRIS TOLLEY Head Gardener
Voice over
3 years ago, Waddesdon Manor was used for a summit between Mrs Thatcher and President Mitterand.
Now the builders are in.
The Loire-style Chateau is a piece of France in Buckinghamshire.
Baron Ferdinand de Rothchild built Waddesdon and furnished it exclusively in 17th and 18th century French style.
He lovingly picked out for Waddesdon the deks of Kings and carpets of emperors.
Female speaker
He'd fallen in love with the decorative arts of France of the 17th and 18th centuries and wanted to furnish his house in that style.
So there's a collection of furniture and carpets and Sevres porcelain against a background of wall panelling contemporary with them
Voice over
Now in the care of the National Trust Waddesdon began its facelift in 1986.
The grand rooms and corridors are emptied of most valuables.
What can't be moved has been protected.
The morning room carpet rolled up and boxed in place.
A giant cabinet sealed behind a double skin to protect it's exquisite exterior from dust and temperature change.
Male speaker
We've reroofed the house completely rewired it, put in a fire detection system, resotred areas previously out of use and which weren't seen by the public.
We've introduced new features to the house which has enlarged the area on public view
Voice over
Waddesdon's 165 acres of gardens used to be tended by 120 gardeners bound to silence in daylight.
Now there are 8 and they have to talk to each other.
They're recreating the original garden design.
Much of it with plants rarely seen in modern flower beds.
Male speaker
It's not subtle, it's not delicate lavenders and pinks it's bright sharp garish colours.
It's light blues and salmons and golds and silvers those schemes
Voice over
Waddesdon was built with two purposes in mind and those purposes are also behind its rebirth.
Baron Ferdinand wanted to house his fine collections and have somewhere to entertain his guests.
When Waddesdon reopens at Easter next year the guests will be the general public.
Hopefully their presence is the only difference he'd notice.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Scare over fake washing powder
FTSE down 33
The hundred shares index closed down thirty three point seven at two eight one two point two 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty four and up at two marks, thirty six.
That is all for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A court has heard how a father gunned down a drugs dealer who'd been supplying his sons with cannabis.
It's alleged John Baillie shot the victim twice in the back after threats had been made to his family.
The court heard that Baillie had asked another man to hide the gun and warned him that he could be the next to be 'blown away' 
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
June 1993/MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Voice over
Drug dealer Robert McCubbin was shot two times in the shoulder and back with a pump action shot gun.
It happened outside his home at Wainers Croft in Milton Keynes in June last year.
At Northampton Crown court John Baillie has denied murder.
The court heard evidence from witnesses in a cannabis drug supply ring.
One said Mr McCubbin was angry at losing customers and having his business stolen away.
Threats were banded about.
John Baille's sons were warned they were going to get sorted out, and Mr McCubbin's own drugs distributor George Larkins was warned he was out to kill him.
Larkins told the court that shortly after the killing he received a visit from the defendant.
Baillie had said to him’ I've just done your man.
I shot him in the back’ Bailie asked Larkins to hide the gun and warned him that if anything happened to it, he'd be the next to be’blown away’
The court heard evidence from forensic experts who described the damage caused by the pellets from the sawn off shot gun.
It was later found that Mr McCubbin died, not from the shots, but from a tiny piece of wire carried by the pellets, which fatally punctured his lung.
The trial continues tomorrow.
Campaigners fighting to save a hospital from closure have delivered a petition to Downing Street, calling for the plans to be scrapped.
Forty one thousand people have signed the petition in a bid to save the Standish Hospital near Stroud in Gloucestershire.
Protesters want Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley to throw out proposals to move services from Standish to Gloucester.
They've already won support from MPs and the Community Health Council.
Forty jobs are under threat at a hospital laundry.
HEREFORD
The Community Health Trust in Hereford failed to win the laundry contract for the city's St Mary's Hospital.
Its been awarded to a company from Birmingham.
NORTHAMPTON
And forty eight jobs are to go at M-F-I, in Northampton.
The cuts at the company's distribution depot are part of a national streamlining operation which will see a hundred and sixty redundancies.
A pensioner has been robbed at gunpoint after confronting two masked men who'd broken into her home.
She was woken early this morning by a burglar alarm.
Police are tonight examining a balaclava which was found near the scene.
MIKE DOLAN/Northampton
RON BAYLISS/Victim's Husband
GERRY WRIGHT/Northampton Police
A pilot from Wiltshire has become the first British serviceman to be decorated in Bosnia.
Squadron Leader Christopher Tingay, from R-A-F Lyneham, has been awarded the Air Force Cross for piloting the first relief flights into Sarajevo.
JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
July 1992/Sqd Ldr CHRISTOPHER TINGAY/RAF Lyneham
Voice over
The terrifying approach into Sarajevo airport.
Surrounded by crossfire the Hercules, carrying vital supplies of food and medicines, descends steeply to avoid the crossfire.
Anticipating the journey Squadron Leader Christopher Tingay was aware of the dangers.
Male speaker
Of course we're scared but we won't do anything too dangerous.
Voice over
9 days and twenty one mercy missions later they crew were safely back at RAF Lyneham.
Male speaker
The main threat was from ground fire.
Apart from that it was fairly straightforward.
Voice over
Squadron Leader Tingay was described at today's award ceremony as an extremely brave man and an outstanding leader.
(HARRIET) Squadron Leader Christopher Tingay from RAF Lyneham.
(ANNE) And after the break, we'll follow another detachment from Lyneham working in Africa.
(ANNE) Welcome back.
Well, while airmen from RAF Lyneham are winning medals for their bravery bringing relief to Sarajevo, another detachment from the base are working tirelessly in Africa, to help the starving people of Somalia.
(HARRIET NEXT)
Thousands have already died from the famine produced by war and drought.
The rest rely completely on the food brought in by the RAF.
Our reporter Clare Lafferty joined the crew of an RAF Hercules as they prepared to take off on a’ Flight For Life’.
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
PETER DAWSON/Coney Hill Patient
PAUL RENEE/Ward Manager
CHRIS ANSTEY/MIND Steering Group
ROGER DEEKS/Hospital Manager
Voice over
This is the first time cameras have been allowed access to seclusion rooms at Coney hill hospital.
The way these rooms are used is the subject of critism by the mental health commissioners.
Patients like Peter Dawson are often in an agitated state when they first come into hospital…their first port of call may be the seclusion room.
He says that being put in the seclusion room was right.
He says that it's a last resort…to protect other patients and staff.
But the mental health commission, a body which monitors standards in mental hospitals, says in a report that at Coney Hill hospital patients were locked in the seclusion rooms for too long because there weren't enough staff to look after them properly on the wards.
The watchdog group MIND agrees.
He says that it happens too often.
Managers at Coney Hill say past staffing problems have now been remedied:
He says that past problems have now been rectified.
The hospital adds that relatives and friends of patients who are worried about the emotive issue of locking doors on patients are quite free to seek reassurance and examine the seclusion rooms for themselves…staff say the hospital has nothing to hide
The case against a schoolboy accused of setting fire to a teenage girl while she inhaled an aerosol spray has collapsed because of lack of evidence.
The girl died in hospital a week and a half later.
But the prosecution at the boy's trial was unable to prove that he intended to harm her.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
Voice over
The girl suffered forty per cent burns in the incident in London Road in Cheltenham 18 months ago.
She was taken to Frenchay Hospital in Bristol, but died ten days later.
Judge Peter Fallon has ruled that neither she — nor the schoolboy accused of killing her can be identified.
Bristol Crown Court was told that on the day in question, the girl had gone to the shops with a friend, and stolen two cans of aerosol body spray.
On the way back, she'd inhaled from the can, covering her T-shirt in flammable deodorant.
As she sat on a pavement around lunchtime, she was approached by a boy, who it was claimed tried to demonstrate to her how an aerosol can be used as a flame-thrower.
The prosecution had alleged that the boy had deliberately thrown a lit match into the girl's lap, causing her T-short to catch fire.
But under cross-examination, the only eye-witness said the incident looked to her like an accident.
Ian Dixey, prosecuting, offered no further evidence and Judge Fallon asked the jury to return a formal Not Guilty verdict.
Parent's of pupils at a top Gloucestershire school are being asked to bale it out of a 160,000 pound crisis.
Pate's Grammar School in Cheltenham, which opted out of local authority control three years ago, faces making teachers redundant if it doesn't find the money by April.
KATE GARRAWAY/Cheltenham/Gloucester
DAVID BARNES/Headteacher
LIZ MCCUE/Parent Governor
DAVID COOK/Gloucestershire County Council
Voice over
David Barnes is proud of Pate's grammar school.
He's been head teacher here for seven years and has seen it get some of the best exam results in the country.
But now he says standards are under threat.
Unless the school can raise 160,000 pounds by April teachers will be made redundant…
(HE says we’ re going to have to cut exta lessonsetc.)
Parents of pupils at the school have been asked to give 210 pounds each to bale it out of trouble…but not all can afford to pay.
(She says this is no way to fund a school)
Pate's opted out of local authority control three years ago believing this would be an end to their financial problems.
There have been perks.This new classroom unit is one of them…paid for by extra money from the government…
But because such funds can't be used for staff, education officials fear we could end up with smart new buildings and no teachers to put in them.
(He says it's no answer)
The government says schools like Pate's are better-off out of local authority control…but admit that the school has had it's hands tied by the rules that say they can't spend more on teachers than the county council will allow.The governments proposing a review of the regulations system in 1994 but for teachers at Pate's who're facing redundancy and pupils a drop in educational standards this could be too long a wait.
A former inmate at Gloucester jail has been telling a jury how a senior prison officer beat him across the back.
GLOUCESTER
Michael Pratt, who's (45) forty-five, is accused of hitting Gary Richards twice with a broken table leg, while he was being restrained by officers during a disturbance at the jail.
Pratt denies assault causing actual bodily harm.
One of the men convicted of murdering the newspaperboy Carl Bridgewater is reported to be refusing his food in a prison hospital.
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
Vincent Hickey is already under observation after being discovered with slash wounds in his cell at Long Lartin jail near Evesham.
It's believed he's suffering from depression after being refused leave to appeal against his conviction.
Four gunmen die in ambush
Four men suspected of IRA terrorism have been shot dead in an SAS ambush in Ulster.
One of dead IRA Commander
One of the dead was an IRA Commander, Kevin O'Donnell, who was acquitted of a charge of gun-running in London last year.
Irish Court rules against teenage rape victim's abortion
A High Court judge in the Irish Republic has granted an injunction preventing a fourteen-year-old rape victim from having an abortion.
Government announces payments for HIV transfusion victims
The Government has announced that seventy-four people infected with HIV through blood transfusions are to receive payments of up to eighty-thousand pounds each.
FTSE up 27
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-seven point one at twenty-five, forty-one point zero.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy-seven but down at two marks, eighty-eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
so its all down to the league now…
Swindon have to fight on in the promotion race…while Oxford have to battle on in the relegation scramble…but things are looking up for United…they're off the bottom of the table for the first time since November thanks to a win at Brighton 
Voice over
Hereford are back in action tomorrow night with a game at Doncaster…
Now the only Central South side left in the cup are Gloucester…this saturday they face Orrell in the quarter finals of the Pilkington…at the weekend the Cherry and Whites got themselves ready for the big game by beating Bristol…the score at the Memorial Ground was Bristol seven Gloucester nineteen 
Voice over
and finally Cheltenham racecourse staged one of its biggest chases on Saturday…nearly three thousand runners for the Womens National Cross Country Championships 
Voice over
In racing terms the going was good for the championships which were split into four age groups…in all of them the start was like a cavalry charge as they ran off to tackle the 6000 metre long course…the best local performance came in the girls race where Nicky Slater from carterton who runs in the Radley colours came second…
In the big race…the womens championships…the favourite Andrea Whitcombe who was out to win for a record equalling third year in a row was beaten in to second place by Lisa York of Leicester…they raced for nearly four miles and at the finish there was just three seconds between them
Thousands of people flocked to the country's newest prison over the weekend for a rare opportunity to see inside.
It was a special open day for a jail which is now due to open in April.
Staff say the modern facilities will make their job easier as well as improving life for the inmates.
Gargy Patel reports.
ARNCOTT/Oxfordshire
JOHN THOMAS-FERRAND/Governor
Voice over
A first hand look inside one of Britain's newest jails.
Bullingdon prison, near Bicester is hailed as a prison of the future.
Members of the public took the opportunity to see for themselves in a unique open day.
Almost 3,000 people have been shown what it's like behind bars.
Many wanted to see, from the inside, an institution built on their doorsteps.
He says it's a good education for the children.
He says he's just curious.
She says hopefully it will be the only opportunity to look inside a prison.
Some questioned the idea of investing millions into a building to house offenders, but staff say modern facilities are vital to build a stable prison environment.
Bullingdon is one of twelve prisons designed to ease the problem of overcrowding, which led to disturbances and riots at jails like Strangeways.Here, they'll cater for 635 inmates in single or double cells with toilet facilities.
But the opening date has been delayed.
The Governor says it's essential the prison is in full working order right from the start.
For prison staff, opening their doors has been a chance to show people the reality of a modern jail.
For the public, a rare glimpse into a closed world.
The Boat, Caravan and Leisure show is on at the National Exhibition Centre this week and so far it's attracted record crowds.
One of the first visitors today was the Princess Royal in her role as president of the Royal Yachting Association.Tony Maycock reports 
LINDSEY STUDD/Boat Salesman
Now, how do you cope with stress?
Well, there are all kinds of cures, from yoga to yodelling, but employees of Oxfordshire Social Services have discovered a new way of shedding the cares of the day.
They've switched from juggling cases…to just juggling.
Haig Gordon reports.
KIDLINGTON/Oxfordshire
CHRIS LOCK/Social Worker
Voice over
Chris Lock runs a centre for people with learning difficulties at Kidlington.
But in this case the people with the learning difficulties are his colleagues in social services.
Chris himself overcame his own initial difficulties remarkably rapidly.
He picked up a book on juggling which his daughter had brought home, and 4 months later he's teaching others.
As he learned the craft, the penny finally dropped — or rather the ball.
The first lesson is one in humility, getting you used to the ball being more often on the ground than in the air.
But the basic skills are acquired amazingly quickly, though moving on from balls to clubs too soon is a bit of a clanger.
The effects of the juggling craze on Oxfordshire Social Services aren't easy to predict.
Will home helps start turning up with a set of clubs?
It could give a whole new meaning to DROP-in centres and old folks' CLUBS and mean that for once the social workers won't be criticised for making a balls-up…or down.
Rock bottom: Ex-con strips off in protest at benefit refusal.
Threats to murder:Jury hears that prisoner said he'd kill police informer.
And this murderous trade.Tribesmen are slaughtered in the fight for the rainforests.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
EDDIE SZULUK
TONY SZULUK/Brother
ROBB WADLEY/DSS
MIKE STEWART/NACRO
Voice over
Eddie Szuluk has just served 6 years of a 10 year sentence for drug offences.
Now he says he wants to go straight.
The trouble is, he hasn't got any clothes.
He lost 3 stone while he was in prison, so now none of his old clothing fits him.
His brother has lent him some for the time being, but Mr Szuluk says without proper clothes, he can't get a job.
He says that he's fed up of going round in circles — how can he make a fresh start when he can't get a grant for clothing, and so can't then tunr up for job interviews?
He says he feels sorry for his brother, he fears he may return to a life of crime if he gets desperate for cash.
Mr Szuluk was refused a clothing grant from the Department of Social Security, which said that because he lived at home with his parents, he wasn't a priority case.
Mr Szuluc says his parents are pensioners who can't afford to clothe him, so in frustration he decided to stage a protest at his local DSS office in Stroud, stripping off in front of the other bemused claimants, and handing his borrowed clothes back to his brother.
DSS officials agreed to talk to Mr Szuluk, but asked our cameras to leave the premises.
In the meantime the police had been called, but they stayed in the background throughout the proceedings.
When Mr Szuluk and his brother emerged 2 hours later he still hadn't got his clothing grant.
He says that he's nt been offered a grant, and the case has been refered to higher officials.
He's fed up.
The DSS says every claim is decided upon it's merits and the amount of cash it has available in the social fund.
He says there's only limited funds in the kitty — Mr Zuluc was offered a laon but refused this.
The prisoners welfare group Nacro, says every prisoner leaving jail should be given at least the basics to make a fresh start.
He says that every prisoner leaving jail should at least have enough clothing to make a fresh start, the danger is that prisoners who don't have enough funds can return to crime.
Mr Szuluc is appealing against the DSS's decision.
In the meantime, it looks as thought he's back to borrowing his brothers clothes again.
Prisoners who shared a cell with an alleged murderer have been telling a jury about threats made against a police informer whose body was later found in a lake.
Two men are accused of murdering the informer to stop him giving evidence at an armed robbery trial.
Tim Hurst reports.
Voice over
Gardiner from Stroud in Gloucestershire arrived by prison bus for the start of his retrial for the murder of Alan Chalky White, a man described by the prosecution as a police informer.
White's body was found stabbed and weighted down in a lake near Cirencester in 1989.
Gardiner and his co-accused Simon James from Minchinhampton near Stroud have pleaded not guilty at Winchester Crown Court.
The prosecution say that following an armed robbery at a building society near Gloucester in 1988 White had been due to give evidence against Gardiner and implicating him in the crime.
At Gloucester Prison while on remand awaiting trial the prosecution say Gardiner made threats against White.
A former fellow prisoner at Gloucester Jail, Brendan Ekworth, told the court that Gardiner had told him that White would have an accident.
He'd end up in a motorway bridge.
Simon James, say the prosecution, made what amounted to a confession when he was in Spain after the discovery of White's body.
He told a man who would be called as a witness he helped others to hold down the victim while his mate killed him.
A photograph taken of Gardiner's property in another matter in 1988 was fortunate for the police say the prosecution.
In the corner of the picture was a holdall, a scientist would say it was the same as that used to weigh down Chalky White's body when it was found in the lake near Cirencester.
Gardiner was arrested in Israel and brought back to Britain last year.
He was remanded to Cardiff Prison.
A former prisoner from Cardiff has told the court that Gardiner said he'd offered twenty thousand pounds to Chalky White not to give evidence against him.
After several attempts were made to stop him giving evidence
Gardiner said to have said we had to get rid of him.
The case continues tomorrow.
A Shetland Pony who was suffering from depression has been given a new outlook on the world.
The pony had been pining because he couldn't communicate with his friends.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM Burford
NIKKI SKEGGS Blue Cross Field Centre
ALAN KEY Blue Cross Carpenter
Voice over
It should have been downhill all the way for retired Shetland Pony Selwyn, instead it turned out to be downbeat.
He joined the Blue Cross stables at Burford to enjoy his final days but wound up being depressed.
He was too short to see over his stable door and he couldn't communicate with his friends, especially retired Police Horse, Stapleton.
Something had to be done.
The Long and the Short of it was Selwyn's misery was being caused because he couldn't get anywhere near any of the other horses.
So while he and Stapleton were led out for a little exercise, the Blue Cross carpenter, Alan Key got to work.
He made a shortened door, while Selwyn chewed the fat with Stapleton.
When he returned, Selwyn seemed altogether much more cheerful.
Now he's able to lean over his stable just like any other horse.
He and Stapleton can associate to their hearts' content and that's something to bring a smile to his face.
RUNS=0:05 
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Emma in line for an Oscar
FTSE up 1
The hundred shares index closed up one point eight at 2wenty-eight, fourteen exactly.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-four and down at two marks, thirty-four.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
RUNS=0:10
RUNS=2:05
MANDERA/Kenya
Dr CHARLES DESCHAMP/Camp Doctor
BENOIR D'ANSEMBOURG/Aid Worker
Sq Ldr BOB ILLETT
Gp Cpt DAVID ADAMS
Wing Cmdr TONY MAINE
Voice over
The Mandera refugee camp sits just inside the Kenyan border with Somalia.
It covers more than 500 acres and houses 68,000 people; Somalians forced from their homeland by war and drought.
Thousands died trying to reach the camp.
Those who made it show all too clearly the strains of their journey.
Many end up in the camp hospital.
But at least here they're safe.
And thanks to the airlifts of food and drugs there's a good chance that these people can be saved, particularly the babies.
3 months ago, more than 38% were malnourished and dying.
Now regular feeds with the dried milk brought in by the RAF, mean most are near their normal body weight.
Food comes into camp every day.
But with so many refugees here, there's never enough to go round.
On average, each person can expect to get just 8 kilos of food every 2 weeks.
That's like getting half a bag of sugar a day to live on.
The people here are still hungry, but they've got just about enough to survive.
6 months ago, hundreds of people were dying every day.
Gravediggers worked around the clock.
Thanks to the airlifts, the average daily death rate now is 12.
The RAF crews are always far too busy ferrying food to the airstrips to ever get time to visit the camps.
But Squadron Leader, Bob Illett took time out of his hectic schedule to become the first RAF man to meet the refugees his detachment is helping.
It's not yet known how long the men from Lyneham will stay in Africa.
But there's no doubt that while they're here, these children stand a far better chance of becoming adults.
A village school is resorting to big business techniques to ensure its survival.
It's launched a promotional campaign which it's hoped will attract more pupils.
ABI DONALD/Cheddington
DAVID MANN/Chairman of Governors
PETER BARON/Parent
DAVID WILLIS/Headteacher
Voice over
Cheddington School is celebrating it's 150th anniversary this year, but like many village schools its finding that education has become increasingly competitive.
As parents choose where to send their children some small schools are being by-passed for the larger urban schools.
Governors, parents and teachers at Cheddington have taken the initiative and they're actively promoting the school and what it has to offer to the village.
Parents in the surrounding towns have been targeted.
Leaflets have been delivered and the school is even making a promotional video.
The aim is to encourage parents to come and have a look round the school and it seems to be working.
Theres been increasing pressure on education authorities to reduce the number of empty places at schools, which means some village schools have had to combine or close altogether.
Cheddington is determined not to be one of those.
Promotional campaign or not the best advert for any school has to be the children.
Male speaker
Its a nice school, I like art.
Female speaker
I like the school and the work, and my teacher.
I've got some friends.
Voice over
Parents at Cheddington are urging other local schools to follow their example, before village schools become a thing of the past.
A factory in China has signed a deal to produce a British car under licence.
But no-one is claiming this as a major export deal.
The car in question is the Morris Marina, last built at Cowley almost ten years ago.
And many people think the Chinese are in for a disappointment.
GRAEME BOWD/Cowley
RON WHITEHEAD/Heritage Motor Centre
STEVE DIX/Marina owner
Voice over
A soldier's wife who stayed on in married quarters after her husband walked out has been asked to pay eight hundred pounds for trespass, the term used by the army when it considers a tenancy has become unlawful.
But Gillian Mountfield is challenging the bill and says her husband should pay.
GRAEME BOWD/Cheltenham
GILLIAN MOUNTFIELD
Voice over
Gillian Mountfield and daughter Rosanna, who's mentally handicapped, now live in a council flat in Cheltenham.
But it took 5 months to find them accomodation after she was told to…
Children are being told there are times when kicking and screaming is all right— and could even save their lives.
The advice is being given in a course run by the police and a local authority to help children learn how to deal with strangers.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
CAROL BLICK/Course Instructor
Sgt JOHN WICKHAM/Swindon Police
Voice over
That children should be seen and not heard is a notion with which Carol Blick wholeheartedly disagrees.
Being heard — as well as seen — can mean the difference between life and death.
Carol's the Instructor on a Protect Yourself course for 6 to 12 year olds being run by Thamesdown Council in conjunction with Swindon Police.
The abduction and murder of 2 year old, James Bulger, she says, underlines the importance, whenever possible, of not letting youngsters out of your sight and ensuring they know that when confronted by a stranger they're allowed to scream and shout as loud as they like.
These youngsters are, of course, rather older than James Bulger, and thanks to Carol better able now to fend off strangers.
But attempted abductions of much younger children are not uncommon and the police say it's vital that parents are aware of the dangers.
Meanwhile for Carol's pupils, the course fee may just turn out to be the best £7.50 their parents ever spent.
Female speaker
I particularly like the way the teacher's emphasising that it's sometimes all right to be rude to adults.
Female speaker
You should never talk to them or go in their cars or houses.
Voice over
The next course is scheduled for the October half term.
In the meantime, Carol hopes it won't take another child's death to convince other local authorities of the need to start running similar courses of their own.
(HARRIET AD LIBS BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central news, our second report on the RAF aid missions to Somalia.
(ANNE) Welcome back.
Now for our second look at the relief work being carried out in Africa by the airmen of RAF Lyneham.
Their mission…to fly food to the refugee camps of Somalia.
(HARRIET NEXT) Tonight we see how that food is saving lives inside the camps, in the second of Clare Lafferty's reports from Somalia,’ Flight for Life’.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Kidlington
November 1992
MICHAEL DURGUT/Host
Voice over
Life is beginning to look good for Eleven months old Adisa Blagajac.
But it was only fourteen weeks ago that her mother Snazana came to Britain with her in a condition close to death.
Adisa had tumours on her heart and urgently needed treatment unavailable in her native Bosnia.
Now she's on the mend and preparing to return home this weekend.
Male speaker
She was very woprried to begin with because she didn't knowe the language and no one was sure how ill Adisa was.
But in the endshe was pleased no operation was needed
Voice over
Adisa has been staying At the home of Michael Durgut in Kidlington, a native Bosnian.
He and his wife have been looking after Mother and daughter while she was treated at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.
They were originally brought to Britain by Northampton schoolmaster Gerald Smith.
It was the final stage in a dramatic story which started at Birth for Adisa.
She was transferred from Mostar Belgrade, dumped in a childrens' home separated from her family for four months, then shelled while escaping to safety in Croatia.
Finally she was brought to Britain but had a seizure on the Croatian Airlines flight.
Once here fears of surgery were discounted and the tumours were treated with drugs.
Now they're going back to a sensitive area.
Male speaker
She is apprehensive but she wants to see her husband and two sons.
She would like to have stayed a littlke longer to see some more of the country
Voice over
Adisa's will be back for her first birthday in March.
Then her father and two brothers will be able to see her for the first time in seven months.
A police force has described its biggest ever seizure of cannabis as a major victory in its campaign against drug abuse.
Forty thousand pounds worth of the drug was found in a car that was stopped in a routine check.
ROBIN POWELL/Stroud
Det Insp BRIAN RICE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
10 kilos of cannabis resin, the biggest seizure of drugs Gloucestershire Police have ever made.
They were seized shortly after 8 p.m. last night when a BMW heading south on the M5 motorway was stopped in a routine police check between Junctions 13 and 14 near Stinchcombe.
The officer in charge of the case says it was a highly significant find.
This afternoon, 32 year old, Joseph Lloyd from Bristol appeared before South Gloucestershire Magistrates, charged with possession with intent to supply and being concerned in the supply of illegal drugs.
He's been remanded in custody until the 5th of March.
Students have stepped up their protest over plans to admit men to one of Oxford University's last remaining women's colleges.
They say they've been promised full consultation with the college's governing body before a final decisionis made — and so far that hasn't happened.
IAN MACLAREN/Oxford
JENNI BORG/JCR President
Voice over
Dressed in black, undergraduates say they've been gagged and had their hands tied in their attempts to persuade the governing body to maintain Somerville as a single sex college.
The women claim members of the governing body, who were meeting today, have frustrated the consultation process with the students Junior Common Room.
The governing body announced its intention last year to admit male students because of a drop in admissions from women.
The students say they've put forward new ideas which could solve the dilemma.
The students say they dropped legal action after they'd been promised full consultation, as the Visitor of Somerville College, Lord Roy Jenkins had insisted last year.
Now they feel consultation has been a con…
There are dissenting voices among the 360 women undergraduates at Somerville, but the vast majority want to preserve the college's single sex status.
The University said tonight the governing body at Somerville had made no firm decision on admitting male students today.
The women say that's exactly what they hoped to achieve.
Police have recovered some of the haul of firearms stolen from a shooting range.
Seven pistols were discovered under a bed in a dawn raid on a flat.
A man's expected to be charged tonight.
Meanwhile, the search continues for another nine guns.
KIM BARNES/London
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Voice over
Police in London unveiled 7 handguns found in a holdall under a bed.
The arsenal includes a semi automatic colt point 45, 4 point 22's Browning target pistols and a Ruger point 357 magnum worth more than two thousand pounds in all.
They also recovered some stolen ammunition during a dawn raid on this flat in Notting Hill.
But there are still 9 pistols untraced following the break in at the Dunmore Shooting Centre last week.
Raiders lifted tiles and climbed in through the roof space to take the guns and 150 rounds of ammunition.
Thames Valley Police say they remain concerned about the outstanding firearms and their investigation, involving police forces around the country, continues.
Good evening.
HARRIET RYLEY
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Kidlington
November 1992
MICHAEL DURGUT/Host
Voice over
Life is beginning to look good for Eleven months old Adisa Blagajac.
But it was only fourteen weeks ago that her mother Snazana came to Britain with her in a condition close to death.
Adisa had tumours on her heart and urgently needed treatment unavailable in her native Bosnia.
Now she's on the mend and preparing to return home this weekend.
Male speaker
She was very woprried to begin with because she didn't knowe the language and no one was sure how ill Adisa was.
But in the endshe was pleased no operation was needed
Voice over
Adisa has been staying At the home of Michael Durgut in Kidlington, a native Bosnian.
He and his wife have been looking after Mother and daughter while she was treated at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.
They were originally brought to Britain by Northampton schoolmaster Gerald Smith.
It was the final stage in a dramatic story which started at Birth for Adisa.
She was transferred from Mostar Belgrade, dumped in a childrens' home separated from her family for four months, then shelled while escaping to safety in Croatia.
Finally she was brought to Britain but had a seizure on the Croatian Airlines flight.
Once here fears of surgery were discounted and the tumours were treated with drugs.
Now they're going back to a sensitive area.
Male speaker
She is apprehensive but she wants to see her husband and two sons.
She would like to have stayed a littlke longer to see some more of the country
Voice over
Adisa's will be back for her first birthday in March.
Then her father and two brothers will be able to see her for the first time in seven months.
A police force has described its biggest ever seizure of cannabis as a major victory in its campaign against drug abuse.
Forty thousand pounds worth of the drug was found in a car that was stopped in a routine check.
ROBIN POWELL/Stroud
Det Insp BRIAN RICE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
10 kilos of cannabis resin, the biggest seizure of drugs Gloucestershire Police have ever made.
They were seized shortly after 8 p.m. last night when a BMW heading south on the M5 motorway was stopped in a routine police check between Junctions 13 and 14 near Stinchcombe.
The officer in charge of the case says it was a highly significant find.
This afternoon, 32 year old, Joseph Lloyd from Bristol appeared before South Gloucestershire Magistrates, charged with possession with intent to supply and being concerned in the supply of illegal drugs.
He's been remanded in custody until the 5th of March.
Police have recovered some of the haul of firearms stolen from a shooting range.
Seven pistols were discovered under a bed in a dawn raid on a flat.
A man will appear in court tomorrow charged in connection with the burglary.
KIM BARNES/London
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Voice over
Police in London unveiled 7 handguns found in a holdall under a bed.
The arsenal includes a semi automatic colt point 45, 4 point 22's Browning target pistols and a Ruger point 357 magnum worth more than two thousand pounds in all.
They also recovered some stolen ammunition during a dawn raid on this flat in Notting Hill.
But there are still 9 pistols untraced following the break in at the Dunmore Shooting Centre last week.
Raiders lifted tiles and climbed in through the roof space to take the guns and 150 rounds of ammunition.
Thames Valley Police say they remain concerned about the outstanding firearms and their investigation, involving police forces around the country, continues.
Students have stepped up their protest over plans to admit men to one of Oxford University's last remaining women's colleges.
They say promised consultation with the college's governing body before a final decisionis made hasn't happened.
IAN MACLAREN/Oxford
Voice over
Dressed in black, undergraduates say they've been gagged and had their hands tied in their attempts to persuade the governing body to maintain Somerville as a single sex college.
The women claim members of the governing body, who were meeting today, have frustrated the consultation process with the students Junior Common Room.
The governing body announced its intention last year to admit male students because of a drop in admissions from women.
The students say they've put forward new ideas which could solve the dilemma.
The students say they dropped legal action after they'd been promised full consultation, as the Visitor of Somerville College, Lord Roy Jenkins had insisted last year.
Now they feel consultation has been a con…
There are dissenting voices among the 360 women undergraduates at Somerville, but the vast majority want to preserve the college's single sex status.
The University said tonight the governing body at Somerville had made no firm decision on admitting male students today.
The women say that's exactly what they hoped to achieve.
A factory in China has signed a deal to produce a British car under licence.
The car in question is the Morris Marina, last built at Cowley almost ten years ago.
GRAEME BOWD/Cowley
Voice over
RUNS=0:05 
021793bull(5)
Britain's biggest ever fashion show has just opened at thr National Exhibition Centre.
For the first time it includes children's wear and one of the best known names in British fashion — Hardy Amies, now living in the Cotswolds and still designer to the Queen.
Anne Davies reports.
JANE FAUST/Premier Childrenswear
Sir HARDY AMIES/Designer
Voice over
One of the country's oldest and most haunting woodlands has provided the setting for a new novel by one of the biggest selling writers of historical romance.
In writing the book, EV Thompson drew on his experiences as a wartime evacuee, taken from London in the dead of night to the Cotswold countryside.
Mark Kiff reports.
WYCHWOOD Oxfordshire
E V THOMPSON Author
Voice over
Walking through the ancient forest of Wychwood, EV Thompson steps back through the mists of time.
It's here he spent much of his childhood, learning the secrets of the wood, which appear in his latest book.
More than half a century has passed since he was brought to Swinbrook to escape the horrors of the blitz.
Male speaker
For a very small boy it was a confusing time.
I think the night I was taken from London I thought the whole world was crshing down around me.
I arrived in Oxfordshire with only the clothes I was standing in.
Voice over
EV Thompson, the initials stand for Ernest Victor if you're wondering, was brought up in this cottage in Swinbrook during the war.
The book is based on his knowledge of Wychwood gained then, but for his story he went back even further in time.
Male speaker
I started reading more about the 19th century Swinbrook…about the great wood of Wychwood.
Voice over
Since growing up in Swinbrook, EV Thompson has become known as a best selling author of historical romances.
Male speaker
It was a tag that surprised me very much the first time I heard it…but now I've stopped worrying.
Voice over
With more than a dozen best-selling novels, EV Thompson certainly doesn't have to worry.
He's hoping Wychwood will join that list, based as it is, on his own special memories of a haunting wood.
Court clears man of girl's murder
The Appeal Court has cleared Stefan Kiszko of the murder of eleven-year-old, Lesley Molseed, sixteen years ago.Forensic evidence has shown he could not have been the killer.
Rise in long-term unemployment
There's been a sharp rise in the number of people out of work for more than a year.
Kinnock attacks Major over unemployment
Mr. Kinnock has attacked the Prime Minister over unemployment.
Lamont attacks Labour's industrial policies
Meanwhile, the Chancellor, Mr. Lamont, has attacked Labour's industrial plans saying they would put Britain out of business.
FTSE up 14
The hundred shares index closed up fourteen point nine at twenty-five, fifty-five point nine.
The pound is down more than two cents at one dollar, seventy-five but up at two marks, ninety.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A dentist has warned that hundreds of his colleagues could leave the Health Service and go private because they're threatened with a six thousand pound a year pay cut.
The Government wants to reduce productivity payments to dentists because it says they're treating too many patients.The move has been described by one dentist as appalling.Richard Barnett reports:
BISHOPS CLEEVE/Gloucestershire
GEOFFREY JENKINS/Dentist
Voice over
Last week dentists were celebrating being awarded a pay rise, but this week they've been told they could face a £6,000 pay cut instead.
The Government says the dentists are treating too many patients under a new productivity deal and it plans to cut back on payments by an average of £6,000 to each practitioner.
Geoffrey Jenkins is Chairman of the Gloucestershire Dental Committee, which represents the 200 dentists in the County.
He says it's already almost impossible to find an NHS dentist in parts of the Home counties.
It could soon be the same in Gloucestershire.
And he's furious:
Male speaker
Dentists won't be willing to put up with such a pay cut.
Only around 15 out of 200 work privately at the moment.
But the time could come when it will be very difficult to find an NHS doctor in the county.
Voice over
If patients are forced to go private because the local dentists opt out of the National Health Service, fees will triple.
The average bill for a course of treatment will go up from £20 to £60.
The Department of Health is aware of the disquiet among dentists.
A spokesman told us:’ This is a matter which does need urgent consideration.
The Health Secretary met representatives from the British Dental Association last week and he has asked the Association and his officials to talk about detailed issues’.
Meanwhile the dentists say the threat to go private is a very real one.
NHS dentists already earn on average £10,000 a year less than doctors and they're not willing to take a £6,000 pay cut.
The latest crime figures for Oxfordshire show a rise of more than thirty per cent.
A suspected burglar is on the run after he escaped from police by jumping through a court room window.
Twenty three year old John Kitchin had just been remanded in custody on a burglary charge.
HEREFORD
A new scheme has been launched to put homeless families into private houses that would otherwise lie empty.
The project is the first of its kind outside London, and was opened by the housing minister, as Julie Dolphin reports.
OXFORD
MARY ATKINS/Tenant
Sir GEORGE YOUNG MP/Housing Minister
DAVID ASHMORE/Oxford Citizens Housing Association
Cllr PHYLLIS STARKEY/Oxford City Council
WILL KEOWN/Landlord
Voice over
For three months this small
In part two: Escape to victory.
RAF hero re-lives his route to freedom.
Dress me Hardy.
The new knitwear from the Queen's designer.
And love in the mist:Wartime passion from the master of romance.
Welcome back:An RAF war hero is about to return to Belgium to commemorate his escape from the Nazis after being shot down in a bomber.
Brin Weare fooled the enemy by disguising himself as a priest.
Half a century later, he's joining a team to follow a fifteen hundred mile wartime escape route from Holland to Gibraltar.
The aim is to raise money for former Resistance workers who helped more than two thousand Allied servicemen evade capture.Richard Barnett reports:
CHURCHDOWN/Gloucestershire
BRIN WEARE/RAF Escaping Society
Voice over
Brin Weare still has the silk escape map of Europe that was issued to him in April 1944.
But little did he know at the time, how soon he'd need it.
As a 19 year old Flight Engineer, he was already a veteran of 12 bomber sorties over Germany.
But it was unlucky 13 when he took off from an airfield in Yorkshire in a Halifax bomber.
On a raid over Essen the aircraft was blown to bits.
Brin was the only survivor, parachuting onto German soil.
The young airman turned his uniform inside out as a disguise and walked for 3 weeks until he reached Belgium.
It was there the Resistance hatched a bizarre plot to hide him:
Male speaker
I was hidden in a coffin and taken to a cemetery.Then I was disguised in priests garb.
Voice over
Brin was issued with false documents to fool the Germans and he worked for 5 months with the resistance, helping allied servicemen to escape along the so called Comet line; a 1,500 mile route across Europe from Holland through Belgium and France, on through Spain to the safety of Gibraltar.
Brin and 14 colleagues are about the follow that same route by bicycle and on foot in 3 months time.
The aim is to raise money for any former resistance workers who've fallen on hard times and to say thank you for the help they gave to our servicemen:
Male speaker
For every servicemen who was saved, four Resistance workers died.We do our best to repay the Resistance for their help.
Voice over
When Brin goes to Belgium, he'll leave behind one memento of his time with the Resistance.
It's a Gestapo Officer's silk handkerchief.
Brin says simply,’ The officer didn't need it anymore.’
Abducted and raped: Police warning after woman is snatched by a driver.
Killer at our shores.
RSPCA say don't let rabies in.
And down in the mouth.
Dentists go private to avoid a pay cut.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
At first the victim was so devastated by the attack that she didn't report it to the police.
But now that she HAS come forward, detectives say it's important that the rapist is caught before he strikes again.
Ken Goodwin reports.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
Det Insp TERRY MOORE/Gloucestershire Police
CLAIRE GLASMAN/Women Against Rape
Voice over
It was 11.00 p.m. at night when the victim, in her early 30s, was walking down this alleyway off Barton Street in Tewkesbury.
The rapist grabbed her from behind and dragged her across to a car park nearby.
There, she was bundled into a light coloured mini van and driven to a quiet spot in Lower Lode Lane on the outskirts of Tewkesbury, where she was raped.
Then the attacker drove her to another spot nearby, before raping her again.
Afterwards he took her to the entrance of the Priors Park Estate, where he released her.
He says it was a terrible attack and it's important that they catch the culprit.
The attack happened 2 weeks ago, but the victim was so distressed she has only just reported it to the police.
He says that she told her husband, they discussed it and decided not to tell the police.
But, upon reflection, they changed their minds and decided it would be the right thing to do.
It's not uncommon for victims of rape to be so traumatized by the attack that they delay, or in some cases never report the matter to police.
She says that although victims may be worried that the attacker will rape another woman, they also have to consider what many rape victims feel is the ordeal of going to court and re-living the rape in the witness box.
Police have released a description of the man they're looking for in the Tewkesbury attack.
He's white, in his 20s, around 6ft tall, with short, spikey, dark coloured hair.
He has a local accent.
One of the two men accused of murdering a police informer was also a drugs dealer, according to evidence given by the prosecution on the second day of their trial.
The body of Alan Chalky White was found in lake fifty six at the Cotswold Water Park in 1989…the same lake, it's claimed that was used to hide the drugs.Tim Hurst reports from Winchester Crown Court.
WINCHESTER CROWN COURT/Hampshire
Voice over
Animal experts have condemned moves to scrap the laws on quarantine, which they say could open the floodgates to Rabies in Britain.
With frontier restrictions coming down all over Europe in 1992, they fear the sort of epidemic that has been sweeping the rest of the continent.
So, local councils are rehearsing emergency plans to deal with a possible outbreak.
This report from Gargy Patel.
COI FILM
OXFORD
GRAHAM JONES/Oxfordshire Trading Standards
DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA Inspector
Voice over
Rabies; a killer disease that's been kept at bay by Britain's tough quarantine laws.
But experts say with the easing of trade barriers across Europe, the threat of an outbreak grows stronger.
It's prompted council officers in Oxfordshire to put their contingency plans to the test.
Once a rabid animal has been found in the area, staff would be issued with protective clothing to round up animals in the surrounding district.
They have to plan and act quickly to prevent any spread to other animals or humans.
Animals brought into the country are automatically quarantined.
But the rules are being challenged by Europe.
Animal Welfare groups say it would be madness to remove laws which have protected Britain for so long from Rabies, a disease that causes fever and paralysis, leading to a slow, painful death.
Trading standards officers monitor the movement of animals in and out of the country.
The RSPCA says their job would be much more difficult without the benefit of quarantine.
Oxfordshire has never suffered a rabies case.
Experts say it's vital they prevent it happening in the future.
A dentist has warned that hundreds of his colleagues could leave the Health Service and go private because they're threatened with a six thousand pound a year pay cut.
The Government wants to reduce productivity payments to dentists because it says they're treating too many patients.The move has been described by one dentist as appalling.Richard Barnett reports:
BISHOPS CLEEVE/Gloucestershire
GEOFFREY JENKINS/Dentist
Voice over
Last week dentists were celebrating being awarded a pay rise, but this week they've been told they could face a £6,000 pay cut instead.
The Government says the dentists are treating too many patients under a new productivity deal and it plans to cut back on payments by an average of £6,000 to each practitioner.
Geoffrey Jenkins is Chairman of the Gloucestershire Dental Committee, which represents the 200 dentists in the County.
He says it's already almost impossible to find an NHS dentist in parts of the Home counties.
It could soon be the same in Gloucestershire.
And he's furious:
Male speaker
Dentists won't be willing to put up with such a pay cut.
Only around 15 out of 200 work privately at the moment.
But the time could come when it will be very difficult to find an NHS doctor in the county.
Voice over
If patients are forced to go private because the local dentists opt out of the National Health Service, fees will triple.
The average bill for a course of treatment will go up from £20 to £60.
The Department of Health is aware of the disquiet among dentists.
A spokesman told us:’ This is a matter which does need urgent consideration.
The Health Secretary met representatives from the British Dental Association last week and he has asked the Association and his officials to talk about detailed issues’.
Meanwhile the dentists say the threat to go private is a very real one.
NHS dentists already earn on average £10,000 a year less than doctors and they're not willing to take a £6,000 pay cut.
The latest crime figures for Oxfordshire show a rise of more than thirty per cent.
A suspected burglar is on the run after he escaped from police by jumping through a court room window.
Twenty three year old John Kitchin had just been remanded in custody on a burglary charge.
HEREFORD
A new scheme has been launched to put homeless families into private houses that would otherwise lie empty.
The project is the first of its kind outside London, and was opened by the housing minister, as Julie Dolphin reports.
OXFORD
MARY ATKINS/Tenant
Sir GEORGE YOUNG MP/Housing Minister
DAVID ASHMORE/Oxford Citizens Housing Association
Cllr PHYLLIS STARKEY/Oxford City Council
WILL KEOWN/Landlord
Voice over
For three months this small
In part two: Escape to victory.
RAF hero re-lives his route to freedom.
Dress me Hardy.
The new knitwear from the Queen's designer.
And love in the mist:Wartime passion from the master of romance.
Welcome back:An RAF war hero is about to return to Belgium to commemorate his escape from the Nazis after being shot down in a bomber.
Brin Weare fooled the enemy by disguising himself as a priest.
Half a century later, he's joining a team to follow a fifteen hundred mile wartime escape route from Holland to Gibraltar.
The aim is to raise money for former Resistance workers who helped more than two thousand Allied servicemen evade capture.Richard Barnett reports:
CHURCHDOWN/Gloucestershire
BRIN WEARE/RAF Escaping Society
Voice over
Brin Weare still has the silk escape map of Europe that was issued to him in April 1944.
But little did he know at the time, how soon he'd need it.
As a 19 year old Flight Engineer, he was already a veteran of 12 bomber sorties over Germany.
But it was unlucky 13 when he took off from an airfield in Yorkshire in a Halifax bomber.
On a raid over Essen the aircraft was blown to bits.
Brin was the only survivor, parachuting onto German soil.
The young airman turned his uniform inside out as a disguise and walked for 3 weeks until he reached Belgium.
It was there the Resistance hatched a bizarre plot to hide him:
Male speaker
I was hidden in a coffin and taken to a cemetery.Then I was disguised in priests garb.
Voice over
Brin was issued with false documents to fool the Germans and he worked for 5 months with the resistance, helping allied servicemen to escape along the so called Comet line; a 1,500 mile route across Europe from Holland through Belgium and France, on through Spain to the safety of Gibraltar.
Brin and 14 colleagues are about the follow that same route by bicycle and on foot in 3 months time.
The aim is to raise money for any former resistance workers who've fallen on hard times and to say thank you for the help they gave to our servicemen:
Male speaker
For every servicemen who was saved, four Resistance workers died.We do our best to repay the Resistance for their help.
Voice over
When Brin goes to Belgium, he'll leave behind one memento of his time with the Resistance.
It's a Gestapo Officer's silk handkerchief.
Brin says simply,’ The officer didn't need it anymore.’
In Central News tonight.
Why was he frightened for his life?
Family make public appeal to help catch Richard's killer.
Joyriding victim.
It's thought the driver was a girl just twelve years old.
And, someone's watching you.
Now a hundred security cameras are installed in a town centre
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Richard Miles' body was discovered by his mother in the back garden of their home eight days ago.
But no motive for the killing has yet been established, so Richard's relatives are asking for public help in catching his murderer.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Stroud
DEN CUMBERLIN/Richard's Uncle
BRIAN CUMBERLIN/Richard's Uncle
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Richard Miles' two brothers and two uncles came to Stroud police station to appeal for help in finding Richard's killer.
Mr Miles was found stabbed to death in the back garden of the home in Newtown that he shared with his parents and one of his brothers.
8 days on, there's still no clue as to a motive for the killing.
But his family say that in the weeks before his death, Richard had appeared worried.
Richard worked as a panel beater at a garage in Frampton on Severn.
On the day he was killed he'd left work to go home for lunch as usual.
Yesterday police spoke to more than 1,000 people who regularly use the road behind Richard's house.
They'll spend the next few days sorting through that information.
They hope it'll bring them a step nearer to finding Richard's killer.
A schoolgirl thought to be as young as twelve has knocked down a pedestrian while driving a stolen car.
The injured woman was lucky to escape with her life.
The girl, and two teenage boys ran away.
Local people terrorised by joyriders are worried now that some may take the law into their own hands.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
FRAN MAIDMENT/Hit-and-Run Victim
JASON JACKSON/Friend
PC JEFF DAISY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The hit and run left Fran Maidment with a sprained neck, twisted back, a head injury and cuts and bruises.
She was walking with a friend, when she heard a car screech to a halt behind her.
The car, a stolen metro, was abandoned at by 3 teenagers.
Fran's companion was amazed.
Police investigating the incident at Rose Hill say residents must now come forward if they know anything.
But it's feared some may take the law into their own hands.
Residents have had enough of the joyriders.
Fran Maidment is now revcovering from the shock and pain joyriding causes, while police step up their search for the child drivers, growing it seems younger by the day.
A man killed under the wheels of a concrete mixer died because he was trying to save the life of a colleague.
The dead man's teenage daughters say he's a hero, and they're not surprised he lost his life saving someone else 
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
JAIMIE PAINTING/Daughter
HELEN PAINTING/Daughter
Voice over
Peter Miller was a self-employed JCB driver.
His excavator was his pride and joy.
He was working on a building site at Middle Barton in North Oxfordshire when a concrete mixer rolled back toward a workman.
Mr Miller knocked him out of the way but fell under the machine himself.
His daughters are proud of him
Female speaker
He was always there for everybody, colleagues friends or whatever.
My parents split up but they were always still friends including my step-dad, they were all close.
They were always there for eachother but especially for us.
At the weekend he told us he was porud of us.
I'm glad we had that conversation.
To the whole family he's a hero
Female speaker
He may have lost his life but he saved somebody else.
He'd have done it for anyone.
Female speaker
It's very tragic but he would have done it for anybody.
We love him and we'll always remember him
Voice over
An investigation has been launched by the Health and Safety Executive
There has been some good news on the jobs front today.
Three hundred and fifty new jobs are being created by Rover because of the growing demand for the Montego and Maestro cars.
Two years ago the Cowley plant was threatened with closure.
ERIKA BARNES/Cowley
Library Pictures
PAUL KIRK/Rover Group
ROY EDLEY/Transport Union Shop Steward
IAN ROBERTSON/Motor Industry Analyst
Female speaker
Good morning, Rover Group.
Voice over
There's a call every 20 seconds to the Rover group in Cowley from would-be workers on a special job hotline.
Female speaker
We've set up some walk in sessions on Saturday between 9 and 1 and during the week, so you can talk to someone then.
Voice over
350 new temporary jobs are being created in the body, paint and trim shops and the assembly line for the Maestro and Montego.
Production is being doubled from 300 to 600 cars a week to meet the growing demand and Rover needs the extra staff to take on the extra shifts.
Male speaker
With the Maestro and Montego we said we'd respond to customer demand.
Voice over
Market research indicates we're strong in the UK and Europe.
There's a new air of confidence at Rover, when just 2 years ago, jobs were being lost.
It's raising morale amongst a once discouraged workforce.
Male speaker
If you think what Cowley's been through, we survived and we've got the right car.
It's good news that the Maestro and Montego are selling well.
It's welcome, although we would have prefered full time jobs, but it's a step in the right direction.
Male speaker
Jobs should be given to those who were made redundent last time, as they were forced out.
Male speaker
It's a good thing for the area.
It's handy.
But there'll be a lot of people after the jobs.
Voice over
It seems Rover is now keeping faith with old faithfuls but analysts are looking more at the motives rather than the marketing.
Male speaker
It's important not to over exaggerate the significance of this, the Maestro and Montego are only a small part of Rover's output.
They're clearing the way for the new 600 series and we're seeing the first evidence of the Japanese working practises.
Voice over
But whatever the motive, the Maestro and Montego are providing much needed work at a time when work is hard to come by.
The family of murdered council worker Anna McGurk have given their backing to a new bill to change the bail laws.
Anna was murdered by a man who was out on bail accused of rape, even though the police had asked that he be kept in custody.
The bill would give the prosecution the right of appeal against bail being granted.
CHRIS MOORE/Reporting
GLOUCESTER
KAY POTTS/Anna's Mother
MICHAEL STEPHEN MP/Con
3 weeks before he murdered Anna McGurk in 1991, Andrew Hagans had been on remand in Gloucester Jail, charged with raping another woman.
A week later, magistrates gave him bail, despite police fears that he might commit further offences.
Hagans was sent to a bail hostel, with the only restriction that he had to be in between 11 p.m. at night and 7 a.m. in the morning.
Within 2 weeks, he'd murdered Anna McGurk on her way home from work at Gloucester City Council.
Magistrates said they'd thought the bail conditions were strict enough to stop Hagans re-offending.
The law still says that men accused of rape can be bailed unless they have a severe psycopathic or psychiatric disorder.
Today, Anna's mother was at the Commons, to meet the MP who wants to change that law.
Mr Stephen's bill is due to get its second reading tomorrow.
105 MPs have signed a Commons motion in support of the Bill.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the motorway verges vandalised by voles
(ANNE) Nesting boxes for kestrels are being put up alongside a stretch of the M40.
It's part of a pilot scheme aimed at controlling a huge increase in the roadside population of voles.
(WESLEY) The voles are foiling all attempts to landscape the banks of the motorway.
Now the Department of Transport is hoping that the birds of prey will redress the balance.
JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
JIM TILLEY/Forestry Commission
BARRY MOORE/Department of Transport
The common vole destroys 100 newly planted trees in every 7-mile stretch of motorway.
Today in a bid to keep down the voles, the Department of Transport and the Forestry Commission began placing Kestrel nesting boxes along the M40 motorway.
’ The vole is the Kestrel's principle diet, but they will not be eliminated by any means.
The Kestrels will be maintaining a balance.’
’ Locally, they can do quite a lot of damage.
You only need a small area where the trees are planted close together and the voles can effect up to 100 trees.’
But today's demonstration didn't quite go to plan.
The Kestrel brought along to try the new boxes for size liked his new home so much, he didn't want to come out!
’ There doesn't seem to be a lot happening at the moment.’
If the scheme is successful, it'll be extended to other parts of the motorway network.
Good evening.
Boys and girls playing together at St. Mary and John School in Oxford.
Until this week, they had all their lessons together, but following a governor's meeting, the school has agreed to segregate them for swimming lessons in the school's pool.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY/Oxford
MAHBOOB ALAM/Pakistani Welfare Association
Voice over
40% of pupils at the school are muslim.
The muslim community feels strongly their children shouldn't have swimming lessons together because, according to their religion, it's immodest for both sexes to swim together.
Parents are divided over the decision to separate the children.
No-one from the school was prepared to be interviewed, but one of the governors said.
’ The school is trying to explore ways of co-operating with muslim parents, including plans to provide halal food at lunchtime.
The school's governors will be meeting in March to decide the swimming issue.’
Oxfordshire's Local Education Authority said:
’ We have no policy on single-sex swimming, as it has never been an issue before and it has always been assumed that all children would swim together.’
Some non-muslim parents say they'll boycott swimming lessons while they're segregated.
The school's governors are meeting next month to review their decision.
As unemployment climbed above three million for the first time in six years, the latest figures showed our region has been hard hit by the recession.
Every county in the Central South Region has seen more than four thousand jobs disappear over the past year.
KEN GOODWIN/Ross on Wye
IVAN JAMES/Unemployed Builder
Cllr RAY SMITH/Con
LESLEY GILLMORE/Trader
ROGER GATES/ABT Ltd
ARTHUR CARR/Unemployed
Voice over
At the Noahs ark pub some of the unemployed residents of the Tudorville estate meet to compare notes.
He says that he's got to get out of Ross.
He says that he's joined a few agencies, with no luck.
Builder Ivan James has been out of work for a year.
He says that there are too many people chasing too few jobs.
At first sight Ross on Wye appears to be an affluent market town…but a closer look shows the recession has bitten hard.
He says that the biggest blow came when Rank's made thousands redundant in the eighties.
The town's never really recovered from that.
Traders in Ross have been particularly badly hit.
As unemployment increases, people spend less.
So shopkeepers have joined forces to attract people into the town, with a special publication circulated in neighbouring areas.
She says that three shops have closed down since Christmas.
It's firms like ABT which may hold the key to recovery.
ABT is the archetypal small engineering company, employing and training local people.
The sort of business which flourished in the eighties but suffered in the recession hit nineties, laying off workers.
But as business picks up, ironically there's proving to be a shortage of available workers with the right skills.
He says that they need skilled staff — there aren't enough being trained.
Not much hope for people like Arthur Carr.
He believes he'll probably never work again.
He says he's always told he's too old.
He says being jobless makes him miserable and bored.
Latest figures show that this region has now lost almost all the jobs which were created during the properous years of the late eighties.
Although the unemployment rate here is still below the national average the gap is closing.
And today Labour's trade spokesman Robin Cook accused the Government of destroying the country's manafucturing base,
GRAEME BOWD/Swindon
ROBIN COOK/Labour Trade Spokesman0
OXFORD
JAMES PLASKITT/Labour Leader
Angry students at Margaret Thatcher's old Oxford college are threatening to sue over a decision to admit men.
The college's governing authority voted this afternoon to end the hundred and thirteen year old women-only tradition at Somerville College.
Nick Clark reports.
OXFORD
SUZANNE PARKER/Campaign Organiser
Dr MARY LUNN/St Hugh's College
Voice over
Plans to admit men haven't been well received by the students at Somerville.
A recent poll showed eighty four per cent were against the proposition.
This afternoon members of the college's governing body, on their way to rubber stamp the change, walked through a silent protest of icey stares.
The students feel the move will simply further decrease an already poor representation of women at the university.
Only the CONVERTS on the board were well received.
After two hours the decision was announced.
Female speaker
We have decided to ratify the move.
Voice over
An unhappy crowd were told the step had to be taken to attract more students and so protect the college's long-term future.
The news was not unexpected but the students say the battle's not over.
They believe the decision amounts to a breach of contract and plan to take the case to court.
Female speaker
We will fight on in the civil courts.
Voice over
Meanwhile at the last Oxford college to abandon its women-only principles the feeling was the students will get used to the idea.
St Hugh's opened its doors to men in nineteen eighty six.
Female speaker
It is only right for men to be admitted these days.
Voice over
Around Oxford students from other colleges had mixed feelings.
Female speaker
I think it's good.
Female speaker
I think it's OK.
Voice over
The decision, which still needs final approval from the university's privvy council, means men will be admitted next year.
It will leave St Hildas college as the last remaining women-only college in Oxford.
A campaign is underway to save a wartime operations base, which cracked Hitler's secret code, from being demolished.
Organisers are hoping to raise millions of pounds to turn the centre into a living museum.
And they've already received support from Americans who worked there during the war.
Gareth Furby reports.
BLETCHLEY/Buckinghamshire
ROGER BRISTOW/Bletchley Park Trust
LORD JENKINS of HILLHEAD/Former Codebreaker
Voice over
Working inside these huts, during the Second World War, mathematicians and scientists broke the enemy's secret code.
Battle plans sent out on Germany'senigma machine were quickly decoded.
Hitler's secrets were out and he never knew it.
According to some, code-breaking was one of the allies' most important weapons.
He says without it the war would have gone on for many more years.
50 years on the huts at Bletchley Park near Milton Keynes are near derelict and threatened with demolition, to make way for factories.
Lord Jenkins, now Chancellor of Oxford University, was a Bletchley code-breaker.
He thinks it's a site worth saving.
He says he was an army officer seconded to the site and it made a remarkable contribution to the war, as well as developing the first computer.
Enthusiasts from the Bletchley Park Trust hope to raise millions of pounds to turn the site into a living museum.
The huts would look like they used to and inside there'd even be staff dressed in period uniform.
The trust has received letters of support from Americans who served there during the war and hopes much of the money can be raised in the United States.
He says more than a quarter of the people at the base were American.
The trust has now drawn up detailed plans and claims a living museum at Bletchley Park could attract at least 100,000 visitors every year.
In part two.
On the ball…
Bobby kicks soccer hopefuls into shape.
Off the peg…the clothes fit for a future king.
And, in the news…the cartoon capers drawing in the crowds.
Welcome back.
Hereford United's dismal away form in the League continued last night when they lost two-nil at bottom of the table Doncaster.
Hereford have now picked up only one away point since last October.
Robin Powell reports.
Voice over
It looked as though Hereford's away form was changing for the better on Saturday when they drew at Mansfield, but last night an attacking display by struggling Doncaster had them on the retreat again.
Rovers' first goal started in their own area.
2 headers followed by one touch and a fine shot from Kevin Noteman and Doncaster were one up.
United launched few attacks.
They put Doncaster keeper Mark Samways under pressure here but were unable to take advantage.
10 minutes later came a goal worthy of winning any match.
Eddie Gormley rifling the ball home; the game all but over for United.
After the break, Hereford showed some skilfulful touches, but this Simon Brain shot lacked power and direction.
United were lucky not to go three down just before the end.
John Muir's header rocketed wide and that left a final score of 2-0 to Doncaster.
One of the best known names in football has been teaching a group of schoolchildren some of the skills which took him to the top of the game.
Nearly two decades have passed since Bobby Charlton graced the world's most famous football grounds, but as Mark Kiff reports, his enthusiasm for the game remains undiminished.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
BOBBY CHARLTON
Voice over
We forgot…police mislay stolen car for two months.
We forgive…no anger, just sadness after vandal attack.
And we thank you…baby saved just seconds from death.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The car was stolen on Christmas Eve, and found within hours.
Since then, the owners have been using buses and bicycles, while all the time the car was in storage, running up a bill of hundreds of pounds.
Police blame a breakdown in communications.
Gareth Furby reports.
OXFORD
SYLVIA DICK/Owner
RON GEARY/Garage Manager
INSP JACKIE ARTHUR/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Sylvia Dick is finally reunited with the car she thought had gone for good.
It had been stolen, but was recovered within just two hours.
Ever since, for nearly two months, it's been sitting in a garage.
The police has simply forgotten to tell the owner they had found it.
She says it's appauling.
She's had to walk and cycle to work.
The car was stolen in North Oxford on Christmas Eve, but recovered just two hours later a few miles away, and then taken to a garage in Cowley.
Normally the police then trace the owner through registration documents and the garage offers to do any necessary repairs.
But this time that chain of communication broke down.
He says all they did was just put it in for storage and then wait for the police to call but the first he heard was on Monday.
The garage charges six pounds a day for storage…and after nearly two months the total bill is four hundred and eighty nine pounds.
She says it's a big bill and the police should pay it.
She says it was a breakdown in communication and they made an error.
The police are now reviewing procedures.
Meanwhile the car needs repairsing and the garage says they'll waive the five hundred pound storage bill but only if they get the job.
A woman whose home was wrecked by vandals in an attack which caused thousands of pounds of damage says she's able to forgive them.
The intruders, thought to be youngsters, set the kitchen on fire and flooded the bathroom.
Detectives say they're baffled by the motiveless crime.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
VIVIENNE WILSON/Householder
WDC ANNA TOLAN/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The miserable task of clearing up.
Thousands of pounds worth of smoke and water damage reclaiming the family home from chaos.
But after the fire and flood, the Wilson family, committed Christians, say they can find it in their hearts to forgive.
The vandals broke into the house, piled the cooker with linen then switched it on and set light to it.
Upstairs, they switched taps on and flooded the bathroom and vandalised bedrooms.
The whole house reeks of smoke and is covered in soot.
The intruders, thought to be youngsters, only took childrens videos and a wallet, leaving many other vluables behind.
Police say they're probably just youngsters.
Both Mrs Wilson and her husband are teachers at a Christian pimary school, but neither they nor police believe it's a personal attack, or vendetta.
Now they and their 4 children are trying to come to terms with what's happened.
The family can find forgiveness but not comprehension of a crime which it will take weeks to clear up.
A woman has saved a baby's life using resuscitation techniques she'd learned on a course just two weeks earlier.
The baby boy went blue after his lungs became blocked.
An ambulance crew has confirmed that he would have died within seconds if the right action hadn't been taken.
This report from Richard Barnett.
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
JEANETTE BEALE/Mother
JANE HALE/Nurse
ROGER JOB/Hereford and Worcester Ambulance
Voice over
3 month old premature baby, Ashley Beale, looks happy enough now, but only days ago he was within seconds of death, after his lungs became blocked with fluid.
It was prompt action by auxiliary nurse Jane Hale that saved his life.
Just a fortnight earlier, she'd been on a course called Heart Start, which taught her the basics of resuscitation.
Little did she realise how soon she'd need to exercise her new skills.
Ashley's mother Jeanette takes up the story:
Female speaker
Ashley went blue and I panicked.
Jane got him breathing again.
Female speaker
I was determined to restore his breathing and succeeded
Voice over
The Heart Start courses are run by Hereford and Worcester Ambulance service and the British Heart Foundation.
Male speaker
Without her prompt action the baby would have died.
Voice over
Little Ashley has now fully recovered.
And he's protected by a sensor in his cot which will sound if his breathing ever falters again.
Meanwhile Jeannette makes the most of cuddling the baby she so nearly lost.
.
Now for our second report from Britain's biggest fashion exhibition — Premier Collection at the National Exhibition Centre.
The show features the work of a twenty-three year-old Northampton woman who makes clothes for Princes William and Harry, the best of British bridal wear.
It is also a chance for home-grown designers to sell to the world.
Anne Davies reports.
ANDREA WILKIN/Designer
PAULA FINNERTY/Designer
Voice over
Premier Collections was established at the NEC in Birmingham in an effort to co-ordinate the British fashion industry's sales efforts.
This year they're well on the way to achieving that aim.
Fifteen hundred collections are on exhibit.
The majority are British labels but overseas exhibitors come from more than twenty countries including several from the United States.
The largest foreign exhibitor by far is Germany.
Premier Collections is the shopwindow for our fashion designers.
Here they hope to fill their order books for the coming season.
And as the show increases its international standing as Britain's foremost fashion exhibition, so more and more foreign buyers are placing their orders to the delight of exhibitors.
Female speaker
British bridal designers are the most romantic in the world and she's at Premier to attract foreign buyers.
She says that people still spend on wedding dresses despite the recession — up to several thousand pounds — and that white weddings are here to stay.
Voice over
This company — the children's emporium — is run by 23 year old Paula Finnerty.
In business only four years she already has a turnover of half a million pounds and supplys one outfit a year to the young princes William and Harry.
Female speaker
I like a very traditional look as well as the outrageous.
I also like to make hats and accessories to go with the clothes.
I won an award sponsored by the Prince of Wales.
The prize of five hundred pounds helped me start my business and as well as meeting the Prince I now send an outfit to the young princes every year.
As well as Britain we now sell to Scandanavia.
I'd like to go into Europe and we're also negotiating with the Japanese at the moment which should be very big.
Voice over
There's growing support for a campaign to get cartoons accepted as a serious form of art.
Already, there are plans to establish the first-ever cartoon museum.
And this has prompted one of the oldest museums to put on a special exhibition of sketches that have become collectors' items.
Gargy Patel reportst The Times@2:10 
JOHN JENSEN Cartoonist Punch
Sir ERNST GOMBRICH Art Historian
Voice over
The Art of Laughter…a cartoonists job is all about drawing on the funny side of life…
Sketching out the good and bad side of human nature…cartoons get a fleeting glance in daily papers…but for many there's a more serious side…the cartoonists work raises more than a smile.
At the Ashmoleum Museum in Oxford, a whole gallery has been devoted to cartoons.
They've even invited Michael Heseltine, care of Spitting Image, to cast his eyes over the exhibition.
It's done by artists, so why not call it art.
For cartoonists like Mel Calman and Posy Simmonds, success comes from making a picture say a thousand words.
Art historians call it looking at life through a hall of mirrors…capturing the ordinary and bringing it alive.
Forty two cartoonists are on display, ranging from the simple to the bizarre.
For the cartoonists, it's a daily battle against time, to create work that captures the imagination.
For some younger visitors, it was all a little above their heads…they were even wary of the Right Honourable Michael Heseltine…but even for older patrons, like the eminent historian Sir Ernst Gombrich, cartoons are often a very serious business, especially when it comes to being featured yourself.
And everyone it seems has their own favourite.
For the next three months, the museum's running a competition to find new cartooning talent.
The winner's work will be shown alongside artists in this cartoon hall of fame.
Sara Keays wins
Sara Keays, the former mistress of the former Conservative Party Chairman, Cecil Parkinson, has won a hundred and five thousand pounds libel damages from a magazine in the High Court.
Primary blow for Bush
President Bush has won the New Hampshire Republican primary by a narrower margin than expected after tough competition from the Right-winger, Pat Buchanan.
British Coal admits slimming-down of industry
The Commercial Director of British Coal has admitted that it is likely the industry will be a fifth of its present size by the mid-nineteen-nineties.
BR postpones new rolling stock
British Rail has had to postpone buying new rolling stock for Network South-East because it says there is not enough money available at present.
FTSE down 19
The hundred shares index closed down nineteen point two at twenty-five, thirty-six point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy-six and down at two marks, eighty-eight.
Finally…a look ahead to a special report on tomorrow night's programme.
As the recession continues to bite we'll be looking at how 
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The all-male dance troupe the Chippendales have finally been allowed to perform in Hereford.
Two years ago they were banned from playing at the city's leisure centre because the council said they would’ offend the morals’of local women.
The women disagreed.
CLARE LAFFERTY Hereford
MICHAEL IMES Chippendale
DALE KORONE Chippendale
STEVE CASTRO Chippendale
DAN GARRISON Chippendale
Voice over
The hormone count was high at the Hereford Leisure Centre as a group of local women prepared to work out with the Chippendales.
It was their way of celebrating the belated arrival of the all male American dance troupe.
The Chippendales were due to perform at the Leisure Centre two years ago.
But the City Council thought their particular style of dance would’ offend the morals’of the women of Herefordshire and it banned them.
The women though were more offended at the attitude of the Council.
They waved banners and signed petitions.
Now, 2 years on, they've got their way.
Female speaker
It wouldn't offend my morals.
Voice over
Today the Chippendales, put down their bibles long enough to pull on their bicycle shorts and reach for burn.
For some, it was a work out to remember; others were a bit disappointed.
Female speaker
I prefer my husband.
Female speaker
I wouldn't pay to see them.
Voice over
Spurred on by the promise of really good lighting, more than a million women have already paid to see the Chippendales.
Hundreds more Herefordians are expected to risk their morals at the first show in the city early next month.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Two boys held over James murder
Detectives are still questioning two 10 year old boys in connection with the abduction and murder of 2 year old James Bulger.
Police received hundreds of calls, after they showed specially-enhanced video pictures on television.
Escape inquiry blames court security
A preliminary inquiry into the escape by five alleged Strangeways rioters has blamed inadequacies in the court building's security.
The hunt for the five goes on.
Retrial in cell murder case
The Court of Appeal has ordered a retrial in the case of a man convicted of murdering a cellmate at prison.
Malcolm Kennedy claims he was framed by police.
FTSE up 2
The hundred shares index closed up two point three at twenty-eight, forty exactly.
* Up 2.3 at 2840.0)
The pound is up at one dollar forty-five $1.45, and up at two marks thirty-seven DM2.37.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Our teams maybe away…but make sure you're at home at just after five tomorrow to watch the action on Goals Extra…
Gloucester rugby have got the weekend off…but there's still lots on…here's our weekly round up 
Voice over
In racing Richard Dunwoody rides again…he was first past the post in the 4-10 at Sandown…and the Oxfordshire jockey now leads the championship by fifteen from Peter Scudamore…
Two of the best young swimmers in the land are from central south…that's offical at the world cup meet in sheffield Jamie King of swindon and karen rake from Aylesbury were amongst the records
A must for American football fans in Gloucester tonight…top American coaches are in town to talk tactics…touchdown is at the Royal Mail Conference Centre in Eastern Avenue
The best rugby is over in Aylesbury on Sunday…
Buckinghamshire under 21s are taking on Yorkshire in the semi final of the county championship…kick-off is at 2
There's ice action for hockey fans in swindon tomorrow…wildcats against sheffield…on sunday Oxford city stars take on the basingstoke bulldogs
off the ice…there's hockey at Cheltenham on sunday…the local lads are playing reading in the league…
Oxford ladies kick-off at the university ground in Iffley Road at 2 on Sunday…they're playing the district line from Ealing…lets hope United are on the right tracks…
the real flying machines will be over in Swindon…the Foxhill Track stages its first big meeting of the year…all of Britain's top Grand Prix riders are racing…
The countdown to one of the country's…one of the world's oldest sporting challenges is underway…after a hundred sixty four years the score stands at 69 to 68…the sport is rowing…the contest is the university boat race…they'll be naming the crews on Monday…but we can meet the Oxford blue boat in our Friday Feature 
STEVE ROYLE/Director of Rowing
MATTHEW PINSENT/Oxford President
EDWARD HADDON/Charlbury
KINGSLEY POOLE/Oxford
Voice over
Matthew Pinsent, the Boat Club President, says that when the alarm goes off, it's hard to get up, but you know that over in Cambridge they are already up and lifting weights and something just kicks you into action.
The start of another morning for the Oxford boat crew.
They wake, they row; not to the morning bells, but a different kind of heavy metal.
Training for the University boat race must be one of the most backbreaking, brain blowing experiences in sport.
They pump iron for hours every morning.
They push themselves to the edge of exhaustion.
Why?
How?
Only Matthew Pinsent the Boat Club President, an Olympic gold medallist, a world champion, really knows.
Matthew says you do it because you always want to win.
You always want to come first.
Ever seeking perfection, Oxford this year are using their new training centre.
Torture chamber for the first time, it has been purpose built at a cost of £300,000.
Steve Royle, the rowing director, says the new centre has improved the quality of their training and it is the only one he knows of in the country.
Apart from the weights, there's water in the gym this year too.
The indoor rowing tank is where the work began before Christmas.
Steve Royle says they used the tank for teaching people to row and it has enabled him to see lots of students and they can now coach everybody the right technique.
When it comes to rowing and winning, Oxford, of course, don't need any coaching.
They've won 16 of the last 17 races and victory this year will pull them level with Cambridge on 69 wins apiece.
They're the favourites by a mile.
The power in the boat is quite awesome.
They've 4 Olympic oarsmen on board, 2 gold medallists and 4 blues and the word from the water at Wallingford, where they've been training.
It is one of best crews they've ever had.
Matthew Pinsent says they must not be over confident.
They're not thinking about how good they can be.
They've just got to get to work and train hard to get ready.
The blue boat has a Canadian, a South African, an American and 6 Brits on board.
There are 2 local lads this year; Edward Haddon from Charlbury started rowing as a 9 year old at school in Oxford then the boat race was just a dream.
Edward Haddon says he always dreamed of rowing for Oxford and is looking forward to the challenge.
Last year, Edward missed the race.
Flu sunk his chances, but back for the second year running is Kingsley Poole.
He's a true blue Oxford boy.
Kingsley says he's not sure whether the hunger is there to win for the second year.
Don't worry; in 5 weeks time, when they're alongside Cambridge on the Thames, Oxford will be hungry enough.
They'll be starving for more success; winning.
Shop owners have been warned that they could face jail sentences if they sell second-hand furniture filled with a highly dangerous type of foam.
If it catches fire, the fumes from such furniture can kill in seconds.
But from next month, new laws will make it illegal to sell old-style foam-filled furniture.
IAN MACLAREN/Gloucester
BARRY SEARLE/Gloucestershire Fire Service
FIRE PREVENTION VIDEO
MIKE HEMBRY/Trading Standards Officer
TONY HOPES/Store Manager
Voice over
This demonstration shows how a dropped match can turn a foam- filled armchair into a death trap in seconds.
There are still thousands of pieces of furniture in the second hand market containing the old-style foam.
They give off thick black toxic fumes, which often prove to be more lethal than the flames themselves.
The old-style foam can generate such heat that that other items in a room can ignite spontaneously.
Demonstrations like this, graphically show how quickly fire can spread, destroying a room in just 4 minutes.
Trading Standards Officers in Gloucestershire have already warned they'll prosecute second-hand dealers who sell furniture filled with the older type foam.
With fines of up to £5,000 and a maximum 6-month jail sentence, the new regulations mean that some second-hand store owners, could go out of business.
All second hand furniture should be fitted with a safety label like this.
And while store owners may be aware of the new regulations, many shoppers admit they don't know what to look for when examining furniture.
Potential customers are advised to take the utmost caution when buying second-hand furniture.
An old armchair could have fatal consequences, long before the fire service has arrived to tackle the flames.
One of the region's biggest hospitals is urging staff and patients to step up security in the face of rising crime.
Equipment worth forty thousand pounds was stolen last year and car theft is once again a major problem.
But crime prevention experts say there's little they can do to make hospitals secure.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
TONY STAPLETON/Hospital Manager
PC KEITH RAW/Crime Prevention Officer
Voice over
Car crime has plagued the John Radcliffe Hospital for years.
The latest security report says installing cameras has finally led to a fall in car theft, but overall hospital crime rose 12.5% last year.
Staff are increasingly concerned.
Now the authorities are concerned about the rising theft of office equipment.
Computers like these are disappearing at a cost of around £40,000 a year.
The hospital's now stepping up its own security measures.
Staff name tags have already helped, along with the hospital watch scheme.
But crime prevention officers say the John Radcliffe's a difficult place to protect.
Police and hospital bosses are urging staff, patients and visitors to take every precaution against crime, so that the idea of a hospital as a safe haven does not become a thing of the past.
People living in one of the country's most important farmimg regions are asking for cash from the European Community to help regenerate the area.
On the surface, they say, their lifestyle may look idyllic, but underneath they claim the countryside is in desperate need of financial aid.
JESSICA FOWLE/Ludlow
JOHN EVANS/Farmer
HILARY EVANS/Farmer's Wife
JACK TURNER/Chairman
Sir CHRISTOPHER PROUT MEP/Con Shropshire
(ERIKA AD LIB)(WES) Still to come in part two, the boys are back in town (SOUND ON TAPE)(ERIKA)
Plus, for the rest of us mere mortals: Boat race fever, a month to go…and counting.
Welcome back to Central News South.
Still to come, the Chippendales return to the city that banned them as offensive two years ago.But first, with his Friday sports round-up, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Oxford United have come off the rails a few times this season.
Away from home, they've only won 3 out of 14.
They've drawn 6, though and they've still got some steam left.
The wins away have come at Derby 1-0; Southend 3-0 and Bristol Rovers 1-0.
Next stop is Molineux and the Wolves.
Here's the team news.
Imre Varadi's loan period runs out tomorrow.
Talks are planned for next week.
Nick Cusack may get a recall to play alongside him tomorrow.
On form Wolves are favourites.
They've only lost 3 at home, but Derby, Luton and Brentford have won there this season.
Heading east are Swindon Town.
They're off to Cambridge.
At the County Ground, it was 4-1 to Town.
A hat-trick for hot-shot, Craig Maskell and one for Shaun Taylor and with 3 wins in a row, Glenn Hoddle's men are flying.
Team news.
Top scorer, Maskell is back after injury tomorrow.
He replaces Dave Mitchell, who injured his ankle while playing for Australia this week.
Town are the form team.
Cambridge have picked themselves up in recent weeks.
Only Tranmere have beaten them in the league this year.
In division 3, Hereford are off to Sincil Bank.
They're up against Lincoln City.
United have the worst away record in the table; 2 wins in 12.
The best of those was a 3-1 win at Rochdale.
Player coach, Greg Downs is back in with Davies injured.
A new name on the sheet is Dave Morris.
He's on a month's contract from Bournemouth.
Goal of the week; the Swindon scoring machine.
4 in 4 for Paul Bodin.
Will it be a famous 5 tomorrow?
021993programme
In Central News tonight.
An insult to Maggie.Anger as Clinton gets the degree Mrs Thatcher was denied.
Don't sell the killer foam.Shops warned over new laws on old furniture.
And, muscling in again.
The Chippendales back in the town that banned them.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES
President Bill Clinton has been offered the University's top honour as a former Rhodes Scholar.
Baroness Thatcher too is an Oxford graduate, but when moves were made to confer an honorary degree on her in the nineteen eighties, she was turned down by the same people, amid stormy controversy.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
HARRY GREENWAY MP/Conservative
1985
Dr WILLIAM HAYES/University Council
Voice over
President Bill Clinton has been in the White House just a month but already he's been proposed for Oxford University's highest honour.
And that's infuriated supporters of former Prime Minister Lady Thatcher who was turned down by the same people for an honorary degree after she'd been at Ten Downing Street for five years.
Male speaker
It's wrong to offer President Clinton this degree after just one month when Lady Thatcher still hasn't been properly recognised by her own university
Voice over
President Clinton is being awarded a degree by diploma because of his previous association with Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar at University College.
The degree is only awarded to Heads of state and royalty.
The most recent recipient was the Sultan of Brunei who was presented with his by the Chancellor Lord Jenkins.
Lady Thatcher, an Oxford graduate, was originally proposed for an honorary degree in 1985 but members of the university's ruling body the Congregation voted down the idea in protest at her Government's handling of education.
President Clinton's nomination represents a double snub say critics.
Male speaker
It's not a snub.
There are procedures to be gone through which were the same as for Mrs Thatcher's proposal
Voice over
Recommendations for honorary degrees are made by the University Council.
They are agreed, or vetoed, by the massed staff of the university known as Congregation.
Critics are calling on them to throw out the idea.
Whatever they decide opinion around the university is mixed:
Male speaker
It's just a way of recognising he was here.
It's just perfect.
No way, he didn't do any work for it
Voice over
There's no news from Washington on whether the president will come to Oxford to receive his degree.
Meanwhile Baroness Thatcher has become Chancellor of the private university at Buckingham and hands out her own honorary degrees.
Recognition from Oxford is still a long way off though.
Male speaker
This is a matter for the university as a whole and I can't answer it.
If it's not a hot potato it's certainly not a cold potato
Voice over
President Clinton's award will be decided early next month when Congregation meets.
A man who gunned down a drugs dealer who supplied his sons with cannibis, has been jailed for life.
The Judge described John Baillie's actions leading up to the killing as brutal and arrogant.
JUNE 1992/KAREN THOMPSON/Reporting
Voice over
45 year old, Robert McCubbin, died after being slashed across the face with a razor, and shot in the back.
The killing happened outside his home in Wainers Croft in Milton Keynes last June.
McCubbin ran a drug supply network in the town.
He sold cannibis to the defendent John Baillie's sons.
But when they started to use a different supplier, he threatened them.
Baillie then confronted McCubbin armed with a cut throat razor and a pump action shotgun.
He said he'd only meant to frighten the victim, not kill him.
But the jury at Northampton Crown Court didn't accept his not guilty plea.
The Judge, Mrs Justice Ebsworth sentenced Bailey to life imprisonment saying:’ The events leading to the killing had been a brutal and arrogant series of acts.’
A senior prison officer at Gloucester jail has been cleared of attacking an inmate.
GLOUCESTER
Michael Pratt was accused of hitting Gary Richards twice across his back with a table leg during a mini riot at the jail two years ago.
But this afternoon the jury at Gloucerster Crown court returned a unanimous verdict of not guilty.
A twenty five year old father from Worcester has been jailed for two years after his baby daughter suffered horrific injuries while in his care.
Gary Smith's five week old daughter Danielle suffered fourteen broken ribs, two broken legs and a brain haemorrhage, leaving her permanently mentally handicapped.
Smith was convicted of cruelty but cleared of causing grievous bodily harm.
A man accused of stabbing another to death outside his own house has pleaded not guilty to murder.
It's alleged that twenty eight year old Andrew Livermore of Northampton, went to the home of Digby Saunderson last August and stabbed him to death on his doorstep.
August 1992/NORTHAMPTON
The case was adjourned for trial in July.
Livermore was remanded in custody.
Deathtrap: Holidaymakers warning after Spanish hotel fire.
The axe falls again.More defence jobs lost to the recession
And why me?
Stabbing victim says his attacker must be crazy.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The incident took place in Spain.Those involved say the hotel was a death trap with fire exits blocked by furniture and an alarm system which failed to work.
Travel agents here say safety standards in many continental hotels are inadequate.
Mark Kiff reports.
AMATEUR VIDEO/SUPER MOLINA/Spain
MICHAEL DONNELL/Holiday Maker
CATHERINE DONNELL/Holiday Maker
KEVIN LLEWELLYN/Holiday Maker
KEITH BETTON/Association of British Travel Agents
Voice over
A new wave of job losses is being announced by an engineering company.
Dowty Aerospace is making three hundred workers redundant — the company says it's the result of a worldwide slump in the aircraft industry.
But, it hopes the latest job cuts will be the last.
Ken Goodwin reports.
STAVERTON/Gloucestershire
GRAHAM LOCKYER/Managing Director
FRED HUNT/Amalgamated Engineering Union
Voice over
A gloomy atmosphere hung over the Dowty aerospace factory this afternoon — with workers who've already survived two waves of redundancies by the firm now being told they face a third.
The company makes parts such as landing gear and propellors for the airospace industry — hard hit by the recession they've been forced to streamline their operation, shedding three hundred and twenty four jobs.
He says that the need to streamline comes about because of the recession, increased competition and a worldwide slump in the airospace industry in general.
The engineering workers union the AEU says the job cuts announcement has become a familiar litany.
He says that moral is low, with workers now waiting to see who have been chosen for the latest redundancies.
For workers leaving for home it was a case of deja vu.
Only last april they'd been told three hundred and fifty jobs were being axed — now comes todays announcement of more.
They say that although to a certain extent the cuts were expected, moral is still very low.
These latest jobs cuts come just after another Gloucestershire firm, smiths industries, announced it too had been hit by the slump in the aircraft industry, shedding three hundred jobs.
Workers at Dowty aerospace can at least take comfort in one thing — the firms management say that they hope their streamlining programme is now at an end and that no further major redundancies will be announced.
A man who nearly died after being stabbed in an unprovoked attack, has returned home from hospital.
He says his attacker was trying to kill him and must be caught.
Tonight the police hunt is being spread nationwide.
Erika Barnes reports.
2 FEBRUARY 1992/BICESTER/Oxfordshire
TERRY SPINKS
Voice over
Nursing the wounds that nearly cost him his life.
Terry Spinks is back home after 3 weeks in hospital.
He was stabbed 8 times in the lungs and intestines in a frenzied attack at the Plough pub in Bicester.
Terry managed to fight off the man; if he hadn't, he reckons he wouldn't be alive today.
It was totally unprovoked.
The man appeared to take violent exception to a Liverpool football t-shirt Terry was wearing.
Male speaker
There must have been something wrong with him in his head.
He tried to kill me for no apparent reason.
Voice over
The attacker almost succeeded.
Terry lost 10 pints of blood.
2 soldiers at the pub had to perform life saving first aid.
In hospital both lungs collapsed and since then he's lost 2 stone in weight.
The attack has left mental scars on Terry and his family too.
Something he doesn't want anyone else to suffer.
Male speaker
I think the bloke needs to be caught.
The next bloke might not be so lucky.
All the pain and anguish it's done to my family.
I can't believe what we've been through.
Voice over
The police search is being widened tonight on TV's Crimewatch UK.
They're looking for a man in his early 30's; 6ft tall, of medium build with a tattoo on his right arm.
A witness at the trial of two men accused of the murder of a police informer has claimed that one defendent drove the victim to a meeting with the other, who them killed him.
The witness told the jury that he didn't WANT to give evidence, but the judge told him that he must.
Tim Hurst reports from Winchester Crown Court 
Voice over
The witness, Tony George from Kings Stanley near Stroud, told the jury he didn't really want to give evidence against two men accused of murder.
Danny Gardiner from Stroud who was taken to court in a prison bus, and a his so-accused, Simon James, from Minchinhampton near Stroud, have denied murder.
They're accused of killing police informer Alan’ Chalky’White, whose body was found in a lake near Cirencester in 1989.
When Mr George was said he didn't want to give evidence, the judge, Mr Justice Auld, said he had a duty to give evidence…he should sit down and prepare for it.
Mr George, who has lived with Gardiner's wife Maggie for five years, said he'd been told by Simon James that he (James) had driven Chalky White a to a place where Danny gardiner had killed him.
He only learnt of Chalky's disappearance in February 1989 five days after a meeting at his house between James, Gardiner, himself and a fourth man.
The jury was then sent home pending legal admissions to the judge.
The case continues tomorrow.
And finally, surfers and canoeists have been pitting their skills against the biggest River Severn tidal wave of the year.
Dozens turned out to ride the Severn Bore which at some stages was five feet high.
Clare Lafferty reports.
MINSTERWORTH Gloucestershire
Voice over
The biggest bore of the year attracted surfers and canoeists from all over the country.
Many had come to see if they could break the record for the longest uninterrrupted ride on the tidal wave.
It currently stands at 2 and a half miles.
A few came close.
But most were happy to travel just a few hundred yards.
And due to a few unforseen obstacles some didn't even manage that.
Those who did get going said it was worth the effort.
The wave stood 5ft high in places, travelled at an average of 10 miles an hour and carried the surfers about 8 miles.
Spectators lining the route occasionally got closer to the action than they'd anticipated.
But they appreciated that getting wet was all part of the thrills and spills.
It took about half an hour for the wave riders to travel from Minsterworth to Gloucester.
For those who went the distance it was time to reflect on their achievement.
Male speaker
I was dragged along a sandbank, but it was still good.
Male speaker
It was harder than I thought it'd be.
Voice over
The next big bore is expected in August.
So these dare devils have got 6 months to dry out before diving in at the deep end once again.
UK in longest post-war recession
The UK is suffering its longest recession since World War Two according to official figures.
Kinnock challenges Major over recession
Mr. Kinnock has challenged the Prime Minister to take responsibility for the recession.
Row over Tricolour at IRA funeral
The funeral of two IRA men shot dead by soldiers in Northern Ireland was delayed after the priest initially refused to allow the coffins into the church becuase they were draped with the Irish Tricolour.
Conservative win prompts South African referendum
In South Africa, the pro-apartheid Conservative Party has defeated the ruling National Party in a by-election.
It has prompted President De Klerk to hold a referendum to guage white support on ending apartheid.
FTSE up 6
The hundred shares index closed up six point seven at twenty-five, forty-three point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-five and down at two marks, eighty-nine.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back.
Oxford United winger Paul Simpson has been signed by Derby County for half a million pounds.
Simpson is the second player to leave the Manor Ground since the club was put up for sale eleven weeks ago.
Martin Graham-Scott reports.
PAUL SIMPSON
BRIAN HORTON/Oxford Manager
Voice over
Paul Simpson is Oxford's top scorer with 12 goals this season and arguably the club's best player.
Many valued the former Manchester City winger at around £1m, so Derby appear to have got a bargain.
But with an annual loss of more than £900,000 and debts of £2m United were in no position to bargain.
Simpson says the club's predicament left him little choice but to leave.
Male speaker
The financial plight of the club is a big problem.
The manager has got a difficult job.
But in footballing terms it was move that had to be made.
Voice over
The loss of Simpson makes Oxford's fight to stay in the second division even harder.
He's the second top player to go in the last few weeks.
Welsh under 21 international, Lee Nogan was transferred to Watford.
Brian Horton is especially sad to lose Simpson.
The winger was his very first buy as manager.
Male speaker
It was for the good of the football club.
I don't like doing it but the club has to survive.
Voice over
Last Saturday United managed to lift themselves off the foot of division two, but they're still financially rock bottom.
Whoever comes to Oxford's rescue it'll be too late to keep Paul Simpson and his goal scoring talents at the Manor Ground.
The country's newest and biggest university celebrates its twenty first birthday this week.
In it's short life, the Open University has seen tens of thousands of graduates, and literally millions of students…nearly all of them without an academic background.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
JACK STRAW MP/Labour Education Spokesman
DAVID MISKIN/Graduate
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Higher Education Spokesman
Dr JOHN DANIEL/Vice Chancellor
ALLAN HOWARTH MP/Education Minister
Voice over
Happy Birthday Open University…twenty one today.
There's no bunting or party hats…that's not their way.
Besides everyone's too busy dealing with the latest applications from thousands of people hoping to get a degree.
But if they're not celebrating the Labour Party will do it for them.
Male speaker
The Open University was the Labour Party's child and we're proud of it
Voice over
The Open University has passed one hundred and fifteen thousand graduates through its combined correspondence and broadcasting methods.
People like David Miskin who has just got his degree after six years study.
Now he's going on to upgrade it.
It's meant working at nights, weekends…and any spare time at work…
Male speaker
It's been very hard work but my family put up with it
Voice over
The OU was opened in 1971.
Former Labour Prime Minister Lord Wilson considered setting it up his finest achievement.
Now the Labour Party is looking to its future.
Today they announced how a future Labour Government will be:
MAKING MORE MONEY AVAILABLE FOR STUDENTS,
MAKING MORE PLACES AVAILABLE,
EXPANDING ITS ROLE INTO EUROPE AND THE COMMONWEALTH,
AND PROVIDING MORE TECHNICAL AND VOCATIONAL COURSES.
Male speaker
It's crucial to provide money for students and expand the number of places
Voice over
There are two hundred thousand students enrolled in the Open University at any one time.
Two million have enrolled in the last twenty one years.
Every one of them determined according to the Vice Chancellor.
Male speaker
Getting an Open University degree is the toughest way of doing it known to man
Voice over
The Conservative party in opposition was against the opening of the University, but now they claim they are four square behind it.
Male speaker
The best birthday present we have given is to let them have the seven million pounds to buy the campus freehold
Voice over
So it's a resounding happy birthday all round, and who knows what the next twenty one years will hold.
Archaeologists are using radar to survey a city's historical past.
The device is so sensitive it can pin point a human skull buried three metres underground.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
MALCOLM ATKIN/Archaeologist
KIRSTY RODWELL/English Heritage
Voice over
It looks like a road sweeper, but the only dirt the operators of this machine are interested in is buried several meters underground.
A transmitter sends radar waves down through the concrete and into the soil below.
The signals reflected back from solid objects like these skulls form an image which can be enhanced by a computer.
Using this method archaeologists have already discovered medieval graves buried under a car park, now they're extending the search around the blackfriars friary to try and discover what how much more of the city's history is hidden away under concrete:
He says that the device can reveal many things which would probably remain undiscovered because they're under concrete.
It's also useful to know what lies underground in case any building development is to take place.
The work is being carried out on behalf of English heritage, which is planning to open up the Friary to the public once renovation work has been completed.
She says it's going to provide a lot more information about the site for the public once the Friary is opened to visitors.
Gloucester is being used as a testing site for radar ground probing.
Judging by the results achieved so far it's likely to be adopted by archaeologists all over the UK.
A passenger in a microlight aircraft was injured when the machine crashed-landed at an airfield.
The microlight had been flying for nearly half an hour when it crashed into a field.
Thirty year old Zena Allen, who's from Norton Canon near Leominster, was treated at Hereford General hospital.
The Civil Aviation Authority has launched an inquiry into the incident.
David Lawrence, the Gloucestershire fast bowler injured during England's victorious tour of New Zealand, has returned home.
Lawrence, who fractured his kneecap on the last day of the final test in Wellington, arrived at Gatwick airport this morning.
After his injury earlier this month the seventeen stone Lawrence underwent a forty minute operation.
He's expected to be out of action until June.
Gloucestershire's wicketkeeper Jack Russell also arrived back today.
He's been dropped from the England party now in Australia for the world cup.
One of Britain's largest independent motor parts companies has defied the slump in the car industry with a sharp rise in profits.
COWLEY/Oxfordshire
Unipart, based at Cowley, made pre-tax profits of more than fifteen million pounds in (1991) nineteen-ninety-one.
That's an increase of more than two million pounds on the previous year and a rise of seventeen per cent.
The increase comes during one of the worst recessions to hit the motor industry since the war.
Official figures released today prove that Britain is locked into the longest recession since the Second World War.
It's the shops and small businesses who've suffered the most, and for many, the last twelve months have proved too tough for them to survive.
We've been to one town where many have closed down, and others are struggling to keep their heads above water…
WALLINGFORD/Oxfordshire
KEN LESTER/Butcher
GWENDA BROWN/Beautician
PETER CREHAN/Restaurateur
MARK FRANKLIN/Oxford Economic Forecasting
RON SIMMS/Wallingford 2000 Group
ROBERT JACKSON MP/Con Wantage
Voice over
On the face of it Wallingford is prosperous enough.
Traditionally it's 6,500 inhabitants have enjoyed lower than average unemployment, better than average housing, good schools and medical facilities.
They've mostly enjoyed a high standard of living and voted conservative.
But everything in the market place isn't as rosy as it might seem.
This increasingly is becoming Wallingford's face.
In the last 12 months, as well as losing a number of small commercial businesses the town has lost it's fish shop which had been run by the Crudgington family for more than a century.
The same family has closed it's delicatessen which has now become an art shop and the butcher whose family has been here for 176 years, closes this weekend.
Male speaker
I feel very sad that it's fallen to me to make the decision to close after 4 generations.
The Government said that if we worked hard and trimmed down we would survive.
Voice over
Gwenda Brown also knows what it feels like to lay off staff.
She had a thriving business in Wallingford High Street, before the recession hit her customers pockets and at the same time sent her overheads soaring.
She's still in business, but now she's a one woman band working at home from her garage.
She's in no doubt who she feels is to blame.
She said: I felt very bitter towards the Government.
I'd been working flat out.
I felt that everything I'd worked for had gone down the drain.
One man who's certainly felt the full effect of the recession is Peter Crehan who opened the Regatta restaurant at Wallingford Bridge 15 months ago.
Last week the receivers moved in and now he expects to lose his home as well as his business.
Male speaker
It's no good feeling bitter.It's not the government's fault.
The 80s were the boom time, this is the correction period.
Voice over
Figures for 1991 reveal that this sort of tradgedy is being played out all over the south of England.
For retailers it was the worst year on record and consumer spending is at its lowest since World War Two.
Male speaker
It's precisely prosperous towns like Wallingford which are suffering from the recession.
Voice over
And it's not only the small businesses who've had to pull in their horns.
Habitat, once Wallingford's largest employer made staff redundant last year and now the town's largest employer is the local supermarket.
Added to the drop in demand, businesses have been hard hit by the huge rise in the business rate and the steep increase in interest charges.
In Wallingford, many of the companies still in business are concerned enough about their survival, that they've formed a business group who's aim is to increase co-operation in the town and provide some mutual support.
Male speaker
We're all extending our overdrafts in the hope that we can stay in business long enough to be around when the upturn starts.
Voice over
Although Wallingford is likely to remain staunchly Tory at thforthcoming election among the business community confidence in the Government has taken a hard knock.
The local MP Robert Jackson who's also a Minister in the employment department admits the Government has made mistakes, but says they can't take all the blame.
He blames incautious borrowing during the boom.
Male speaker
The basic problem was a big growth in borrowing coupled with a drop in demand because of the recession.
Voice over
And to those whose support is wavering Mr Jackson has this response.
Male speaker
We have a competent leadership and the right policies.
I hope the people who have suffered from the recession will continue to support the conservative party.
Voice over
Though with at least one of his constituents it's too late.
Female speaker
I've always voted conservative but I feel they've made such a mess of everything I'll vote for someone different this time.
Voice over
Whether it means a change of Government or not, what the business community wants is an end to the recession.
In part two: What a loss.Oxford sell their best player to pay the bills
What next?
The Open University ponders on the next twenty one years.
And what a bore!
Surf's up for the tidal wave of the year.
Man arrested over Stephanie Slater kidnap
A man has been arrested in connection with the kidnap of the Birmingham estate agent, Stephanie Slater.
Kiszko was attacked by inmates
Stefan Kiszko, the man who was cleared of the murder of eleven-year-old Lesley Molseed has told how he was set upon by inmates when he first arrived in jail.
Man jailed for acid bath killing
Cecil Jackson has been jailed for life for the murder of his wife: he strangled her and dumped her in a bath of acid.
Lloyds Bank cuts 3
Lloyds Bank is to cut three thousand jobs.
Israelis withdraw into security zone
Israeli troops have withdrawn into their self-declared security zone in Southern Lebanon.
FTSE down 1
The hundred shares index closed down one point one at twenty-five, forty-two point three.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-five and at two marks, eighty-eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
and we'll be back with the Camel Trophy in Herefordshire next month for the final training session…don't think our footballers will find the going as tough as that…tomorrow we've got Oxford against Cambridge…
Swindon are at Grimsby and Hereford take on Cardiff 
Voice over
After selling top scorer Paul Simpson to pay the wages, the message from the Manor is; we fight on.
They got a draw at Cambridge earlier in the season, but with Simmo gone, who's going to get the goals?
Joey Beauchamp has looked as lively as sharp as any over the last few weeks.
Could he be the new Goal King?
Here's Brian Horton's 13.
Teenager Chrissy Allen from Oxford is all set to wear Simmo's number 11 shirt.
It'll be his first full league game.
On form Cambridge look a real threat.
They've got the best away record in the second division.
Swindon Town are back on the league treadmill at Grimsby tomorrow when the two teams met at the County Ground in November it finished 1-1.
Town have to make a change tomorrow.
Martin Ling is injured, so Fitzroy Simpson comes off the bench to play in midfield.
One name missing is old favourite, Steve Foley.
He's off to Stoke for £50,000.
Away from home, Town have won 3 and drawn 6.
They need a good result tomorrow to keep up with the promotion chase.
in the fourth division, it's Hereford against Cardiff.
United lost the match in Wales, so chance to make amends at Edgar Street.
Team news!
Goal of the week comes from Paul Simpson; his last one for Oxford at Brighton last Saturday.
Great way to finish.
In rugby we're down to the last eight…in the Pilkington Cup…which means Gloucester are two matches away from Twickenham…they've got a game on their hands tomorrow though…away to first division leaders Orrell 
Voice over
The last time the two teams met, was at Kingsholm in the league last season.
Orrell won that one 16-9 scoring two tries to Gloucester's one.
They've got stronger since then and have set the pace in the championship race this season.
They lead the first division by one point from Gloucester, so it's going to be some cup tie.
The cherry and whites are at full strength.
Skipper, Ian Smith, who's made quite an impact with Scotland in the 5 nations this season, is back to lead the team.
If Gloucester need heart; inspiration they need look no further than the last round, when they ran in 3 tries against London Scottish to win 20-7.
They need to be at their best tomorrow to beat Orrell and make it to the semi-finals.
there'll be a minutes silence before that cup match tomorrow in memory of Gloucester club secretary Terry Tandy who died this week at the age of 57…he served the club for twenty five years…he was a cherry and white through and through 
let's hope they can win the game for him…we're going to finish with our roundup of what's going on and what's coming up…here's Mark Kiff 
Voice over
Swindon's Edd Horler helped lift Britain's sagging spirits in Albertville today with a sterling performance in the four man bob.
Brakeman for Great Britain Two, Edd helped the team to a better than expected thirteenth place after the first two of the four runs.
Bicester rugby club drive towards another Twickenham appearance when they travel to Ongar tomorrow in the quarter finals of the Provincial Cup.
Gloucester side Old Richians play Bracknell.
Oxfordshire snooker star Tessa Davidson has made the big break into the game's elite.
The Bodicote based player becomes one of only seven women to join the professional circuit.
Karate is just one of the sports featuring in this weekend's Varsity Games in Oxford, when the Dark Blues battle it out with Cambridge for sporting honours.
And finally, rally ace Colin McRae has achieved the best place by a British driver in any World Championship event: by finishing second in the Swedish rally.
Driving a Banbury prepared Prodrive Subaru, McRae now lies third in the championship.
Balloonists from all over the country have been arriving in the region for a festival at the weekend.
It's being held in the town that claims it's the birthplace of British ballooning.
Richard Barnett reports:
ROSS-ON-WYE/Herefordshire
IAN ASHPOLE/Skydiver
CHRIS DUNKLEY/Pilot
Voice over
The people of Ross on Wye claim the first British balloon flight was over the town on February the 22nd 1784.
The claim is disputed…but it's still a good excuse for a ballooning festival.So the lawns of the Chase Hotel were busy this evening as the fist arrivals for the weekend event prepared for their ascent.We took up the offer of a flight with Ian Ashpole, who told us he planned to jump out of the balloon when we reached full height:
Male speaker
He'll be going up and then at six thousand feet or so, he'll jump out.
Voice over
As we climbed over the town, Rupert Bear turned to wave a greeting…and the rest of the balloons stretched out across the sky…
We climbed way up higher than the other balloons…and once above the clouds at more than seven thousand feet…
Ian prepared to jump:
We thought that was the last we'd see of him…but Ian reappeared as we lost height…and he was clearly having a whale of a time…
Meanwhile Chris Dunkley, our pilot who's a veteran of ten years ballooning explained the appeal of festivals:
Male speaker
It's great to have freedom of the skies, and you never know where you will land.
Voice over
If the weather holds out, Rupert Bear and friends will take to the skies again tomorrow.
A bishop has performed the opening ceremony at a pub which is owned by the church.
The license is held by the local vicar, and part of the pub's profits will go towards his church's restoration fund.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
CHALGROVE/Oxfordshire
Rt Rev ANTHONY RUSSELL/Bishop Of Dorchester
Rev IAN COHEN/Vicar
CHRIS AND LYNN HALL/Pub Tenants
Voice over
The Bishop blesses the pub.
It must be a music hall comedian's dream.
The Bishop of Dorchester all dressed up behind the beer pumps at his local giving a blessing and then leading the congregation in the Lord's prayer.
The Bishop leads them in the Lords Prayer.
But just in case anyone was tempted his Bishop's crook was on hand to hook em out.
That's asking an awful lot of people who seek no more than a relaxing pint or two, or more especially when the Bishop pulls the first pint of the day.
But the Red Lion at Chalgrove is no ordinary pub.
It's been owned by a church charity since the 17th century and a nice little earner it is too.
It's been re-opened today after 2 years renovation and the new tenants will be paying £15,000 this year alone.
It was a new experience for the Bishop.
He's more used to the communion wine than pulling pints.
Male speaker
The Church and pub have always worked together as centres of the community.
Voice over
The license is still held by the local vicar, although not for much longer.
He's kept it going while the building work went on.
Male speaker
It's been very worthwhile and enjoyable being the licensee.
Voice over
The new tenants have no rules about what should happen in the pub.
They say: There are no rules outside the normal licensing laws.
You don't have to go to church to come in here.
And they already seem to have found some highly respectable regulars.
Male speaker
you have to be a pub regulkar when you're an Archdeacon.
As for the £15,000 raised from the pub this year, it goes to the local church restoration fund.
Voice over
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
DAVID LAWRENCE
Voice over
David Lawrence is putting his feet up…after the trials of test cricket in New Zealand…and after the shattering knee injury that dashed his hopes of playing in the World Cup.
Home means family…and time to relax with his three and a half month old son Alexander…but it also means time to reflect on the disappointments.
Male speaker
I remember planting my foot down and hearing a snap.
Then collapsing and screaming out in pain.
Voice over
The X-rays revealled the worst…a broken knee cap…
Now held together with wire and support!
Male speaker
You do think — is my career at an end?
But once I got to the hospital and after the operation the doctor reassured me it was a straightforward and took forty-five minutes.
Voice over
The injury means Lawrence will miss the early part of the new season with Gloucestershire…and may play for just three months.
In the meantime he'll have to take a back seat whilst his team-mates bid for World Cup glory.
Male speaker
I believe they're the best side.
We proved that in New Zealand.
Obviously the Aussies are favourites but we pose the biggest threat.
Voice over
So it could be a few months yet before we see Lawrence in the lightning form that bowled out England Captain Graham Gooch last season…
And he says his days of tripping the light fantastic on the dance floor are well and truely over thanks to the injury.
Male speaker
I think this knee has given me early retirement.
It'll be smoochy roochy for me from now on.
No spinning on my knees or anything like that.
It'll be all the slow stuff!)
Voice over
lets hope old Syd is back bowling very soon…we're off on the trail to South America now for one of the most demanding and torturous sporting trials of all…
The Camel Trophy…they call it life's last great adventure 
JOE IVES/British Team Manager
RICHARD BARR/Fitness Coach
ANDREW STREET/Selector
PETER BIRCH/Stroud
TIM JOHNSTONE/Ross-on-Wye
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
LONGNEY/Gloucestershire
HARTLEY EVERETT/Eyewitness
DEREK COX/Gloucestershire Ambulance Service
ALAN PALMER/Severn Rescue Team
Voice over
The coastguard joined police and ambulancemen in the rescue operation.
The boaters, 4 adults and 4 children were sailing on the River Severn, when they got swept up by the Severn bore.
The 6ft tidal wave flipped the dinghy over and threw the two families into the icy water.
They scrambled onto the upturned hull and drifted for more than 20 minutes before coming to rest on a bank two miles away.
People living nearby ran to help them.
Ambulancemen took the group to the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital.
Today's accident has prompted calls for greater caution to be exercised on the water, especially when a bore has been forecast.
7 of the group are expected to be discharged from hospital within the next few hours.
The 8th, a woman is in a poorly, but stable condition and will stay in hospital overnight.
A council is asking for Government action to help RAF wives who're being evicted from their homes.
The RAF says the women, who are divorced or separated, are now occupying the homes illegally — the women say they and their children now face life in bed and breakfast accomodation.
This report from Gareth Furby.
CARTERTON/Oxfordshire
CLARE REDDCLIFF/RAF Divorcee
SUSAN HURD/RAF Wife
Wing Cmdr DAVID INGHAM/RAF Brize Norton
DAVID WATERS/West Oxfordshire Council
Voice over
For the past four years Clare Radcliff has lived in RAF married quarters.
But nearly two years ago her marriage to an air engineer broke down, he moved out, and later they divorced.
Ever since she's been under threat of eviction.
The bailiffs are due in just eleven days.
She says it's a disgrace.
There is no way she is going subject her son to the degredation of bed and breakfast.
This woman isn't divorced, and she says her husband still works at RAF Brize Norton.
But because they no longer live together, she's also facing eviction.
She says she's going to live with her brother and she'll have sleep on the sofa.
RAF Brize Norton says there's no choice.
The homes, forty one in all, are needed by service families.
But only a few hundred yards away from homes targetted for eviction…other RAF quarters stand empty.
In total sixty eight are currently unused.
She says some have been empty for years and she wants to live in one.
He says they're substandard and unfit to be lived in.
West Oxfordshire district council says it can't house the women.
With more than a thousand people already on the waiting list, they'll be offered bed and breakfast.
He says the council wants the RAF to join in discussions to find a solution.
The council has now written to the Ministry of Defence and the Department of the Environment.
But only the swiftest of action will save a woman who's already lost her husband from losing her home as well.
A witness who says he knows who killed police informer Chalky White has admitted he's scared of the alleged murderer.
He says he's also sueing the police because he's bitter about his treatment during the murder investigation.
Tim Hurst reports.
Voice over
An historic Gloucestershire coaching inn, which was facing closure because of financial problems, has been saved.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
The Bell Hotel in Church Street, Tewkesbury, has been sold for an undisclosed sum.
The new owners of the seventeenth century hotel have pledged to retain its charm and character.
A painting of a salmon which was owned by an eccentric Cheltenham antiques dealer could throw fishing records into turmoil.
CIRENCESTER/Gloucestershire
The painting shows a Welsh salmon more than four pounds heavier than the Scottish fish which has held the British record for seventy years.
An inscription says it was caught in the late eighteenth century and weighed sixty eight and a half pounds.
The picture was owned by antiques hoarder Ronnie Summerfield who died three years ago leaving a collection valued at millions of pounds.
The portrait was sold for almost six thousand pounds at an auction in Cirencester today.
Its looking good for both Swindon and Oxford, but down in the third division Hereford are having a tough old time…they're just four points and four places off the bottom of the table…on Saturday they missed out at Lincoln…they lost two-nil 
Voice over
Away from home Hereford have one of the worst records in the country.
They've won 2 out of 13, let in 25 goals and if not for keeper, Alan Judge, goals against could have topped 30 by Saturday tea time.
Lincoln were top dogs when they growled.
The Hereford defence fell to pieces, apart from Judge who did everything and more to try to keep them out.
What city had and United lacked was hunger.
They wanted the win.
They wanted goals and sure enough they got them.
The first one came after 27 minutes, when Neil Matthews beat everyone else to the ball.
There was no change of luck, no change of direction in the second half.
No change, luckily enough, from Alan Judge, who did his best to stop Lincoln.
Being Hereford's keeper though, is rather like being King Canute.
The next Lincoln attack swept United away.
They were all at sea as Neil Matthews took aim and fired in number 2.
Up front, United were never a force; coming up one of their best efforts, which deserved more than it got.
They were lucky to escape at 2-0.
Back at the other end, those waves of Lincoln attacks were still crashing in.
Matthews missed a hat-trick; Hereford missed the boat.
Big confrontation in Parliament today when the opposition threw down a challenge…they want a head to head on march 27…no we're not talking politics…we're talking sport and the boat race 
WESTMINSTER
MATTHEW PINSENT/Oxford President
JAMES BEHRENS/Cambridge President
MARTIN HAYCOCK/Cambridge Cox
Voice over
As Big Ben ticked…the cameras clicked as the oarsman of Oxford and Cambridge came face to face for the official challenge
FX
Today's challenge by Cambridge was the start to the annual boat race which takes to the Thames at the end of March…
The two crews were named today…
Oxford looked ready and willing…but Cambridge who've still to finalise their line-up looked a little lost…
Experts reckon its the most one sided race in years…
Oxford president
Cambridge president
one man with a foot in both boats this years is 19 year old…
Martin Haycock…he's Oxfordshire born and bred but is the Cambridge cox
Finally, the man with the largest feet in Britain has just taken delivery of what are believed to be the biggest pair of shoes in the world.
John Thrupp has always had problems getting shoes to fit, so he had a pair of size twenty-ones specially made by a master craftsman.
IAN MACLAREN Blockley
NOVEMBER 1980
JOHN THRUPP Britain's Biggest Feet
BILL BIRD Shoemaker
Voice over
At just under 7ft tall and 18 stones, John Thrupp is a giant among men, but he has a king size problem; his feet.
John from Burton on Trent takes a size 21, which won him a place in the Guinness Book of Records as the owner of Britain's biggest feet.
It's been a life long problem.
Here he is aged 15 with twin brother Mark, who's a normal size.
John, then, was a mere 6ft 8ins and took a comparatively dainty size 18 in shoes.
Fed up constantly repairing his sole pair of shoes specially built 6 years ago, John despaired of finding someone to make him another pair.
His problem was solved by Bill Bird, a master craftsman, based at Blockley in Gloucestershire.
He spent more than 40 hours constructing a wooden last and fashioning a brown leather shoe that measured up in terms of style and fit.
Normally these would cost £600.
In John's case, Bill charged just £120.
The final fitting and Bills shoes are put to the test.
His ambition now is to get a new pair of work boots and some trainers so he can play his favourite sports football and squash.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Lis Howell to leave GMTV
FTSE down 1
The hundred shares index closed down one point seven at two eight three eight point three 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty five and down at two marks, thirty seven.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The sights and sounds of a Red Indian Reservation have been reverberating through the pastoral tranquility of Gloucestershire.
Hundreds of enthusiasts for the culture of the native American Indian have been attending a Pow-Wow.
IAN MACLAREN/Ullenwood
MAZ RATTY/Organiser
Voice over
The traditional music thunders through the modern-day PA system.
The dancers exhorted to act out dizzying inter-tribal dance routines by an MC.
The drums deliver an almost hypnotic effect as the dancers circle the floor.
The Cheltenham Pow Wow has become one of the biggest events of its kind in Europe.
It attracts people from far afield, united in their admiration for native American culture.
Most of the participants have studied the philosophy and way of life of the American Indian.
They adopt the traditions of individual tribes, like the Sioux and take great pains to ensure their regalia is authentic…
But the modern day Indians are attached to the trappings of modern culture.
The stars and stripes perhaps a symbol of acceptance of America today.
Imported Indian artefacts are on display and you could attempt to barter, but you'll need British currency to buy.
The organisers say genuine native American Indians approve of the Gloucestershire version of the Pow Wow.
No one quite knows HOW the fascination for American Indian culture took hold here.
But support for the Pow Wow appears to be growing.
This is the 5th annual Cheltenham event and the biggest yet.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come in part two, these boots are SPECIALLY made for walking.
Where DO you go when you take size twenty ones?
(WES
Plus, Oxford bag another one…
Beachamp pops in to make it Seven Up.
Welcome back to Central South.
Still to come, the man with the biggest feet in Britain who can now step out in style once more.
But first, here's Tim with the Monday sports round-up.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
United won the game at Molineux in the first half.
Everything went their way.
Wolves were pressed back into defence, as Oxford went for an all out attack.
Too many chances came and went, but they never stopped going.
Joey Beauchamp was on form.
He always looked the man most likely to score.
And sure enough, mid-way through the first half, Joey gave United the lead.
Jim Magilton supplied the cross.
Nick Cusack the flick on and Beauchamp's boot did the rest.
Wolves looked a beaten team even then.
They had one shot in the first half and that was seen off by Paul Reece.
It should have been 2 or even 3 nil at half-time.
United found it easy enough to open Wolves up, but they couldn't quite finish them off.
In the second half, they nearly paid the penalty.
Wolves were much sharper and United had to work hard to keep them out and thankfully Wolves have lost their goalscoring touch at the moment.
United deserved the win, but they nearly lost it in the closing minutes.
Paul Reece pulled off the save of the match to make it Wolves 0; Oxford 1.
Over at the Abbey Stadium, it was wrotten afternoon for Swindon.
Not one to remember, as Cambridge gave them the run around.
Closest Town got to a goal, was a first half header from Shawn Taylor.
After that, Cambridge took over.
Their winner though was a bit questionable.
With 15 minutes to go, they won a penalty.
What do you think?
If you are a Swindon fan, you're bias of course, but it was a close call.
No argument about the kick.
Alan Kimble slammed that home to make it Cambridge 1; Swindon 0.
its a big week for both Swindon and Oxford why…well a look at the first division table shows all 
Voice over
Here's the top 6.
The promotion race in the first division and coming up tomorrow at the County Ground, it is Swindon against Tranmere Rovers.
If we wind the table up another 6 places, 6 more teams who could be fighting for promotion and at the Manor tomorrow, it is Oxford take versus Grimsby.
If United have ambition, they need to win.
Dave Penney will be back in the team to replace Imre Varadi who's gone back to Leeds and Swindon team news, Martin Ling is very doubtful and almost certain to be missing.
A hospital is investigating how a woman patient went missing from a ward and was later found dead.
She is thought to have fallen from an eighth floor window.
The hospital manager has confirmed that a wide ranging review of procedures will now be carried out.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
PAUL BYRNE/Hospital Manager
Voice over
The woman, who hasn't been named, went missing from the ward where she was being treated at Gloucestershire Royal Hospital on Saturday.
Police and medical staff carried out an extensive search of the hospital grounds and several hours later they found her body.
The hospital is being guarded in its comments on the death, as it doesn't want to prejudge the outcome of an inquest.
Male speaker
The hospital is carrying out a wide ranging inquiry.
There are no suspicious circumstances surrounding the death.
Voice over
The Hospital has refused to confirm or deny a report that the woman fell from an eighth floor window.
And that she was originally being treated for injuries to her wrists.
The woman's body was formally identified today.
And an inquest will be opened later this week.
A protest by badger lovers who chained themselves to railings at a Ministry of Agriculture culling centre has been broken up by police.
ASTON DOWN/Gloucestershire
Six demonstrators spent two hours chained to the fence at the R-A-F Aston Down Airfield near Stroud.
They blocked the entrances in protest at what they claim is the unnecessary culling of badgers organised from the base.
Police had to use wire cutters to move on the protestors.
A mother and daughter have been killed in a head on collision.
TEDDINGTON/Gloucestershire
It happened on the A four three five at Teddington near the Worcestershire border.
The driver of one of the cars, Laura Hale from Pennsylvania Avenue in Cheltenham, and her mother Joyce Hale, died at the scene.
Four other people including a six year old girl are being treated for serious injuries.
Oxford United lost almost half a million pounds last season despite selling off several key players.
The losses of (£440,000) four hundred and forty thousand pounds are revealed in the club's annual report to shareholders.
That's despite the(£766,000) seven hundred and sixty six thousand pounds they made on the transfer market last season, after parting with Paul Simpson to Derby, and Lee Nogan to Watford.
Now there's concern that the club may have to part with Joey Beauchamp to help balance the books.
The figures, which are none the less an improvement on the previous year, will be discussed at United's AGM on March the fiftenth.
Small businesses struggling to beat the recession have adopted their own version of the exchange rate mechanism to stay out of the red.
They've got together to form a barter scheme, using a special currency which allows them to work for each other without REAL money changing hands.
An added benefit, they say, is that it offers a lifeline to the unemployed.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
NARA KRONFLI/Student
JUNE FOX/Scheme Co-Ordinator
STROUD/Gloucestershire
ADRIAN BLIGH/Swindon Chamber of Commerce
DON MACARTHUR/Tax Inspector
Voice over
English student, Nara Kronfli can't afford to pay for word-processiong lessons.
Not in pounds sterling anyway.
But as a member of the Swindon LETS — or Local Exchange Trading System — she CAN pay with a brand new currency.
Named after the second syllable in Swindon, Dons are each equivalent to £1.
This lesson cost 7 Dons, but no actual money is exchanged — Nara builds up credit by offering other scheme members skills of her own.
Nara's instructor is the scheme's co-ordinator June Fox.
She's responsible for compiling a directory of services on offer and sending members monthly statements to let them know if they're in credit or not.
From ironing to dog-walking, June says skill-swopping binds a community together and gives everyone — not least the unemployed — a sense of purpose.
Similar schemes have proved successful elsewhere — one of the best-known being the Stroud Pound scheme, which now boasts 200 members.
But the business community's sceptical about whether bartering would ever work on a larger scale.
And whatever the advantages of dealing in Dons rather than pounds, it's definitely NOT a tax dodge.
Meanwhile June Fox is spending the Dons she earns teaching word processing on the services of an osteopath.
As well as Swindon's economic ills, she's hoping Dons can help cure her back pains.
Anne Dawson
In Central News tonight.
Death in Paris.
Murder charge is dropped after claims that dead model took drink and drugs.
Wesley Smith
Accused of cruelty.
Two huntsmen on trial after a horse is whipped.
Anne Dawson
And, Your Feet's Too Big.John's problem plates of meat are finally brought to heel.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
A man accused of killing a young British model in Paris has had the charge of murder against him dropped.
Kim Brockwell was found stabbed to death outside her flat in the city, but when the trial began today the charge was reduced to manslaughter.
Wesley Smith
WESLEY SMITH
The Lebanese man in the dock says he was invited back to the flat, and it was Kim who threatened him with a knife.
The court's heard that she had been taking cocaine and drinking whisky.
She'd also told the accused man that she was pregnant.
KIM BARNES/Reporting
Voice over
24 year old Kim Brockwell, a successful fashion model, was found with knife wounds in the stairway of her flat in Paris.
She'd lived in the apartment in the fashionable Latin Quarter for four years, with her wealthy American boyfriend, Richard Knorr.
It's claimed the night she died, Kim had been to this nightclub near the Champs Elysees and had returned late with a friend and the accused.
22 year old Lebanese chauffuer Ali Choukeir has appeared at the Palais de Justice charged with involuntary manslaughter.
Choukeir claims he was invited to return to Kim's flat, but there was a disupte.
She threatened him with a knife…he pushed her away in self defence and the knife plunged into her back.
Choukier also claims Kim said she was pregnant with Knorr's child.
Medical experts told the court that they found cocaine and half a bottle of whisky in Kim Brockwell's body.
Kim's parents, Carole and Dennis Brockwell left the family home in Waterstock in Oxfordshire to come to Paris for the trial.
Mr Brockwell's expected to take the stand tomorrow.
If found guilty, Choukeir faces a prison sentence of up to 15 years.
Two huntsmen have gone on trial on cruelty charges.
In a case brought by the RSPCA, it's alleged that a horse was repeatedly beaten with a whip after it became stuck on a high gate.
Both men deny the charges.
GRAEME BOWD/Amersham
Voice over
The two men charged are Alan Hill who's joint master of the Vale of Aylesbury hunt and another huntsman Gordon Middleton.
Magistrates at Aylesbury were told of an incident last year involving horse called Max which was owned by Mr Hill and ridden by his wife Trelawny.
While attempting to jump a five bar gate near Chesham the horse became stuck with its forelegs over the gate and hindlegs behind it.
The gate couild not be opened and the men could not remove the top bar.
Its alleged that Mr Middleton repeatedly whipped the animal to frighten it into jumping clear.
The court was tolds that the
The Home Office has agreed to look again at the case of two men serving life for the murder of a drug dealer.
Gary Mills and Tony Poole have protested their innocence ever since they were first arrested for the murder of Hensley Wiltshire four years ago.
They hope the investigation will bring them closer to a re-trial.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
GEORGE MILLS/Gary Mills' Brother
JANUARY 1989
11 DECEMBER 1992/NEVILLE JUKE/Eyewitness
Voice over
For George Mills there's good news at last.
For three years he's been campaigning on behalf of his brother Gary Mills and another man Tony Poole.
Both men are serving life sentences for the murder, more than three years ago of a drug dealer, Hensley Wiltshire.
Mills and Poole have always protested their innocence.
And they've got the support of Gloucester MP and barrister Douglas French.
He's told the Home Office that he believes the conviction of the two men is’ unsafe’.
Now the Home Office has agreed to look again into the circumstances surrounding Wiltshire's death.
Hensley Witshire was stabbed in a fight at a flat in Conduit Street in Gloucester.
He was taken to the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital, but then discharged and taken to Gloucster Police station for questioning.
He was later readmitted into hospital where he died.
George Mills wants the Home Office to find out why a witness, Neville Juke, wasn't called to give evidence at his brother's trial.
Speaking on Central News last year, he says he was in the flat when the fight broke out between Mills and Wiltshire.
He backs up Mill's claim that he was acting in self defence.
The Home Office will start the investigation next month.
Mills and Poole hope it will lead to a re-trial.
Fifty nine years after the death of Sir Edward Elgar, an appeal has been launched to build a lasting memorial to the composer's life and work.
It has the backing of the Prince of Wales and Yehudi Menuhin, and the organisers have high hopes of raising the million pounds they need.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Lower Broadheath
JULIAN LLOYD-WEBBER/Appeal Supporter
WULSTAN ATKINS/Elgar's Godson
Voice over
To pass by, you'd never know that this humble Victorian cottage was the birthplace of one of the world's greatest composers; Edward Elgar.
Today the house has become a mini museum to the man.
Crammed with his manuscripts, his instruments and evidence of his other interests outside music, the house is attracting up to 10,000 music lovers each year.
Now the organisation which owns it says more room is needed to accomodate all the visitors.
So an appeal has been launched to raise £1 million to build a new, larger Elgar library and museum on nearby land.
The appeal is supported by notable musicians like the cellist Julian Lloyd-Webber.
His best selling recording was a version of Elgar's cello concerto.
He's giving the appeal his wholehearted support.
Another staunch supporter is Wulstan Atkins, Elgar's godson.
He's one of the few people alive today who knew Elgar personally.
He remembers how much this cottage and the surrounding countryside inspired his Godfather's work.
£300,000 has already been raised, and work has now started on the new Centre.
With the support of the likes of Prince Charles and Yehudi Menuhin, the appeal directors hope it won't be long before the they can guarantee that the Malvern Hills will forever echo to the sound of Elgar.
Dramatic new pictures from space have brought scientists a step closer to understanding the effects of global warming.
The pictures are coming from a satellite, five hundred miles above the earth.
The laboratory where the scanning equipment was developed was visited today by a Government Minister, who said the pictures were better value for money than sending astronauts into space.
EDWARD LEIGH MP/Space Minister
DAVID LLEWELLYN-JONES/Space Science Dept
Voice over
The clear view from space on a very clear day over Ireland.
It's been achieved with the help of this satellite.
From it's viewpoint 500 miles above the earth, scientists can scan the whole world.
On board is a piece of equipment — a radiometer called the ATSR — which can measure the temperature of the seas.
The pictures sent back to earth tell an important environmental story.
The sea temperature gives us clues to the changing climate and the possible effects of global warming.
Scientists can also understand more about possible links with extreme weather like hurricanes.
The project is led by the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in Oxfordshire, who today welcomed the Minister for Space.
Male speaker
It's a very impresive world class establishment.
I've seen fascinating pictures of global warming and the ozone layer.
What we concentrate on in Britain, is earth observation.
We haven't wasted money on sending someone into space.
Voice over
The accuracy of the images are better than expected.
The red colours show the hot spots and the blue shades are just a few degrees cooler.
The scanner produced this sequence of pictures showing the sea off the west coast of South America.
It shows remarkable warming and cooling of the sea over a period of just 10 days.
Male speaker
When it vanished, it was equivalent to switching off 100,000 power stations the size of Didcot power station.
Removing the heat from the atmosphere will have had an effect on the global climate.
Voice over
This is what the erupting Mount Etna looks like from earth.
And here's the volcano from space.
One of the world's hot spots that might give clues for the future.
The ATSR is proving to be a perceptive eye above the skies, but it won't be until the next century until scientists can fully analyse what weather and climate is in store for the generations to come.
Finally, while pancake racers everywhere were rubbing their bruises, a parish church was reviving a centuries-old tradition to mark Shrove Tuesday.
It enlisted the help of the Town Crier to encourage parishioners to empty their larders in time for Lent.
ROBIN POWELL/Newent
WILLIUM CHAPMAN/Town Crier
Rev PAT PHILLIPS/Deacon
CHELTENHAM
Voice over
Just in case they'd forgotten, Town Crier Willium Chapman's been reminding the good people of Newent what day it is.
Ringing the Pancake Bell at all 4 corners of the parish church is a tradition dating back 300 years.
High time, thought St Mary's, Newent, the custom was revived.
Shrove Tuesday is, of course, a religious festival; a fact St Mary's is anxious we don't forget.
In years gone by, emptying the larder of flour, milk and eggs was the traditional way of starting the fast of Lent.
An equally serious tradition, of course, is pancake RACING.
Over in Cheltenham, 6 teams of 4 turned out for the day's main event, won by the team from the St James Hotel.
Despite their chefs' and St Trinians outfits, they managed to clamber up poles and leap over jumps in relay and raise more than £400 for charity.
Meanwhile, back at Newent, it's time for lunch.
The George Hotel has prepared an appropriate feast for the Town Crier. 300 years on, pancakes taste just as good as they always did.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
A mining equipment factory is to close with the loss of around (350) three hundred and fifty jobs.
The firm is centralising production in Lancashire, and staff are blaming the job losses on the Government's pit closure programme.
ROBIN POWELL/Ashchurch
PAUL SAUNDERS/AEEU
WORCESTER
ROGER WESTERN/ Leader
Voice over
Just when there's talk of the recession at least loosening its grip comes a body blow to Gloucestershire's economy.
The engineering firm, Meco is to close its plant at Ashchurch near Tewkesbury, making around 350 staff redundant.
The local defence industry's already suffered from Government cutbacks, now the demise of British coal mining appears to be taking its toll.
Male speaker
The Government's partly to blame.
Our business has just gone down and down, and now demand has run out.
Voice over
Meco, which used to be part of the Dowty Group, makes mining equipment including pit props.
It recently merged with a Wigan-based firm to form a new company called Longwall International.
The engineering union, the AEEU, says staff have been told that Longwall is now centralising its operation in Lancashire because of Government grants available to companies creating jobs in the North.
Better news is that the Meco factory in Worcester, which was due to close, has now earned a reprieve, saving three hundred jobs.
But that's little consolation for staff at Tewkesbury, or the town's economy.
Longwall's management declined to be interviewed.
But a spokesman said this was a very sad day for Ashchurch and he confirmed that the factory will close at the end of May.
A huge bird of prey has been captured after terrorising a flock of sheep and their newborn lambs The Eagle Owl with a wingspan of six feet also attacked two farm dogs before quietly surrendering to wild animals experts.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Haddenham
HILARY NEW/Sheep Owner
LES STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles Hospital
Voice over
Birds of prey have a wild side no matter how calm they look or how tame they appear to be.
The one currently being looked after by Les Stocker of the St Tigglywinkles wild animal hospital almost certainly took a new born lamb in the night, and had a furious fight with two of the farm terriers.
Female speaker
It swooped down on one of the dogs and was standing on its chest with its beak at her throat.
My husband kicked it in the chest and it flew off but returned shgortly after and attacked the smallest of the dogs pinning it against a stile
Voice over
Not content with that the bird then circled another new born lamb at the Chinnor smallholding apparently ready to pounce.
The rare welsh blackhaired sheep are currently in lamb and vulnerable to predators.
The Eagle Owl is tame.
It was found by Les Stocker's team perching on a garage ten miles from the scene of his attack.
It had leather straps and jessies attatched and was easily caught.
Male speaker
it's obviously a tame bird and I'm not certain if it knows how to kill.
They can seem quite dangerous if they come from the sky and land on someone's head.
All they're doing is asking for something to eat, but it can be quite painful
Voice over
Eagle owls aren't native to Britain, and are generally kept as pets.
This one weighs about six pounds and still seems very uncertain of its role in the wild.
It's unlikely to be released but will be looked after until either its owner or a new home is found.
(ERIKA AD LIB)(HARRIET) Still to come in part two, the forgotten victims of alcohol.
New help for the children whose parents have a drink problem.
(ERIKA
Plus, pictures from space.
A satellite's eye view of global warming.
Welcome back: A new report says help is urgently needed for the forgotten victims of alcohol…the CHILDREN of drinkers.
Living with an alcoholic parent can lead to violence, abuse and emotional scars.
The only specialist service for such youngsters is run here in the region…the report says more like it must be set up.
But the centre faces a funding crisis and its future is uncertain.
KIM BARNES/Reporting
Dr RICHARD VELLEMAN/Alcohol Researcher
WORCESTER
GILL HOLLYN/SCAD Co-ordinator
Voice over
Life with a parent who drinks too much can be hell.
Uncertain, unpredictable.
How will they be tonight?
Can I bring friends home?
For many, the dangers are more serious.
Violence and child abuse, the destruction of relationships.
Dr Velleman has just completed new research into alcohol and the family.
Around 4.5 million people have a problem with their own drinking or someone in their family.
Up to a third of parents involved in child abuse are heavy drinkers.
The report highlights the lack of help for these youngsters.
In fact, the only specialised counselling is offered in Worcester.
This girl's family life is ruined by a brother who drinks.
But this victim is also a counsellor, helping other youngsters who have drinkers in the family.
And it's this approach which is a key the scheme's success.
SCAD — Support for the children of adult drinkers — talks to children as young as 12 and also those who've grown-up with the problem, but are still trying to deal with it.
But SCAD has only got funding until the summer.
They desperately need backing just to continue the work everyone agrees should be expanded.
Travellers not welcome.Exclusion zone to stop another hippy party.
We won't sue.
Parents drop civil action over barn fire deaths 
And, is this the phantom sheep stealer?
The eagle owl has landed.
Good Evening:
HARRIET RYLEY
A four-mile exclusion zone is being planned around common land to stop a second invasion of the area by New Age travellers.
Last year twenty thousand set up a tented shanty town on the site, taking police by surprise and enraging local people.
ERIKA BARNES
An exclusion zone order was last used to keep revellers away from Stonehenge.
It gives the police the right to halt convoys and arrest the travellers if necessary.
It's been welcomed by the area's MP and local residents:
May 1992/RICHARD BARNETT/Reporting
COLIN DAVIS/Malvern Hills Council
Supt TREVOR McAVOY/ West Mercia Police
MICHAEL SPICER MP/Con
NEWENT/Gloucestershire
Voice over
This was the May Bank holiday scene at Castlemorton Common in Worcestershire last year, as 20,000 New Age Travellers took over the ancient common.
After pitching their tents, the travellers held a rave party that went on for 3 days and nights.
The music could be heard 5 miles away.
Now police and local Councils plan stern measures to stop a similar event happening this May.
West Mercia's Chief Constable is to ask Malvern Hills District Council to make an order excluding processions or convoys of travellers within a 4-mile radius of Castlemorton over the May Bank Holiday.
The last time such powers were used was to keep hippies away from Stonehenge and it is hoped the move will deter travellers from trying to camp at Castlemorton again.
Male speaker
The people of Castlemorton shouldn't have to put up with another invasion.
Voice over
Police are already monitoring the movements of travellers convoys and the exclusion order will give them widespread powers of arrest.
Male speaker
Police will act vigorously.
They will arrest people heading for the common.
Voice over
The move has been welcomed by the area's MP.
Male speaker
It would have taken an army to shift the travellers once they got to Castlemorton.
That's wy it's essential to stop them getting there.
Voice over
Meanwhile, local people are delighted that the threat to the tranquility of the common seems to be receding.
A group of New Age travellers are currently camped in Newent, 10 miles away from Castlemorton.
They refused to be interviewed on camera, but said they were unaware of any plans for another mass invasion of the common.
However, they said the exclusion zone would be an infrigement of their right to travel where they liked.
The parents and boyfriend of a model stabbed to death in Paris have told a French court they don't believe the account of her killing.
A Lebanese chauffeur is accused of the involuntary manslaughter of Kim Brockwell from Oxfordshire.
But he says he was defending himself when she threatened him with a knife.
KIM BARNES/Paris
Voice over
24 year old Kim Brockwell was found stabbed to death in the stairway of her flat in the fashionable Latin quarter of Paris in 1990.
A successful model she'd lived in the city for four years.
22 year old Ali Shukir a Lebanese chauffeur is accused of involuntary manslaughter.
Yesterday he told the court Kim threatened him with the knife after inviting him back to her flat.
He claims he only pushed her away but she fell back onto the knife.
The court also heard from medical experts who found traces of half a bottle of whisky, and cocaine in Kim's body.
Today Kim's wealthy American boyfriend Richard Knorr took the stand.
He told the court he didn't believe the accused's story, Kim was shy and self-conscious and he didn't believe she would have brought Shukir back to the flat.
He said she'd been raped at 18 by a Lebanese man in London.
That meant she couldn't bear to be touched.
When asked by the judge if she ever drank or got aggressive.
He replied,’ like everyone else.’
He also said he knew she took cocaine from time to time.
Kim's parents Carol and Denis Brockwell from Waterstock in Oxfordshire each took the stand briefly to be questioned by the judge.
Carol Brockwell told the court she was shocked by the accused's story.
Kim was caring and sensitive but she admitted she didn't know her daughter could drink so much.
Denis Brockewell was asked if Kim would have used the knife in this way.
He replied,’ the only possibility was if her honour was threatened.’
The defence is expected to summarise its case tomorrow — the final day of this trial at the Palais de Justice in Paris
The family of twin sisters killed in a barn fire have decided not to pursue a civil case against the three men acquitted of their manslaughter.
They say they still want to find out how the girls died, but can't get legal aid to sue for damages.
The lawyer for the three men cleared says they should now be left in peace.
IAN MACLAREN Reporting
VICKY HARPER Twins' Mother
TIM ROBINSON Solicitor
Voice over
17 year old twins, Rebecca and Emma Harper were killed in the fire at Uckington 2 years ago.
They'd gone to the barn with David Harper, Daniel Winter and Wisdom Smith after an evening at the pub.
Following an 8-day trial at Bristol Crown Court, the 3 men were cleared of manslaughter and arson charges.
But shortly after the trial the twin's parents announced that they were considering pursuing a civil case for damages.
Now they say they've changed their minds.
But the solicitor for the three cleared men says he doubts a civil action would have succeeded.
That plea was echoed by the men and their families.
The Harpers commissioned an indpendent pathologist's report, which is now being studied by the Crown Prosecution Service.
No further action is planned by them at the moment.
Virgin probes new BA’ dirty tricks’
FTSE down 20
The hundred shares index closed down twenty point three at twenty-eight, eighteen exactly.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-five and down at two marks, thirty-five.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Hundreds of Trekkies queued for up to three hours to spend what for them was an almost perfect day at the cinema.
The Trekkies — fans of the Space adventure Star Trek — sat through a thirteen hour showing of all six films featuring Captain James T. Kirk and the crew of the Starship Enterprise.
Mike Rowbottom was there.
PARAMOUNT-UIP
OXFORD
IAN MINTON/Oxford University/Star Trek Society
SHARON IMONDI/Cannon Cinema
Voice over
CAPTAIN Kirk finally makes peace with the Klingons, albeit unwillingly…it's the end of an era…although considering it takes place four hundred years in the future, it hasn't even begun yet.
But that's not enough to deter a determined trekkie.
Three hundred of them queued for up to three hours at the weekend to watch all six of the Star Trek films, culminating with the latest, the Undiscovered Country.
Male speaker
I've seen them all before but it's an event isn't it
Captain's Log Star Date 230292.
Location, the Cannon Cinema, Oxford, Planet Earth.
We have discovered a human sub species of the late twentieth century called a Trekky.
These anorak clad devotees are almost fully conversant with the workings and history of the Starship Enterprise…some even know the language.
Initial scans show the phenomenon is not restricted by age.
Female speaker
I have followed Star Trek for years, it will be interesting to see how the wigs change through the films;
Male speaker
I'm a big fan
Voice over
Eeducation is no barrier with one of the planet's premier universities represented.
Male speaker
we just get together to enjoy the videos
Voice over
Some have adopted the relevant clothing…
Female speaker
I made it from a pattern
Voice over
It's life Jim, but not as we know it.
The Trekkies are not afraid to step boldly, in this case thirteen hours of back to back space fantasy…
Female speaker
Everyone remembers Star Trek, it's been going for twenty five years
Some things never change.
Captain's log out
Young corgi hopefuls have been auditioning for the ultimate corgi role — playing alongside the Queen.
A touring production of Roald Dahl's’ Big Friendly Giant’needs an impeccably behaved pooch to accompany Her Majesty on stage.
Harriet Ryley reports.
SWINDON Wiltshire
KEVIN CHADDERTON Manager
Voice over
A true performer needs patience to cope with all the waiting in the wings and general hanging about while some director chappie takes his pick of the talent.
And it takes nerve to walk and sit to order in the glare of the lights with all those people watching.
But surely it would be worth it to any corgi worth his or her doggy bone, to be able to play alongside the ultimate corgi-owner — the Queen.
The chosen dog will play a bit part in the adaption of Roald Dahl's BFG — the Big Friendly Giant which is touring the country on a sell-out tour.
It's a demanding role:
Her Majesty's dogs did make a bit of a dent in the corgi image when one of them bit the Queen's hand during a fight last year, but like King Charles the second and his spaniels, the Queen is inseparable from her corgis.
But some of the hopefuls were definitely not keen on the idea of stardom…
In the end the role became something of a timeshare job — awarded to both Storm — for his impeccable behaviour and tri-colour Brandy — for his good looks and lovely nature — most of the time.
Man on remand over Slater kidnap
Michael Sams, has been remanded in custody for three days accused of kidnapping the estate agent, Stephanie Slater.
His solicitor said Sams denied any involvement in the murder of the teenager, Julie Dart.
Irish Court considers abortion case
The Supreme Court in Ireland is considering whether to overturn a High Court ruling which has prevented a fourteen-year-old rape victim from having an abortion.
USA loan warning to Israel
The United States has said it will guarantee ten billion dollars in loans to Israel only if it stops building settlements in the occupied territories.
Jail term increased on baby batterer
The Court of Appeal has increased the jail term on a father who attacked his baby daughter from four years to six years.
De Klerk announces referendum on March 17th
President De Klerk of South Africa has said the whites-only referendum on democratic reform will be held on March the seventeenth.
He's threatened to resign if defeated.
Major warns against Scottish devolution
The Prime Minister has repeated his plea for Scotland to remain in the United Kingdom warning that independence would lead to bitterness and chaos.
FTSE up 17
The hundred shares index closed up seventeen point four at twenty-five, fifty-nine point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy-five and up at two marks, eighty-eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A ban on the use of lead fishing weights has resulted in a record increase in the number of mute swans in Britain.
A report just published shows there are now forty per cent more birds than there were ten years ago.
Clare Lafferty reports.
SLIMBRIDGE/Gloucestershire
SIMON DELANEY/Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust
Todays figures are undoubtedly good news for swans.
But environmentalists warn that the birds are still susceptible to other threats.
So work still needs to be done to make Britain a completely safe place for the mute swan.
But for the time being conservationists everywhere are happy to know that the swans and the anglers are no longer rivers apart.
Voice over
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
so at lunchtime today every rugby fan in the city was by a radio to listen to the draw for the semi-final…club coach Keith Richardson was in our Gloucester office ready for the news 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
Voice over
good game…who's he kidding it's going to be a cracker…what's the odds I wonder on a Gloucester…
Harlequins final 
another rugby side on the road to Twickenham are Bicester…congratulations to them…they're through to the semi-final of the Provincial cup where they'll be playing Altrincham Kersal…let's kick the round ball next…and what about Oxford United on saturday…they beat promotion chasing Cambridge…one-nil…didn't they do well 
