We've already seen one Oxford Cambridge battle tonight…now we have news of another…the big one…the boat race…the two crews were named today…
Erika Barnes has been on the towpath in London to meet them 
ANDREW PROBERT/Cambridge Cox
ELIZABETH CHICK/Oxford Cox
Voice over
This is when the serious business begins…swotting up on the opposition for the 1992 University Boat Race.
On paper it appears the light blues are inches shorter…and a few months older…but what about on the water?
Oxford, last years winners, are determined to continue their winning ways…and today they accepted the Cambridge challenge at the London Rowing Club alongside the Thames.
It may be all smiles…but really it's war.
The battle of brawn…and the clash of the coxes.
This year it's Oxford's Elizabeth Chick verses the oldest ever competitor, Andrew Probert…who demonstrates the wisdom of his thirty-eight years.
Male speaker
Coxes have a sizable effect on their crews but they don't dictate whether they win or lose.
They can help a crew lose and they can help them go at their best.
Nice as she is and nice as I am, we're both second string to the power and the rowing ability of the crews.
Female speaker
Now you're billed very much as the strong silent type by your crew.
Is that right or do you give them hell?
Female speaker
I don't give them hell.
It's encouragement and motivation.
But mainly your job is harnessing the power and you often do that by being calmer and more confident, rather than screaming’ like a banshee’
Female speaker
Obviously there are the comments about your age.
Can you be too old to be a cox?
Male speaker
I don't think so.
You can be too geriatric to stand up in a boat…and you might quiver a bit.
Getting my zimmer frame into the boat is a bit tricky!
Voice over
The training tempo increases over the next few weeks…as cox and crew alike attempt to learn all they can about the famous course.
And as the Press tell all the tales they can of this year's boat race heros…and heroine!…
Old Mother Thames will be keeping mum about what she has in store for them…until the big day in April.
022492pogramme
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
PRINCES RISBOROUGH/Buckinghamshire
DAVID HOBBS/RSPCA Inspector
Voice over
The body of the 18 month old collie pup was found dumped in woods by the side of a road.
RSPCA inspectors found him after combing the area for an hour following a tip off.
His head was covered in blood and several wounds.
His owner, Jeremy Young admitted repeatedly shooting him with an air rifle at his home in Princes Risborough.
In court he was banned from keeping animals for 2 years.
The RSPCA says it was an act of mindless cruelty, he should have been banned for life.
A post mortem examination showed 11 pellet wounds in the head.
The vet said he would have undergone prolonged suffering and an extreme amount of pain, because the first pellet wouldn't have killed him.
Young said the dog, called Jim, was difficult to control.
When he brought him home after a walk, Jim bit him.
He lost his temper, tied up the dog and shot him 11 times.
He told the court he hadn't meant to torture Jim.
A teenager accused of blinding a woman pensioner by throwing acid into her face is being treated in a prison hospital wing after an apparent suicide attempt.
The youth needed emergency treatment.
This report from Gareth Furby.
OXFORD
A man who thought he'd lost pension payments worth thirty-eight thousand pounds with the crash of the Maxwell empire is celebrating after hearing he WILL be paid.
It ends months of financial worry for Alan Govier, who worked for a printing firm for forty-nine years.
Now he says he'll continue to campaign for other former employees who've been left without pensions.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
ALAN GOVIER/Maxwell Pensioner
ALAN FISHMAN/Pension Fund Trustees
Voice over
Some good news at last for Alan Govier.
He will receive the pension he's paid into for 49 years.
The collapse of robert Maxwell's business empire left him with no income for 5 months, forcing him and his family into crisis.
Maxwell took over Nuffield Press, Alan's employer, in 1986.
They were only too pleased to grant him early retirement back in September when they needed to shed staff.
He got his redundancy money but heard nothing about his pension.
Now there's concern about people like the Hinton twins who've since been made redundant.
They've got nothing.
A spokesman for the people now running the pension fund says they will in time.
Meanwhile, Alan Govier plans to continue the campaign for others.
He's disappointed the firm he joined at 13 have tarnished the start of his retirement.
Now he hopes he can put the Maxwell crisis and his worries behind him.
An RAF station which is to close this year has said farewell to its last jet fighter.
It was also the last test flight for the station's long serving test pilot…and his colleagues had lined up a surprise.
Mike Rowbottom reports 
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Sqdn Ldr MIKE LAWRENCE/Test Pilot
1990
Sgt NEIL HARRIS/Jaguar Engineer
Voice over
A timely salute from the RAF's 54 squadron over Abingdon.
The 2 Jaguars flew past as a tribute to Squadron Leader, Mike Lawrence.
Today marked his last test flight from the station and the Jaguar pilots wanted to mark the end of a career which started with their squadron 25 years ago.
RAF Abingdon closes this summer bringing to an end its role as a servicing centre for jet fighters.
Mike Lawrence has been the test pilot here since 1983 and has flown 4,000 sorties including every one of the 165 Jaguars in the RAF Fleet.
Male speaker
it's a very sad day for me with my last test flight, I started here in nineteen eighty three and my first job was to clean up the station after the air show
One of his most extravagant displays was in a race against a Jaguar racing car at Abingdon 18 months ago.
Male speaker
I've always enjoyed flying the Jaguar, it's a lovely plane to fly, espoecially if it's flying light
It's also been a favourite with the maintenance crews.
Male speaker
it's a very good plane to service
As for Mike Lawrence, it may have been his last test flight, but he was determined to go out in flamboyant style
Voice over
Football now, and Swindon Town have stepped up their promotion challenge by moving up into fifth place in the first division.
Last night they beat Tranmere Rovers (2-0) two nil at the County Ground.
But there was no such luck for Oxford, they lost (1-0) one nil to Grimsby Town at the Manor.
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
Voice over
When Swindon first played Tranmere back in December, a power surge sent the sparks flying, blew a fuse box and a floodlight failure abandoned the game.
Last night, the sky, the whole County Ground was alight.
Glenn Hoddle and his players were shining brighter than ever.
Tranmere, a so-called promotion force were dazzled.
In the first game, Rovers were 2-1 up.
But second time around, there was only one team in it.
Swindon were in a different league and could well be playing in one if they keep this up.
First goal came after 10 minutes; a hook in from Dave Mitchell.
After that, it was a question of how many.
Town swept forward.
They played the ball the game the easy way and the opposition couldn't cope with it.
They all joined in.
That's the beauty of the Swindon system.
Attack; midfield; defence; they all like to have a go.
Tranmere just creaked and groaned under the pressure.
Everything fell right for Swindon.
The ball bounced their way, but sometimes it didn't quite go far enough.
Star man was Glenn Hoddle.
Everything he touched turned to gold.
The set-up for the second goal was sheer wizardry.
Mitchell finished it off again and at 2-0, it was a cruise.
Here's a great advert for first division football; a break from the half way line, which should have brought Martin Ling a goal.
It's hard to think that these 2 teams are next to each other in the league.
They were miles apart last night and at 2-0.
Swindon were swinging on a star.
No magic moments at the Manor.
Oxford blew their chance to stake a claim in the promotion race.
Grimsby are good, but United need to win these matches.
What went wrong?
Well, it is more a question of what went right.
Not a lot.
There were 2 attacks early on, but it takes stronger stuff than this to beat Grimsby.
The only goal.
The winner came midway through the second half.
It was some strike too.
Well-made, well-taken by Dave Gilbert and United were well beaten.
There was half a chance of an equaliser when Magilton got going again to send Penney racing clear, but by then Grimsby had the points in their net.
They nearly ran off with a second too.
As for United, 1-0 doesn't sound so bad, but the players know its nowhere near good enough.
With 16 games to go Oxford have still got time to pull their socks up.
The promotion places are still wide open, but Swindon are right there.
On Saturday, they're at home again to Portsmouth.
All the fans should be on board for that one.
The tall ship which featured in the seventies TV series The Onedin Line is being completely refitted.
The hold, the rigging and the decks of the Soren Larsen are all undergoing major work…but the most difficult part is replacing the one hundred foot main mast.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
OCTOBER 1992/GLOUCESTER
IAN HUTCHINSON/Crew Member
Voice over
It was all hands on deck as the crew of the Soren Larsen, prepared to lift the first part of the ship's 100 ft foremast back into place.
The tallship is most famous for appearing in the 70s TV programme, The Onedin Line.
She sailed into Gloucester Docks 4 months ago to undergo a complete refit.
Mechanics and technicians have joined ships carpenters in revamping and upgrading her decks, the accomodation area and of course the rigging.
Taking down the 3-piece mast to work on it was trouble enough.
Even with the help of a dockside crane, putting it up again proved even more problematic.
The Soren Larsen was built in Denmark in 1949.
But Gloucestershire has now become her home.
Back in 1986, she sailed from Gloucester docks bound for Australia.
On the way back, she became the first British square rigger to round Cape Horn in 55 years.
One piece in place; 2 to go.
And working this high up the crew was thankful there wasn't too much of a wind around Gloucester docks today.
When all the rigging's in place, the sails will be attached.
Then, in April, the Soren Larsen will once again sail out of the docks.
She'll be used as a holiday cruiser until the Summer.
Then it's hoped her new fixtures and fittings will help her win the 1993 Tall Ships Race.
Now, imagine being able to show a feature film on your television from an ordinary compact disc player.
Well, that very technological breakthrough has just been made by a British company.
It's given them a flying start ahead of their Japenese competitors, who until now were the traditional market leaders in electronics.
KEN GOODWIN/Monmouth
GERALD REYNOLDS/Nimbus Records
Voice over
This CD could mean the end of the videocassette.
The same CD on which your favorite album is recorded can now hold an entire feature film or rock concert.
It's makers have have got the system on the market before Japanese rivals — now they're hoping to cash in.
CD's store information digitally in the form of bumps and grooves.
These are read by a laser.
The Nimbus CD company has developed a system for pushing the bumps and grooves closer together.
Coupled with a device produced by an American company, C-Cube, which electronically squeezes the digital information, the end result is a standard sized CD capable of storing a full length film.
If that doesn't sound impressive, look at it this way; using conventional techniques it takes up to three twelve inch laser disks to record one feature film.
Now all this can be done on an ordinary CD.
And the new system uses a domestic CD player, coupled to a decoder.
Nimbus says it hopes this will become the new video format of the future.
He says that he's convinced that the format will catch on.
CD's will one day be used for everything, storing data, films, computer games etc.
The picture quality of the system is said to be better than VHS and if it catches on then in future all CD machines may be build with decoders already inside, making the CD the most versatile medium for home entertainment.
Back to our lead story, and we've just heard from Paris that
Ali Shoukeir has been found guilty of the involuntary manslaughter of
Kim Brockwell, a fashion model from Waterstock in Oxfordshire.
He's been sentenced to seven years in prison.
More on that in our late news.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Australia plan republic referendum
FTSE down 1
The hundred shares index closed down one point at two eight one seven 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty three and down at two marks, thirty two.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A fresh attempt has been made to persuade the Government to let a county council spend ten million pounds more than Whitehall wants.
Cheltenham MP Nigel Jones said Gloucestershire had been underfunded compared to others, but he failed in his bid and earned a rebuke for taking up too much time.
RICHARD BARNETT/Reporting
JOHN REDWOOD/ Local Government Minister
NIGEL JONES MP/ Lib Dem
Voice over
The Cheltenham MP was trying to take up the cudgels on behalf of Gloucestershire County Council, who face being charge capped for wanting to spend ten million pounds above the Government's limit.
But he took so long to make his point, the Speaker intervened.
Outside the Chamber, Mr Jones was critical of the Government's response.
The Government will decide over the next few weeks whether to penalize Gloucestershire for overspending.
It's been claimed the cut in spending threatens up to 400 jobs.
A major chain of small grocery shops has taken on the might of the big wholesalers in a battle over the right to sell newspapers.
The shopkeepers claim that wholesalers have a monopoly, and are refusing to supply them with papers.
But newsagents shops say if the grocers win, it'll hit THEIR trade.
Now the grocery shops want the Prime Minister to intervene.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
MOHAMMED AFZAL/VG Store Manager
AMARJIT SINGH/Newsagent
Voice over
This grocers store in Oxford sells most things, but not newspapers.
The staff would like to do so, but the wholesalers won't let them.
This is typical of convenience stores throughout the country.
But 60,000 shoppers have backed a campaign to give shops like VG, Mace, Spar and Londis, the right to sell papers.
And pages from their petition were delivered to 10 Downing Street, asking the Prime Minister to end what they call a monopoly.
Shop manager Mohammed Afzal is angry that newsagents can sell groceries but he can do the same with papers.
Male speaker
It's very unfair.
If you have a shop which can sell anything, why can't a grocer sell anything?
It's unfair competition and unfair to the customer as well.
Voice over
But the newsagent next door to Mr Afzal's store doesn't agree.
Amarjit Singh says there's too much competition to sell newspapers.
There are 6 agents within a mile of his shop on the Abingdon Road and another outlet would seriously threaten his business.
Male speaker
Newspapers are my only source of income.
If they're taken away I'll be finished.
I'm working on a small margin of profit.
If big places sell papers, businesses like mine will go down.
Voice over
WH Smith which distributes to 22,000 newsagents everyday would only say that’…
The issue has been looked into by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and the Office of Fair Trading.
In both cases they decided no action was required.
We only supply newspapers if we believe a new outlet will expand the market.
Our first duty is to our existing customers.’
But stores like VG say their first duty is to the shoppers and they'll make sure they keep the campaign in the headlines until they can sell the story themselves.
(ANNE) Still to come in part two, the Cheetahs roar is no more.
Why Oxford's speedway team won't be competing next year.
Wesley Smith
Plus, from CD…to TV.
A British first in the video revolution.
Welcome back.
(ANNE) One of Britain's top speedway clubs is pulling out of the British league.
The Oxford Cheetahs say the decision has been forced upon them.
(WES) Almost all the club's riders have refused to agree to new pay scales laid down by the sport's governing body.
And with the new season just weeks away the Cheetahs are left without a team.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
HANS NIELSON/Team Captain
JOHN BLAKE/Stadium Manager
GEOFF BARBER/Supporters' Chairman
JOHN GAINSFORD/Speedway Correspondent
Anne Dawson
In Central News tonight.
Waiting for a verdict.
Jury still out in Paris model killing.
Wesley Smith
Are these homes safe?
Fears over houses beneath the pylons.
Anne Dawson
And read all about it…the battle to decide who sells your daily paper
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Kim's parents from Oxfordshire have been in court to hear three days of evidence.
A Lebanese chauffeur who denies Kim's manslaughter has told the court that she had been taking cocaine and drinking whisky.
He said she invited him to her flat, and then came at HIM with a knife.
KIM BARNES/Paris
Voice over
Environmentalists are demanding that plans for Europe's largest housing development are put on ice because of fears that nearby power lines could be a health hazard.
It's not been proved that children living near power cables are more likely to develop leukaemia.
But families who could be at risk say they at least deserve the benefit of the doubt.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
MICK HAYES/Father of Two
JANE BALLARD/Friends of the Earth
Voice over
Mick and Lisa Hayes have lived at Haydon Wick in Swindon for the past 9 years.
At first they didn't think twice about the 132,000 volt power lines above them; in fact they used to live next door, but one, with a pylon next to their garden fence.
Since then, speculation that families living close to high-voltage cables are at a greater than normal risk from childhood leukaemia and other cancers, has made them wonder about the safety of their sons Daryl, aged 2 and Jack, just 8 weeks old.
Wiltshire County Council shares Mick's concern.
Earlier this week it asked Crest Homes, the developers of a new primary school for the area, to think again about the proposed site.
The school will serve a residential development, dubbed by planners the Haydon Sector, which it's thought will be the largest of its kind in Europe.
But before any work starts, Swindon Friends of the Earth wants a thorough investigation into the possible dangers.
But a report issued last year by the National Radiological Protection Board concluded that although it encouraged further research, there was no reason to link power cables with cancer.
A spokesman for Southern Electric, which owns the cables at Haydon Wick, told us that the evidence is still far from conclusive and that no study to date has demonstrated that there are any adverse effects.
He added that nevertheless the electricity industry is pursuing its own and funding independent, research.
Crest Homes told us they were aware of the suggestion there may a problem at Haydon Wick, but insisted it's not supported by the research that's been carried out.
The company says it abides by national guidelines and on matters of safety, commercial considerations are always secondary.
Mick Hayes believes the only way to get to the bottom of whether living next to power cables can damage your health is a full-scale Government inquiry.
For Harry's sake, he says, it can't come soon enough.
The motor spares company Unipart has made record profits despite the recession.
The news came on the same day that the car makers Rover announced another year of losses.
Now industry insiders believe the two may be connected.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
JOHN NEILL/Unipart Chief Executive
CHRIS GIRDLER/Garage Owner
JOHN WALKER/Oxford Economic Forecasting Unit
Voice over
The spare parts trade is booming.
The Cowley based company Unipart appears to be going from strength to strength despite the gloom in the rest of the industry of the last three years.
Last year they increased turnover by nearly a hundred million and increased profits by nearly twenty nine per cent.
Male speaker
we foresaw a long downturn back in 1989 and we planned for it with re investment.
We set targets and trained staff to meet them
Voice over
The company's profits, just over nineteen million, come on the same day that Rover announced a forty nine million pounds loss over the same period.
They're keeping quiet at the moment saying simply that they've invested a lot in new technology and models, and their cars are doing well against others in the country.
But the interpretation from dealers and experts is that motorists are hanging on to their ageing cars instead of buying new ones.
Male speaker
It's true that more people are hanging on to their cars and strangel; y not paying for their servicing.
So when something goes wrong it's likely to be very expensive…and that means new parts
Voice over
The Stoke Row Garage is having to take on extra staff to deal with servicing demand.
They need a constant stream of parts…supplied by companies like Unipart.
But actual car sales remain very slow.
It's a feeling backed up by industry analysts.
Male speaker
They're putting parts into used cars but there's also been a slight upturn in the vehicle market and they're benefitting from that as well 
Voice over
Rover is gambling a lot of money on the market picking up.
They've announced a new sports car to be built at Cowley and they launch a new model in April.
They'll be hoping their losses can be turned into profit by this time next year.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
COI FILM
GUY TAMPLIN/Kennel Owner
ROBERT HOOPER/Vet
Voice over
The effects of rabies are little known in Britain, that's because we've been virtually free of the disease since quarantine regulations were introduced in nineteen twenty two.
Since then it's been illegal to bring dogs and cats into the country without the animals undergoing a six months quarantine period, where they can be monitored to make sure they are disease free.
The laws have been strictly upheld, with fines of up to two thousand pounds for smuggling animals into Britain.
But all this could soon change: a committee of vetinary experts within the EEC is pushing for the quarantine laws to be scrapped: vets in France and Germany in particular say that vaccination is a more effective way of preventing rabies.
But Guy Tamplin, who runs a special quarantine kennel in Gloucestershire is horrified at the thought of the law being changed.
He says that it would be a ste backwards — Britain is still rabies free, other parts of Europe aren't.
Many vets believe that vaccines would not be as effective at controling rabies as our present quarantine laws.
He says that vaccines don't always work, it would be a disaster for even one infected dog to get into this country.
In a statement The ministry of agriculture says’ The Government would not support any changes to existing arangements which would increase the risk of rabies being introduced in this country.’
But other members of the EEC will undoubtably support changes — the hope is it won't lead to sights like this becoming as common here as it is in some other parts of Europe.
Magistrates are being urged to get tough on landlords who harass and intimidate their tenants.
A new report says growing numbers of tenants are facing illegal evictions or even threats of violence.
Housing officers say the only answer is for tenants to be prepared to take their cases to court.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
OXFORD TENANT
KEVIN EINON/Tenancy Relations Officer
Voice over
Oxford is second only to London in the extent of its rented accommodation…and the price tenants have to pay for it.
That leaves many at the mercy of landlords in a tough market…like this young woman who was told to get out after falling one week behind with her rent.
Oxford City Council councils housing experts were able to tell her the eviction order is illegal.
But tenancy experts at the council are concerned about this and more serious reports.
In a new report to the council he points out some serious problems…first of all persuading terrified tenants to make a formal complaint…then there's the threat of violence…both tenancy officers have themselves been threatened and, when convicted, many landlords are still being fined low amounts.
Officers plan to meet magistrates to discuss court procedures
Meanwhile this young woman can't face a court case and must stay put until she finds new accommodation.
She says tougher action is needed.
Several prosecutions are imminent in Oxford but in the meantime the message to tenants is the usual one…check the small print and make sure you know your rights
A ticket agency is closing down claiming it's lost fifty thousand pounds following the last minute cancellation of a concert by the pop star Prince.
Fans are now being offered tickets for the star's new tour.
But some still want to know where all the money for his cancelled concert ended up.
Gareth Furby reports.
STOKE MANDEVILLE/Buckinghamshire
ROGER MOTT/Concert Connections
GLEN MATTHEWS/Prince Action Refund Group
Voice over
Almost a year ago Roger Mott set up a new ticket agency called Concert Connections.
Today he claims all he's left with is a fifty thousand pound loss, and hundreds of worthless tickets to a pop concert that never happened.
He says it makes him sick.
It's cost a vast amount of money and time.
The concert by Prince was due to go ahead at Blenheim Palace last August.
But it was suddenly called off with just a week to go.
Tickets cost up to thirty pounds a head, and thousands of fans were unable to get their money back.
Roger Mott claims he also fell victim.
He says his company paid seventy eight thousand pounds to promoters, and has never received a penny in refunds.
He says he doesn't know what happened and he's never received anything officially in writing from anyone.
But Glen Matthews, who represents hundreds of disgruntled fans, remains to be convinced.
He's even tried to take Concert Connections to court to get his money back.
He says they may be able to exchange their tickets but what he wants to know is where has all the money gone?
But Roger Mott insists his company has lost fifty thousand pounds — and it will cease trading after March 6, the deadline for ticket exchange.
Fans who've bought tickets are now being offered seats on the new tour.
It's reported the ticket swap deal has personally cost Prince up to four hundred and fifty thousand pounds.
The world's top fashion designers have been creating spectacular outfits to help raise funds for the charity Oxfam in its fiftieth year.
The clothes were modelled by celebrities, including Boy George, and applauded by royalty and stars at an exclusive fashion show.
Gargy Patel reports.
LONDON
WENDY TWIST Oxfam
BOY GEORGE
ERROL BROWN
JONATHAN ROSS Compere
Voice over
A dramatic entry for Oxfam into the world of fashion…
A show to promote the charity's work in India…weaving together the colour and vitality of the country to create an exclusive collection from the world's leading fashion houses.
Fabrics were donated by Liberty, the creations by designers like Bruce Oldfield, Zandra Rhodes, Yves St. Laurent…and of course Vivienne Westwood.
For more than 50 years Oxfam has been trying to improve the fabric of society in some of the world's poorest regions.
Projects in India are aimed at the most vulnerable…women and children.
If communities there are to survive, women are the key players.
So the show celebrates them as well as the spectacular clothing they've inspired.
Behind the scenes…chaos…smooth operators…and hairdressers everywhere.
The money was raised by bids from the star studded audience, including Prince and Princess Michael of Kent…the theme of the show…
Shocking Pink.
Extra sparkle was added by supermodels Yasmin Le Bon and, off the catwalk, Marie Helvin, who masterminded the event.
But the star of the show just had to be Boy George, who was so inspired, he bought the outfit he modelled.
Others steered clear of temptation, like singer Errol Brown from Hot Chocolate.
In fact the most expensive was a red silk ballgown by Valentino…a mere 1800 pounds…the total raised runs into tens of thousands of pounds.
Even the compere, noted for his own style in suits, tried to bump up the bidding.
At the end, acclaim for a stylish extravaganza.
And in Oxfam's fiftieth anniversary year, designers are definitely thinking pink.
Nearly 5
Nearly five thousand job losses have been announced with four thousand redundancies announced at the National Westminster Bank and eight hundred within the Department of Employment.
Kinnock accuses Major of tax bribe
Mr. Kinnock has accused Mr. Major of borrowing billions of pounds for a pre-election tax cut bribe.
Baker announces new bail measures
The Home Secretary, Kenneth Baker, has announced new measures to crackdown on people who commit crimes whilst on bail.
Gunman lawfully killed by police
An inquest jury has returned a verdict that a man who was shot dead by two police marksmen in Shropshire was killed lawfully.
Lord Lane to retire
The Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lane, who at one time rejected an appeal against the conviction of the Birmingham Six, is to retire and be replaced by Lord Justice Taylor.
Army wife pleads guilty to manslaughter
An army major's wife, Christine Dryland, has pleaded guilty to the manslaughter of her husband's German lover, through deminished responsibility.
FTSE down 12
The hundred shares index closed down twelve point nine at twenty-five, forty-six point eight.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy-four but down at two marks, eighty-eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Two brick arches put up to channel the waters of an underground river have been uncovered for the first time in nearly two hundred years.
The tunnels were built in the reign of George the third…but engineers say they've stood up to two centuries of wear remarkably well.
Simon Garrett reports 
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
NEALE FERGUSON/Resident Engineer/National Rivers Authority
Voice over
Aylesbury's Bear brook has run through these brick arches since the beginning of the last century.
In deepest drought the very top of the curved roofs has occasionally been visible, but until now no-one realised how big the structure really was.
It's been re-discovered during work to lower the level of the brook and stop flooding.
Male speaker
It's basically a massive brick structure carrying the water of the Bear brook through Aylesbury.
It was built around the year 1800 at the crossing point of the brook and the Grand Union canal, which it carries above it.
Voice over
The Grand Union canal, or the Grand Junction as the Aylesbury arm was known was one of the main routes for freight transport through England in the last century.
Dozens of men with hand tools may have taken up to a year to dig out the brook banks and build arches and canal on top.
Todays toil to lower the level of the brook takes a bitmore than one man and his dog, but the necessary speed of the work means thispiece of Georgian architecture will be hidden once more in a few days when the brook's allowed to flow through here again.
Meanwhile the canal and stream are drained and every hour 7,000 gallons of brook water is pumped around the arches leaving them dry and workable.
The engineers are staggered at how well preserved the brickwork is.
Male speaker
In the circumstances it's in very good condition; we'd expect it to be far worse than this but the more we uncover the better it gets.
Voice over
The arches will never be seen in their original form again; To preserve them against the increased exposure to the elements which lowering the water level will bring, they're to be sprayed with a fine layer of protective concrete, leaving no visible sign of their remarkable survival.
A former aide to American senator Edward Kennedy has found success in Britain as a watercolour artist.
Sandra Walker finds her inspiration in bricks and buildings rather than landscapes, and could soon be accepted into the prestigious Royal Institute of Watercolour painters.
Nick Clark reports.
SANDRA WALKER
Voice over
It's a long way from Washington, USA to Wing in Buckinghamshire, but Sandra Walker will tell you it's a move worth making.
She arrived in England in 1988, a talented but unknown artist.
Inside just 4 years she's made an impact that she finds hard to believe.
The days on Capitol Hill when she had to paint in her limited spare time seem far off now.
Female speaker
I used to work for McGovern, who challenged and lost the Presidential election to Nixon.
Then I worked for Edward Kennedy.
Voice over
Marriage to an Englishman brought Sandra to Britain and within 6 months she'd won the Sunday Times best Watercolour competition.
She hasn't looked back since.
Sandra paints from photographs she takes of old, often derelict buildings.
She's not one for beautiful landscapes, in fact she has a passion for bricks.
Female speaker
Greenery just leaves me cold.
I just love bricks and buildings.
Voice over
This painting is one of 6 Sandra is sending off as part of her application to become a member of the Royal Institute of Painters in Watercolour.
To be accepted as member there really would cap a memorable few years.
Female speaker
It really would be wonderful if I could become a member of the Royal Institute.
Voice over
The institute currently has 58 members.
With luck Sandra Walker could just be number 59.
The maker of one of the world's most exclusive cars is offering its customers a guarantee that their purchase will last at least seventy-five years.
Aston Martin Lagonda is introducing a service and restoration programme which means its cars should live longer than their owners.
Mark Kiff reports.
NEWPORT PAGNELL/Buckinghamshire
KINGSLEY J RIDING-FELCE/General Manager
SIMON DRAPER/Aston Martin Owner
Voice over
A man who raped an antiques shop assistant seven days after his release from prison has been sent back to jail.
He was said to have sniffed glue during the two days before the attack at a shop in Bath.
Dixon was sentenced to seven years for the rape and a concurrent two years for an unrelated theft.
He had admitted the offences.
Police are hunting two youths after a businessman was threatened with a handgun, and a woman kicked in the back and then robbed.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
The man was approached on Avebury Boulevard in Milton Keynes, after leaving an office.
But police say both youths ran off after the man told them he didn't believe the gun was real.
An hour later a woman standing outside Central Milton Keynes railway station was kicked in the back by a youth on a racing bike.
As she fell to the ground a second youth, also on a bike, snatched her handbag.
A leaked report has shown that house valuations made in the region in preparation for the new council tax are among the most inaccurate in the country.
Labour believes the errors will lead to a flood of appeals.
Julie Dolphin reports.
GLOUCESTER
DAVID BLUNKETT MP/Shadow Local Government Spokesman
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Voice over
The Inland Revenue is valuing thousands of homes to prepare for the council tax…due to replace the controversial poll tax in 1993.
They've given some of the business to local estate agents…but according to a leaked Government document some estimates have been inaccurate.
And valuations carried out in the region are some of the worst in the country.
For instance, one in three homes in Gloucestershire has been valued incorrectly.
And that says Labour will lead to a flood of appeals.
The process involves estate agents looking at a property from the outside and ticking a valuation banding on a form.
The Inland Revenue requires them to submit sample batches of property valuations for checking each week.
According to the leaked document, out of sixty batches checked in Gloucester, eighteen were incorrect.
That's a failure rate of thirty per cent.
The same rate of failure was recorded in Northampton and in Swindon it was even higher at thirty two per cent.
But Gloucester's MP has defended the work of the estate agents.
A spokesman for the Inland Revenue said it was early days but added:’ There are stringent quality controls to make sure the estate agents are doing their jobs properly.
If an estate agent is consistently wrong the contract will be terminated.’
Police say they're concerned for the safety of a twenty six year old man from Hereford who's gone missing from his home.
Stephen Chamberlain is believed to be depressed after splitting up with his girlfriend.
HEREFORD
Scientists have proved that a frozen body at first thought be from the bronze age is in fact thousands of years older.
The Iceman, as he's been dubbed, was found by a climber in the Tyrol Alps on the Italian-Austrian border.
Gargy Patel reports.
SEPTEMBER 1990
OXFORD
Dr ROBERT HEDGES/Carbon Dating Unit
DAVID MILES/Oxford Archaeological Unit
Voice over
The discovery of the so-called iceman has been fascinating not only for scientific experts; it's captured the public imagination as well.
He's a rare well preserved example of a person originally thought to be from the bronze age.
Skin and bone samples sent from the Alps, where he was found, have been analysed at Oxford University using carbon dating.
Experts here say he's much older, going back more than 5,000 years.
That dates him at between 3200 and 3300 BC.
The Oxford team has it's own history of working with notable finds like Lindow man, preserved for 2000 years in a peat bog in Cheshire.
Carbon dating helped put an age to the body and helped the archaeologists to understand his lifestyle.
Iceman has shed new light on knowledge about our ancestors.
For archaeologists like David Miles the challenge is to try and piece together the sort of person he was.
Icemen, possibly a hunter who died during a snow storm, has been hailed as a historic find, but because he was found so near the border between Austria and Italy, politicians are still arguing over who owns him.
At least the scientists can agree about the age of his body and others can draw on the evidence to imagine how he lived.
Anne Dawson
In Central News tonight.
Seat belt compensation.
The battle moves to America.
Wesley Smith
Get tough now.
Police call for crackdown on young thugs.
Anne Dawson
And, catch his killer.
Ten thousand pound reward in murder hunt.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Sixteen-year-old Peter Elliston is suing the Ford Motor Company.
He says the lap-type seatbelt didn't restrain him properly on impact.
His back is broken, and, barring a miracle, he's crippled for life.
ROBIN POWELL/Faringdon
Reconstruction/3D/Yorkshire Television
DOUGLAS STEWART/Peter's Solicitor
PETER ELLISTON/Aged 16
JACKIE ELLISTON/Peter's Mother
Voice over
Paralysed from the waist down, Peter Elliston from Faringdon expects he'll never walk again.
18 months ago he was on a family day out when his father's car hit a lorry.
Peter was wearing a 2-point lap restraint, like the dummy on the left, his brother Paul the more usual 3-point shoulder strap worn by the one on the right.
Paul suffered relatively minor injuries.
But Peter's back was broken and his spinal cord damaged.
Now he's suing the Ford Motor Company in America.
But however much he's awarded, Peter says it'll never compensate for what he's lost.
Ford says it already meets the EC requirement for securing rear seat passengers and is no different from most other manufacturers in only fitting a 2-point centre belt.
But Peter's mother says it's time the whole industry made safety a higher priority.
Robin Powell reporting.
And you can see more about Peter Ellison
Three Dee, tonight on Central, at seven thirty.
The chairman of the Police Federation is calling for much tougher action to deal with young offenders.
Alan Eastwood, who represents more than a hundred thousand rank and file officers, wants more police powers and stiffer sentences.
In a speech in Gloucester tonight he's expected to launch a bitter attack on the Government's failure to deal with the current wave of crime.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
POLICE VIDEO
ALAN EASTWOOD/Chairman
OXFORD
STUART PHILLIPS/Ex-offender
MICHAEL JACK MP/Home Office Minister
Voice over
Each day in the Thames Valley police area more than sixty cars are stolen, many of them to be driven at high speed by teenagers, the so-called joy riders.
This chased filmed from a police video car shows the risks offenders are prepared to take — and the danger to officers who try to catch them.
Tonight in a speech to the police in Gloucerstershire the country's top police spokesman will call on Government to make law and order it's top priority.
Alan Eastwood believes the the answer is to lock up young offenders instead of releasing them to commit further crimes.
Male speaker
Police moral is very low.
Officers are fed up with seeing offenders caught and then released by the court.
It is very frustrating.
Voice over
But ministeres believe that custodial sentences would not provide a simple answer.
In Oxford today the junior home office minister Michael Jack was visiting the Trax project in which problem youngsters are taught how to drive and mend cars.
Some of the youngsters are sent on Trax courses by the courts as an alternative to custody.
This 21 year old came here after a string of car offences.
He says he won't steal cars again.
Male speaker
In prison you just learn how to do it better.
Voice over
Schemes like Trax in other parts of Britain have cut local car crime by up to three quarters.
But the Government accepts that for persistent offenders some kind of youth detention must also be available to the courts.
He said the Government was looking at other types of custodial sentence for young people.
But schemes like Trax were the answer for some youngsters.
But the Government remains deeply concerned about low police moral and the fact that detection rates for all crime is falling.
In the Thames Valley last year the detection rate for car theft was just thirteen per cent, down from 20 per cent two years ago.
And police point out that most offenders have been in court before and released.
A stuffed lion which is expected to sell for more than a thousand pounds is just one of the unusual exhibits at a auction of taxidermy.
The event is expected to attract collectors from all over the country.
KEN GOODWIN/Cirencester
ANDREW GIBBS/Auctioneer
Voice over
This is the closest this little girl is likely to get to a lion.
It's part of a collection to be auctioned off in Cirencester.
It's expected to fetch over £1,000.
Auctioneers, Moore Allen say that stuffed animals are becoming very popular among collectors.
He says that there's been a revival in the popularity of stuffed animals.
He doesn't think it's wrong to auction them because they're part of a by-gone era.
Many of the animals in this exhibition were gathered by hunters from a different era; one which saw the decline of rarer species shot almost to the point of extinction.
Times have changed, but the fascination for stuffed animals hasn't.
He says it's amazing.
She says that her husband suggested they buy it and put it in the bedroom!
Not everyone visiting the auction wants to buy anything.
Some are just content with a closer look.
If you've ever wondered what it feels like to go into space, a new machine is available that can give you a pretty good idea.
It's based on the technology that was developed to help astronauts cope with weightlessness.
And it's been turned into fairground attraction…but be warned, you'll need a strong stomach.
RICHARD BARNETT Hereford
ROBIN TUCKER Laserball Builder
Voice over
This is the latest craze to hit the fairgrounds and it can even be seen in some discos.
It's called the laserball; a sit in gyroscope that can rotate in any direction.
It was originally designed by space scientists in America to help astronauts to come to terms with weightlessness.
Now it is giving those of us on earth that spaced out feeling.
Laserballs are being built by Burford Trailers, a company based in Hereford.
They're made out of tubular steel and toughened perspex and are powered by an electric motor that spins the laserball more than 30 times a minute.
Male speaker
It's quite intricate work to make the laserballs strong and safe.
The firm is hoping to sell to Europe.
Voice over
Being spun round at high speed confuses the senses.
That's why astronauts need to learn how to deal with disorientation.
But laserball enthusiasts.
Young and old think it is great fun.
The Hereford company has already sold 8 laserballs at £10,000 a time.
And orders are rolling in from all over Europe.
It seems even in recession, it is worth aiming sky high.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
6
FTSE up 11
The hundred shares index closed up eleven point seven at two eight two eight point seven 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty two and up at two marks, thirty three.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A Lebanese chauffeur may decide to appeal against a seven-year jail sentence for killing Oxfordshire fashion model Kim Brockwell.
A French jury found him guilty of involuntary manslaughter after a three-day trial in Paris.
But his lawyer says it was the wrong verdict and the wrong charge.
KIM BARNES/Paris
ANTOINE COMTE/Defence Lawyer
Voice over
Kim Brockwell's parents leave court after the man accused of killing their daughter was found guilty.
He was sentenced to 7 years in prison.
Kim's father says he's satisfied with the way the trial was handled.
The Brockwells had been present for all the evidence at the Palais de Justice in Paris.
24 year old, Kim Brockwell died from stab wounds at her flat in the city in 1990.
Lebanese chauffer, Ali Choukeir, who's 22, was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter.
He claimed Kim used the knife to threaten him.
He said he pushed her and she fell back onto the blade.
His defence lawyer says the case is unique in French law in that the court accepted Kim might have stabbed herself in this way.
He wanted the manslaughter charge dropped and says the case is full of uncertainty.
Choukeir will now decide whether to go for the French equivalent of an appeal; a cancellation in the Supreme Court.
Meanwhile, Kim Brockwell's family and friends will try to put the trial behind them and come to terms with her violent and tragic death.
A ten thousand pounds reward has been offered to help catch the killer of a seventy year old pensioner.
Jim Eggleton was found dead with head injuries and a knife wound shortly after the New Year, but so far police investigations seem to have led nowhere.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Russell's Water
Det Chief Insp ROY PAYNE/Thames Valley Police
PAUL HUTTON/Victim's Friend
Voice over
Jim Eggleton's murder touched a nerve throughout his small community in the rural hamlet of Russell's Water.
The 70 year old was a popular man in the area and police have been flooded with people offering information, but they're no nearer to catching his killer.
So today they announced a £10,000 reward offered in tandem with the Community Action Trust.
Male speaker
If people have been wavering about giving us information this might just be the thing to make them come forward
Jim, a lorry driver who'd lived in the area for forty years, had spent Christmas with friends, but disappeared from view until his body was found in his house.
He had head injuries and his throat had been cut.
His friend Paul Hutton, a Cholsey grocer, tried top get a reward fund going, but only managed to raise £300.
Male speaker
It's immoral to give a reward but murder is immoral.
I just hope someone will come forward now
It's been two months since Jim was seen here at his home alive on Boxing Day.
Police inquiries seem to have got nowhere but they believe, as do Jim's neighbours and friends that the killer is being shielded within the local community.
(ANNE) Still to come in Central News, back to the Lebanon.
The boys from Beruit gear up to go home.
Wesley Smith
Plus, it's out of this world.
The thrills of space, without leaving the ground.
Welcome back to Central News.
Two boys crippled by snipers during the war in the Lebanon are preparing to go home again after their second spell of treatment in Britain.
Wesley Smith
Bilal and Samir have been treated at the world-famous Stoke Mandeville spinal injuries unit.
They'll be taking brand new wheelchairs back to Beirut with them as gifts from the hospital.
SIMON GARRETT Princes Risborough
SAMIR Spinal Patient
ISAAC NUSEIBEH Consultant
Sir JIMMY SAVILE
Dr HEKMAT AL-JURI Medical Aid for Palestinians
Voice over
Bilal and Samir first came to Buckinghamshire in 1987.
Crippled by gunshot wounds they were rescued by British doctor Pauline Cutting and taken for treatment to Stoke Mandeville and the National Spinal Injuries Unit.
Last year they came back for a checkup and medics found their wheelchairs were ruined by the war torn terrain.
Today at the Paddocks Hospital in Princes Risborough they were testing out new ones.
They're looking forward to taking them home, but will miss this country.
Male speaker
I like it here, I love it here.
Male speaker
Here we are we have children who are paralysed, who have been looking after themselves while others have died.
We want others to look to them and see their way of survival.
Male speaker
All the team here has turned them into citizens of the world with dignity, honour and a great future.
Voice over
Charity workers are looking to the boys to set an example when they return to Beirut.
Male speaker
Now Lebanon is no longer at war and I hope they will be the last victims for the coming generation, for the new future
Voice over
Even if they never come back to Britain Balil and Samir will remember some things forever.
Have they been feeding you well at the hospital?
Male speaker
No (laughter)
Homeless charity tries to deter teenagers from London
FTSE up 18
Voice over
The hundred shares index closed up (18.2 at 2565.0) eighteen point two at twenty five sixty five.
The pound is down against the dollar at ($1.75) one dollar, seventy five, but up against the mark at (2.88) two marks eighty eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Two and a half million families are being crippled by mounting debts according to an independent report just released.
The most comprehensive survey ever undertaken…it cites rent and mortgage arrears, poll tax payments and dwindling state benefits as major factors in a worsening crisis.
Simon Garrett reports 
WOOTTON/Oxfordshire
PETER CHAMPION/Former Landlord
TOWN HALL/Oxford
ANDY LANE/
ELAINE KEMPSON/Author
Voice over
Three years ago Peter Champion took over the King's Head at Wootton near Woodstock.
He made a profit…kept up with the mortgage payments and cut his overdraught by a third.
But his bank wants their money back; the business will be sold for less than he paid for it, and Peter will be left with debts running into six figures
The debt-counselling charities shoulder much of the burden; here Citizens Advice Bureaux workers from all over Oxfordshire are themselves advised on what they should tell the desperate people who come to them for help because of spiralling debt.
Up to half the people visiting CAB offices even in well-off country areas will be facing money troubles they can't handle
Often people try to ignore their bills hoping something will turn up.
When the debt counsellors see them the most urgent task is sorting creditors into priority
The shock figure of two and a half million households in debt has been reached by the independent Policy Studies Institute.
Solutions they say are as complex as the causes.
They say what's needed is a big increase in the help and counselling available to those in dire financial straits
The report doesn't lay blame solely with government, building societies, credit companies or irresponsible borrowers, they say life isn't that simple.
Almost certainly we've never owed so much, and without economic recovery there's little hope of improvement
Football now, and Hereford's disappointing form in the Fourth Division continued last night.
They lost at home to Mansfield Town.
Tim Russon reports.
Voice over
Inspector Morse returns to our screens tonight in the first of what will be the penultimate series.
In the five years since the Inspector made his first appearance, the audience has grown to seven hundred and fifty million people worldwide.
It seems everyone is intrigued by Morse, whose past until now has remained a secret.
Tonight, though, we're given some clues as to why the bachelor detective leads such a very private life.
INSPECTOR MORSE/Zenith for Central
COLIN DEXTER/Author
MARK SANDERSON/Author
Det Insp DAVE BELCHER/Thames Valley Police
COLIN DEXTER/Author
Voice over
Inspector Morse and Sergeant Lewis, Britain's most popular screen detectives on home ground in Oxford.
It is home too to Colin Dexter, Morse's creator.
This unassuming author is one of the city's best-known celebrities since the success of the books and TV series about the character who has become one of the all-time greats with some 750 million viewers around the world.
But, surely one of the biggest mysteries is Morse, the man himself.
There's an unusual twist in the new series.
Up until now there have been few clues provided about his private life.
But in the first of the new series, we're offered more than a glimpse into his past, when we meet Susan Fallon.
Without giving away too much of the plot, she's an old flame of Morse's and he's brought in when her husband is found shot.
Up until now, Morse's only known passions were for opera, beer and crosswords.
No one even knows his first name, isn't that the way it should be kept?
The demand for another tv series has exceded the number of books Dexter has written so far, though he is writing another at the moment.
It's also led to a whole industry around the Morse phenomenon, including the CD of music to the series, the Inspector Morse tourist trail and now a non-fiction book about how the series is made.
It's gone right into the top-ten best-sellers.
The author is a self-confessed Morseaholic and has seen every episode hundreds of times.
Morse fans obviosuly take it all very seriously, but what do the Police themselves make of it?
DI Dave Belcher is the nearest real-life Thames Valley Police have to the fictional Chief Inspector.
D.I.
Belcher si not a great beer-drinker either, but for Morse and Dexter there's no better way of ending the day at the pub, one of their favourite haunts is the Kings Arms where you might even get Dexter to admit he might actually share one or two of his creation's habits.
John Thaw himself hates beer, so it's a real performance when he has to take a pint.
No doubt Morse will feel the need for more than a tipple when his past catches up with him in that new series starting tonight at 8.00 p.m. here on Central.
Health officials are warning that so-called rave parties could lead to a drug epidemic.
They've launched a campaign to make young people and their parents more aware of the dangers of drugs like ecstasy.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES
Dr PHILIP FLEMING/Wessex Regional Health Authority
BARONESS HOOPER/Health Minister
Voice over
All night rave parties involving music and dancing have become a way of life for a large section of young people.
But health officials are worried that the drug culture which sprung up with it has now reached epidemic proportions…and the Swindon area is as hard hit as anywhere.
Male speaker
People are suffering from physical and mental problems, sometimes resulting in being taken to mental hospital.
Doctors are concerned that young people don't know enough about the effects of drugs like LSD, Ecstasy and amphetamines.
So the Department of Health has started a campaign aimed at young people and parents.
It started in the Wessex Region today, and will spread through the rest of the country in the coming weeks.
Female speaker
Parents have a major role to play in getting the message home.
Young people in Gloucester today seemed aware of the dangers, but not all of them.
Female speaker
Most young people don't know how dangerous they can be
Female speaker
People recognise the difference between hard and soft drugs.
The campaign uses posters and newspaper and radio advertisements.
It will come tothe Oxford Region next week)
An inquest has heard how a woman fell twenty five feet to her death from a lorry which crashed on a motorway bridge.
OCTOBER 1991/M40/Northamptonshire
Juanita Garcias, who was twenty five and from France, was a passenger in the lorry which came to a stop hanging over the edge of the bridge on the M-forty near Aynho.
The inquest heard that she died from multiple injuries.
A verdict of accidental death was recorded.
Police say charges may be brought against the driver.
A prized garden which has been tended by the same family for sixty years has been wrecked by an out-of-control car.
HARTPURY/Gloucestershire
A council is meeting to decide whether to chop more than sixteen million pounds off its budget.
It could mean more than a hundred teachers losing their jobs, and some council services being cut.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
GORDON JACKSON/School Governor
KEITH ANDERSON/Chief Education Officer
Voice over
The message was clear as members of Gloucestershire county council turned up to todays budget meeting, with protestors, anxious over the scale of impending cuts urging councillors to think again before wielding the axe.
If Gloucestershire wants to stay within Government spending limits the council must find a way of saving sixteen million pounds — or risk being charge capped.
In the run up to todays budget meeting there have been protests by parents and teachers worried that education, as the authorities biggest spender, will bear the brunt of the cuts.
Gordon Jackson, a school governor has been watching the meeting — for his school the outcome is crucial.
He says that his school caters for children with special needs, one of the areas most under threat from cuts.
The man in charge of Gloucestershire's schools has had to prepare for the worst — though he hopes a compromise will be reached:
He says that in the worst scenario cuts of around 2 per cent would be made, that could mean job losses.
He hopes it won't come to that.
The council have looked at three proposals: Cuts, of at least sixteen million pounds, thus avoiding charge capping.
That's the option favoured by the conservative group.
Some cuts, but steering a way from too many job losses is the option favoured by the liberal democrats.
Or, to defy the Governments spending limits completely, with no cuts, but incuring the full wrath of charge capping, is the option favoured by the labour group.
The makeup of the council is hung — and after much talking there's no agreement on any of the three options.
So the three political groups must now decide if they're to form alliances to push through some sort of compromise package.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
LIBRARY PICTURES
Dr ERNEST NICHOLSON/Provost of the College
JOHN WILSON/Cambridge University Boat Club
STEVE EYLES/Race Organiser
LIBRARY PICTURES
Voice over
Today flags at every College boat house in Oxford flew at half mast…as a mark of respect.
John Hebbes was one of the University's best oarsmen.
He just missed selection for boat race crew named earlier this week, but he was still in with a chance of a late place.
Yesterday he was rowing with the boat race squad on this stretch of Thames at Wallingford when he complained he felt unwell.
Medical students in his boat tried to help him, and a local doctor was called but there was nothing they could do.
Today Oriel College Oxford was in mourning.
John Hebbes was a second year student, studying mathematics.
At six foot six inches tall…he was the biggest man in the college…and one of the most popular.
He says the college is stunned and shocked.
He was a very clever young man.
Even Oxford rivals in the boat race have been affected.
He says it's a great shock to everybody and not something you expect to affect such a young chap.
But despite the death the rowing at Oxford went on as normal today., with crews competing in the traditional college races.
He says he would have liked it to continue this way.
An inquest is to be held.
One theory is John Hebbess have died from a heart attack.
The training for the boat race tests the body to the limit.
A weak heart could be exahausted, or a heart condition suddenly exposed.
Another theory is he was suffering from a rare viral infection which enlarges the heart, and can lead to sudden heart failure.
Many Oxford students knew John Hebbes by his nickhame…
Doughboy…a giant of man who didn't drink or smoke and just lived for his studies, and his rowing.
He says he was popular and will be greatly missed.
And Oriel College will hold its a own memorial service…after the funeral…expected to go ahead early next week.
A man died and a woman was seriously injured in a stolen car which crashed after catapulting six feet off the ground into a telegraph pole.
The car was a Ford Sierra Cosworth, capable of a hundred and fifty miles an hour.
Safety experts say such cars should have their engines regulated to make it impossible for them to travel at speeds far above legal limits.
Kim Barnes reports.
Voice over
Angry traders say more police are needed in a village hit by two armed robberies in the space of a week.
In the latest raid, a shop assistant was stabbed as thieves escaped with jewellery worth more than ten thousand pounds.
Tim Hurst reports.
BROADWAY/Worcestershire
PETER PLIMMER/Shop assistant
MAY 1991
Supt BOB MULCASTER/West Mercia Police
DAVID SMITH/Broadway Traders' Assoc
PAUL HICKS/Businessman
Voice over
Armed robbers have hit the Cotswold village of Broadway in Worcestershire twice in a week.
In the latest theft, a man escaped with jewellery worth more than £10,000, after stabbing a shop assistant in the hand and escaping in a stolen car.
Last week thieves armed with a shotgun stole £9,000 from the Midland Bank in Broadway and last year an armed robber raided another Jewellers.
Angry traders blame too few police and a part time police station.
One businessman accosted a senior officer, as he arrived to be interviewed by Central South about the level of policing in the village.
Passers by have been questioned by police in an attempt to discover more about the stubbly, blotchy-faced man who who escaped in a stolen car driven by an accomplice after the latest robbery.
The jewellery shop lost more than £10,000 worth of stock.
The exact amount is still being checked.
And an award has been given to the developers of Gloucester Docks.
GLOUCESTER
Over the past decade, the Victorian dockland has been transformed into a multi-million pound leisure and shopping complex.
The award is one of five given this year by the British Urban Regeneration Association.
The docks project was praised by the association for its scope and imagination.
A slice of Broadway has come to the region in the shape of an all-singing, all-dancing spectacular.
The cast of Forty Second Street are in town with the show based on the Busby Berkeley films of the Thirties.
It's a familiar rags-to-riches story of the chorus girl, Peggy Sawyer, played by Bonnie Langford, who becomes star of the show.
OXFORD
BONNIE LANGFORD/Peggy Sawyer
ADRIAN LEGGETT/Executive Producer
Just off George and Cornmarket, you'll find 42nd, the Street of dreams.
Here they go on youngsters but they've got to come back stars.
It's a celebration of a time in the 30's when to forget the depression, you put on your taps to go into your dance.
Star of many a West End musical success, Bonnie Langford dances her way through two and a half hours of showstopping song and dance.
Bonnie Langford explains that the songs from the show were big hits in the time of the 1930s depression.
The original stars Ginger Rogers, Dick Powell and Ruby Keeler first belted-out these numbers nearly 60 years ago in Hollywood musicals like the Gold Diggers of 33 and 35, Footlight Parade and 42nd Street itself.
And you still can't help tapping your feet to melodies like’ We're in the Money’and’Your getting to be a Habit with me.’
Executive Producer, Adrian Leggate, used to be a technical assistant at the Oxford Apollo and has taken this show all over Britain.
Producer, Adrian Leggate, explains that it is a complex show to stage with 55 in the cast.
The film of 42nd Street was made in 1933, the same year as the Apollo was built and can still attract the hardest critics.
Bonnie explains how her brother-in-law, who normally dislikes musicals, went to see’ 42nd Street’two nights in a row.
It's hard work for the cast, but a spectacle for the audience, a hearty chunk of Broadway where dreams of Hollywood's golden age live on.
Average Community Charge to rise to
A new survey claims that the average Community Charge this year will rise by more than eleven per cent to two hundred and eighty pounds.
Major hints at tax cuts
In the Commons, Mr. Major has hinted of tax cuts in the Budget.
Australian Prime Minister offends British MPs
British MPs are demanding an apology from the Australian Prime Minister, Paul Keating, after he accused Britain of deserting his country during World War Two.
Some also called him disrespectful to the Queen during a recent speech.
Man remanded on Dart murder charge
Michael Sams has been remanded in custody charged with the murder of the teenager from Leeds, Julie Dart.
He is also accused of the kidnap of Stephanie Slater, the estate agent from Birmingham.
Britain's trade gap widens
Britain's trade gap almost doubled last month with the worst figures for almost a year.
Authors lobby Parliament over libraries
Some of Britain's best-known authors have lobbied Parliament to try to secure the future of the country's libraries.
FTSE down 3
The hundred shares index closed down three points at twenty-five, sixty-two.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy-six and at two marks, eighty-nine.
That's just about it from us for tonight…apart from to say that the film star Warren Beatty is in the region and we'll be talking to him in tomorrow night's programme…
BUGSY/Columbia TriStar Films
Beatty, who recently starred in and directed the gangster movie, Bugsy, is here to address the Oxford Union…
He'll be telling them about the pressures of being a superstar living in Hollywood!
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Today is national Save Our Libraries day and campaigners are warning that many could disappear without more funding.
Cuts in budgets mean libraries can't afford new books and are opening shorter hours as Simon Garrett reports 
OXFORD
TOM FORREST/Chief Librarian/Oxfordshire
SUSAN HILL/Author
Voice over
Oxfordshire's library service is typical of the rural networks in the shire counties.
More than fifty libraries are maintained by a budget of around four million pounds a year.
But poll tax capping means cuts in County Council budgets, and that means substantial reductions in the number of new books the library can buy.
Male speaker
We're facing cuts in our new book budget of ninty thousand pounds.
It may not sound like much but it means we can buy substantially fewer new books than in previous years
Voice over
Oxfordshire's problems are far from unique.
In Gloucestershire the book fund's been cut by eighty thousand pounds this year, and opening hours have had to be slashed by nine per cent.
In Northamptonshire new book money has failed to keep up with inflation for the last three years…and charges have had to go up.
Buckinghamshire's total book stock was going up by about forty thousand volumes a year, last year it grew just eight thousand.
For children, students, old people and anyone on a restricted income the choice of buying rather than borrowing is not open to them
Male speaker
Books are so expensive in this country — I couldn't possibly afford to buy them.
Libraries are such an important resource
Male speaker
I wouldn't be able to buy books if the library wasn't open — not on a pension
Female speaker
There's nowhere else with such a great choice of books, nowhere where I can trawl through such a selection
Voice over
Professional writers fear reduced access to books in libraries could have disasterous effects on the future of English literature itself
Female speaker
This isn't a case of writers bleating because their own books won't be available; we all spent hours in libraries learning our trade, the only way to learn to write is to how it's done by other people be it well or badly
Voice over
Today the library service is the most used of all county council facilities; some of its supporters fear dwindling stocks and reduced opening hours could damage it beyond repair for future readers and writers
Two cyclists are playing their part in putting South Africa back on the sporting map, by competing in one of the countries most exciting and challenging events.
Many thousands of bicycles will be lining up for the Argus Cycling Tour…but one entry is particularly unusual…because it's a tandem.
Erika Barnes reports.
ROUSHAM/Oxfordshire
TIKI KYTE
ANGIE BUTLER
Voice over
It's a bike made for 2, preparing for a race made for 10,000.
Tiki Kyte in the front and Angie Butler at the back are putting in the miles around the country lanes of Oxfordshire.
But they'll be returning to their home nation, South Africa for a unique cycling challenge.
It's the 65 mile Argus Cycling Tour around the hilly Cape of Good Hope.
The 2 friends took up the tandem around 5 months ago especially for the race.
Female speaker
At the front you're in control because you deal with steering, breaking and gears.
The most important thing is to communicate with your partner at the back.
In the beginning we had lots of laughs and kept falling off because of the balance.
Female speaker
I maintain that I'm the power behind, although we probably do the same amount of work.
Because I know Tiki so well, it's been a lot of fun.
We haven't had any arguments which tandem riders are supposed to do.
Voice over
The race has a double purpose for the cycling duo.
They're raising funds for an orphanage in Namibia, a country still suffering the effects of civil war.
But their tandem ride comes at a time when unity is becoming more of a possibility in South Africa.
Female speaker
It's exciting; going back together and going back to a country which hopefully is changing.
The whole atmosphere of the race is very exciting.
People have been tremendous with sponsorship.
We're doing it for this little orphanage and it's all terrible exciting.
Voice over
It'll be the first time the race will be multi racial.
A clear sign that a South African partnership could be the way ahead.
A film explaining everything you ever wanted to know about hedgehogs has won a top award.
Starring animals from one of the region's best known wildlife hospitals, it was voted best documentary at the National Video awards.
Harriet Ryley reports.
THE COMPLETE HEDGEHOG/Watchword Video
HADDENHAM/Buckinghamshire
LES STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles
SUE STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles
Voice over
Les Stocker in his element — talking about hedgehogs.
It was for injured hedgehogs he and his wife Sue originally set up their wildlife hospital, St. Tiggywinkles — and now he's made a video with all you need to know about taking care of the hedgehog which despite their reputation, he says performed beautifully:
He says you get to know a hedgehog — and I could tell the director what an animal was going to do…
The Complete Hedgehog beat off all rivals to win the best documentary video at the National Video awards in London — it also won prizes for best direction, best production and best distribution:
He says it was just like the Oscars!— with a meal and wine and Barry Cryer as the compere.
The Complete Hedgehog looks set to be the first of many and to be as successful as the series of books on wildlife Les has already bought out.
Sue Stocker says she had no idea her husband would prove to be such a good performer in front of the camera…
She says — at first he was quite nervous, but after the first day he became much more confident and started his David Bellamy act, waving his arms about…
The film is the first audio-visual home doctor for treating hurt or ill hedgehogs.
Money from sales of the video will go towards the new St. Tiggywinkles Wildlife Hospital in Haddenham.
Poll tax payers could find an extra twenty five pounds on their bills after a council voted to defy Government spending limits.
The authority has been branded as’ irresponsible’by an MP, because the overspend could lead to charge capping.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
JOHN SEWELL/Lib Dem Group Leader
FRANK THOMPSON/Lab Group Leader
RICHARD IZETT/Con Group Leader
Voice over
For 13 hours they talked; in the end it was agreed.
Gloucestershire County Council would defy the Government and spend an extra £10m.
Music to the ears of teachers, parents and school governors, who've mounted a series of demonstrations fearing that education would bear the full force of any cutbacks.
The council is politically hung, which means that the parties had to form alliances to get a budget voted through.
In the end, after much to-ing and fro-ing between the labour and liberal democrat camps, a deal was struck.
The council would spend £10m more than Governments limits, putting off the need for drastic cuts.
That move, with it's inherant risk of charge-capping, has immediately been branded as irresponsible.
He says that the council has already had extra funding, how much more do the labour and liberal democrat councillors want?
The budget is irresponsible.
The liberal democrats and labour say their budget was the only way to prevent drastic cuts.
He says yes, there is a risk of charge capping.
But they had to protect services and this budget was the only way to do so.
He says that education is the priority.
There's been a lot of public concern about cuts and the budget should address those concerns by saving education from cuts.
The conservative group leader says the budget could mean an extra £25 on Gloucestershire poll tax payer's bills, as well as risking the county being charged capped.
He says that the budget is a disaster, there's no way that the county can now avoid charge capping.
But with a general election just around the corner, some of Gloucestershire's councillors are gambling that the politcal temperature may soon change enough to take the heat out of any future moves to charge cap the authority.
Ambulance chiefs are warning that some accident victims will die if the funds aren't found to keep an air ambulance in operation.
The helicopter, which covers six counties, has flown four hundred missions and saved at least twenty lives in the last year.
Tim Hurst reports.
DECEMBER 1990/GLOUCESTERSHIRE
STEVE EVANS/West Midlands/Ambulance Service
Voice over
The air ambulance is available to all ambulance services within flying time of the West Midlands, but it's trial period of one year expires in May…and without a promise of half a million pounds a year it won't fly again.
The extra speed and wide reach of the service means more patients reach hospital within the so-called Golden Hour, when surgeons have a better chance of saving life.
Grounding First Air will inevitably cost lives.
int
The air ambulance, with two paramedics on board, can also carry two patients.
The half million popunds a year keeps it flying five days a week over an area from the outlying villages of Herefordshire to Northamptonshire and the city streets of the West Midlands.
Ambulancemen believe helicopters are now vital everyday tools of their trade.
int
By drawing attention to the need for funds the ambulance service hopes to spark a debate on where the money should come from…health authorities, the NHS, or the Government.
Road hauliers are calling for urgent talks over new speed limits for trucks.
There's a move to slow them down, but the hauliers say it could lead to a very dangerous situation.
Mark Kiff reports.
MARTIN RICHARDS/Freight Transport Association
New limits on the speed of lorries are coming from both Britains Parliament and the European Community.
But the Freight Transport Associations says that its members will get the worst of both worlds.
Brussels wants our lorries to slow down to European limits and our own law-makers plan restrictions that vary with the size of the truck.
At worst they see the future as two motorway lanes blocked with slow lorries with just the outside lane for the car driver.
Martin Richards of the Freight Transport Association says I wouldn't fancy his chances.
Lorries will be observing three different limits and coaches going at another different speed.
At the moment we have a sixty limit for lorries, while it can be anything from fifty two to sixty five in mainland Europe.
But before Europes new rules come in, Britain will insist on speed limiters with our sixty limit.
In four years time, though, we'll drop with Europe to fifty five.
That's except smaller trucks which will be able to go sixty…and coaches at sixty two…and cars at seventy.
All very dangerous say the governments opponents.
He says there's a direct correlation between the varying speeds of vehicles and the rate of accidents.
Truck companies would like a simple sixty mile an hour limit for all lorries.
He says it's a typical example of a government promising to aid industry and doing the opposite.
The Freight Transport Association is now wondering if the government will increase the car speed limit in line with Europe, as motoring organisations have been suggesting.
In part two.
Just the ticket…campaign to save our libraries.
Hogging the limelight…top award for wildlife video.
And streets ahead…
Bonnie brings a touch of magic to a Broadway favourite.
Cancer breakthrough…researchers identify rogue protein.
Drugs raid…police seize ecstacy tablets in run up to warehouse party.
And save our libraries…campaigners call for better funding.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
ANNA HUDD/Cancer Patient
DAVID BENNETT/Cancer Patient
OXFORD
Prof CHRIS HIGGINS/Imperial Cancer Research Fund
Voice over
Twice a week for eighteen months, Anna Hudd underwent drug therapy for cancer of the lymph glands.
For her the treatment was a success, but for thousands of others…the tumours become resistant to chemotherapy, which means prolongued drug treatment.
Around forty thousand people a year die because of that resistance…even in successful cases, the drug regime can take it's toll.
Research by the Imperial Cancer Research Fund Laboratory in Oxford has traced the protein responsible for blocking treatment.
Scientists have unravelled how it works inside a cancerous tumour…. it sits in the membrane of the cell…using computer graphics, researchers know what P-glycoprotein looks like, and that it's more common in cancer cells.
Normally it's job is to maintain fluid balance.
But when drug treatment is given, the protein pumps the drugs back out, so they have little effect.
By limiting it's action, cancer drugs have a much better chance of destroying the tumour.
The discovery also has implications for around 25 thousand children and young people who suffer from the inherited disease cystic fibrosis.
The same protein is involved.
For cancer specialists, developing this knowledge is still a long way off, but would be vital.
Ten people have been arrested by police carrying out early morning raids on suspected drug dealers.
At least one hundred tablets of the drug Ecstacy were seized.
The operation comes a day before an all-night pay party which, police say, will be allowed to go ahead.
Gareth Furby reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Det Insp PETER BURROWS/Thames Valley Police
LIBRARY PICTURES
STEVE DONNELLY/Promoter
Voice over
60 officers searched 13 addresses in Milton Keynes early this morning.
They seized Cannabis, Amphetamine Sulphate and Ecstasy.
The total value may only come to around £2,000; small by recent standards, but the police say the operation was a success.
He says although it is a small haul if they keep going at it they will get results.
The police say they acted after hearing reports of drug dealing in the run up to a warehouse party.
Today the organisers were setting up.
It's due to go ahead tomorrow night.
3,500 people have paid £20 a ticket.
But there'll be no alcohol on sale even though the event lasts 11 hours.
At other warehouse parties youngsters have taken the drug Ecstacy.
But the organisers of tomorrow's event insist no drugs will be on sale.
He says they have a security company to search people on the door and dealers will be pinpointed.
And the police warn they will be more raids in Milton Keynes if they hear drug dealing has started up again.
Tomorrow night plain clothes officers are expected will mix with dancers at the warehouse party, ready to catch anyone selling or using the drug Ecstasy.
An MP is calling for an improvement to the exotic bird trade which a new Government report has branded’ barbarous and inhumane’.
According to the report, twenty thousand exotic birds die each year while being imported to Britain.
Clare Lafferty reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES
CARL NICHOLSON/RSPB
TONY BALDRY MP/Con Banbury
Voice over
The Government report reveals that in ninteen ninety alone, three and a half thousand birds were dead by the time they'd arrived in Britain.
A further eighteen thousand died during quarantine because they were in such poor condition.
RSPB officials say they're appalled.
The Government is also concerned at the way exotic birds are transported.
Today the Environment Minister Tony Baldry vowed to improve conditions for birds in transit.
Mr Baldry's plans include bringing in stricter requirements for the care and housing of live birds, and introducing new checks on all imports.
The RSPB wants more radical steps to be taken.
Mr Baldry's new measures will be discussed at a Convention on International Trade in endangered species in Japan next month.
A post mortem examination on an Oxford University student, who collapsed while training for next month's boat race, has revealed he died fron natural causes.
John Hebbes, who was nineteen, was rowing on the 
WALLINGFORD/Oxfordshire
Police hunting a man who threatened to kill a pensioner have released a security video of her attacker.
SECURITY VIDEO
Just before the attack, the man was filmed shopping in the Underhill Circus Co-op in the Barton area of Oxford.
After he'd left the store, he grabbed the sixty three year-old woman by the throat, knocked her to the ground and punched her, then ran off.
One of Britain's best young chess prospects is in Holland for the start of the World Ladies' Chess Championships.
At fifteen, Harriet Hunt will be the youngest competitor in the West European Zone.
IAN MACLAREN/Oxford
HARRIET HUNT/Chess Player
JOHN WALKER/Chess Writer
Voice over
Harriet Hunt practises against adults, who would probably prefer not to risk the shame of defeat in public.
At 15, she's in a different class from the average county player.
Her sights are set on international competition.
Her best performance to date was third place in the World Junior Championships.
Tomorrow she switches to adult competition and the West European zone of the Women's World Championships.
Those who've seen Harriet develop as a player, predict a bright future.
The success of Nigel Short, who's preparing for a dramatic world championship final against Kasparov, has raised the profile of chess in this country.
But is a young player like Harriet prepared for the gamesmanship and all out psychological warfare that appears to accompany chess masters at the highest level.
As she disposes of quality adult players, with apparent ease, this 15-year old displays a remarkable poise that will see her well-equipped to take on the best in the world.
The Cavaliers and Roundheads have been stocking up for another season, re-enacting the English Civil War.
But where DO you go to find authentic Seventeenth Century arms and clothing?
Answer…a Midwinter Market.
CHRIS MOORE Reporting
GROVE Oxfordshire
IAIN HICKS-MUDD Market Organiser
Voice over
This is how members of the Sealed Knot Society re-enact the major conflicts of the Civil War.
It's tough work staging the Battle of Edgehill, with an eye for authenticity and tough on the props that bring realism to a 350 year old battle.
And this is where these latter day Roundheads and Cavaliers stock up for future conflicts.
Lain's Barn is the perfect setting for Midwinter merchants, selling everything from weapons to costume.
Those with a taste for battle choose their weapons and most of them look capable of inflicting real damage.
But an army marches on its boots and relies on much the same footwear as the soldiers of the past.
But there's just about every artefact from the past on sale.
Meanwhile, for those who want to revive their spirits, there's a re-furbished pub in Banbury, which opened today.
Ye Olde Reine Deer Inn is where Cromwell allegedly made his plans for the Civil War.
Re-enactments of the battles of 1643 are planned throughout the summer and taking care over minute details are essential for those who want to present their version of living history.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Funeral of James Bulger
The funeral has taken place of the toddler, James Bulger, on Merseyside.
Three charged over gasworks bomb
Three people have been charged in connection with the bombing of a gasworks in Cheshire last week.
Strangeways rioters sentenced
Eleven men have been jailed for up to ten years each for their part in the Strangeways prison riot.
TV revelations over Princess
Australian Television has broadcast previously unpublished extracts from a telephone conversation said to be between the Princess of Wales and her friend, James Gilbey.
Charles leaves top-grade polo
The Prince of Wales is to pull out of top-grade polo severing his sporting links with Major Ronald Ferguson.
Family die in road crash
Four members of one family, including a mother and baby, have been killed in a road accident in Norfolk.
FTSE up 14
The hundred shares index closed up fourteen point six at twenty-eight, eighty-two point six.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-four and up at two marks, thirty-seven.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back to Central News.
In a little while, we meet the young woman hoping to make an impact at the world ladies' chess championship.
But first, with a look back at the weekend sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
One of the County Ground's biggest crowds of the season, packed in to watch a typical promotion battle.
Hard, fast and close.
Town dominated, but Pompey were dangerous when they got within firing range.
Martin Ling was Swindon's inspiration he was everywhere.
Mitchell and White ran themselves into the ground and Nicky Summerbee tried everything he could to get a goal.
Towards half-time, the fans must have got the feeling that Swindon were never going to score.
If Portsmouth could survive this, they could survive anything.
The fans had come for goals and it was Pompey who nearly supplied the first.
In the second half, it was all Swindon.
Their approach play to goal was top class, but the ball just wouldn't land in the net.
They never gave up trying.
This one looked a certainty.
Some fans were shouting goal.
Summerbee the shooter groaned and Knight the keeper sighed with relief.
With 2 minutes to go, it looked all over.
A 0-0 draw, but one last attack won it for Town.
The scorer, Welsh international full-back, Paul Bodin.
His 5th goal in 7.
His third winner in as many matches.
Hail Bodin the boot.
The top of the first division shows what a vital win it was.
Swindon's next home game is against Newcastle.
Before then, it is Watford and Southend away.
The game at the Manor was just as close; just as unpredictable.
United shone first, but it was Derby who nearly scored first.
Oxford should have gone in for their half-time cuppa. 1-0 up.
The Derby defence looked as solid as a tea-bag, but Penney fluffed the shot.
There were chances in the second half too.
Lewis and Penney were robbed or at least stopped by some great goalkeeping from Martin Taylor.
Expensive miss; costly save, because just 4 minutes later, Derby had hit or rather rolled in the winner; soft goal it was.
Paul Williams the scorer
And then in injury time, the game exploded, when Derby defender, Craig Short clearly handled.
Everyone saw it, apart from the ref and even after he'd watched the video he thought it was accidental.
United manager, Brian Horton was upset with the decision.
He wouldn't shake hands with Derby manager, Arthur Cox.
The two have never seen eye to eye apparently and although some papers called him a hothead, Horton insists he wasn't going to have a go at the ref, who was given a police escort back to the dressing rooms.
I'm glad to say they all finished as friends over a glass of beer…but there were no cheers for the Tredworth rugby team from Gloucester on saturday…they were hoping for a fairy tale in their Provincial Cup Semi-Final…sadly what they got was a horror story 
Voice over
This report should have started…
Once upon a time, there was a small team from Gloucester called Tredworth, who came back from financial ruin to play in the Provincial Cup Final at Twickenham.
The fairy tale finished in the semi-final against Fleetwood at Moseley on Saturday afternoon.
No happy ending; no happy anything.
Tredworth in green and black hoops were well and truly beaten on the field, but it is what went on off the field, that this cup game will be remembered for.
The police were called in as fighting broke out in the crowd between the rival sets of supporters.
One man had his ear sliced off in the fight and another was arrested, but later released.
The players were forced to leave the field as the trouble stormed and Tredworth are saying today that poor stewarding and the sale of too much beer was to blame.
An investigation is under way into what went wrong and the trouble didn't stop there, because back on the pitch Tredworth, full-back, Andy Hill got himself sent for allegedly throwing a punch.
For the rugby records, Fleetwood won by two tries to one.
24-5 was the final score.
For the sporting records, this was one to forget.
there's better news of Gloucester…better news for rugby…the cherry and whites ran in four tries at Kingsholm on saturday to beat Richmond by 24 points to fifteen 
Voice over
A full-strength Gloucester side against Richmond.
It should have been easy; it should have been a walkover.
The 4 tries were good enough, but inbetween, the cherry and whites made heavy weather of the game.
They were 10-15 down at half-time.
Richmond scored the first try.
Gloucester came back with touchdowns from Don Caskie and Simon Morris.
The attack looks good here, but coach, Keith Richardson knows what really went on.
Keith Richardson says it was a welcome win and the 4 tries were very good, but there are areas of concern which the players are aware of.
Ball retention was poor and they will have to improve on this for the league games.
So there you.
That's how the Gloucester coach saw the game.
His team won it for sure in the second half, with tries from full-back, Martin Roberts and flanker, Pete Glanville.
Inmates and officers at Britain's newest jail say the food there is appalling.
The officers blame the private catering company for the standard of food and say they should be sacked.
The Governor admits there have been teething problems which need sorting out.
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
SHAUN/Prisoner
MARK/Prisoner
RON ADAMS/Prison Officers' Association
JOHN THOMAS-FERRAND/Governor
Voice over
On the prison menu today, a sausage roll, mushy peas and fried potatoes.
The inmates at Bullingdon jail near Bicester may be serving their time, but they claim they're being served up insufficient and unpalatable food.
Male speaker
It's appalling.
This is the most food I've had this week.
Female speaker
You're in prison, you shouldn't expect luxury.
Male speaker
We're human, we're not animals.
Voice over
The food is prepared in the prison kitchens by a private catering company — ARA, which has a contract to provide food at a set cost.
But prison officers who work alongside them claim they're over budget and as a consequence, they're are producing inadequate meals.
In addition, they say that prisoners are going to be employed in the kitchens to work alongside civilian staff, because recruitment is so difficult.
That raises new concerns about security.
Male speaker
You can't mix inmates with them.
Knives are going missing, we've had a hostage incident.
Voice over
The POA says the catering firm should be sacked and that the kitchen work should go entirely to inmates.
The prison authorities say candidates will be carefully selected.
The contractors wouldn't be interviewed but said they check the standard of food every day and they aren't aware of any dissatisfaction amongst the kitchen staff.
Male speaker
For 80 to 90 percent of the time things go well.
Unfortunately if things go wrong we go back to square one.
There's room for improvement.
We have teething problems to sort out.
Voice over
The issue of private catering in the prison will be highlighted by the POA at their conference this week.
They say it's one step closer to further privatisation within the prison service; something that leaves a bad taste in their mouths.
Scientists want to start testing a new drug which could revolutionise the treatment of cancer.
They believe they've found a way to destroy cancer cells without the unpleasant side-effects produced by existing drugs.
The new technique attacks cancer but NOT healthy tissue, and has already worked in tests on animals.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
Dr IAN HART/Imperial Cancer Research Fund
OXFORD
Prof ADRIAN HARRIS/Imperial Cancer Research Fund
Voice over
Scientists are always reluctant to use the word’ breakthrough.’
But recent work by the Imperial Cancer Research Fund could lead to a completely new approach in cancer treatment.
Already, there are many treatments which destroy cancer cells.
But they also kill other normal cells.
And this can cause side effects which can be so severe that the drugs must be used very sparingly.
Now researchers have found a way of using a gene which destroys cancer cells, but does not effect others.
It is made active by a chemical switch which is only found in malignant tissue.
Male speaker
One of the concerns of gene therapy is that other tissue will be affected.
With this technique the activity is limited to the tumour cells.
Voice over
Tests carried out on mice have been encouraging.
And so far, no side effects have appeared.
The team is now seeking approval to carry out clinical trials at the Churchill Hospital in Oxford.
Because the technique involves work with genes it must be approved by an independent ethical committee.
Initially, the scientists will be trying to treat cases of malignant melonoma; a form of skin cancer which can be caused by sun bathing and which affects more than 3,000 Britons each year, mostly women.
But the technique could eventually be used to treat many different forms of cancer.
Male speaker
If it works with melonoma it could be applied to all the other forms of cancer.
Voice over
But the doctors point out that the research is still in its early stages.
Even if all goes well, it is unlikely that gene therapy treatment will be available for at least 10 years.
(WES AD LIBS BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, going great guns.
Swindon sink Pompey in the race for promotion.
Wesley Smith
Plus, the sale of century…the SEVENTEENTH century.
In Central News tonight:Digging for clues.
Man questioned twenty years after woman vanishes.
Victim of terror.
Raiders hold knife at baby's throat.
And hard to swallow…inmates say prison food is appalling.
Good evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Joan Main was thought to have moved to South Wales after she disappeared, but despite a nationwide appeal for information the police have never tracked her down.
Now they hope they're on the verge of finally finding out what happened to her.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
Det Chief Insp DAVID SINCLAIR/Wiltshire Police
Chief Insp DAVID FRAMPTON/Wiltshire Police
Cuttings/SWINDON ADVERTISER
JULIAN HEBER-SMITH/Former Neighbour
Voice over
20 years after Joan Main disappeared, police officers have been digging up the garden of her former husband's house.
Joan, a mother-of-three, was 35 when she went missing from her home at Haydon Wick in Swindon in November 1973.
It was suggested she'd gone to live at Newport in Gwent, but she was never located.
This morning Swindon Police called a press conference to announce an important new development in the case.
In 1986, there was a nationwide appeal for anyone who may have seen Joan to come forward.
Nobody did.
The police had launched the hunt after Madeleine Cavey, Joan's husband's second wife, said she thought Joan had been killed.
Two years later David Main was given a 9-month suspended jail sentence after being found guilty of using forged papers to sell Joan's house.
The following year Madeleine committed suicide.
Mr Main, who's a plumber, was unavailable for comment when we called at his house near the Gloucestershire border.
Neighbours described him as pleasant and helpful.
One of the few clues to Joan Main's whereabouts appeared to be a birthday card she's sent to her mother from Newport.
The police later discounted that as a forgery.
They're refusing to release any information about the man they've arrested.
Digging in and around the garage of Mr Main's former home is expected to continue in the morning.
)
A gang of three armed raiders threatened to cut two babies' throats if a family didn't hand over jewellery.
They held their victims hostage for half an hour before making off with twenty thousand pounds worth of gold and a thousand pounds in cash.
Police describe the raid as extremely callous.
HARRIET RYLEY/Milton Keynes
TANWARU BEGUM/Aged 12
Det Sgt RICHARD OSMOND/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The Begum family had rung a pizza delivery service three times on Saturday night when it was late delivering to their home in Heelands in Milton Keynes.
But when the doorbell rang, at half past nine, three Asian youths armed with knives burst in.
Monwara Begum's husband, Muddin, was out — leaving his wife, three young daughters, their daughter-in-law, her eighteen month old son Imran and another grandson, four month old Salman.
Twelve year-old Tanwaru was forced to act as interpreter between the raiders and her mother who only speaks Bengali.
They said they would cut both babies' throats and held a long kitchen knife to Salman's throat, while Tanwaru was holding the child
The raiders made off with twenty thousand pounds worth of 22 carat gold jewellry, which is given to Indian women as a dowry.
They also took a thousand pounds cash.
Tanwaru says she's seen the men before in Luton and Milton Keynes — police who described the attack as’ extremely callous, say they think it was part of a pattern of similar raids:
On the day of Jamie Bulger's funeral, hundreds of mothers have vowed to work together to prevent the killing of another toddler.
The group, Mothers Against Murder, says in future women should keep an close eye on ALL children…not just their own.
GARETH FURBY/Reporting
JULIE HEARN/Mothers Against Murder
Voice over
15 days after the killing, thousands mourned today in Liverpool.
But for Julie Hearn, from Oxfordshire, grief isn't enough.
She's helped set up the protest group, Mothers Against Murder and Agression.
At the weekend they held a silent vigil in Liverpool.
And the group says if toddlers are to be protected in future, mothers everywhere must start working together.
She says in the old days women used to look out for each other 's children.
Jamie could have been saved if someone had done this.
They should do it in future.
The group says the police can't be everywhere.
It's up to mothers to protect the youngest and most vunerable.
Hundreds of women have already shown an interest.
The organisers say if the idea catches on Jamie Bulger will not have died in vain.
its the big game…
Oxford against Swindon at the Manor on Saturday…
There could be a comeback for Town player manager Glenn Hoddle…he's with the second division select side in Italy this week and may even give himself a game across there…
to rugby next and a banana skin called Bath Rugby Club sent Gloucester tumbling to their first league defeat of the season on Saturday…the score twenty nine…nine 
Voice over
we did have a winner at the weekend…young chap by the name of Nigel Mansell driving for the Oxfordshire based Williams team went and won the South African Grand Prix 
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
An arctic explorer has been preparing for his latest expedition by spending the weekend in a freezer.
David Hempleman-Adams is setting off in search of the Geomagnetic North pole in April.
But even though the fridge helped him acclimatise to the cold, the temperature of minus twenty degrees celcius was still a little on the warm-side!
Erika Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
EXPEDITION VIDEO
DAVID HEMPLEMAN-ADAMS/Arctic Explorer
Voice over
Stepping out into the freezing cold; 20 degrees below zero.
Swindon's David Hempleman-Adams is preparing with team-mate Neill Williams for another unique expedition.
To walk to the North Geomagnetic Pole a different location on the map to the geographical and magnetic pole.
David's first attempt at the challenge last year had to be abandoned because the ice began to melt.
He's philosophical about making a return journey.
Male speaker
You get used to the disappointments.
You become pragmatic.
If it happens, it happens.
If it doesn't, it doesn't!
If you're not patient with the arctic, you run into problems.
Voice over
David readily admits he hates the cold!
Although his weekend stay in a freezer owned by Farepack in Swindon is comparitively tropical to the temperatures he's likely to encounter at the North Pole.
Male speaker
We use these cold stores about minus 25 to minus 30 degrees which is a bit warm for us.
We want temperatures to go down to minus 40!
But it's important we test the equipment to check it works, before we take it on site.
Voice over
The expedition's main aim is to uncover some of the scientific mysteries hidden deep in the frozen north.
The team of four will be heading out with just packs and skis.
No dogs or vehicles to help them.
But adventure is of secondary importance to survival.
The arctic is coldhearted and should be treated with respect.
It's thirty years since Frankie Valli had his first hit with the Four Seasons, with a song that was to become his trademark.
Now he's on a comeback tour of the UK, entertaining a new generation of fans who weren't even born when his career began.
Tim Hurst reports.
1962
HEREFORD
FRANKIE VALLI
PROMOTIONAL VIDEO
Voice over
Sherry, by Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons, was one of the fastest climbing chart toppers of all time when it was released in Britain in 1962.
Thirty years on, with a new Four Seasons, Valli is touring Britain again, with a timeless repertoire of rock'n'roll standards.
Before concerts last night at the Palladium, he was appearing in Hereford, attracting a new generation of fans, as well as those he calls his oldies.
His UK tour has been timed to coincide with the release of new collection of his classic singles.
but he readily admits that years of one night stands can lead to damage.
Protestant Church leaders agree to IRA talks
Protestant Church leaders say they are prepared to meet the IRA in an effort to end the terrorist campaign.
Brooke suggests Ulster summit imminent
Meanwhile, the Northern Ireland Secretary, Peter Brooke, has suggested that an Ulster summit is imminent.
House prices continue to fall
A building society survey has revealed that house prices are continuing to fall.
NUT election campaign to highlight education
The National Union of Teachers has begun a two hundred thousand pound campaign to put education at the top of the General Election agenda.
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven point eight at twenty-five, fifty-four point three.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-five and up at two marks, eighty-eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Two men have appeared in court after three thousand forged tickets for the Cheltenham National Hunt Festival were seized by police.
They were charged with conspiracy to defraud the race course.
The tickets have a face value of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds.
Kim Barnes reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
BIRMINGHAM
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Course Manager
Voice over
Cheltenham National Hunt festival attracts thousands of visitors and features the prestigious Gold Cup Race.
Now police have seized 3,000 forged lapel tickets in a raid on this Birmingham pub and a number of houses.
Two men appeared at Birmingham Magistrates court charged with conspiraccy to defraud Cheltenham race course.
Graham Slim and Keith Hastings; both from Birmingham were remanded in custody.
This is what the real thing looks like.
Course officials fear the seized batch isn't the end of the story.
But they won't get the holder in; course security was stepped up after another fraud 10 years ago.
Race goers are advised not to buy a ticket offered at less than face value, while anyone who's concerned about a ticket they've already bought should get in touch with the course.
Meanwhile preparations for the festival which takes place next week are under way.
Gold Cup day is already sold out.
Officials are warning further forgeries could cause hold ups on the day and are hoping it won't spoil the festival atmosphere.
The daughters of a man who died after breathing asbestos dust are suing his employers British Rail for a hundred thousand pounds.
They say that until his death he cared for their mother, who's disabled with polio.
Now she requires expensive nursing.
Richard Barnett reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
AMATEUR VIDEO
Voice over
Mervyn Hayward worked for 46 years as a Coppersmith at the British Rail engineering works in Swindon.
He retired early in 1981 so he could nurse his wife Ruby, who was partially paralyzed with polio.
His family said he acted like a Saint.
The High Court in Bristol has been hearing how Mr Hayward became seriously ill in 1989 with a tumour caused by asbestos in his lungs.
A year later he died after suffering months of agonizing pain.
His widow is now in a nursing home in Swindon.
She can no longer walk unaided, she needs round the clock care and spends much of her time in a wheelchair.
The family say if her husband was still alive, he would be looking after her at home.
Her daughters, Elizabeth Beak and Rosemarie Craig are claiming damages totalling around £100,000 against British Rail for negligence.
The claim is for the pain and suffering Mr Hayward went through before his death and to pay the nursing home fees for his widow.
British Rail Engineering says it accepts that Mr Hayward was exposed to asbestos at work which led to his death.But it disputes the amount claimed.The Judge will decide on the claim tomorrow.
A village which has been hit by a big increase in crime has become the first in Britain to install video cameras on its roads.
Now everyone coming into or leaving the village will be recorded on video tape.
Ken Goodwin reports.
PURTON/Gloucestershire
WENDY LORD/Landlady
Insp COLIN HANDY/Crime Prevention Officer
Voice over
Big brother has come to the village of Purton in Gloucestershire.
This camera is being used to crack down on a crime explosion that's made victims of people like 91 year old Beatrice Wakefield, burgled of her savings as she sat in the garden.
She says that they took everything, £200 plus all her jewellery.
Purton is a tranquil village nestling between the banks of the River Severn and the Sharpness Canal.
Hardly the sort of place, you'd think, to be hit hy a crimewave.
But that's exactly what's happened and now fed up villagers are doing something about it.
They've clubbed together to pay for the instalation of two video cameras, which scan the only road into the neighbouring villages of Purton and Halmore.
Now, if a crime is committed, the police will be able to play back the video tape for clues, noting for instance the registration numbers of vehicles using the road.
One of those behind the idea, is landlady Wendy Lord who's pub is among the properties which have been burgled.
She says 5 years ago there was virtualy no crime, now that's all changed and the community has had to respond to that change.
The idea has proved popular among villagers, many of whom would like to see a return to the days when they could safely leave their doors unlocked.
She says that there's quite a lot of crime in the village, with cars driving through at night, break-in's, etc.
She says that the video camera is a good idea, especially as the police seem so stretched these days.
He says that they have to police a large area, with officers spread thinly.
The idea of a community taking it's own initiative is a good one and he hopes it works.
Villagers have contributed an average of three pounds each towards the video camera scheme, most say that's a small price indeed to pay for some added peace of mind.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
POLICE VIDEO
PC ANDY ALEXANDER/Wiltshire Police
CHIPPENHAM/Wiltshire
OZZIE GRIFFITHS
POLICE VIDEO
WALTER GIRVEN/Wiltshire Chief Constable
Voice over
This is probably one of the maddest motorway manoevres you'll see.
A car travelling at 100 mph in the outside lane of the M4 motorway west of Swindon towing another car.
They were caught on camera by amazed police officers in an unmarked car.
The two vehicles were separated by just 13ft of rope tied diagonally between them.
The safe breaking distance for vehicles at that speed is more than 300ft.
The dangers are clear to see.
Male speaker
It's tremendous; indescribable.
With most of the traffic travelling 20 to 25 mph faster than anyone else.
If something happened and they tried to stop, they could become a missile travelling at 90 mph; a big one.
Voice over
The driver of the lead car, Martin Barnes pleaded guilty to reckless driving at Chippenham Magistrates court.
He accepted he'd been grossly stupid and foolhardy.
He was banned from driving for 6 months and ordered to do 200 hours of community service.
Meanwhile the passenger in the second car was reliving the horror of being towed at such great speed.
When the cars were finally stopped by police, Ozzie Griffiths thanked the police for pulling them over.
Male speaker
All you got to do is keep an eye open and watch the break lights.
I think it was safer than being among the lorries.
It could have caused an accident, but it didn't.
Voice over
The high speed tow is just one of many video nasties police have filmed on the regions motorways.
Here, cars are reversing back up a slip road because the way ahead is blocked.
Here someone is changing a wheel on the hard shoulder as traffic speeds by.
And here a car and trailer are too close to the vehicle ahead and can't break in time.
Britain's top traffic police officer, Wiltshire's Chief Constable Walter Girven is hoping the video message will bring an end to motorway madness.
Male speaker
There will always be people who'll take a chance.
We're addressing their wives and children and loved ones do you want your people to wipe themselves out and other people off the earth.
If so let them carry on.
Voice over
This stupidity nearly cost Martin Barnes his liberty.
The court had considered sending him to jail.
It could so nearly have cost him his life.
There's traffic chaos in the region tonight with thousands of motorists caught up in tailbacks more than seven miles long.
It's been caused by a delay in the operation to move a bridge crossing the M4 near the Severn estuary.
Nick Clark reports.
GLOUCESTERSHIRE
Supt CHRIS PHILLIPS/Gloucestershire Police
PETER MOSS/Department of Transport
LORD BRABAZON/Transport Minister
Voice over
What the Department of Transport hoped would be an engineering showpiece has become something of an embarrasment.
A stubborn bridge leading to jammed roads and rush hour tailbacks.
Some of the worst congestion has been in Cheltenham and Gloucester, the traffic diversions along roads in and out of Wales meaning an extra 76 mile journey for some drivers.
The bridge was supposed to have been moved and the motorway re-opened by yesterday morning.
At 4.00 pm this afternoon, the 2,000 ton span hadn't budged.
The hope to open the motorway in time for tonight's rush-hour doomed.
Male speaker
The traffic's been very bad.
Voice over
Ever since the bridge was turned on Saturday ready for its short journey down the motorway to its demolition site, the 79m structure had been developing visible cracks.
Engineers have been forced to operate at a snail's pace to counter the danger of the bridge deteriorating further.
This afternoon the Government and the Department of Transport apologised for the delay.
Male speaker
We're very sorry this has happened.
Male speaker
It was a tricky move and the delay hasn't altogether suprised us but we are very sorry for all the problems.
Voice over
In the event the wheels did start rolling about 4.45 pm this afternoon.
It's travelling at one mph and SHOULD be off the motorway by 7.00 pm tonight, with the road opening an hour later.
Several thousand drivers will hope the engineers are right, this time.
Let's stay with high culture with Rolf Harris's version of the seventies rock classic Stairway to Heaven.
It seems this year's surprise chart hit has prompted a renewed interest in the didgeridoo.
And that's meant a big boost in trade for one of the few people in this country who makes them.
CLARE LAFFERTY Syde
JEREMY BROOKES Didgeridoo Maker
Voice over
INSTRUMENT
Can you see what it is yet?
Well, with a bit more work from craftsman Jeremy Brookes, this piece of wood will be turned into a didgeridoo.
Didgeridoos were first made and used by Aborigines in Australia.
But the instrument was made really famous by that most celebrated of Antipodeans, Rolf Harris.
Thanks to his latest musical offering it's more popular than ever.
Jeremy, who's from Gloucester started making didgeridoos as a hobby.
He's been doing it for three years now.
And thanks to Rolf's record he's never been so busy.
It takes Jeremy about three days to make each instrument.
They can be anything from four to ten feet long.
And every one gives a different sound.
Jeremy claims anyone can play a didgeridoo.
People in Cirencester weren't so convinced.
Well they say practise makes perfect.
But some people think that one famous didgeridoo player is already one too many.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Prescriptions rise to
Medical prescription charges are to rise by fifty pence to four pounds, twenty-five.
Dentist and optician fees will also rise.
Crackdown on youth crime
The Home Secretary has announced plans for new secure training centres to tackle young frequent offenders.
Britons in Texas siege
It's believed that up to fifty Britons could be involved in the siege involving a heavily armed religious group in Texas.
Armed police at bomb trial
Armed police kept a look out as three men appeared in court in connection with the IRA gasworks bombing in Cheshire.
Princess arrives in Nepal
The Princess of Wales has arrived in Nepal for a four-day visit.
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down point three at twenty-eight, eighty-two point three.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-five and up at two marks, thirty-eight.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
(WES AD LIBS BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, Aston Martin's new cut price car.
(ANNE) Aston Martin has unveiled what by its standards is a cutprice sports car.
The DB7 will still cost close to eighty thousand pounds, but that's a fraction of the price of the company's other cars.
(WES) Aston Martin says it's the most important new sports car since the E-type Jag.
Environmentalists say it's a dinosaur of the road 
Promotional Video/SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
JACKIE STEWART/Director
BLOXHAM/Oxfordshire
KAREN MCVEIGH/Friends of the Earth
WALTER HAYES/Chairman
Voice over
It'll do 165 mph and 0 to 60 in under 6 seconds and it's a mere snip at less than £80,000.
It's half the price of any other Aston Martin.
But management at Newport Pagnell are convinced they won't miss their market.
The DB 7's revealed to the world at the Geneva Motor Show today.
Company men, like former world champion racing driver Jackie Stewart believe it's a world beater.
Male speaker
What Aston Martin are doing here is the first breath of fresh air that's been brought to the industry for a very long time.
This is the the new generation of a motorcar of enormous iumportance to Britain.
It's a very important motor car.
Voice over
The DB7 will be built at the Oxfordshire factory used by Jaguar to produce the XJ220.
The facilities at Bloxham have become available because both marques are now owned by Ford.
300 are planned for next year rising to 600 in 1995.
For enthusiasts it brings motoring craftsmanship within more affordable range.
But there are those who say such a concentration of valuable resources is wrong and that the sportscar is the dinosaur of the road.
Female speaker
They're designed primarily to be fast and powerful and therefore they're very polluting and in fact, when you look at the engineering and craftsmenship, it could be much more usefully employed making models more fuel efficient and therefore, less polluting.
Voice over
But Aston Martin point to the fact that of the 12,000 of their cars built over 80 years, 9,000 are still on the road.
Buy an Aston Martin; buy a car for life.
Male speaker
I know a very distinguished gentleman at Windsor who's reaching a certain age where he wants to put the Aston Martin in his will in case there may be a family war over its inheritance.
They are that kind of car and if you look at £80,000 and how long it'll last you and see how many £15,000 cars you'll buy in that time, we're probably bargains.
Voice over
If the security services are hit by defence cuts, maybe even James Bond might consider buying a new more affordable Aston Martin.
A tree that's thought to have provided arrows for the Battle Of Agincourt has been saved from collapse.
The yew tree is estimated to be at least two thousand years old and required drastic surgery to make it safe.
KEN GOODWIN/Staunton
JIM UNWIN/Tree Surgeon
Rev JOHN EVANS/Vicar
Voice over
Tree surgeon, Jim Unwin, took one look at this ancient yew in Staunton churchyard and realised he'd have to act fast.
The tree, thought to be more than 2,000 years old, was in imminent danger of collapse.
He says that the tree is split into two halves.
These needed pinning together.
No-one knows for sure the exact age of the tree.
But it would seem it was planted long before the church was built.
He says that it probably pre-dates the church by 1,000 years.
It may well have been used to make bows for local archers who went off to fight in the battle of Agincourt.
There are not many yews of this age left in Britain; in fact if the tree is 2,000 years old it'll be one of only about 40 trees in western Europe to have reached this age.
But how much longer can it last?
He says that if it's given regular pruning there's no reason why it shouldn't live for a few hundred years more.
So, the tree which from which bows used in the Battle of Agincourt could have been fashioned seems set to live on for a few more generations yet.
The tenor Jose Carreras is to open a new outdoor festival of opera set in a castle grounds.
The series of four concerts aims to bring classical music to a wider audience, although the tickets aren't cheap.
The promoters say they hope that if the event becomes an annual festival, prices may then come down.
HARRIET RYLEY/Sudeley Castle
LADY ASHCOMBE/Owner
LESLEY GARRETT/Opera Singer
GREGG LYNN/Festival Organiser
Voice over
Jose Carreras has had some practice singing out of doors — he sang in the grounds of Castle Howard last year and also in front of a 15,000-strong audience in Bath.
On July 22nd, this summer he'll be opening the first Sudeley summer festival in the grounds of Sudeley Castle.
A special stage stretching out over a carp pond will be built in front of a ruined tithe barn, with 2 stands of covered seating for 2,500 people.
The family who live there have always felt the castle's gardens were just right for a musical performance.
English National Soprano, Lesley Garrett will be singing in the third of the 4 concerts.
Sudeley Castle is quite a contrast to some places she's performed at.
The ticket prices range from £65 for Jose Carreras to £40 — £45 for the other concerts, which the organisers admit isn't cheap.
Tickets go on sale in April.
If the festival is a success, it's planned to hold concerts at Sudeley every summer and promote young up-and-coming performers alongside more famous ones.
Oxfam aid workers say they've become the new targets in the war in Somalia.
The charity has seen positive results from health care and farming projects.
But even though the famine is beginning to ease, the recent death of a worker from another charity has highlighted the danger for Oxfam volunteers.
GARGY PATEL/Reporting
DAVID BRIAR/Oxfam Director
JOHN MAGRATH/Oxfam
Voice over
Hope again for the people of Somalia.
The famine is beginning to ease and Oxfam's farming and health care projects have seen good results.
A few months ago, thousands fled to refugee camps across the border in Kenya.
Civil war and malnutrition had taken their toll.
Relief supplies flown in by planes from RAF Lyneham played a vital part in keeping people alive.
The Hercules aircraft have now stopped bringing in aid.
Oxfam says the country is on the road to recovery.
Its director, David Briar has seen how the farmers have made a new beginning.
So agriculture is getting back to normal, but villagers are still in danger of being looted by armed factions in this war.
And aid volunteers have become the latest targets.
The route to Mogadishu is particularly dangerous.
Valerie Place was killed just a few days after Oxfam workers had visited the area.
The presence of both American and United Nations troops has stabilised the country.
Farmers still face natural disasters.
This makeshift boat is the only way to reach the crop fields.
The day after Oxfam was there, heavy flooding swept it away.
But the crucial problem is still the war.
Most of the country has been devastated by fighting, the worst of the famine was due to conflict.
If Somalia is to have a chance of survival, Oxfam says disarmament is the key to a better future.
Ten fighter jets from Upper Heyford have left the base for the last time, as the American operation there begins to wind down.
It's been a sad day for many of the base personnel.
And many villagers who've grown up with the noise of the jets say its the end of an era.
GARETH FURBY/Upper Heyford
Lt Col KEN HOLDER/USAF
Capt PAUL DAVIS/USAF
WENDY LOVEGROVE/Village Post Office
PATRICK QUINN/Parish Council Chairman
Voice over
After more than 20 years in the skies over Oxfordshire, the F1-11 fighter bomber is leaving.
10 flew out today and by December, all 50 will have gone.
Soon many of the 11,000 Americans at Upper Heyford will follow as well.
It is part of the wind down of NATO bases, following the end of the cold war.
He says he'll be sad to go.
He'll have to leave behind the friends he's made in England.
The Upper Heyford F1-11s took their part in the Gulf War and the bombing of Libya.
But the basic design is 25 years old.
To the mechanics who've nutured the old warhouse over the years, it's like saying goodbye to an old friend.
He says each jet has its own character.
Last autumn an F1-11 crashed, narrowly mnissing to the village of Upper Heyford.
2 crew were killed and many locals felt they'd had a lucky escape.
But today there was some sadness in the village pubs and shops, now that the Americans are finally preparing to pull out.
She says it'll mean less trade.
He says many people in the village have grown up with the noise of the jets.
They've never known anything different.
Most of the F1-11s will remain on active service at an airbase in the United States.
But some will be mothbattled.
And Upper Heyford now faces a similar fate.
The Americans have been here since 1950.
But unless theres a change of plan, by the summer of next year the base will effectively be deserted.
With just 1000 troops staying behind to guard the empty airfield.
Police have begun a campaign against car tax dodgers.
Non payment costs the taxpayer millions of pounds a year, so today roadside checkpoints were set up to stop drivers at random.
But it wasn't just the disc dodgers who found themselves in trouble.
CHRIS MOORE/Worcester
Insp DAVID WOOLRIDGE/West Mercia Police
RHOS MATHIAS/DVLA
The end of the morning rush hour.
Just a few hundred yards from West Mercia police HQ in Worcester and the first of what's thought to be 28,000 drivers in this area with no tax disc, is pulled in.
Male speaker
’ We are here for road safety and to prevent road accidents.
We are not just looking for tax disc dodgers, we are looking for insurance offences, or MOT offences and the condition of vehicles.’
Voice over
He is asked if he has been booked.
Male speaker
’ I presume so.
He has taken my details for having no tax.
I knew it was out — I am short of money.’
Voice over
Of course, there's usually a reason why the tax hasn't been renewed.
Male speaker
Sorry mate, the wife's taken it along with the insurance and MOT to be re-done today at the post office.
Voice over
She's taken the old disc?
Yes, yes.
The reason why we've stopped you is that there's no disc on your windscreen.
Yes I know.
I'm doing it today.
Are you?
And the trawl for tax dodgers also threw up other misdemeanours.
An illegal tyre here.
Male speaker
They will check the vehicle to make sure the tyre has been replaced.
Voice over
When it's fully legal, they will stamp the certificate and you send it to us.
That way it doesn't involve any court appearance.
No seat-belt there.
Male speaker
I can deal with the incident by means of a fixed penalty ticket.
It's non-endorsable and won; t carry penalty points on your licence.
Voice over
If you're caught without road tax, it can be an expensive business.
Fines for a car are up to £1,000; for a lorry, up to £25,000.
It's cheaper to get a tax disc.
Male speaker
My message is don't risk a fine.
Get your disc in time.’
Voice over
But if you were caught today, remember, they're only doing their job.
Who said policemen aren't human?
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
MIKE STAIRS/Freelance Journalist
Voice over
As police looking for the remains of Joan Main continued digging at the back of a townhouse in Swindon's Old Town, her ex-husband David Main, whose house it once was, appeared before magistrates charged with her murder.
Joan was 35 when she went missing from her home in Haydon Wick in January 1973.
Despite early suggestions she'd started a new life in South Wales, she has never been found.
Local journalist Mike Stairs has been following the story closely, but says it wasn't until the mid-'80s that it was given national attention.
It wasn't until yesterday that Swindon Police announced they'd arrested a man in connection with Joan's disappearance.
He was later confirmed as David Main, a 60-year-old plumber from Broadwell near Lechlade.
60-year-old David Hugh Main appeared before Swindon Magistrates this morning.
The prosecution alleges that he murdered his ex-wife some time between the 21st and 23rd of January 1973 — she was last seen alive on the 20th.
There was no application for bail, and Main was remanded in custody for a week.
The police say that no body has yet been found.
Digging will resume in the morning.
A patient who claimed he almost died after a doctor failed to diagnose his heart attack, has been speaking about his battle against medical red-tape.
Paul Jordan was unable to lodge an official complaint about the doctor because he missed the deadline for procedings.
His story is told in a Central television documentary tonight, which highlights the difficulties of bringing a case against a G.P. 
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
PAUL JORDAN/Heart Patient
’ TUESDAY SPECIAL’/Central Television
BRIDGIT JORDAN/Wife
COLIN NEWTON/Widower
Voice over
Paul Jordan from Kidlington in Oxfordshire was suffering the first pains of a heart attack, when his GP told him the agony was caused by a bad bed.
Male speaker
The doctor said I probably had a viral infection and the bed was too soft.
If you're thinking you're having a heart attack, I can assure you, you're not.
Female speaker
He was in a state of collapse.
He said he was feeling sick and numb and had a crushing pain.
I felt it had to be a heart attack.
Voice over
A second doctor confirmed it WAS a heart attack.
Mr Jordan needed 2 weeks in hospital and three months off work to recover.
But because he waited more than 13 weeks before he took any action, he was too late to lodge an official complaint against his GP.
A Tuesday Special documentary tonight investigates Britain's laborious and painful complaints procedure.
’ Losing Patients’explains how it's mainly doctors who investigate doctors and how tribunals often take place in private.
Colin Newton from Craven Arms in Shropshire lost his wife, Patricia.
She had blood clots on the lung, but when the symptoms recurred, her doctor diagnosed something completely different.
Male speaker
’ It was hayfever’he said.
But I knew it was more serious.
I took her to hospital.
They said she had pulmonary embolism and 7 days later, she died.
Voice over
Mrs Newton's GP wouldn't be interviewed.
He was found blameless by all official health service investigations.
Male speaker
The law not there to protect the patients, it's there to protect doctors.
It's corrupt, it wants changing.
Voice over
Mr Newton is now trying to sue his GP.
Losing Patients is on Central tonight at 7.30 p.m.
A film which stars the people of a railway town and whose costumes were created by a cleaner, has scooped two major awards.
The drama called’ When I was a girl’focuses on life in Swindon in the fifties.
It's already won international acclaim with a Grand Prix for the Best European short film…and has just clinched the prestigious Golden Gate award in the United States.
Erika Barnes reports on the nostalgic story of a young girl whose life was turned upside down.
WHEN I WAS A GIRL/Thamesdown Media Arts
KATY SMITH/Actress
DAVID YATES/Director
CAROL COMLEY/Thamesdown Media Arts
Female speaker
When I was a girl we moved to Swindon.
It was because the air was supposed to be better for my Dad.
He had a problem with his chest.
Voice over
It's a powerful image of Swindon in the 50s seen through the eyes of a girl called Anne.
At the age of 12, her life appears so carefree, but growing up in the railway town sees her family growing apart.
Anne is played by Swindon schoolgirl, Katy Smith; her first ever acting role.
Female speaker
Anne was supposed to be 12 and I was actually 14 when I did it.
She had lots of problems with her parents.
Her Dad was a drunk and her Mum ran away.
It showed her developing trying to understand what was happening to her life.
Voice over
’ When I was a girl’was the brainchild of Oxfordshire director, David Yates who delivers dark, yet affectionate memories of days gone by.
From childish disappointment when Anne's parents forget to attend the school play, to the adolescent discoveries in the town park.
Female speaker
When I was a girl I discovered sex!
Male speaker
Swindon's got a really northern feel as a town and I'm from the north of England myself.
It's got a lot of history, partly to do with its railway background and’ When I was a girl’was set in that world; red brick, terraced housing and it's really unique in that sense I think for a town in the south of England.
Voice over
The scenes used in the film are familiar.
The GWR railway museum in Swindon provided an ideal location.
Steam trains brought with them good times and bad to the town and townspeople alike.
It was an enterprising project on a small budget; making the best of local talent.
Male speaker
Our costume designer was a cleaner at the town hall; a wonderful woman called Fran who made the most wonderful costumes.
The cast were mainly non-professionals and I think what's exciting is their contribution to this film made it the success it is.
It's now being shown around the world.
Voice over
The film was made in association with Thamesdown's Media Arts group.
The international acclaim for’ When I was a girl’will help them put Swindon firmly on the film-making map and help Swindon reflect on its inheritance and the way ahead.
Female speaker
It's reinforced Swindon's sence of identity as a railway town.
But also Swindon as an ex-railway town, that is looking to the future.
I think at the end of’ When I was a girl’the main character Katy is looking to the future.
Female speaker
And we get on.
I think 'cos I'm more grown up and so is she.
'Cos now I'm a woman.
Voice over
The world's fastest and most expensive estate car has been unveiled.
Despite a price tag of more than a (165) hundred and sixty-five thousand pounds, Aston Martin are confident they'll find a ready market for the vehicle.
Mark Kiff reports.
NEWPORT PAGNELL/Buckinghamshire
GEOFF COURTNEY/Aston Martin
MALCOLM McKAY/Classic Cars Magazine
Voice over
Aston Martin call it the Virage Shooting Brake, a name with a certain ring to it.
After all, at this price, the word’ Estate’doesn't really convey the right image.
When it was first shown to the Buckinghamshire firm's workforce it certainly created the right impression; an achievment in a factory used to seeing some of the world's most desireable cars.
Aston Martin seem sure they're onto the right thing.
Male speaker
We're claiming it to be the fastest estate car in the world, the most exclusive and the most expensive.
Voice over
The car has a top speed of a 152 miles an hour plus all the features the golf-clubbing, jet-setting buyer would want.
One of Aston Martin's most famous customers…
James Bond…would surely approve of the gun holders in the back.
This model is the first estate Aston Martin have actually made themselves in their 78 year history.
Male speaker
We have never ever here at the factory built an estate car before.
There have been eighteen previous Aston Martin estate cars all converted by an outside company, Harold Radford of London.
So this is a first for Aston Martin, after all these years.
Voice over
The pedigree is clear to see.
But will anyone pay the money for such an expensive supercar?
The company and the critics have no doubt the answer is yes.
Male speaker
There is a limited market for them.
Particularly to people who buy Aston Martins at the moment.
There isn't room in the standard car.
If you've spent a £145,000 on the standard Virage, you don't want to put your muddy labrador on the back seat, messing up the leather, so it's much better to actually have some space in the back for it.
Voice over
The car, it seems, has every indication of success.
But get your orders in fast; they only plan to build around fifteen each year.
The Dowty Group is shedding a further one hundred and eighty jobs.
It's getting rid of almost half the workforce at Dowty Seals in Ross-on-Wye.
Thirty more jobs are to go at another plant at Cinderford in the Forest of Dean.
STAVERTON/Gloucestershire
It follows last week's announcement of three hundred redundancies at Dowty Aerospace at Staverton in Gloucestershire.
The company blames the recession and a downturn in orders.
A girl needed eighteen stitches to her face after she was savaged by a dog.
Now her mother, a Labour councillor, wants all dogs banned from children's playgrounds.
Debbie Kelly reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
AIMEE MANDERSON/Age 9
MARGARET MANDERSON/Mother
Voice over
18 stitches were needed to repair Aimee Manderson's face.
She was attacked as she played in a children's playground as she bent down to stroke a dog tied to a post it attacked her.
Female speaker
I had blood running down my face.
I ran out of the park crying towards my mother.
Female speaker
She had her mouth open and there was a hole in her top lip.
I said;’ What have you done.’
Voice over
Unlike some other boroughs, Thamesdown doesn't ban dogs from children's playgrounds, although some owners follow a voluntary code.
Mrs Manderson the local councillor wants that changed.
Female speaker
I don't think its fair to children to have dogs in playgrounds.
Voice over
But Thamesdown Council say it'll cost too much to put up gates and fences to keep the dogs out and it can't afford to pay the legal cost of bringing in a by law.
Money, Aimee, who is scarred physically and mentally by the attack, believes would be well spent.
Cattle have been evacuated from sheds next to a burning barn at Gloucester Cattle Market.
Twenty firemen are trying to bring the fire under control.
Livestock 
GLOUCESTER
A telephone advice line for Gulf War families could fold because the couple who run the service from their home are facing eviction.
They're appealing for funds to ensure the future of the Gulf Families Crisis Line.
Tim Hurst reports.
WITHINGTON/Gloucestershire
DOUG MORRIS/Crisis Line
Sir TEDDY TAYLOR MP/Con Southend East
Voice over
Business debts of almost £200,000 may force the sale of the Gulf Families' Crisis Line headquarters at Withington in Gloucestershire.
It's the home of Crisis Line founder Doug Morris, who's defence consultancy in the Middle East was crippled by the war.
Mounting debts, unconnected with Crisis Line, may leave the service without a home, wiping out a year's work building up a national referral network.So Mr Morris wants a grant to continue the work.
Doug Morris and his wife Wendy run the Crisis Line, with colleague Barry Lloyd, founder of the Gulf Families Association.
Mr Lloyd is taking legal advice after charges of theft against him were dropped without reaching court.
Their Gulf War stress counselling, they believe, should be expanded to cope with disasters like Lockerbie.
Unlike other European countries, Britain has no national network able to cope with another Zeebrugge or Hillsborough.
Crisis Line does have political support for its work with victims of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Crisis Line need £200,000 to save the property; a national disaster management network, they believe, could be established for a totasl of £300,000.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
BRISTOL
AMATEUR VIDEO
ELIZABETH BEAK/Daughter
Voice over
Elizabeth Beak and Rosemarie Craig brought the High Court claim against British Rail Engineering on behalf of their mother, Ruby Hayward, who's partially paralysed with polio.
She's in a nursing home in Swindon.
Her husband Mervyn worked at the Swindon railway workshops for 46 years and was frequently exposed to asbestos.
He retired early to care for his wife, but died of a tumour caused by breathing in asbestos dust.
The Judge, Mr Justice De Cunha said Mr Hayward had been an exemplary husband who'd cared for his wife around the clock.
He'd suffered intense pain before his death.
He awarded the damages for the suffering Mr Hayward had endured, and to pay the nursing home fees for his widow.
After the hearing his daughter welcomed the damages award of £142,000:
Female speaker
The money will ensure her mother is well looked after.
She believes British Rail Engineering could have done more to protect her father from the danger of asbestos.
Voice over
Mrs Hayward can now look forward to proper care for the rest of her life.
British Rail Engineering has refused to comment on the award.
A Government minister has agreed to investigate the case of RAF wives who face eviction from their homes because their marriages have broken down.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd has asked the Ministry of Defence for more information.
But his intervention came too late for one woman who was evicted today.
This report from Gareth Furby.
CARTERTON/Oxfordshire
SUSAN HURD/RAF Wife
DIANE FOSTON/RAF Wife
Sqdn Ldr GRAHAM COPPING/RAF Brize Norton
CLARE REDDCLIFF/RAF Divorcee
SUSAN HURD/RAF Wife
Voice over
For nearly 3 years Susan Hurd has made an RAF house her home.
But when her marriage broke down and her husband, a corporal, moved out, she was no longer entitled to live there.
Today the bailiffs finally arrived.
She says they've taken her home.
They shouldn't be allowed to do this to people.
Supporting her, other women who say they could also lose their homes because they're separated from their RAF husbands.
In total nearly 40 households on the estate serving RAF Brize Norton could eventually face eviction.
And the local council says it can't house them.
The best it can offer is bed and breakfast.
She says they have children to bring up and have suffered the stress of a broken marriage and now they have to cope with all this.
One woman's anger boiled over.
She asks them how they can sleep at night.
She says it's all happened just because she chose to marry an RAF serviceman.
But after the shouting there was nothing to do except drive away, even though there are empty RAF flats just across the road.
Nearly 70 properties are unoccupied.
The base says they need modernisation.
And even when they're fit to be lived in.
They'll go to RAF personnel and not their ex-wives.
He says they have 81 families waiting to move into service accomodation.
This woman's was also due for eviction today, but the bailiffs were held back after she wrote to her local MP Douglas Hurd, who's agreed to make inquiries.
She says it seems unfair that she's not being evicted but Mrs Hurd is.
Her home is now the lounge of her brother's flat; his sofa is now her bed.
She says it's a nightmare come true and it's not fair.
A man who was apparently brain damaged during an operation has been given permission to sue for damages…even though the operation took place twenty five years ago.
The High Court says Keith Atkinson should be allowed to sue after an operation in nineteen sixty seven, even though some of the medical team have since died.
Tim Hurst reports.
MALVERN/Worcestershire
KEITH ATKINSON/Patient
ANDREW MOSS/Oxfordshire Health Authority
JOAN ATKINSON/Mother
Voice over
Keith Atkinson from Malvern in Worcestershire, went into hospital as a teenager in 1967 for two operations to remove brain tumours.
He and his family say the second operation was unnecessary, and the hospital, the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford, was negligent; a claim Oxfordshire Health Authority deny.
The operation left Keith profoundly disabled, he's deaf, he walks with difficulty and suffers double vision.
Legal claims for medical injury must normally be filed within three years, but the High Court has made the unusual decision that Keith can sue for damages, 25 years after his operation.
Oxfordshire Health Authority say they regret Keith Atkinson's disabilities, but they deny any negligence by staff in 1967.
In 1986, new evidence came to light about Keith's condition.
6 years on, he's asking the High Court to solve the puzzle of what went wrong.
One man has died and another was seriously injured when a fifteen tonne machine fell on them at a factory in Gloucestershire.
BROCKWORTH/Gloucestershire
The accident happened at the ICI fibres plant in Brockworth near Gloucester.
The men, from Pickfords Removals, were loading a machine onto a trailer when part of it collapsed, trapping the men beneath them.
It took ambulance crews more than half an hour to free them.
One of the men died in hospital.
The Health and Safety Executive is investigating.
Children, at least seem to be getting richer, despite the recession.
A survey has shown that pocket money has increased in the past year by almost double the rate of inflation.
But as Ken Goodwin reports, nothing much has changed when it comes to how children choose to spend their cash.
GLOUCESTER
RUSS JAMES/Walls
Voice over
If the recession is hitting mums and dads, it's certainly not being passed on to the children.
A survey by the Gloucester based ice cream company Walls shows that pocket money is keeping well ahead of inflation.
The biggest increase is on Wall's own doorstep, in Gloucestershire and the South West.
But the survey has also thrown up an anomaly between the north and south.
He says that pocket money increases in the north are outstripping those in the south, in a strange reversal of trends.
When the survey started in 1975, the average weekly pocket money was 33 pence.
By last year it had risen to one pound sixty nine.
Most years pocket money has kept well ahead of inflation, and this year is no exception.
It's up to one pound eighty two, an increase of eight per cent, more than double the rate of inflation.
Central South compared the results with it's own mini survey among children at Moat junior school in Gloucester.
So how much pocket do these children get?
Some get about a pound a week, while on girl gets a pound a day, another five pounds a fortnight.
Another accuses his dad of being a bit stingy.
Do they have to do anything to earn their pocket money?
The general concensus is that some housework is required — car cleaning, bed making, one lad even tries his hand at ironing!
And what do they spend their pocket money on?
Sweets, as you'd expect, but also arcade games, and’ taking my girlfriend to the pictures’
Like the Walls survey, ours shows quite a wide cross section of income and expenditure.
But ours also revealed a bit of quick thinking enterpise: Eight year old Adam who's had his pocket money stopped, spotted our camera, and before we left insisted on making this appeal:
He says Mum, can I have some pocket money again please?
One of the world's top snooker players has been gracing an unlikely stage.
Former world champion Dennis Taylor was guest of honour at the Oxford Union Society.
Robin Powell was there.
DENNIS TAYLOR Snooker Player
CHRIS GRZESIK Student
Voice over
A familiar sight for snooker fans; Dennis Taylor potting another black.
But this isn't the Crucible or the Assembly Rooms, it's the Oxford Union.
Dennis was on his first visit there and signing the star-studded visitors' book is enough to make even a former world champion feel a little over-awed.
Of course, the genial Ulsterman is an entertainer as well as a sportsman these days and the audience was there for his jokes as much as his trick shots.
The Union's more famous for producing Cabinet ministers than snooker players, but for Balliol undregraduate, Chris Grzesik, this was the chance of a lifetime.
His prize for winning the Union snooker competition.
3 frames with Dennis Taylor.
Was he nervous?
For a sport that's supposed to indicate a mis-spent youth, those bright young things at the Union take it very seriously.
Dennis Taylor did his best to keep things light-hearted.
But soon it was on with those famous upside-down glasses and down to business.
Surprisingly it was the student who took the first frame, managing a break of 54.
But the pro took the match, winning the second and third.
For Chris it was a result he'll never forget; for Dennis a reminder that if he's to make an impact at next month's world championship, even he will need to do some potting practice.
Major attacks Labour on taxes
In Prime Minister's Question Time, Mr Major said a Labour government would mean more taxes and higher interest rates for homeowners.
Kinnock accuses Tories of putting cash before health
Meanwhile, Mr Kinnock has accused the Conservatives of putting cash before health in its policies.
Clarke in crisis talks after Lords reject bill
The Education Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, has been holding crisis talks after the Lords threw out two Government proposals in the Education (Schools) Bill.
A campaign costing five hundred million pounds over three years is underway to combat credit card fraud which cost companies more than a hundred and sixty-five million pounds last year.
FTSE up 11
The hundred shares index closed up eleven point one at twenty-five, sixty-five point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-four and unchanged at two marks, eighty-eight.
And finally, in case you haven't remembered, it's pancake day.
Pancake races have been run across the region to mark Shrove Tuesday.
OLNEY/Buckinghamshire
One of the oldest races has been taking place in the village of Olney since (1445) fourteen forty five.
The story goes that a housewife, who was making pancakes before Lent, realised she was late for church…and rushed off, still clutching her pancake.
Today, the race attracts huge crowds…and raises money for local charities.
The winner of today's (415) four hundred and fifteen yard dash was thirty-three-year-old Hazel Jones.
(That's it for tonight.
Our main programme tomorrow is earlier than usual at 6.00 p.m. to make way for European Soccer later in the evening.
Tonight's late news is at 10.35 p.m.
Goodnight.)
A couple who make medieval musical instruments have just won a fifty thousand pound order from the Far East.
Bernard Ellis and his wife Megan are among only a handful of people in the world capable of making the reproductions.
Nearly sixty examples of their work will go on display at a new cultural museum in Taiwan.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Wigmore
MEGAN ELLIS/Instrument Maker
Voice over
It's the kind of music you might have danced to in the 1600s.
And it's being played on replicas of the musical instruments of that day.
Very few of the originals have survived.
Those that have are museum pieces.
So Bernard Ellis and his wife Megan make reproductions.
They've been making them for 30 years.
Now, they've just won a £50,000 order to supply 59 instrumenmts to a new Museum of Music in Taiwan.
Among the instruments going to Taiwan, a reproduction monochord.
This was one of the first musical instruments ever made.
The Ancient Greeks would have used it to learn scales.
In the 1000s, things got a little more complex.
This saltry was one of the first string instruments and was the forerunner to the harpsichord.
From the 1500s, instruments started to adopt a more familiar style.
And they bacame far more decorative.
All these instruments are hand made.
Some take weeks of hard work.
It'll take Bernard and Megan at least a year and a half to make all 59 of the instruments.
They'll be shipped out to the Far East in batches.
One export that won't say Made in Taiwan.
A sheep farmer is rearing his biggest ever lamb…a giant youngster twice the normal weight at birth.
Rambo the lamb is reckoned to have broken the local record, weighing in at twenty two pounds.
RICHARD BARNETT Oxenhall
GWYN DAVIES Farmer
Voice over
Rambo the lamb is now a week old…and he dwarfs the other youngsters around him.
He now weighs twenty nine pounds…week old lambs would normally turn the scales at around fifteen pounds.
Rambo is one of more than four hundred North Country Mule cross Suffolk lambs that will be born at Winters Farm near Newent this Spring.
In fourteen years working with sheep, farmer Gwyn Davies has never seen such a whopping lamb before:
Male speaker
A large lamb usually turns into a large sheep.
He's never seen a lamb this big before.
Voice over
Gwyn's children Craig and Laura are thrilled with the new arrival:
Male speaker
Rambo is a tup lamb…when he grows up he'll run with the flock as a ram.
Voice over
And Gwyn's hoping Rambo will father a few more record breakers in the future.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Ten year olds remanded on murder charge
FTSE up 36
The hundred shares index closed up thirty six point three at two nine one eight point six 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty five and up at two marks, thirty eight.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
(WES AD LIBS BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, a mystery that could have baffled Hercule Poirot.
(ANNE) Welcome back.
One of Britain's most successful writers died in 1976.
But seventeen years later, she has two plays running in the West End, a television series and her books sell as well as ever.
(WES) Agatha Christie's work has never been more popular.
But although her books are read by millions of people all over the world she's never had a fan club…until now.
GRAEME BOWD/London
MATHEW PRICHARD/Agatha Christie's Grandson
POIROT/Carnival Films for LWT
CLIVE EXTON/Playwright
London 1972
CHARLOTTE ATTENBOROUGH
Voice over
Unlike many of her characters, Agatha Christie's popularity shows no sign of dieing.
Last month saw a new Christie play in the West End and her books still sell in millions.
But it's only now, 17 years after her death, that the first lady of crime fiction has at last acquired a fan club.
It was the idea of her only grandson who wanted to create a focus for her many devotees.
Male speaker
I was suprised she didn't have a fan club before.
No-one else started one so we decided to do it ourselves.
Voice over
Mr Prichard remembers his grandmother as a warm but private person who liked nothing more than to sit beside the Thames at her home in Cholsey and to tend her beloved roses.
Male speaker
She was a terrific person.
I remember spending time with her in the summer at her home.
She was very kind to me and my friends.
Voice over
But the new Agatha Christie Society is more than an outlet for affectionate memories.
Marketing the author's work is a multi-million pound business, currently cashing in from the TV success of her most famous detective.
Clive Exon who adapted Poirot for television and also scripted the current play believes Christie's work will survive for many years to come.
Such is the quality of her writing, he says, that most of her 83 books and short stories will eventually be brought to stage and screen.
Male speaker
She was a very good writer, good at creating characters and dialogue.
Her scripts are easy to adapt.
Voice over
But it's unlikely there will ever be an equal to the play for which Christie collected a special award at the age of 82.
The Mousetrap is now in it's 41st year.
The original cast included Richard Attenborough who's daughter Charlotte is now appearing in’ Murder is Easy.’
He told her of Christie's reaction when the Mousetrap first went on stage.
Female speaker
The play first went on stage at Nottingham and Agatha Christie was there.
The cast were in the pub afterwards and she said to them’ I think we might have a bit of a run with this one!’
Voice over
She was buried at Cholsey where her grave has become a shrine for fans from all over the world.
The launch of the Agatha Christie Society will put an end to one of her biggest mysteries — why she never had a fan club.
German Shepherds from eight different police forces are battling it out for the title of the best in the west.
The dogs are judged on qualities ranging from obedience to the ability to catch criminals without hurting them.
ROBIN POWELL/Devizes
PC TONY WEBB/Gloucestershire Police
WALTER GIRVEN/Chief Constable
Voice over
Beau, a 6-year-old German Shepherd on active service with Gloucestershire Police, wants to become Top Dog.
He's one of 21 dogs from 8 forces in Wales and the South West taking part in this year's Police Dog Trials at Wiltshire Constabulary headquarters.
Dog-handler, Tony Webb's taking time off from his regular job in the Traffic Division to help Beau in his quest for stardom, but doesn't rate his chances.
Beau's strongest discipline is obedience.
First to go, he does everything he's told to in a flawless display.
But agile he isn't; witness this rather half-hearted attempt at the long jump.
Others managed, no problem at all.
Perhaps Beau was having an off day?
The next test is more to Beau's liking — dealing with a mob that gets out of control.
And all the dogs enjoy this particular exercise.
The idea, by the way is to bite the sleeve, though a helicopter's on hand to whisk the criminal off to hospital if the dog gets carried away.
Beau finished halfway down the field at the end of Day 2.
Tony's hoping he'll pull out all the stops on the final day tomorrow.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GARETH FURBY/Gloucester
PAUL GALLAND/County Trading Standards Officer
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
The videos were being distributed across the country from a house in Gloucestershire.
The precise address is being witheld until the operation is complete.
Along with about 1000 tapes, trading standards officers seized 17 video reocrders, which were being used to duplicate the material.
Some of the tapes were already packaged up ready to be sent out.
There was even a specially printed brochure listing 76 different pornographic films.
He says it was quite a large ring distributing films nationally.
Police and the trading standards were led to the house by a suspicious neighbour.
One man was arrested.
But he hasn't yet been charged.
Investigators are now checking out other addreses.
He says they need to follow up their leads.
Gloucestershire police say the pornographic video business appears to be booming, so a crackdown on the dealers is to be welcomed.
He says its quite widespread in the county and often its the more vunerable members of society who end up suffering.
In a separate operation trading standards officers have seized counterfiet and pirate childrens videos.
They were selling for five pounds each at a market at Moreton in Marsh in Gloucestershire.
Investigators beleive they were duplicated in the South of England.
One man is now helping with their inquiries.
A woman was sprayed in the eyes with ammonia after disturbing a gang of burglars at her parents home.
She's recovering in hospital, and it's believed her sight will be saved.
Police have described the attack as horrific.)
KATE GARRAWAY/Reporting
MILCOMBE/Oxfordshire
Det Insp MARK LOWEN/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The remains of the robbers getaway car found burnt out and abandoned 2 miles from the scene of the attack.
It still contained some of the stolen antiques, but the robbers got away with the rest over £20,000 worth of goods.
The car had been stolen earlier in a raid in Freelands then driven over 20 miles to the isolated village of Milcombe near Banbury.
It was here Morwena Wood was attacked.
She was visitng her parents home and disturbed the thieves.
They bundled her into the living room punched and threatened her with a knife, before spraying her in the face with Ammonia.
There are only about 400 homes in Milcombe.
Neighbours are shocked that such an attack could happen in their village.
Morwenna Wood a practising doctor is being treated in Oxford's JOhn radcliffe hospital.
It's believed her sight will be saved.
The attack resemnbles an axssault in December 1991, when 75 year old, Joan Cooper was nearly blinded after burglars sprayed kettle de-scaler in her face.
Her attackers are now serving jail sentences totalling 19 years.
Police have been continuing the search for the body of a woman who went missing twenty years ago.
SWINDON
They've continued to dig at the back of a house in Swindons Old Town.
Joan Main disappeared from her home in Haydon Wick in (1973) nineteen seventy three.
Yesterday her ex husband, David Main appeared in court charged with her murder.
A coroner has called for road improvements after an inquest heard that flood water was to blame for the death of a motorist.
18 December 1992/MITCHELDEAN/Gloucestershire
John Watt, from Tewkesbury, died when his car collided with a lorry during torrential rain on the Gloucester to Monmouth Road at Mitcheldean.
The coroner recorded a verdict of accidental death.
Councillors are meeting about now to discuss proposals to build a Coca Cola Schweppes distribution centre in Northampton.
Coca Cola initially wanted to build a large bottling factory, like this one at Wakefield, on the Brackmills industrial estate.
But they dropped the idea after the plans were strongly criticised on environmental grounds.
Now the company want to build the distribution centre instead which will create more than fifty jobs.
(3)
Let me forget it.
Woman hired to kill by a family is released from jail.
Ministry inquiry.Vets called in after farm fire reveals animal suffering.
And upon my sole…there's something fishy down at the cobblers.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Tonight, she told Central South she wanted nothing to do with them ever again.
The man she tried to kill says he's happy that his wife and family have been released.
He didn't want them jailed in the first place.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
LOUISE PRICE
NOVEMBER 1991
WHEATLEY/Oxfordshire
TERRENCE REEVES
Voice over
The RSPCA has called in the Ministry of Agriculture to investigate the living conditions of animals on a farm which was hit by an arson attack.
The inquiry comes after firemen spent several hours tackling the flames, and a policeman was hurt helping to rescue dozens of cows from the burning barn.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
PC KEITH RICHARDS/Gloucestershire Police
JOHN SWEET/Gloucestershire Fire
ALAN BROCKBANK/RSPCA
SIMON HALL/Ministry of Agriculture Vet
Voice over
The fire, at riverside farm in gloucester, started early yesterday evening and had soon engulfed most of the haybarn.
Police, firemen and the farms owner led cows to safety through the flames.
They managed to rescue all but one of the 40-strong herd.
PC Keith Richards, who was one of the first people on the scene, was taken to hospital suffering from smoke inhalation.
He says that it was very difficult to get some of the cows out, because they were so frightened of the flames.
He says that another 5 minutes and many of the cattle would have perished, because the shed they were in exploded into flames.
As the clearing up began, John Perry, who works the farm with his elderly mother started rounding up the herd.
The RSPCA had come to the farm to see if Mr Perry needed any help, but they became worried about the condition of some of the livestock, these cows for instance, kept in a shed with just deep mud for a floor.
He says that the sheds need a good clean up, some of the cattle are showing the effects of being kept in such muddy conditions.
There's no suggestion that any deliberate cruelty was taking place on the farm, but the RSPCA decided to call in a ministry of agriculture vet to examine the animals.
He says that he's advised the farm owner that conditions aren't up to scratch, he says he'll return to check that things have been put right.
Meanwhile the police are continuing their investigation into the cause of the fire, which it's thought was started deliberately.
Commuters have attacked British Rail's new Passenger Charter, saying it could lead to even higher train fares.
The scheme offers compensation to travellers for late and cancelled trains, and sets minimum standards for service.
But rail users say the cost of running the scheme may force up ticket prices.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
OXFORD
PHILIP WHITE/Swindon Commuter's Club
RICHARD FERN/British Rail
Voice over
’ Announcement that the train is late’
A familiar sound for frequent rail travellers.
British Rail's answer to late and cancelled trains is to offer future discounts.
The Passenger's Charter, launched today in London, sets stringent targets for the whole of BR.
If those targets aren't met, passengers can claim compensation.
But the scheme's been critisised by commuters who say that the cost of compensation may put prices up.
Male speaker
I feel sceptical.
Where's the money going to come from.
It may eventually put up prices.
Voice over
BR says the cost of the compensation scheme…estimated at between ten and fifteen million pounds, is relatively small…and that the Charter will raise standards.
Male speaker
It's going help us by knowing our targets…staff will work hard to meet them.
Voice over
The Charter says that
90 percent of Intercity and long-distance trains should arrive within ten minutes of schedule
on short regional routes, 90 percent of trains should arrive within five minutes.
If these targets aren't met, there'll be compensation.
For delays of more than an hour…vouchers worth 20 percent or more of the ticket price will be given
For journeys cancelled because of delays…there'll be a refund.
And, for season ticket holders, discounts of between five and ten percent.
Travellers today said the Charter was a step forward, but BR still had a long way to go.
Male speaker
If you're an hour late for an important meeting…a small amount of compensation is neither here nor their
Male speaker
It's not the answer…
British Rail should be given proper funding.
Voice over
Monitoring of the service has already begun, and results for the first four months will be published in May.
But season ticket holders will not get their first discounts until January 1993.
Onto another club trying to pull themselves out of the doldrums…
Hereford United's hopes of chalking up their second successive away win foundered on the rocks at Blackpool last night.
United lost two nil.
Mark Kiff reports.
Voice over
Hereford's away day to the seaside started promisingly, but they missed their chances and ended up at all at sea.
Blackpool are riding high in Division Four, while United have slowly sunk down the table.
So it was no surprise to see the Seasiders have the best of the chances.
Hereford lived dangerously but by half time were still managing to keep afloat.
United began shipping water after the break, a goal from the Fourth Division's top scorer, Dave Bamber doing the damage.
United almost contributed to their own downfall, but Blackpool's finsihing let them off the hook.
By now, United were in need of a lifeboat, but sadly there was no one on hand to rescue to them.
Fortunately, Alan Judge was in fine form, pulling off a great save to keep Hereford in the game.
But he was unable to stop Blackpool skipper Paul Groves' header.
Two nil to the Seasiders, who are now sailing on top of the table, with Hereford left in the backwaters of Division Four.
Swindon Town Manager Glenn Hoddle overcame injury to make a brief appearance for the English Division Two side playing in Italy.
Now we're off to see a man about his dogs.
Sixty year old Ernie Hammond from Banbury in Oxfordshire is the oldest musher or handler in British dog racing.
His best friends are Siberian Huskies.
ERNIE HAMMOND
Voice over
Most people Ernie's age would be thinking of more sedate exercise; WALKING the dogs perhaps, but this is far more exciting.
Male speaker
It's a great sensation.
I love it.
Voice over
Ernie intitially bought a Siberian Husky as a pet.
But he knew they're bred for working and when he retired he decided to give it a go.
Now Ernie's got a team of 6 and travels the country to compete on the national circuit.
Male speaker
I realised I could race them keeping them and me fit.
Voice over
Husky racing came to Britain in 1978.
There are now 30 races a year.
Ernie never wins, but if you're the oldest musher in the business, who cares!!
LORI DUFFY/Designer
DAVID CHAPMAN/Production Director
Question: What starts off life as a salmon, goes to a plaice and ends up with a sole?
Answer: These do.
According to a couple of young London shoe designers, the well heeled amongst us will soon be stepping out shod in salmon skins.
A factory in Northamptonshire has taken up the challenge to create the fish footwear.
The skins arrive tanned and dyed costing about £7 a piece.
The skins are waste products from the Scottish smoked salmon industry, making them environmentally friendly.
And the designers reckon that their fish will also stand a reasonable battering.
Workers at the Wellingborough factory are dab hands at turning out unusual orders.
In the past they've used shark skin and turkey feet to adorn human footwear.
But with a certain amount of bemusement they've had to overcome several problems to meet their latest challenge.
And now the opportunities seem endless.
Sprat sandals, tuna trainers, cod court shoes pilchard pumps or perhaps even bream brogues.
But for the time being, the first salmon skin shoes are expected to be ready for sale in 8 weeks time.
Buying a pair may take a bit of soul searching.
The retail price — about £150 pounds a pair.
Hundreds feared dead in mine disaster
Hundreds of people are feared dead after a mining disaster in Turkey.
BR charter offers refunds for poor service
British Rail has unveiled its passengers' charter including plans to refund passengers when trains are late.
Consumers' Association insulted by Rail Charter
The Consumers' Association has described the charter as an insult to passengers and little more than a glossy public relations con.
Lorry driver shot dead in Ulster
A lorry driver has been shot dead in his cab in Ulster.
First Trident nuclear submarine unveiled
Britain's first Trident nuclear submarine, HMS Vanguard, has been unveiled.
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven points at twenty-five, fifty-eight point four.
The pound is down against the dollar and the Deutsch Mark at one dollar, seventy-three and at two marks, eighty-eight.
One of the country's finest cheese shops has been saved from closure 
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
A thousand years of winter grazing on a city's historic common land could be set to end.
Councillors say grazing all year round is ruining the grass and they want to restrict the ancient rights of commoners.
But the commoners are angry at the threat to the tradition, and say they'll fight for their land.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
JOHN ARNOLD/Oxford City Council
RON BATEMAN/Chairman/Commoners' Committee
JOHN PATTEN MP/Con Oxford West
Voice over
Oxford's historic Port Meadow and Wolvercote Common have provided grazing land since the Domesday Book with hundreds of local people enjoying commoners rights all year round.
But now Oxford City Council says grazing in the winter months is wrecking the land encouraging the spread of thistles and ragwort and threatening the rare species.
Now the council is planning to put a bill through parliament to allow them to restrict winter grazing.
They already own Port Meadow.
Now they want to gain ownership of Wolvercote Common which has long been managed by a commoners committee.
They're not taking it lying down.
And Wolvercote commoners say the evidence for damage isn't there.
They say there's no evidence that the land is being damaged, in fact it's undergrazed.
The woman says she brings her horse onto the Common and Wolvercote poeple would miss the rights.
The commoners MP says their complaints are filling his postbag.
He described Port Meadow as a green jewel.
Commoners have been consulted and a public report will be published, before the controversial Bill is put forward.
A job centre is praying for help from a higher power…after being asked to find work for a man of the cloth!
A vicar has now joined the ranks of the unemployed and signed on the dole.
This from Gareth Furby.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
Rev LEONARD HENDRY/Jobless Vicar
Rt Rev JEREMEY WALSH/Bishop of Tewkesbury
Voice over
As far as omens go, when a man of the cloth has to sign on, things must be getting bad.
Reverend Leonard Hendry has joined the dole queues in Tewkesbury.
And he says it took all his strength to make the journey from church to job centre.
He says he was very nervous and had to pluck up courage because it's so unusual for someone like him to register.
For 10 years Reverend Hendry worked as chaplain to a British community in Northern Greece.
But he came home to a recession.
Unemployment in Tewkesbury has doubled in the past year.
The job centre staff are doing all they can.
But after a lifetime working for God, a vicar's cv doesn't offer much to more down to earth employers.
He says he'd consider being a care worker, but his experience in the army was many years ago, so he may not qualify any more.
The Diocese of Gloucester employs around 200 clery.
But at the moment there are no suitable vacancies.
He says they need to fit the man to the parish and at the moment they're are just no suitable openings.
Meanwhile, back at the job centre the search for work isn't going well.
He says he saw one job but that's already gone and that was last week.
The vicar says he'll can live of his savings for a few weeks, but if there's still no escape from the dole he'll have to return to Greece.
Proof perhaps that no one, not even a man called by God, is now immune from the recession.
Now, with news of an important day for Oxford United, a bad night for Hereford United, and a strange type of dog racing, here's Nick Clark.
Hello.
NICK CLARK
First the Oxford United saga goes on…with things improving out on the pitch, off the field it's a tangled complex web of debts, transfers, receivers, and…adjourned annual general meetings.
Yes…the company appointed to sell Robert Maxwell's shares in the second division club have announced they intend to adjourn the Oxford United AGM at the Manor Ground tomorrow night almost as soon as it starts.
The receivers say there are potential buyers in the frame for the club so the meeting should be postponed.
But United fans are not happy.
BRIAN HORTON/Manager
IAN DAVIES/Co-Editor/Supporters' Magazine
Voice over
There's been very little for United fans to cheer about this season.
Apart from performances which have left the team knocking on relegation's door, revelations on Robert Maxwell's death that the club was up to four million pounds in debt, stunned the terraces.
With the club currently losing fifteen thousand pounds a week Oxford United PLC is close to insolvency.
A buyer is needed fast.
Forced Sales of players like Paul Simpson and Lee Nogan for three quarters of a million pounds simply to keep the club alive have become a neccessity.
Male speaker
It's difficult to operate when you have to sell your best players.
Voice over
Robert Maxwell owned almost ninety percent of the club's shares.
Last week the receivers who now control those shares, advertised in the Financial Times inviting offers for them.
This afternoon they announced they intend to adjourn tomorrow night's AGM.
It's not exactly clear why.
The receivers will only say:
’ Whilst we are still discussing offers for the shares it would be unproductive to hold a full AGM.’
But it's almost certain the meeting will be adjourned before the controversial second item on the agenda, the re-election of chairman Kevin Maxwell.
That means Mr Maxwell will remain at the helm of the club at least for the short term.
And that's something many fans simply don't want.
Male speaker
Kevin Maxwell must go.
Voice over
The reason for the planned adjournment of the agm will doubtless become clear in time.
But there is some speculation that it could mean there really is a buyer in the frame.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
JESSICA FOWLE/Oxford
June 1992/RAPE VICTIM
Det Insp PHIL DENNIS/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Roy Fisher, an unemployed landscape gardener, had pleaded not guilty to raping a 28 year old woman in Oxford city centre last August.
The jury at Oxford Crown Court found the married father of two guilty after hearing that he'd tied the woman's hands hands behind her back in the city's New Road and subjected her to a terrifying ordeal, during which she'd feared for her life.
After the jury returned the unanimous guilty verdict, Fisher called out’ Kangeroo Court’and made to leave.
He was followed to the cells by 2 policemen.
In his absence, the judge told the jury of 7 men and 5 women that they were about to discover something they may find interesting.
They were then told that Fisher had already pleaded guilty to raping an Oxford University student in June on last year and that he had a string of other convictions, including 2 of indecent exposure.
Listening to an account of the previous rape in the Saint Giles public toilets, Fisher sat motionless with his head in his hands.
Following the attack, the victim, her voice disguised, spoke to Central South of her ordeal.
The inspector in charge of both investigations hopes that today's verdict will encourage other victims to come forward.
Sentencing was adjourned while psychiatric reports are prepared.
Police have arrested twelve people, including a solicitor's clerk, in dawn raids.
They're investigating allegations of interference with witnesses and tampering with evidence in a forthcoming trial.
The six men and six women have been questioned all day by detectives:
RICHARD BARNETT/Cheltenham
FAY JOHNSON/Eyewitness
Voice over
More than 30 uniformed and plain clothes officers carried out simultaneous raids on homes across Cheltenham early this morning.
They swooped on 8 separate houses and flats, including 3 houses on the Hesters Way Estate.
Howard Banton, the solicitor's clerk at the leading Cheltenham law firm of Robinsons was one of the twelve people arrested.
14 year old, Fay Johnson was in bed when police arrived in St Peters Square in the early hours to arrest her aunt and uncle, Steven and Tracey Goth.
Female speaker
Police banged on the door and arrested her aunt and uncle.
There were 16 officers.
She was frightened.
Voice over
Police say the raids are part of an investigation into alleged interference with witnesses and tampering with evidence in a forthcoming trial.
The case involves an attack on PC Bob Holt in Cheltenham in January.
PC Holt was hit in the face with a hammer and needed four hours surgery after breaking up a fight in the Royal Well area of the town.
A 16 year old youth and a 33 year old man have been charged with an assault on police.
Former staff at a British Rail engineering works are leading a national campaign against Government plans to take charge of railworkers' pensions.
At least half the fund's assets could end up going to the Treasury — a move which pensioners are calling the second Great Train Robbery.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
PETER LUFF MP/Con Worcester
TIM BRYAN/Railway Historian
Voice over
So many turned up for this emergency meeting of Swindon's railway pensioners, that more than a hundred had to stand outside.
Their cause for concern; the announcement on Tuesday by Transport Secretary John MacGregor that he intends to transfer at least half the fund's assets to the Treasury.
Male speaker
They're just doing us out of money that we've been saving up over the years.
Male speaker
Privatisation of the railways is designed only for the benefit of the Goevrnement and its friends.
Voice over
The British Rail pension scheme now has assets of around £8.5 billion.
It's thought the Government could take charge of at least half that amount.
Exactly how the money will be invested is still to be decided, but pensioners are being assured they won't lose out.
Male speaker
One of the options being considered is an index-linked pension.
That's a very attractive proposition.
Voice over
There are almost 3,000 British Rail pension scheme members in Swindon.
The vast majority worked in the old GWR Works taken over by British Rail after the war.
The works closed down 7 years ago, but the camaraderie remains.
Male speaker
There was great loyalty among staff at GWR and that continues today.
They care very much about the railways.
Voice over
The next stop for Swindon's railway pensioners is Parliament, to lobby MPs debating the Railways Bill.
Some fear it's their last chance to secure the future they and their forefathers worked for.
One of the world's greatest classical violinists has been surprising audiences at a top JAZZ club.
Nigel Kennedy, who lives in Malvern was a sell-out success at Ronnie Scott's.
ADRIAN BRITTON/Reporting
NIGEL KENNEDY
The punk maestro…his famous fiddle…rocking to the psychodelic notes of Jimi Hendrix.
It's a new ball game for the scruffy soccer fan, who turned the classics into pop and put Vivaldi in the charts.
Every night this week he's been playing Hendrix to a packed Ronnie Scott's in Birmingham.
He says he just loves Jimmy.
He's the kind of musician he admires because he's not confined to one kind of music and is willing to extend people's perception of that music and that's what he'd like to do.
Kennedy has long held a fascination for Jimi Hendrix, who died from a drugs overdose in 1970.
He recently bought all his music rights.
Is it true that he influenced you more than Vivaldi?
Yeah, because I don't want to write music for pre-menstrual girls to play.
I want to write it for live musicians of both sexes.
Your Mum and Dad were in the audience the other night.
Do you play better in front of close family?
No, the presence of my parents at any gig doesn't guarantee a feeling of ease, because my mother is very critical of what I do, particularly anything outside a classical genre.
She isn't proud to be associated with that when I'm doing it.
She gives me a lot of stick for it.
But I think she had a good time.
She got a couple of drinks down her and loosened up a bit.
But the new tune on Nigel's fiddle has confused some critics as well as Mum.
It's too classical for rock; too improvised for the classics.
And they ask what's jazz got to do with it.
Kennedy's response; he's having a great time.
If you've ever worried about how to get a spider out of your bath…help could be at hand.
A group of school children have developed The Humane Spider Catcher.
And it's catching on with arachnaphobics everywhere.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Hereford
RICHARD THOMAS/Spider Catcher Maker
SUSAN DAVIES/Spider Catcher Maker
Voice over
It's every arachnaphobics nightmare!
In the past if you wanted to get spiders out of your bath you could either patiently try to tempt them…or take action that was a little more drastic.
Now you can use a Humane Spider Catcher.
They've been designed and made by fifth formers at Haywood High School in Hereford.
And they couldn't be simpler to use.
And spiders can't hide in cobwebbed corners either.
Although it started off as a school project, the spider catcher has attracted alot of outside interest.
The school has applied to patent the design, and pupils are busy making up a batch of fifty to sell to commercial customers.
It's success could be put down to the hard sell.
Faced with such a threat…spiders may be better off lurking beneath the plughole from now on.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
PM announces new honours system
The Prime Minister has announced a reform of the honours system saying they should be awarded on merit not seniority.
Controversy over Hillsborough death
A priest has threatened to launch a private prosecution against the doctor who treated the Hillsborough coma victim, Tony Bland, who died after his life-support machine was legally switched-off.
Moslems offered safe passage
Serb commanders have offered Moslem civilians safe passage out of eastern Bosnia.
Princess greeted by lepers
The Princess of Wales shook hands with lepers during her visit to Nepal.
Record losses for Barclays
Barclays Bank has recorded its first loss since it was established in eighteen nineteen-six.
FTSE down 13
The hundred shares index closed down thirteen point eight at twenty-nine, o four point eight.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-five and down at two marks, thirty-seven.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Companies from across the region have been included in a list of six thousand firms who'll suffer if the truck makers Leyland Daf go out of business.
Shadow Trade Minister Robin Cook says the Government should intervene to prevent the list turning into a dossier of disaster.
LIZ HANNAM/Chipping Norton
DAVID CROSSMAN/Managing Director
ROBIN COOK MP/Shadow Trade and Industry Secretary
THAME/Oxfordshire
Voice over
The entire workforce at Owen Mumford in Chipping Norton is on short time working.
They're the unseen victims of the crisis at Leyland Daf. 50 people are employed at the factory which assembles door parts for trucks.
They're currently working alternate four and five day weeks.
If Leyland Daf collapses, more short time working will be inevitable.
Owen Mumford is one of 6 companies in Oxfordshire which has been hurt by the Leyland Daf troubles.
Philips Car Systems in Bicester supplies stereo equipment to the truck company and could loose half a million pounds worth of trade if it collapses.
According to the Labour Party one in every 150 engineering companies in Britain trades with Leyland Daf.
But David Crossman disagrees.
He says the long term interests of his company are best served in private sector, even if this causes short term problems.
Meanwhile, a month after the administrators first moved into Leyland Daf's sales and marketing headquarters in Thame, 75 jobs have already gone and the future of the other 300 remains uncertain.
Villagers are demanding the removal of their local bobby because they say he's been over-zealous in handing out parking tickets.
They claim PC Bob Packer is making their lives a misery by booking them, even outside their own homes.
PC Packer says he's only doing his job.
CHRIS MOORE/Chalford
MANDY LOUGHLAND/Villager
MARIAN DEL LAS CASAS/Villager
PC BOB PACKER/Village Bobby
Voice over
As village bobbies go, Bob Packer is not a popular man in Chalford.
In fact as village bobbies go, they wish he would.
The reason; what they see as his dictatorial attitude to parking in the High Street.
When it comes to the dreaded ticket, they say he's slap happy.
It all came to a head the day a fire engine couldn't get down the High Street for parked cars.
Female speaker
He was actually sitting here in his car.
He saw that one fire engine got through okay but the second a slight problem in two places.
So he immediately declared the whole road unfit for parking.
Female speaker
I've had four tickets, but the problem is that there is nowhere to park, and you have to put your car somewhere.
Voice over
Tonight, a residents' group will meet to demand that PC Packer be sent packing.
But Bob Packer isn't a man to compromise where the law is concerned.
Male speaker
It's my duty to uphold the law and preserve life.
If that means that I've got to upset a few people because I'm trying to prevent somebody's life being lost then I will upset those people.
I'm sorry, but that is my main concern.
Voice over
And he has the full backing of his bosses.
They say PC Packer is clearly doing his job.
He's there to enforce the law as well as serve the local community.
So barring a change of policy by the force, or by PC Packer, both of which seem unlikely, the battle of Chalford High Street looks like a stalemate.
(WES AD LIBS BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, a town's battle of the airwaves 
(ANNE) Welcome back.
A war is about to break out between rival radio stations, battling for the ears of half a million listeners.
A new service called CD 603 is setting up in Cheltenham.
(WES) It brings the number of local stations covering the area to four.
And if there's not enough advertising to go round, it could be a fight to the death.
GARETH FURBY/Cheltenham
PAUL BOON/Managing Director
PENNY HALTON/Chief Executive
TONY TALMAGE/BBC Radio Gloucestershire
Voice over
Cheltenham is the battleground.
The target — the ears of half a million potential listeners.
Today the challengers were celebrating, certain that their launch tomorrow morning will be a success.
He announces the station.
He says they're targeting a unique audience of young adults.
And that could be bad news for the established commercial station Severn Sound.
Latest research suggests its audience may be falling.
But the management disputes those figures and insists the new service isn't a threat.
She says the radio world is tough but they'll survive.
But the new station will have lower costs.
The overnight service for example is completely automatic.
With a computer operating the equivalent of a giant CD jukebox.
It's even targeting the BBC.
He says the BBC caters for a different audience.
But the listeners will decide.
And some are not convinced Cheltenham needs a new service.
He says he likes it as it is.
He says he likes Radio Wyvern.
She says she likes the BBC.
But from tomorrow there'll be even more choice.
And CD-603 — the CD stands for Cheltenham and District — are confident, in the battle of the airwaves, they won't be the losers.
Three people have been charged with handling stolen goods after police seized more than a quarter of million pounds worth of luxury cars hidden in farm buildings.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
The cars include top-of-the-range Jaguars and a Rover saloon.
They were found by detectives during raids on half a dozen barns around Duns Tew near Banbury.
Two other people, a man and a woman, have been released on police bail.
There's been another arson attack on a local school, the second to be targetted in two days.
Damage is estimated at tens of thousands of pounds, even though the burglars stole just EIGHT POUNDS from the staffroom tea kitty.Gareth Furby reports.
FIRE SERVICE VIDEO/LONG HANBOROUGH/Oxfordshire
JANET CAPEL/Caretaker
NIGEL JAMES/Chairman of Governors
YESTERDAY/OXFORD
DAVID BROWN/Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
Police driving through Long Hanborough at 2am this morning smelt smoke and called the fire brigade.
They were quickly on the scene, and saved the Manor Primary school.
But one classroom was gutted, and another severely damaged.
It'll take up to 6 months to rebuild.
But school work lost in the fire can never be replaced.
And all the arsonists stole was £8, from a tin containing the teachers tea money.
She says it's sick and wicked.
He says it's mindless and the upsets the children.
Yesterday a fire at Headington Girl's School in Oxford caused damage estimated at £145,000.
Police are looking for any links with today's fire.
He says they're looking at ways of resolving the problem of security in schools.
Despite the damage Manor School opened as normal today.
The children who've lost their classroom will share another room, until a prefabricated replacement arrives.
He says the children were singing’ always look on the bright side of life’which says something for the spirit of the school.
The burglars are believed to have forced a window.
And the school is now looking at ways of improving security.
Police are parading a range of race and rally cars in an attempt to make speeding motorists slow down.
The high-performance cars are strictly for the racetrack…and the message is, going too fast on the roads can kill.
It's a message echoed by doctors and accident victims alike, as Kim Barnes reports.
KIDLINGTON/Oxfordshire
OXFORD
SIMON FORREST/Accident Victim
PETER WORLOCK/Surgeon
TONY MASON/Ex-Rally Driver
Insp DAVID WISE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Thames Valley Police have rounded up some of the world's fastest cars to ram home the anti-speeding message.
You'd have to be on a race tract or a rally circuit to push these to the limit, but on normal roads in normal cars motoring can be more dangerous.
Simon Forrest suffered multiple fractures when his car crashed into a van, recovering in hospital, he echoes the speed warnings.
Casualty doctors who're at the sharp end see the evidence that speeding is deadly.
Ex Rally driver Tony Mason opened Thames Valley's drivewise show; not surprisingly he says speed and safety aren't incompatible, but says care is needed.
The police exhibition and campaign lets the motorist in on all the tricks including the latest speeding cameras.
Legislation is going through to allow their pictures to be used as evidence.
Despite the apparent apparent emphasis on high performance, police hope the show will slow drivers down.
And that's the medical opinion.
New figures show that 3 in 5 motorists break the speed limit on motorways.
Now it's hoped future generations will leave statistics like that behind.
In part two: Clean round the bend.Sweepers offer to take take a pay cut to keep their jobs.
And how's this for in-car entertainment?
The ultimate stereo mini system.
No money…no operation.Locals lose out in health service cash crisis.
Facing the music.
Maxwell meets United shareholders at last.
And one for the road, the last word in car hi-fi.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
One patient has been told he can't have his knee operation, because his local hospital doesn't have the cash even though the hospital continues to treat patients from another county.
Tim Hurst reports.
RISBURY/Herefordshire
JOHN JONES/Patient
VIC SEAL/Consultant
DOUGLAS CAULDWELL/Herefordshire Health Authority
BRIAN SHERLOCK/Community Health Council
Voice over
Health Secretary William Waldegrave told an NHS managers' conference in London that in January long term waiting lists had been cut by thirty percent.
That didn't impress John Jones from Risbury in Herefordshire, who's waiting for an operation on his knees.
He's had a letter from Hereford General Hospital telling him he'll have to wait again because the hospital has run out of money.
Orthopaedic surgeon Vic Seal at Hereford General says he can't operate on patients on his own waiting list, but he continues to operate in other, often less urgent cases, sent to him by health authorities, in Wales, which do still have money to spend.
Herefordshire Health Authority say since NHS reorganisation more operations are being carried out than ever before.
Just as Hereford General accepts patients from outside the county, so other regions will accept patients from Herefordshire…it's a two-way traffic.
Health watchdogs such as Hereford Community Health Council, say that patients have been confused by the NHS reforms.
John Jones has been told more money will be available from the first of April and he can expect his knee operation in the next year.
Oxford United chairman Kevin Maxwell has attended the club's annual meeting tonight, to face calls for his resignation.
The death of his father Robert Maxwell and the collapse of his business empire have left United fighting for financial survival.
An attempt to remove Kevin Maxwell has been mooted for some time.
For the latest, we're going over live to the meeting, and our reporter Nick Clark.
NICK CLARK/Live from Oxford United
RUNS=0:40EST
’…but first let's have a look back over the Maxwell era at the Manor ground.
A time when the club's gone from near bankruptcy to Wembley glory and back to crisis times.’
(The late Robert Maxwell took over Oxford United in nineteen eighty two.
In the decade since then, the club has had a brief taste of the glory days but now is immersed in the worst crisis in its hundred year history.
Nick Clark looks back over the Maxwell era.)
JIM HUNT/Former Director
Voice over
1986.
United's finest hour evidently enjoyed by the man who'd rescued the ailing club 4 years earlier.
His takeover in January 1982 came with Oxford in the 3rd division and facing bankruptcy.
Within 4 years they were at the height of their achievements.
United had won promotion all the way to the 1st division, the Milk Cup win capping a glorious but brief revival.
Oxford's fortunes quickly turned sour.
In May 1987 with the club still in the first and the accounts showing a profit, Robert Maxwell, under fire for his involvement in other clubs like Watford and Derby County, handed chairmanship to his son Kevin.
In the 5 years with Maxwell junior at the helm, the club has dropped back into the second division and shows debts of up to £4.5 million.
Fans have reacted angrily to sales of players, calling transfers like Dean Saunders' move to Derby stripping the club's assets.
This season has a side struggling to stay in the second divison.
A side depleted by the forced sales of Paul Simpson and Lee Nogan.
Transfers made to pay the players wages and stem a bank overdraft.
In December the crisis was such that four directors resigned, including Jim Hunt, who said life on the United board had become too risky.
Male speaker
On legal advice i resigned.
When Robert maxwell was here it was exciting.
But I think the club has spent more money than it could afford.
Voice over
Amongst all the gloom there is of course the game of football.
And Oxford fans will be taking heart that the side's enjoying a good run at the moment and may yet avoid relegation.
On and off the pitch United's decade under the Maxwells has given them a brief but all too short taste of glory.
The club's now in a mess and it seems only someone with big money and the right intentions can prevent a desperate situation getting worse.
(Nick at OB+1 or 2)
RUNS=1:30est
A twenty-five year old man suffered multiple injuries when he fell from a train which was moving at sixty five miles an hour.
A hundred jobs are to go at a medical factory over the next two years.
SAUNDERTON/Buckinghamshire
A father and son team of street cleaners are offering to take a fifty percent pay cut, in order to keep their jobs.
Private contractors take over from them next month, and have said they won't take on Tony and George Sabin.
But the pair have warned that without THEM, cleaning standards will drop.Sheila Brocklebank reports.
STOW-ON-THE-WOLD/Gloucestershire
TONY SABIN/Son
BOB CHECKETTS/Parish Councillor
George and Tony Sabin have been keeping the streets of Stow-on-the-Wold in the Cotswolds clean for the past three years.
Street cleaning is currently the responsibility of the Parish council…but from the end of the month, the District council takes over…and they use private contractors.
Tony and George have offered to take a fifty percent pay cut to keep their jobs…but, as yet, to no avail.
Male speaker
It's a shame for shopkeepers…we've been here for three years and have always done an excellent job for them.
We're here seven days a week, Christmas day and Bank Holidays as well.
I don't think the new contractors will do the job as well.
Voice over
Tony and George work seven days a week to keep Stow on the Wold clean.
The private contractors will only come once a week…
The Parish Council, who currently employ the pair, say the town will suffer.
Male speaker
I can't possibly see how once a week will be enough.
Our bins are full by lunch time on some days.
Voice over
The pair have the support of the whole town…local traders have organised a petition to keep them on.
Female speaker
They're goldust…they're marvellous.
Voice over
We get some many visitors in the summer…this place will look a wreak without them.
The Parish Council may be able to keep the pair on…at a reduced rate…
But it would be in addition to the new contractors.
That would cost more money.
He says’ It could be solved…but in that case it would mean paying twice…the cost would fall on the poll tax payer.
The Parish Council are set to meet to decide the fate of Tony and George.
Towns people, meanwhile, fear that their streets may never be as clean again.
A man whose family has been importing American jukeboxes for generations is about to turn the tide and start exporting his own design to the States.
Steve Joynes has a vast collection of jukeboxes of all shapes and sizes.
But his latest design breaks all the previous moulds.
Clare Lafferty reports.
CHELTENHAM Gloucestershire
STEVE JOYNES Jukebox Fanatic
Voice over
It looks like the aftermath of a car accident.
But this is in fact a state of the art jukebox.
It's been designed by Steve Joynes from Cheltenham.
His family has been importing the machines from America since the nineteen forties.
Now Steve plans to sell his design back to the States.
The mini is a long way from what's considered to be the first jukebox; the Edison Phonograph.
That was more like a cumbersome personal stereo.
Jukeboxes as we know them today first showed up in the 1940s.
At around £5,000 each, jukeboxes are an expensive luxury, favoured mainly by pop stars.
John Entwistle of the Who has one like this in his front room and Elton John is known to be a collector.
But Steve has sold jukeboxes to all sorts.
The Joynes Jukebox is already attracting alot of interest from abroad and could soon be gracing cafes and bars all over the world.
Bringing a whole new dimension to the concept of in car entertainment.
Government to consider election date at weekend
ITN sources say that the Prime Minister will consider this weekend whether to hold the General Election on April the ninth.
Record fall in NHS waiting lists
The Government has announced a record fall in the number of people on National Health Service waiting lists for more than two years although Labour does not agree with the figures.
Robbers shoot guards and flee with
Gunmen have shot two security guards in Southampton and escaped with fifteen thousand pounds after hijacking a police car.
Injuries and widespread damage in 1000lb Ulster bomb
Seven people have been hurt and widespread damage caused in a thousand pound bomb explosion at Lurgan in Northern Ireland.
Botham secures England win over Australia
Ian Botham has secured England's win over the Australians in the Cricket World Cup.
FTSE down 20
The hundred shares index closed down twenty point two, at twenty-five, thirty-eight point two.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-two, and at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
(ANNE) Welcome back.
Later in the programme the fiftieth birthday of Britain's first jet fighter.
But now with a look at the weekend's sport, here's Tim Russon.
(TIM) Hello there…they all get a look in tonight…as we round up the local sport…on the start line ready to go first is the football parade 
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
There's a long journey coming up.
No, we're not doing horoscopes just looking ahead to Saturday afternoon.
All 3 teams are travelling.
Swindon Town are off to Watford.
I wonder what the stars predicted for them in February?
The moon must have moved into mercury or something like that.
It was their month alright.
4 wins in 5. 7 goals scored; only one conceeded.
Rivals Millwall, Tranmere and Portsmouth all beaten.
Glenn Hoddle's in the running for Manager of the month.
Town are up with the pacemakers for promotion.
Team news.
Town are unchanged Player Manager, Hoddle has shaken off his back trouble.
Nicky Summerbee has come through a fitness test on a leg strain.
Swindon are the form team.
Watford are better away than at home.
Town beat them 3-1 at the County Ground in October.
After 2 defeats in a row at the Manor, Oxford United are probably looking forward to their trip to St Andrews to play bottom club, Birmingham.
United won twice away last month at Bristol Rovers and Wolves, while Birmingham are on a real downer.
Their last win was 6 weeks ago; 2-0 against Peterborough.
United are taking 14 to St Andrews, but should be unchanged, which means Les Robinson keeps his place and joint top scorer, John Durnin sits it out on the bench.
Birmingham are rock bottom.
The only way they can go is up, but United can't afford to slip up.
In the third division, Hereford are playing at Wrexham.
United need the points to pull away from the bottom.
They got one off the Welsh side in October in a 1-1 draw.
Hereford are planning to play tighter tomorrow.
15 players in the squad.
Missing is Simon Brain, top scorer last season.
He's gone on loan to Bromsgrove.
Goal of the week; the only one scored.
Still, a good one, though; Paul Bodin's winner against Portsmouth.
we'll have to get our skates on for rugby…they're kicking off at Kingsholm at seven o clock 
Voice over
Gloucester against Bridgend…that's the game tonight…its more than a run out too…next week the cherry and whites are back in the first division fight at Northampton…but no chance of planning ahead six first teamers are missing
STING
here's the side…there's a call up for laurie beck at scrum half…
Andrew Stanley is captain for the night
At Twickenham tomorrow English rugby expects…and Gloucester boy Mike Teague hopes to beat Scotland and help England take the Calcutta Cup
its busy busy for local sport at the moment…but one team struggling to make a go of it are Oxford Cheetahs speedway…news of them coming up now in our action round-up 
Voice over
England star Martin Dugard is set to ride off to Eastbourne as the cheetahs struggle to find a new financial backer…there are talks this weekend but if no deal is done then Dugard is certain to sign for the Sussex team…he doesn't want to go but may have to…
there'll be no Jaguars racing at le mans this summer…the Oxfordshire team have pulled out after a row of regulations…reason is there V12s haven't got a chance against the turbos of the porsche and peugeots…
there is a future for this racing though…the first quad bike competition for disabled drivers took off at Abingdon this week…more racers are needed…more meetings coming up…
the prodrive subaru team from banbury are chasing the leaders in the Ralleye de Portugal…
Marku Alen is fourth…4 minutes behind leader Francois Delacours in a ford…
Colin Mcrae is seventh…5 and a half minutes off the front…last day tomorrow but there's still 175 kilometres of competition to go
in the hockey world the City of Oxford are on the march…in the semi-final of the association cup they've been drawn away to Oxton of Cheshire
the ice hockey this weekend…tomorrow its Milton Keynes against Sheffield…
Swindon versus Telford and Oxford against Stevenage…on sunday the wildcats of swindon are at home again to Slough…
there's point to point racing at Mollington tomorrow…where the Bicester and Whaddon Chase have a full card of runners and riders…
and finally next Tuesday the country's top dogs…are in Oxford to start racing for the Pall Mall trophy…its the richest prize of the year…at the Cowley Stadium…the final's on March the twentieth
Two huntsmen have been cleared of ill-treating a horse by repeatedly striking it with a whip.
But magistrates found them guilty on a lesser charge of causing the animal to be terrified.
Gordon Middleton and Alan Hill were both given a conditional discharge.
The case was brought by the RSPCA after claims that the animal was subjected to brutality when it became stuck on a five bar gate.
Library Pictures/GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
Voice over
Three people have been charged with conspiracy to pervert the course of justice after a series of arrests in dawn raids yesterday 
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
The police operation in Cheltenham followed allegations of interference with witnesses and tampering with evidence in a forthcoming trial.
The case involves an attack on PC Bob Holt in January.
Nine other people have been bailed, pending further enquiries.
Two men have been arrested after a stolen car was chased at up to one (140) hundred and forty miles an hour.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
The Sierra Cosworth was chased along the A5 before it crashed into a police roadblock near Milton Keynes.
One officer suffered whiplash injuries.
Cancer specialists say new reasearch shows greater evidence of a link between children suffering from leukaemia and the work carried out by their fathers at nuclear sites.Families of children who've died are calling for a public inquiry.
Home Video
IAN MACLAREN/Mortimer
PHILLIP WYSOCKYJ/Aldermaston Worker
Dr ANN WATSON/Co-author
PETER ROCHE/Greenpeace
Dr MALCOLM DEAN/Safety Director
Voice over
John Wysockyj was diagnosed as suffering from leukaemia at the age of 4.
He died a year later.
His family believe it was because his father, Phillip worked at the atomic weapons plant at Aldermaston.
A new study by cancer researchers in Oxford has found a possible link between childhood leukaemia and fathers who work at nuclear sites.
54 cases were studied near Aldermaston over 18 years.
The report says 3 fathers who worked there had children, suffering from leukaemia.
The Wysockyj family wants a public inquiry.
The report's authors say, although the results should be treated with caution, more research needs to be done.
Campaigners say alongside studies at Sellafield and Dounreay, this is more evidence of how lethal nuclear sites can be.
But the nuclear industry takes a cautious view.
Already information is being collected by a study group on the children of up to 100,000 past and present employees at nuclear plants across the country.
British scientists who are working on a pioneering nuclear fusion project, have held a one day strike.
They're angry that they're paid only half that of their European colleagues and aren't given equal access to the best jobs.
LIZ HANNAM/Culham
JOHN BILLARD/IPMS
JERRY GOFF/IPMS
NICK HANCE/Atomic Energy Authority
Voice over
After a break of almost 6 months, the pickets are back at the Jet laboratories at Culham in Oxfordshire.
They're protesting at what they see as discrimination in the way they are treated compared with their European colleagues.
The average salary for a European Scientist at Culham, who's employed by the European Commission, is £40,000.
A British scientist, employed by the Atomic Energy Authority, gets half that.
And the dispute affects their work.
In November 1991, the Jet project scored a major success in its search for a waste free nuclear power.
It fused 2 nuclear atoms.
But the experiment was delayed a day because of the strike.
Last August there seemed a breakthrough, when the European Parliament commissioned a report into the dispute.
All strikes were suspended.
The report recommended that all British staff be put on temporary contracts.
But on Friday, the governing body at Jet rejected the scheme.
The unions blame the Atomic Energy Authority which has representatives on the Jet council.
The European Commission is set to rule on the dispute at the end of the month.
Until then, work on one of the most important nuclear projects in the world seems certain to be disrupted.
(WES AD LIB BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the schoolgirl swimmer who's now the best in Britain.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Baroness Thatcher described Lord Ridley tonight as a great Englishman who had made an enormous contribution to the country.
Yet his political career, spanning more than three decades, ended bitterly in a row over Europe.
CHRIS MOORE/Reporting
Baroness THATCHER/Speaking in 1992
HARROGATE/Yorkshire
DAVID CLIFTON-BROWN MP/Con
Lord VESTEY/Constituency President
JOHN ASHPLANT/Former Agent
Voice over
Nicholas Ridley was a political firebrand even keener than Mrs Thatcher to dismantle what he called the nanny state and roll back the effects of years of nationalisation.
He was MP for Cirencester and Tewkesbury for 33 years, holding posts in the Foreign Office, Treasury and Department of Trade, Transport and Environment.
While at Environment he was burned in effigy by the people of Foxley Wood for approving a major housing development.
It was said that he'd refused a smaller plan just because it was near his own home at Naunton in the Cotswolds
Throughout, on the national stage he was an ardent supporter of the Iron Lady
Male speaker
To the end of my days I shall continue to defend this government and to attack the rabble opposite.
Voice over
And when she was unseated he turned his wrath on those he saw as traitors
Male speaker
The people who have done this will not be at peace for years to come.
If any of them were to inherit the crown, uneasy would lie their head.
Voice over
And it was that habit of speaking his mind that led to his downfall.
When he suggested that the European Monetary System was a German racket to take over Europe, he had to go, to the dismay of his biggest fan
Female speaker
We don't have many with that range of experience and that marvellous mind.
We owe a great deal to Nick and we shall miss him.
Voice over
Lord Ridley retired at the last election and took a peerage.
He last spoke in the Lords on February 17th, his 64th birthday.
His health was already failing, but his death still shocked those who knew him
Female speaker
Something very sad has just happened…
Mr Nicholas Ridley has died.
Male speaker
Anybody with strong convictions that what he is doing is right is bound to stir up controversy.
He believed absolutely in what he was doing and that is why he and Mrs Thatcher achieved so much.
Male speaker
He knew what was right for us and for the country and he said it.
He wasn't prepared to be carried along with the wave and the various things that he said about Europe were completely right for what he said.
Male speaker
I'm sad.He was a character, and there arne't too many of those.
He said what he thought.
Female speaker
Great sadness.
He was very much loved in the county and everybody will be very upset.
Male speaker
Mr Ridley was quite a private person, but he was very kind and gentle, and worried a lot about his consituents and the country in general.
He really was that sort of man.
Voice over
Lord Ridley of Liddesdale, a former graduate of Balliol College Oxford leaves a widow and three daughters.
Chris Moore reporting on the life and political times of Nicholas Ridley, who died today.
Well, joining us now from London is our political editor Jon Lander, with his assessment of Lord Ridley's often controversial career.
JON LANDER/Political Editor
Voice over
Nicholas Ridley always boasted that he was a Thatcherite before Mrs Thatcher.
He was so committed to the free market that he once said 12-year-olds should be allowed to have credit cards — if they had the money.
Although he was one of her most enthusiastic supporters, Mrs Thatcher often found he was more of a liability than an asset.
His greatest ambition was to be Chancellor of the Exchequer.
But he blew his chances when he said that giving up sovereignty to the European Commission was like giving in to Hitler.
His problem seemed to be that he believed a Government could do exactly as it liked without taking public opinion into account.
He was frequently arrogant and overbearing and far from suffering people he regarded as fools gladly, he wouldn't suffer them at all.
He smoked constantly and his clothes were always smeared with cigarette ash.
And yet, he painted delicate water colours which sold for high prices.
He created a water garden at his former home in the Cotswolds and grew primulas with great skill.
And his staff at all the Ministries he worked in adored him.
Politically, he often behaved like a bull in a china shop.
Privately, Nicholas Ridley could be a man of great sensitivity.
An eighteen year old woman has appeared in court charged with the murder of her young step-daughter.
She also accused of the attempted murder of her baby son.
HARRIET RYLEY/Cheltenham
STOKE on TRENT
Voice over
18 year old Michaela Jane Foster, a former chilkd minder, is charged with the murder of her 22 month old step daughter Creina.
Creina was the step daughter of Mrs Foster's husband by his first wife.
She died on the night of January 9th this year.
It was originally recorded as a cot death and there was no inquest but there will now be an inquest.
Mrs Foster is also charged with attempting to murder her own 9 month old son John, who died in hospital at Stoke on Trent on March 2.
Mrs Foster, of Sochi Court, Hesters Way, Cheltenham, was remanded in custody for six days.
Magistrates turned down a defence application that the children's names should not be disclosed.
The sport of swimming issued its new world rankings this week…the best British girl is Karen Rake…
Karen who…
Karen Rake…she's 17…lives in the Buckinghamshire village of Steeple Claydon…swims for the Maxwell club in Aylesbury…is a sixth former at the nearby Waddesdon school…and is our guest for the Friday Feature 
KAREN RAKE
MICK WAKELY/Coach
JANET RAKE/Karen's Mother
Voice over
The clockwork life of Karen Rake is ticking by faster than ever before.
Up at 5 a.m., swimming by 6 a.m., breakfast at 8 a.m., school at 9 a.m.
During the day, there's A-levels to study for and then at night it is back into the pool at Aylesbury, where hopefully there's gold medals to train for.
In just 2 years, Karen Rake has come from nowhere to be the fastest British women swimmer.
Karen says that her mum used to compete as a swimmer, so she took it up and caught the bug.
She enjoys it, but training is hard work.
Twice a day she swims and sometimes when she's tired, she wonders why she keeps it up; but the answer to that is she enjoys it so much.
Mick Wakely, Karen; s coach, says that she is one of the best breastrokers that Britian has produced.
She is very tough mentally and determined and should go all the way to a medal.
Janet Rake, her mum, says that Karen loves swimming.
If she's ever out of the water, she thinks it is evil.
Karen talks about her life and says that her friends are very good when it comes to going out.
If she is training, they just arrange another time and she doesn't think she is missing out.
Her school is very good with time as well and she manages to get most of her work done.
Keeping your head above water is half the secret in sport and young Karen Rake seems to be made of the right stuff.
To be the best though and to stay at the top, you need willpower.
You need a mountain of motivation
Karen says that next year she hopes to go to the commonwealth games and then the Olympics in Atlanta.
She says that everyone dreams of winning a medal, but at the moment she is just hoping to get there.
Britain's first jet fighter, the Gloucester Meteor celebrated it's fiftieth birthday today.
The jet has become an aviation legend.
Former test pilots, engineers and craftsmen turned up to watch a fly past by two of the jets.
KEN GOODWIN Staverton
SID WOODACRE Former Meteor Pilot
MERVYN GOWELL Former Meteor Fitter
JIM COOKSEY Former Test Pilot
Voice over
The Gloucester Meteor; a golden anniversary party guest of honour.
2 of the jets staged a fly-past over the Gloucestershire airport at Staverton.
There to celebrate, were former pilots like Sid Woodacre.
He flew a meteor in 1944 and shot down a German doodlebug flying bomb.
He says that he shot it down, after chasing it at low level.
4,000 Meteors were produced at the Gloucester aircraft company at Brockworth, which closed down in the 1960s.
Mervyn Gowell was a fitter at the plant and says that working on the Meteor was a labour of love.
He says it was like a romance.
Pilots fell in love with the craft too; some were eager to refresh their memories with a glance at the Meteor; s cockpit.
He says that it looks different.
He probably couldn't fly one today!
He says that they used lots of fuel at low level.
they were also a bit sluggish at first.
Only 3 Meteors remain flying in the UK, but their close links with Gloucestershire ensures their memory will live on in the region for years to come.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Lord Ridley dies at 64
The former Gloucestershire MP, Lord Ridley, has died at the age of sixty-four.
2 remanded over Harrods bomb
Two people have been remanded in custody in connection with the bombing of the Harrods store.
70 die in air crash
Seventy people have been killed in an air crash in Macedonia.
Life ban for Johnson
The Canadian sprinter, Ben Johnson, has been banned for life after failing a drugs test five years after he was expelled from the Olympics for drug-taking.
FTSE up 17
The hundred shares index closed up seventeen point three at twenty-nine, twenty-two point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-five and up at two marks, forty-one.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
More families could be made homeless in one of the region's housing blackspots, because of delays in the payment of housing benefits.
A woman who has helped scores of homeless people is having to sell some of the houses she uses, because the payments are coming in so late they are causing HER financial difficulties.
Kim Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
DAWN WALKER-WEBB/Hotelier
DAVID SCRIBBENS/Tenant
LINDA BAKER/Tenant
Voice over
Steve and Stuart are just 2 of the homeless people, Dawn Walker Webb has helped over the past 20 years in Swindon.
She owns this hotel offering Bed and breakfast accommodation and 4 private houses for families.
But now the first of these is up for sale as Dawn tries to beat her own crisis.
She says delays from the Department of Social Security in paying out housing benefit have given her financial problems.
David Scribbens and his family moved into the house after weeks spent in one room in the hotel.
Now he fears for his future.
Next door is Linda Baker.
She moved into another of Dawn's houses after she was made homeless with four children.
A spokesman for thamesdown Borough Council admitted there is a backlog in housing benefit claims, but says they've introduced new measures to clear it.
He added that the application procedure is very complicated and depends on full information from the tenant.
Meanwhile, Dawn is taking it up with her MP.
She turns away up to 6 homeless people a day.
She fears Swindon's housing problems can only get worse.
Anglers are blaming pollution for a fall in the numbers of fish in some sections of the Rivers Severn and Avon.
They fear that if nothing is done, the fish will disappear altogether.
Clare Lafferty reports.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
ROBERT DANTER/Angler
Dr ALAN STARKIE/National Rivers Authority
Voice over
Robert Danter has fished this stretch of the River Avon in Tewkesbury for more than twenty years.
But in the last TWO years, he's hardly had so much as a bite here.
He says the fish are avoiding the area.
Mr Danter blames the lack of fish on pollution.
He believes that sewage is contaminating the water and driving them away.
But the National Rivers Authority says that's nonsense.
The NRA says the fish have probably just moved away to find somewhere better to spawn.
In part two: Gold Cup Fever…the Emerald Isle gets ready for Cheltenham.
A hard act to swallow…
Dangerous Dan and his latest flame.
And this lamb needs ewe…the adoption agency that's proud of its woolly ways.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
MICHAEL REGAN
MICHAEL CUNNINGHAM/Trainer
NOEL MEADE/Trainer
Voice over
and we'll be joining all the Irish folk at Cheltenham…don't think Carmody's mare will be running…but we'll be following those that are with special reports from the festival all next week…for football fans the big one is tomorrow…at the Manor Ground its the Central South second division derby Oxford against Swindon…
Mark Kiff has all the news 
BRIAN HORTON/United Manager
Voice over
The last time Oxford and Swindon met in January, the fog was coming down but the quality of the football was clear to see.
David Kerslake's opening goal for Town was a classic.
Swindon maintained their supremacy over Oxford that night with a two one win; Duncan Shearer scoring his 27th goal of the season.
But since then Oxford have been on the up and up.
So could this be the time for Brian Horton's luck to change?
Male speaker
Everyone knows Swindon's record against us.
But it's time to change.
There should be a great atmosphere.
I just hope the result is in our favour at twenty to five.
Voice over
Brian Horton's named the same side which took a point off top of the table Blackburn Rovers last week.
That means a home debut for Brett Williams on loan from Nottingham Forest.
With Fitzroy Simpson off to Manchester City and a spate of injuries, Glenn Hoddle will have to make at least three changes.
Argentinian Nestor Lorenzo is set to start his first game of the season.
Shaun Close, 21 goals in the reserves, could be brought in to add some firepower.
Swindon might be fourteen places above Oxford in the League, but the form guide shows Oxford are on a roll, Swindon away are in a rut.
It could be a match to remember.
first pictures of the big game in Goals Extra on Central tomorrow when we'll also have news of Hereford's home match against Doncaster…as for the other sport…here's Chris Moore 
Voice over
Driven to despair…mother says NHS cash problems led to son's suicide attempt.
The nightmare continues.
Zeebrugge survivors five years on.
And a fishy problem…anglers blame pollution for dwindling river stocks.
GOOD EVENING.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
SOUTH MORETON/Oxfordshire
JANET McCRAE/Mother
ALEX GATHERER/Oxfordshire Health Authority
Voice over
It was on this stretch of line near Didcot that William McCrae tried to kill himself by jumping off a train travelling at nearly seventy miles an hour.
Police say he only survived because he didn't hit anything as he rolled down an embankment.
At twenty five, it was his second attempted suicide.
He was a normal child, but started behaving odly after taking his A levels.
At nineteen he was diagnosed as schizophrenic and later admitted to Oxford's Littlemoor Hospital.
But two years ago he was finally discharged, to be treated as an out patient.
His mother runs the Oxfordshire Branch of National Schizophrenia Fellowship.
She thinks her son may have been discharged too early.
And says if he'd been given his own psychiatric nurse…he would never have jumped off the train.
She says there are a shortage of nurses and the service is generally underfunded.
Tonight William McCrae is being treated for multiple injuries in Oxford's John Radcliffe Hospital.
His mother's claims come just a few days before the publication of a report into the case of seven mental patients, who died after they were discharged from hospital.
Oxfordshire health authority insists there's no link with this latest case.
And it says the decision not to assign a psychiatric nurse was made on medical and not financial grounds.
He says it has nothing at all to do with underfunding.
William McCrae will now be asigned a psychiatric nurse, as soon as he leaves hospital.
But his mother still worries, should vital care be withdrawn, he could again try to kill himself.
On the fifth anniversary of the Zeebrugge ferry disaster, relatives of those who died say safety measures, aimed at preventing a similar tragedy, are being ignored.
One family involved in the disaster have been describing the agony they still endure to this day.
Debbie Kelly reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
ALAN ROGERS/Survivor
PETER SPOONER/Families' Support Group
Voice over
5 years to the day, the Rogers family were in the television room of the Herald of Free Enterprise, when it capsized just outside Zeebrugge.
So many people were killed.
The Rogers family still have nightmares about that day.
Alan, who hurt his back, hasn't worked since and is still fighting for compensation.
Soon after the disaster he tried to kill himself.
There are times when he considers it again.
he says; I would not care if I dropped dead tomorrow.
There is nothing to live for.
I'm still fighting for compensation.
I get to the stage when I cannot be bothered.
Martin Spooner was 29 when he was killed in the disaster.
His father helped form the relatives support group; 5 years on he claims safety standards on ferries are still not high enough.
The Herald of Free Enterprise overturned in less than a minute.
Operators may not have to update similar boats to prevent it happening again until 1999.
Male speaker
On ferries you need the highest standards of safety systems.
Zeebrugge demonstrated that was not the case and there is evidence that there's still room for improvement.
Voice over
The Department of Transport said today that ferries are inspected at least once a year to maintain pressure on operators to meet safety requirements.
The British Goverenemnt wants all ferries to be updated by 1993 and it's trying to persuade the rest of the world to agree, but the families say its taking too long.
Male speaker
Ferry companies need to get their acts together to make ferries safe.
They are still not 100 % safe.
Male speaker
We feel we have some sort of responsibility to continue jumping up and down until the situation has improved.
Voice over
There's a memorial service to the people who died at the weekend; many of those still suffering will be there.
All hoping the lessons of that day fiuve years ago have been learned
Let's have a bit of fun to finish with…and believe it or not another good night for the Irish…this one was at Cheltenham Town Hall in the wrestling ring 
Voice over
Wrestling may have lost its Saturday tea time slot on the telly, but the fans still love it and they pack in to watch when there's a show in town; and some show it was too this week.
Topping the bill was Dangerous Dan the fire eater, but it was the finish that brought the house down.
It's called a Battle Royal.
That's 12 fighters in the ring.
The rules; last man standing wins.
The way out is over the top rope.
Joining Dangerous Dan was the Ninja Kid, Texas Joe, Vic the Body, Super Trouper, Andy Pike and Tarzan Phil Taylor who was the over the ropes before he had time to swing on them.
They punched, pulled, pushed and pulverised each other for 10 minutes or more.
The winner, last fighter in the ring, was Tony Stewart, the man they call the Irishman.
An adoption agency with a difference has been set up to help find parents for orphan lambs.
It means that lambs which have lost their parents, for reasons such as sheep worrying by dogs, can quickly be given a new mother.
Ken Goodwin reports.
ROSS-ON-WYE Herefordshire
ALISON HUNTER BLAIR Sheep Farmer
JOHN DAVIES Sheep Farmer
PHILLIP JENKINS NFU
Voice over
This lamb needs a mother.
Orphaned when it's own mother died while giving birth it'll either have to be bottle fed, or another mother found.
It's scenes like this that sheep farmers prefer to see, the Ewe licking her newborn lamb clean, forming a close bond in the process.
But sadly some Ewes die while giving birth, other are the victims of sheep worrying.
Sheep farmer Alison Hunter Blair has a lamb which has been orphaned after it's mother died, now through a special lamb bank set up by the national farmers union she'll be able to find a new mother for the lamb.
She says many things can go wrong at birth and it's better to find a new mother for a lamb than to have to hand rear it.
A Ewe owned by farmer John Davies has lost a lamb during birth and so he's been put in touch with Mrs Hunter Blair by the farmers union.
He'll now take the lamb for adoption.
But it's not a simple process, the ewes can reject the lambs, so she's held in this restraint while the lamb is introduced, giving it a chance to suckle and allowing the mother to get used to it.
When the two have got to know each other a bit better, they can go out to graze.
He says the ewes aren't stupid, they can tell by smell if the lamb is their own; so they need a bit of gentle coaxing.
He says it's a bit like a dating agency without the romance, farmers with orphaned lambs are put in touch with farmers with Ewes which have lost their offspring.
The lambing season can be frought with difficulty, but thanks to the lambing bank there's a happy ending for at least some orphans.
Man shot dead at Lancashire home
A man has been shot dead at his home in Lancashire after he and his family were held hostage by armed raiders.
National Lottery announced
A national lottery to raise a billion pounds per year has been announced to support charity, sports and the arts.
25
British Telecom is to axe twenty-five thousand jobs over the next year partly because of the recession.
Branson sells Virgin Music to Thorn EMI
Richard Branson has sold Virgin Music to Thorn EMI for five hundred and ten million pounds.
MPs attack army cuts
MPs have attacked Government plans to make cuts in the army.
FTSE down 5
The hundred shares index closed down five point two at twenty-five, thirty-three point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-two and up at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Murder in the street.
Student teacher is stabbed to death.
And where's the Marquis?
Becky Blandford injured hunting, but no visit from her husband.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
Murder in the street.
Student teacher is stabbed to death.
And where's the Marquis?
Becky Blandford injured hunting, but no visit from her husband.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Bishop Peter Ball was enthroned just eleven months ago.
He says he regrets with great penitence and sorrow the circumstances that led to the caution.
The Archbishop of Canterbury will now decide if he'll face disciplinary action.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
4 APRIL 1992
Canon ANDY RADFORD/Diocesan Spokesman
Rt Rev JEREMY WALSH/Bishop of Tewkesbury
Voice over
Peter Ball became the Bishop of Gloucester in April last year, at an enthronement ceremony at the Cathedral attended by Prince Charles.
He and his twin brother, Michael, had previously founded a monastic order in Stroud.
He believed in the simple life and slept on a mattress on the floor.
But 15 weeks ago, a 17 year old trainee monk walked into Brixton Police Station and claimed Bishop Peter had indecently assaulted him.
And today, police confirmed the Bishop had been formally cautioned for an act of gross indecency.
The Bishop's resignation was announced at a Press Conference held at the Cathedral, when a statement by him was read out by the Diocesan spokesman.
The Bishop of Tewkesbury, who's been standing in for Bishop Peter, spoke of his sadness over the resignation.
Male speaker
He's sad having worked with Bishop Peter to see him go.
Acceptance of a caution is an admission of guilt.
Voice over
There was a mixed recation from the people of Gloucester.
Meanwhile there are wider implications for the Church.
Male speaker
It's inevitable that the resignation will affect the Church.
But the whole Church need not be tarnished by what's happened.
Voice over
It will now be up to the Archbishop of Canterbury to decide if the church should take disciplinary action.
Bishop Peter is said to be receiving medical treatment for the stress of recent weeks.
Police are still questioning a man about the murder of a twenty four year old student teacher.
Murray Pugh was stabbed to death in an apparently motiveless attack.
Police and fellow students have described his killing as a tragedy.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
Det Supt PETER SHAYLE/Gloucestershire Police
BILL CRONSHAW/College of Higher Education
APRIL 1991
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem Cheltenham
Voice over
At twenty four, Murray Pugh was in his final year as a trainee teacher at the Cheltenham and Gloucester College of Higher Education.
A keen sportsman, he'd spent Saturday afternoon playing rugby for his college club.
At eight o'clock he and his team mates were walking through Cheltenham.
A car pulled up beside them, and a group of young men jumped out.
There was a scuffle and Murray was stabbed in the chest.
Today college friends congregated at the place in Lower High Street where Murray was attacked.
Some had been with him on that night.
They were too shocked to talk…but the cards said it all.
Murray's death bears similarities to a case two years ago when sixteen year old David Nock was stabbed to death as he jogged home through the town.
Cheltenham's MP says he's shocked by this latest tragedy.
Detectives are tonight still questioning a man they arrested on Saturday night.
But they're appealing to the public for any extra information.
Meanwhile Murray's parents have travelled to Cheltenham from their home in Liverpool, and his college friends are preparing to hold a memorial service.
The Marquis of Blandford still hasn't visited his estranged wife Becky, even though she's critically ill in hospital after a hunting accident.
The Marchioness is in intensive care after a fall from her horse.
But the Duke of Marlborough says his son and heir, who's a former drug addict, hasn't even contacted HIM.
GARETH FURBY/Wootton
RICHARD SUMNER/Hunt Joint Master
The Duke of MARLBOROUGH
Dr DERICK WADE/Consultant
DAVID WILSON/Radcliffe Infirmary
Voice over
Today the Heythrop hunt met again as planned.
But without a familiar fugure.
Becky Blandford, who's still seriously ill more than forty eight hours after a hunting accident.
She feel from her horse during a weekend meet at Ditchley near her Oxfordshire home.
He says she fell onto a concrete road.
She says there little they could do.
She says she doesn't think she was wearing a hat with a chin strap.
Today Becky's mother checked on her progress at Oxford's Radcliffe Infirmary.
But her father-in-law spent the day with the hunt.
He says he's heard her condition is critical and they're all waiting for news.
He says his son hasn't contacted him.
The Marquis of Blandford, a former drug addict, married Becky in 1990.
But they separated a year ago, and today Jamie Blanford stayed in London.
He says it's a cross to bear.
The Duchess of Marlborough was also out hunting today.
Her hat secured with chin straps.
It's possible her daughter-in-law's injuries would not have been so serious had she done the same.
He says she may not fully recover.
He says she is stable.
At worst it could mean many months in hospital.
But the hunt's attitude today was it's a dangerous and risky sport, injuries will happen.
A supermarket chain with its roots in the nineteenth century is having a facelift.
Market research shows that many shoppers considered the image of the Co-op to be old-fashioned.
So now it's come up with a new look, aimed at the modern shopper.
ROBIN POWELL/Cheltenham
BOB BURLTON/Oxford
Voice over
150 years after its first branch opened in Rochdale, the new-look Co-Op was launched today in Cheltenham.
Newly refurbished and the first to show off the new logo, the Bath Road store's being hailed as a model for Co-Ops to come — proof, says the company, that it's serious about shedding that fuddy duddy image once .
Apart from the switch from Cambridge light to Oxford dark blue — the first change to the logo for a quarter of a century — the Co-Op says it's widened its product launch — and the aisles, to make things easier for those with prams or wheelchairs.
Co-Op stamps are gradually being phased out and the dividend scheme, by which customers once shared in the company's profits, has now been replaced with a system of money-off vouchers.
So are customers satisfied that their caring, sharing foodstore is heading in the right direction?
Female speaker
I do most of my shopping here.
Male speaker
The layout is better now.
Female speaker
You can walk around more easily, and there's a wider choice of things.
Voice over
With all the major supermarket chains currently locked in a price war, the big test for the Co-Ops's new-look is whether it'll boost takings.
A long and ditinguished history offers little protection from the recession.
Nostalgia buffs are gathering for an auction of items which most would have thrown away a few years ago.
Old cigarette cards and the like are now worth thousands of pounds.
WESLEY SMITH/Oxford
MICHAEL WELCH/Phillips Auctioneers
Voice over
Now for today's dance lesson, courtesy of the cigarette card.
GENTLEMEN, take a step 3 beats forward with your right foot, carrying your weight onto it,
LADIES, take a step 3 beats with your left foot, carrying your weight onto it.
Cigarette cards could teach you a wealth of different skills, not only to dance, but how to play golf or learn palmistry.
For others, the fun came from sticking pictures of their favourite varieties in albums.
Be it a selection of flags of the World or top sports stars, it could take a lifetime to collect a complete set.
Then there was the American sprinter Jesse Owens, who swept to victory in the Berlin Olympic Games of 1936, much to the disgruntlement of Hitler.
Or maybe you'd prefer stars of cinemas silent era, the languid Ivor Novello, singer Bebe Daniels, or the vamp, Gloria Swanson.
Whatever your taste, there's bound to be something to interest you among the 3 collections of cigarette cards up for auction at Phillips in Oxford.
The auctioneer says they can fetch up to £20,000, not bad when they were given away free originally.
Some of the cards really are works of art, like this butterfly card made from silk.
A browser remembers collecting cards years ago.
The advice is search your attic, he says.
Next door, it's old toys they're after, the sort of thing most of us will remember from the toy cupboard of old.
They've stood up to years of games to earn retirement in the showcase.
So rubbish it is not, as long as beauty lies in the eye of the beholder.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Fears grow of famine in Sudan
FTSE up 35
The hundred shares index closed up thirty five point two at two nine five seven point three 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty four and down at two marks, forty.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back: Still to come on Central South, a new look for nineties for the old fashioned Co-op stores.
But first here's Tim with the sport 
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Swindon are on a roll at the moment and when things are going right, you can't go wrong.
Take Swindon striker, Steve White.
Everything he touches goes in the net.
The first one came after just 90 seconds.
Easy win.
It wasn't the stroll.
The scoreline suggests Fraser Digby in the Town goal did his bit as well.
He stopped 3 certain goals.
2 Watford strikes came in as many minutes.
If one of these had gone in it could have been a different story.
But there was no stopping Swindon once they'd got the second.
It was well made by Maclaren and Bodin and perfectly taken by Dave Mitchell.
It was all over by half-time.
Town went in 3 up, thanks to another from Steve White.
It wasn't a graceful goal, but being in the right place at the right time is what counts.
In the second half, Watford tried to hit back, but there was no way through when Digby's on his best form.
10 minutes from time Swindon got their 4th.
A dream goal.
This is the art of one touch football.
Hoddle to Bodin, to White…
Watford were nowehere.
Watch again in slow-motion.
The ball on leaving Hoddle's boot doesn't touch the ground, until of course it's bouncing in the back of the net.
And Swindon are bouncing up the table into third now.
They've got Southend away on Wednesday and the big one Newcastle at home on Saturday.
Oxford have dropped down into the bottom half of the table, after losing by 1-0 for the third match running.
It was Birmingham's first win in 8 matches; a scrappy game won by a scrappy goal, which came after 29 minutes.
The ball could have gone anywhere in the scramble sadly it went into the back of the United net.
Paul Peschisolido, the scorer.
With just one goal in five games you don't have to be an expert to see where Oxford are going wrong at the moment.
Brian Horton is looking for a striker.
They need one badly.
The game at St Andrews was there to be won.
United could have taken it.
Should have taken it in the second half, but they couldn't find the net.
There were a few flashes from Joey Beauchamp, but no goals from anyone.
United have now dropped back into 15th place in the 1st division.
Tomorrow night they go to Luton and can't afford to miss out again.
Also playing tomorrow night Hereford United…they're at home to Crewe and they too could do with a win…on Saturday they lost two-nil at Wrexham 
Voice over
Hereford lost this game in the first half.
The first half hour in fact with Wrexham banging in 2 quick goals.
Jon Cross got the first.
The United defence was caught flat footed by the free kick and Cross was simply too strong; too determined to be stopped.
The second goal also looked too easy for Wrexham.
You can't afford to give goalscorers like Gary Bennett too much time and space.
This was his 19th goal of the season.
Wrexham are 3rd in the table.
They're going for promotion and there was no way they were going to lose a 2-goal lead.
As for Hereford, they've just got to keep going.
better news of rugby…
Gloucester knocked up a new record at the weekend…at Kinghsolm they flattened Bridgend by forty two points to fifteen just three days after beating Newport…its the first time the cherry and whites have beaten two Welsh sides in the same week…in the valleys they'd say…die yown…very good 
Voice over
Six tries was just what the doctor ordered for a Gloucester team that's been under the weather for too long this season…and this win was even more rewarding when you think that six first teamers were missing…
Bridgend had a strong side out…not strong enough to hold the cherry and whites though…
Simon Morris got the first try…
Paul Holford the second to give Gloucester a half-time lead of 15-3…
Pete Miles barged through for the third try at the start of the second half…
Bridgend came back with tries from Evans and Greenslade…
Morris got another in the middle of those two and then to finish things off scrum-half laurie Beck and full back Tim Smith scored a try apiece to make it 42-15…good weekend for them…good weekend for coach keith Richardson
The Gloucester coach Keith Richardson says that the week may have turned around the team's season…the win over a strong bridgend side was very rewarding and it reflects the old Gloucester dog attitude…when they think there's competition a match to be won they respond and come through…there's a big league game against Northampton coming up on saturday and Gloucester need all the inspiration they can get to win
Three people have been arrested in connection with what police describe as a substantial fraud at Oxford City Council.
It's believed tens of thousands of pounds of public money has been misused.
LIZ HANNAM/Oxford
BOB BLOCK/Chief Executive
Det Insp BILL WATTS/Fraud Squad
Voice over
These are just some of the goods which police believe were bought by Oxford City Council to be sold by some of its employees for private profit.
The Council's Audit Department and Thames Valley police have been investigating the fraud for the past fortnight.
At 9 a.m. this morning, 13 officers from the fraud squad raided the Works Department of Oxford City Council and a council contractor A. C. Electrical.
2 council employees and a member of staff from the contracters have been arrested and are being held at St Aldates police station.
Plans to revive part of the old railworks in Swindon have been sabotaged.
The only useable machinery left in the workshops has been wrecked…and it's thought industrial saboteurs could be to blame.
ABI DONALD/Swindon
KEN RYDER/Project Chairman
BILL JEFFRIES/Works Manager
Voice over
Mindless vandalism or industrial sabotage?
These machine tools at the old railworks in Swindon have been wrecked.
They're the only remaining workingtools in the buildings that used to house one of the largest railworks in the country.
It was hoped that a small part of those works could stay in operation, renovating locomotives and rolling stock and that eventually a heritage museum could be set up on the site.
Now those plans have been thwarted.
Once these buildings were the heart of Swindon, they employed 14,000 people, turning out one locomotive every week and a wagon every hour.
6 years ago, they closed down completely.
That is, all apart from this one which now employs a handful of people.
The site is owned by Tarmac, Ken Ryder a locomotive enthusiast leases the shops.
A spokesman for Tarmac says they're taking the vandalism seriously, but’ they don't know how the damage occured and they've called in there own security advisers to investigate.
They'll then be advised on what action to take.’
As yet, there are no plans to call in the police.
The town of Swindon expanded around the works and they form an integral part of the towns history, Bill Jeffries is Ken Ryders works manager.
He's worked on the site for 46 years and he knows what a heritage museum would mean to the town.
It's hoped the machines can be repaired, but the person responsible for the damage has wasted a lot of time and money and delayed an important project.
