A former RAF pilot is making a last-minute bid to save Britain's last flying Vulcan bomber.
Harry Bromley is putting up his own money to try to keep the aircraft off the scrap heap.
IAN MACLAREN/Reporting
HARRY BROMLEY/Save Flying Vulcan Campaign
Voice over
The last flying Vulcan is about to be sold off.
It's expected the Ministry of Defence will receive up to forty tenders for the Delta Wing jet, including nine from overseas.
The deadline closes tomorrow morning.
But a last minute attempt to save the bomber for posterity…has been launched by former RAF pilot Harry Bromley.
He's finalising the documentation for a private bid, and is putting up the cash himself…
The Vulcan, which only saw active service during one raid in the Falklands campaign…was at the heart of Britain's Air Defence for thirty years.
Althought the sealed bids will be opened tomorrow morning, it could be another month before the fate of the Vulcan is known.
(HARRIET AD LIB BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News…mine's a treble.
Plus, it's all NEW at the Co-op, but will a break from the past pay dividends?
Another slice of the Maxwell empire is going up for sale.
This time it's the publisher's wine from the cellars of his mansion.
Three thousand bottles are to be auctioned and, as you might expect, many are on the large side.
Debbie Kelly reports.
PAUL BOWKER Christie's
MICHAEL BROADBENT Christie's
Voice over
Mention the name Maxwell and you're assured of attention.
This time it was his wine collection, housed in specialy built cellars of Headington Hill Hall in Oxford; the wine, over 3,000 bottles is being sold off by administrators.
Fortunately for those coping with the Maxwell debt, the publisher selected his wine well.
Much of the claret is from 1982; a good year.
He says, Its a superb vintage.
Its one of the best four or five vintages of this century.
It is unusual to have so much of one vintage.
In keeping with the man, the cellar includes a large number of oversized bottles including over 750 magnums equivalent to 2 bottles and the larger iamperiales, the size of 8 bottles.
He says, One might expect a big man to have big bottles, but if you are giving a big dinner party its very practical to have magnums.
The highest prices are expected to be paid for a 1982 Mouton Rothschild at upto £250 a bottle, but perhaps it could be topped by an outsize bid.
Former Israeli premier Begin is dead
FTSE up 17
The hundred shares index closed up seventeen point six at twenty-five, fifty point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar seventy-two, and down at two marks, eighty-six.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
One of the most famous food shops in the country is to close, ending a slice of history which goes back more than a hundred years.
The Frank Cooper Marmalade Shop, which forever linked the name Oxford with marmalade, is closing its doors for the last time.
Mark Kiff reports.
OXFORD
DOUG PESTELL/Executive Chef
ELIZABETH VENTHAM/Hotel Guest
MAXINE VENTHAM/Hotel Guest
Voice over
In part two: Derby thriller…
Oxford turn the tables on arch rivals Swindon.
And Maxwell's vintage years…the tycoon's wine collection to be auctioned.
Hello there…derby between Oxford and Swindon…it was a thriller from start to finish…with eight goals…five to United…three to Town 
TIM RUSSON
BRIAN HORTON/United Manager
Voice over
There's always a lot riding on a local derby; pride more than anything, but this match was also about survival for United and promotion for Town.
Glenn Hoddle sprung a surprise by playing himself after a 5 month injury lay-off and in the opening minute Swindon were crowing; just 30 seconds had gone, when Shaun Close set the match rolling with a freak of a goal.
Ken Veysey must have had nightmares about this on Saturday night.
Wouldn't you?
The pace the pattern was set seconds later, as Oxford roared back with their first attack.
Should have been a goal, but everyone knew we had a game.
Swindon threatened to kill Oxford off, as they put together some delicate and dangerous football.
But then Jimmy Magilton fired the United midfield machine and the match was back in the boiler when John Durnin scored a brilliant equaliser.
Suddenly the sound Swindon defence was at panic stations.
They were surviving; Oxford were soaring.
United took the lead from the penalty spot.
This was the offence and this was the execution by Magilton.
It was 3-1 minutes later.
Great goal this one from young Joey Beauchamp; the shot too hot for Hammond to hold.
Town came back just before half-time with a strike from Dave Mitchell and at 3-2 it was still anybody's game at half-time.
John Durnin settled things though.
United's other young star, Chrissie Allen raced down the left and set things up for goal number 4.
Durnin, the striker whose speed tortured Swindon, turned creator then setting Beauchamp up for number 5.
Back came Swindon, as Oxford eased off and when Dave Mitchell scored his second with a delightful bit of acrobatics, things started to bubble.
Town were on the charge now.
United's turn to man the escape hatches.
Shearer was desperately close to a goal and then Mitchell bounced a shot off the bar.
It was a fair result.
A real scorcher of a game and one of Brian Horton's best wins at the Manor.
This week United are home to Watford…
Swindon play Charlton tomorrow…and they could be losing full-back David Kerslake…
Newcastle are after him…and Town need the money…
to rugby next the cherry and whites are back on the winning trail…they beat Pontypool at the weekend in a real rough and tumble of a game…
Nick Clark reports 
Voice over
Now its a longtime since we've had a motorcycle racing champion in Central South land…all could change this year with Trevor Nation and the Oxford Products team…here's Nick Clark again 
TREVOR NATION
Voice over
Tomorrow all roads and ways to Cheltenham will be full for the first day of the National Hunt Festival…
For the steeplechasers and their desciples its the simply the best 
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Racecourse Manager
Voice over
After months of work Prestbury Park looked proud of itself today on the eve of what horseracing folk regard as their Olympic games…to race…to ride…to watch at Cheltenham is the highlight of the year…millions of pounds will be bet on the nineteen races that make up the festival and this is one place where the budget rarely bites…
chat
and Central South could make a clean sweep in the Gold Cup meeting…the going will be good tomorrow…the first big race is the Champion Hurdle…
Oxfordshire jockey Richard Dunwoody has a good chance on Kribensis…
Wednesday they race in the Queen Mother Champion Chase…
David Nicholson's Waterloo Boy from Condicote near Stow on the Wold should start as favourite for this…what a popular winner he would be…
And on Gold Cup day another Gloucestershire favourite champion jockey Peter Scudamore will be riding Carvill's Hill…the hottest prospect for years…it should be a golden year whoever wins
Making a stand…jailed man's mother enters political ring with foreign secretary.
Heroin haul…police seize drugs at illegal rave party site.
And a sticky end…marmalade shop to close after a century of trade
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
GRAFTON/Oxfordshire
MARILYN BROWN/Parliamentary Candidate
DOUGLAS HURD MP/Foreign Secretary
STEPHEN JACOBI/Fair Trials Abroad
Voice over
Police have seized hundreds of pounds worth of drugs at the spot where an illegal rave party was due to have been held.
More than thirty people were arrested.
Police have now warned of tough action against plans to hold any future rave parties.
Erika Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Supt GLEN SYMES/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
The party was over before it began.
400 people gathered at Groundwell Farm in Swindon after hearing about the illegal rave on a telephone hotline.
But they were turned back by police who'd found drugs at the scene.
Male speaker
Legal raves are fun for young people.
But the criminals target the illegal events, sell drugs and encourage people to become addicted.
When we did the raid a quantity of drugs were found: 15 wraps of what could be heroin.
If it is, it would be worth £1,500.
Voice over
32 people were arrested at the party site, which had been occupied by a group of travellers.
They've all been released without charged.
One has been bailed whilst tests into the drugs are carried out.
Meanwhile organisers of illegal-raves are being warned.
They're not welcome in Wiltshire.
Male speaker
We will stop unlawful parties.
We will know in advance and will stop them using everything in our legal power.
Voice over
And party-goers who're looking for a good time are being warned they'll find nothing but trouble at illegal raves.
A paralysed Nigerian man, who was flown to this country for life saving treatment, has left the National Health Service with bills totalling almost sixty thousand pounds.
He was flown here after being injured by armed robbers.
But two hospitals say they have no idea whether they'll be paid.
Kim Barnes reports.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
LIBRARY PICTURES
OXFORD
MICHAEL ADDISON/Churchill Hospital
Voice over
Rafiu Tijani came to Stoke Mandeville hospital first.
He was paralysed after being shot by armed robbers in his home country of Nigeria.
He paid for his treatment here.
Then he was transferred to Oxford's John Radcliffe Hospital, with heart problems.
He spent 3 months there, running up bills of £30,000, as yet unpaid.
Now he's in the Churchill Hospital after developing an infection.
Managers here have no idea whether he'll be able to pay his bill, thought to run to around another £30,000.
But some money has been paid.
The problem he says is only that Mr Tijani turned out to be so ill, otherwise he came as a legitimate private patient.
Now they're taking the case up with the Department of Health, the Foreign Office and the Home Office to find out where they stand if he can't pay.
They may yet have to write the debt off.
An elderly woman has been rescued from her burning house by decorators working nearby.
/BETA 
CHELTENHAM
Lecturers and students have started a campaign to avoid being evicted from their college.
The college, which is housed in council premises, has been told that the authority wants its buildings back.
Ken Goodwin reports.
MALVERN/Worcestershire
MIKE SMITH/College Director
Cllr JOHN ARNETT/General Purposes Cmte
Voice over
Joan Reid has been a student at Malvern Hills college since she retired as a civil servant on health grounds — now she's learning new skills in the upholstery class.
But the lessons may be short lived.
The council, which has been leasing the buildings to the college, now wants them back.
She says closing the college would be a terrible blow — it's used by thousands of people.
More than two thousand students use the adult education facilities at the college, which even has it's own playgroup so that mothers who want to attend classes can bring their babies.
The college is run as a private trust, and leases the building from hereford and worcester county council for a peppercorn rent.
The council has also been giving the college a yearly grant of seventy thousand pounds.
But that's going to be withdrawn, and the lease terminated, because the council says it needs to cut costs by using the building for it's own staff.
Needless to say, the college is putting up a fight.
He says he can't understand why the council should, on the one hand, put so much money into the college, and on the other hand virtualy sign it's death warrant.
The council says that finding office space for more staff and saving money must be the priority.
Students say that closing the college, or at best trying to move the facilities elswhere, would be a disaster.
Malvern Hills college has been given a years notice to leave the buildings — but they're hoping public support will make the council have a change of heart.
In Central News tonight.
Was it for the cash?
Three accused of attempting to murder couple for the insurance money.
Don't make us go.
The children being sent back to a violent father.
And banana surprise.
The supermarket fruit with that little extra bite.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
The victims, Pauline Leyshon and Ivor Stokle escaped from the car but suffered horrific burns.
The prosecution claims that if the defendants had succeeded in their plot, they would have netted more than a hundred and thirty eight thousand pounds.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Bristol Crown Court
BIRDLIP/Gloucestershire
Amateur Video
Voice over
Norman White from Gloucester was one of the first defendants to arrive at Bristol Crown Court.
Together with Mark Evans from Staunton in Gloucestershire and his lover, Sheila Stroud, also from Staunton, he's charged with attempting to murder Pauline Leyshon and her boyfriend, Ivor Stokle…both from Gloucester.
Leyshon and Stokle suffered horrific injuries when they were trapped in a burning car that plunged down a steep hillside near Birdlip in Gloucestershire in November two years ago.
The court heard that a police officer on the scene said Ms Leyshon's burns were so bad she looked like something from a horror movie.
Opening the case the prosecuting counsel claimed that Evans and Stroud had plotted to kill the couple, and they'd hired Norman White to help them.
He said the motive was money.
Stroud, who'd been Stokle's common law wife, planned to claim life insurance.
It's alleged that once there, they were tied up; bundled into a truck and driven to Barrow Wake.
There they were put into Mr Stokle's car.
Petrol was poured on it, and the truck was used to shunt the burning car off the edge of a steep hill…leaving Pauline Leyshon and Ivor Stokle for dead.
Evans, Stroud and White have all pleaded not guilty to attempted murder.
The trial continues tomorrow.
Detectives have issued a description of the man who stabbed a student teacher to death in Cheltenham.
There's been anger and despair in the town over this latest example of violent crime, and increased calls for more police to bring the Gloucestershire force up to strength.
IAN MACLAREN/Cheltenham
Det Supt PETER SHAYLE/Gloucestershire Police
Cllr BRIAN CASSIN/Mayor of Cheltenham
Voice over
They continued to lay flowers and momentoes today on the spot where Murray Pugh was stabbed to death in Cheltenham High Street.
The murder has brought home to the genteel Spa town, the reality of violent crime in Britain today.
Murray, a PE student, gave up his spare time to help organise holiday activities for youngsters.
He was killed by one of two men who jumped from this Blue Ford Sierra Estate car.
Two others remained inside the car.
The murder suspect is described as of black or mixed race in his early 20s.
He was wearing a baseball type cap, dark casual jacket and possibly jeans.
The second man was white in his early 20s with blond skinhead hair or clean shaven.
Both are believed to be local.
Four other men, who were held for questioning, have now been eliminated from police inquiries.
Detectives are still searching for the murder weapon, probably a wooden handled knife.
They also want to know more about the movements of the Ford Sierra, TBO 592Y on Saturday night.
Although the police say violent crime is no worse here than any other town of its size, Cheltenham residents find the escalation in violent crime hard to take.
Cheltenham Borough Council has passed a motion expressing its outrage at the murder and has promised to imrove security in the town.
There's also more support for an extra 40 police to bring the Gloucestershire force up to strength.
Any information on the murder of Murray Pugh will be dealt with on a direct line to the Incident Room on Cheltenham 250405.
A mother has been ordered by the High Court to return two of her children to their father in America.
Joy Scott, who's married to a US airman, brought the children here because she claimed, her husband was violent.
Now she says she's worried that once they're back in America she'll never get them home again.
KEN GOODWIN Gloucester
JOY SCOTT Mother
ESTELLA ESSON Joy's Mother
FREDDIE SCOTT Joy's Son
Voice over
4 year old, Freddie Scott and his 5 year old sister, Cheryl, at their grandmothers house in Gloucester.
But soon they'll be on a plane back to America on the orders of a High Court Judge.
Their mother, Joy, is married to an American airman who she met while he was stationed in England.
She moved to West Virginia, but soon the relationship turned sour.
Amid accusations of violence against her and her children, Joy Scott fled to England, bringing her children with her.
But now her husband has tracked her down and obtained a High Court order for the return of his children to America.
She says she thinks the system has failed her.
Joy's mother says that she can't bear to be parted from her daughter and grandchildren again.
She says she can't bring herself to say goodbye.
She can't take any more.
Only 10 year old, Levi will remain in England.
He's not included in the court order because he's only Mr Scott; s stepson.
But the other two children are sure they don't want to return to America.
He says that daddy hits him.
She says that she thinks that once she's back in the States, her husband will continue to harrass her.
The family are due to fly out to America shortly.
It's a sad parting; one Mrs Scott hoped she'd never have to make.
Liverpool players attend Tony Bland's funeral
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven point four at two nine four nine point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty three and down at two marks, thirty nine.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
(HARRIET AD LIB BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, a horsewoman fighting back.
A new life for the injured rider who came out of a coma.
Plus, play it again Elvis.
The Presley fans who can't keep away.
Anne Dawson
Welcome back to Central News.
The Marchioness of Blandford is still seriously ill from head injuries after a hunting accident at the weekend.
But she's being encouraged in her fightback by a young rider who's recovering from a similar fall.
Anne Haine suffered a serious head injury after falling from her horse but is now back in the saddle.
Her family say riding hats must be improved, but riding experts insist they're safe enough.
KIM BARNES/Cherington
ANNE HAINE
October 1991
JENNIFER HAINE/Mother
ANNE GARDENER-RULE/British Horse Society
Library Pictures
Voice over
Anne Haine wasn't expected to survive after she fell from her horse 18 months ago, but she's proved the doctors wrong, fighting her way back into the saddle.
She suffered a serious head injury even though she was wearing a recommended riding hat.
But she's certain about the key to her amazing recovery.
Anne spent 3 months in hospital and can barely remember this royal visit.
She says a range of alternative therapies have helped her improve.
Her mother believes the British Riding Society should look at alternatives to riding hats.
But the BHS say the hats they recommended, which comply with a British standard, are safe; a harness hat with a chin strap and a jockey skull hat.
Cycling helmets get no backing.
It's thought Becky Blandford's hat came off as she fell and it's not certain whether it had a chin strap, like the one she's wearing here.
Today, hospital officials say her condition is improving, but she remains seriously ill.
Now back working at her own riding stables, Anne Haine offered this encouragement.
Football, now, and the chairman of Swindon Town says he deeply regrets having to sell one of the club's best players just as the race for promotion to the Premier League is hotting up.
David Kerslake is joining Leeds United for an undisclosed sum, and player-manager Glenn Hoddle says he'll be sorely missed.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
RAY HARDMAN/Chairman
GLENN HODDLE/Player-Manager
SANDY COBERN/Supporters Club Secretary
Voice over
There's been no stopping Swindon Town of late.
This four-nil win at Watford on Saturday — their sixth in seven games — left them in third place in the First Division.
But their chances of promotion to the Premier League were dealt a blow today — with the announcement that defender David Kerslake is to join League Champions Leeds United for an undisclosed sum.
It's been suggested that player-manager Glenn Hoddle will resign if any more players are sold to pay off debts — he's certainly very disappointed at Kerslake's departure.
Supporters say they're angered by the Kerslake deal — it's not the first time, they claim, that Swindon's best players have been sold with the end of the season in sight.
Ray Hardman's insisting that no one else is about to leave the County Ground — depite speculation that club captain Colin Calderwood has been approached by Crystal Palace.
Meanwhile Glenn Hoddle denies that one sale will put an end to Swindon's promotion prospects.
His immediate task is to get his team in shape for the visit of league leaders Newcastle United on Saturday.
More than fifteen years after the death of Elvis Presley, the appeal of The King of Rock and Roll is just as great.
In fact, a musical dedicated to Elvis is on tour, giving two fans the chance to see it for the FORTIETH time.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
CLAYTON MARK/Elvis
RAY and DIANA HILL/Elvis Fans
Voice over
It could be Vegas, 1969.
In fact it's Oxford 93 and a rehearsal to boot.
But who's counting, certainly not Ray and Diana Hill, not the years anyway.
But they can count the number of times they've been to see Elvis the Musical; 38 to date and it will be forty by the end of the week.
They've become such regulars as they've followed the national tour they now give the Star, Clayton Mark, a lift back to Cheltenham every Saturday night.
Male speaker
They're going to be the godparents of my twins when they arrive soon.
They're not like average stage door people or those who hang around Gracelands.
Voice over
They really like Elvis the Man and they're not out to make money.
Ray and Di come from Gloucester and have known Clayton since he moved to Cheltenham 3 years ago.
Their home is called Gracelands and is dedicated to the memory of Elvis.
They live so close to Oxford, they're seeing the show 3 times this week.
But they have travelled as far afield as Belfast and Aberdeen.
Male speaker
We don't think it's obsessive.
We don't smoke or drink, so we have some money to spare.
Voice over
The show charts Elvis's musical career and leaves the rest of his life alone.
But neither Ray and Di, nor Clayton, are folled into thinking he is Elvis.
Male speaker
Elvis was Elvis and no-one will ever replace him.
This is just an actor playing a part.
I leave it behind when I leave the stage.
Male speaker
I don't know what we'll do if the show finishes.
We want it to go on forever.
Voice over
The King may be dead.
Long live the King!
ANDREW TRYTHALL
A widow who claims she contracted the lung disease asbestosis from washing her husband's overalls is sueing British Rail for damages.
Ruby Allison is constantly breathless.
She may have to give up her job.
ROBIN POWELL/Purton
RUBY ALLISON/Asbestosis Sufferer
BRIGITTE CHANDLER/Ruby's Solicitor
Voice over
2 years ago, Ruby Allison developed a serious lung disease.
Now, even a little housework leaves her breathless and her doctor wants her to give up her job as a cook.
Ruby claims her illness was caused by washing her late husband's overalls.
He worked for several years at the British Rail Works in Swindon, where he was regularly exposed to asbestos.
Ruby's solicitor has dealt with a number of asbestos cases connected with the Swindon Works.
She says there were sveral steps British Rail could have taken to protect staff and their families once the dangers were known.
British Rail Engineering Limited has so far made no comment on Ruby Allison's case.
John Allison died of a heart attack on his 53rd birthday.
What's happened to Ruby since, makes the memories all the more painful.
Brigitte Chandler says Ruby's claim will not be the last.
The Swindon Works only closed in 1986 and since it can take many years for asbestos to affect people's health, she expects to be dealing with similar cases well into the next century.
A woman's being questioned about the attempted murder of a man who was dragged underneath a car.
She's been brought to Banbury from Newcastle on Tyne where she was arrested.
Sonny Worthington, who's twenty five, was beaten up and dragged for half a mile by the car in Banbury almost two weeks ago.
He was found lying in the road with severe injuries.
A man has been arrested in connection with a fraud at Cherwell District Council.
It follows two raids yesterday by police investigating a fraud at Oxford City Council.
OXFORD
It's believed that over the past year tens of thousands of pounds worth of equipment has been charged to the council and then sold privately by some of its staff.
Two people from the Oxford works department and an employee from a council contractor have been arrested and released on police bail.
Environmental campaigners have won their battle to stop a bypass being built across ancient water meadows.
The Government has told the planners to think again.
The campaigners say the decision could mark a watershed in attitudes to the environment, but the local MP says the traffic problems won't go away.
RICHARD BARNETT/Hereford
JAMES BRADLEY/Department of Transport
COLIN SHEPHERD MP/Con Hereford
Dr JOHN ROSS/Herefordshire Nature Trust
PENNY OLIVER/CPRE
Voice over
Environmentalists have waged a 4 year-long battle to save the Lugg Meadows on the edge of Hereford.
This ancient wetland has been under threat ever since the £50 million Hereford Eastern bypass was announced in 1988.
The proposed dual carriageway would have cut right across the edge of the meadow; common land for centuries and a favourite spot for walkers.
But after a 7-month-long public inquiry which saw vigourous opposition from green groups to the plan, the Government has backed a recommendation by its Inspector that the bypass should not be built to the east of the city.
It's also refused to approve an alternative route to the West, telling the planners they must think again.
Male speaker
It's back to square one.
We'll have to consult and go to another inquiry.
Voice over
Hereford’ s MP says the city's traffic problems won't go away…in fact they'll get worse.
Male speaker
It's seven years since the bypass was first planned.
Something will have to be done about the traffic.
Voice over
Campaigners who've fought long and hard to save the Lugg Meadows were jubilant today.
Male speaker
It's very exciting that the meadows have been saved.
Female speaker
At long last the environmentalists are being listened to.
Voice over
Meanwhile walkers on the meadow had an extra spring in their step.
Whatever happens to Hereford's traffic, at least city dwellers can continue to enjoy the centuries old peace and tranquillity of the Lugg Meadows.
A Tesco superstore where a customer was bitten by a tropical spider in a bunch of bananas has promised a full investigation.
Diana Adams was treated in hospital after being bitten on the arm.
The spider is still missing.
Mrs Adams says she'll never buy bananas again.
GARETH FURBY/Swindon
DIANA ADAMS/Spider Victim
RAY GABRIEL/Spider Expert
Voice over
Diana Adams braved a visit from a private collector this afternoon…to see if she couid identify the spider that she says attacked her.
But these were all too big.
She says it was a small as their head.
But small or not, it appears to have left a nasty bite mark on her arm.
She says she was attacked in Swindon's Tesco superstore.
She says she didn't notice at first but her arm began to swell up later.
A hospital doctor prescribed a course of anti-biotics.
And today a spider expert claimed the creature had to be caught for the sake of other shoppers.
He says if someone has a low immunity it could cause muslce paralysis.
Today Tesco's promised a’ full investigation’and said their’bananas are always inspected’.
But their statement doesn't say whether the spider had been caught.
She says she won't buy bananas again.
It just ran away.
She wants to know where it is.
Diana Adams will now be taking her business elsewhere…with bananas firmly off the shopping list.
Now you may think the budget was today's big story, but for the people of one town it was nothing compared to a row over a much-loved local landmark.
So far it's inspired a five hundred signature petition, infuriated a councillor, and there's still no solution in sight.
This report from Gareth Furby.
WINCHCOMBE/Gloucestershire
PAT SMITH/Parish Councillor
LES WILTSHIRE/Campaign Organiser
Voice over
For many in the ancient town of Winchcombe — it's the hottest news for years.
Not the budget or the general election -- but something far more important: the fate of a cattle trough.
They say its their heritage and they're very emotional about it.
The trough used to stand outside a garage, now being redeveloped.
Now it lies in a parish councillor's front garden.
And many townspeople want it back.
He says he remembers watering his horse, and even though it is only a trough, it's important to the town.
But councillor Pat Smith says he has documents and photographs that prove him right.
He says back in 1963 the trough was due to be broken up to make way for a path.
He owned the nearby garage so the highways authority handed it over and he moved it onto his land
By the 1970s he'd moved it back onto the street.
And there it stayed until he sold up.
He says people can raise peitions but they musn't say he stole it.
If it wasn't for him it would have been in bits.
But this man says his documents prove the trough was given to the town in 1907 and still belongs to the parish council.
He's organising a campaign to get it back and five hundred villagers have signed a petition.
He says the trough is vital to the town.
Les Wiltshire even videoed the trough outside the garage -- as proof that it was once there.
But Councillor Smith isn't intimidated.
He says if people think he's not telling the truth they must tell him to his face.
The give-us-our trough back campaign is threatening to organise a protest march every week but Councillor Smith says he won't even discuss moving the trough until he receives a full apology from his accusers.
First, the changes to income tax and personal allowances.
The basic rate is unchanged at (25%) twenty five percent.
But a new rate of (20%) twenty per cent has been introduced for the first (2,000) two thousand pounds of taxable income.
It's designed to help the low paid.
The single person's allowance has gone up in line with inflation to (3,445) three thousand four hundred and forty five pounds.
But the married couples allowance is unchanged.
The combined changes make an average taxpayer two pounds sixty four pence a week better off.
Drink, cigarettes, petrol and diesel are all up.
It means about a penny on the price of a pint, five pence on a bottle of wine and about (28p) twenty eight pence on a bottle of spirits.
Duty on cigarettes is up ten percent — that's thirteen pence on a packet of twenty, but on pipe tobacco duty is only up by the rate of inflation.
Unleaded petrol and diesel go up by five pence to a gallon, but Leaded petrol is up by ten pence a gallon.
That means the difference between leaded and unleaded is now (22p) twenty two pence a gallon.
And car tax is raised to a hundred and ten pounds a year.
Mr Lamont also announced measures to boost the car industry.
Special tax on new cars is halved to five percent, making a new car about four hundred pounds cheaper…
And company cars are to be taxed according to price instead of engine size.
FTSE up 24
So to the city and the hundred shares index closed up twenty-four point one at twenty-five, seventy-four point eight.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-two but up at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
A parliamentary candidate has branded a football club as sexist because she's been barred from a men-only dinner.
Two of the other leading political candidates have been asked to attend the event.
But Labour's Pam Tatlow says it's politically unfair.
Erika Barnes reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
PAM TATLOW/Labour Candidate
DENNIS DEACON/Club Chairman
JOHN TAYLOR/Conservative Candidate
NIGEL JONES/Liberal Democrat Candidate
Voice over
Pam Tatlow is standing for Labour in Cheltenham at the General Election.
But unlike her Conservative and Liberal Democrat opponents she's been excluded from the centenary dinner at the Town's football club tonight.
It's a men-only night.
But Pam Tatlow says the club shouldn't have invited the other politicians if they wanted to steer clear of controversy.
They're not just holding a private function.
They've invited other representatives, including some from the Borough Council: and if they were women they couldn't have gone.
My Parliamentary opponents would have been outraged if they'd been excluded because of their colour.
Entertainer Jimmy Tarbuck is top of the bill tonight.
Some said his jokes would be too blue for the Labour candidates tastes.
The club deny they're being sexist, but regret the political implications.
It's a men's night.
It's one of many all round the country.
There are other events for women only.
It's the first time we've held the event because we wanted something special for the Centenery.
On the guest list though is Conservative candidate John Taylor.
Whilst he's no stranger to discrimination himself, he says the club is entitled to run the event in its own way.
I think it's been blown up out of all proportion.
I'm the last person to start discriminating against people.
The charities which benefit are for men and women.
It's important to point that out.
To complete the political picture, Liberal Democrat candidate Nigel Jones says he will be at the dinner, but will voice his objections.
He says the all male event is probably not an appropriate way to celebrate the club's centenery.
It should have been a family event, something special to celebrate the centenery.
There won't be any Labour representation at the dinner, because the town's Mayor has now declined his invitation.
It's clear for tonight's centenery celebration.
Politics and sport are on the menu.
The man accused of murdering a police informer has told a jury that he's a drug dealer and a poacher, but not a killer.
Danny Gardiner said he sold drugs to Chalky White…but he had nothing to do with his death.
Tim Hurst reports.
WINCHESTER
A blind mother is threatening to take her two partially sighted sons out of school because she says they're not getting enough attention.
She wants to send them to the same private boarding school as her other partially sighted son, but her local council has refused.
Her MP is backing her.
Richard Barnett reports:
GLOUCESTER
JANET AUGHTON/Mother
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
TONY SAUNDERS/Principal Education Officer
Voice over
Janet Aughton has been battling for two years to get her two sons, Steven who's 7, and six year old Jason…moved from the council school they attend in Gloucester.She says the two children are gradually going blind because of a hereditary defect that's already made her lose her sight.
And she claims the Fieldcourt School in Quedgeley has only one teacher trained to help the visually handicapped.
Mrs Aughton wants the County Council to send Steven and Jason to the fifteen thousand pound a year private West Country Boarding School in Exeter which caters exclusively for the blind and partially sighted.
Her other son, fourteen year old Andrew already goes to the Exeter School, and she says he's getting a much better education:
Female speaker
She has seen the improvement in Andrew when he went to the Exeter School.If the council doesn't agree to send her other two sons there she'll take them out of school.
Voice over
The children's case has been taken up by Gloucester MP Douglas French, who wants the Secretary of State for Education to intervene:
Male speaker
It would be common sense to send the children to a school for the blind.
Voice over
Gloucestershire County Council maintains that the children are getting a proper education at their existing school:
Male speaker
Although parents views are taken into account, what's best for the children is most important.
And private schooling is very expensive.
Voice over
The council says it will continue to assess Steven and Jason's needs, and it hasn't ruled out a change of school.Meanwhile the argument over what's best for the youngsters goes on.
TIM RUSSON
MICHAEL ROBINSON/Trainer
DAVE HORTON/Managing Director
GRAHAM McCOURT
Voice over
Mental health deaths: Families say inquiry ignores the real problems.
A poacher and a drug dealer, but Danny Gardiner says he's not a killer.
And bring back our trough.
The watering hole that's got them foaming at the mouth.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
Parents of a group of mental patients who died while under the care of a local health authority have criticised the report of an inquiry into the deaths.
They say it's just a paper excersise which ignores the real problems in the mental health service.
(harriet next)
HARRIET RYLEY
The report, prepared by a member of the health authority involved identifies twelve areas where improvements are necessary.
But relatives of those who died, including three who took their own lives are calling for a new, full and independent inquiry.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
GWEN WATKINS/Mother
VIVYENNE RUBINSTEIN/Report Author
STEPHEN MERRELL/Brother
DAVID PERRY/Oxfordshire Health Authority
Voice over
The report has taken 6 months to prepare.
The brief to investigate the deaths of 7 patients between 1990 and 91. 3 men committed suicide including Paul Merrel, while a coroner recorded an open verdict on 4 others, including Tristan Watkins.
The review was carried out by Vivian Rubinstein, a lay member of the Health Authority.
She points out 12 areas where action is needed.
They include the Authority's discharge and trasnfer policies, most of the deaths occurred at or around the time when patients were moved.
She points to cutbacks in beds and says the full complement for acute mental patients should be made avaialble.
She'd like to see a key worker allocated to each patient and families made more fully informed about treatment.
Mrs Rubinstein's brief from the health authority was to make recommendations, not to apportion blame and not to deal with specific cases.
The report has bitterly disappointed the mother of Tristan Watkins, who was found dead in a pool 11 days after being discharged.
But Mrs Rubinstein says she could only look for common themes.
Stephen Merrell says a full independent inquiry should be held.
His brother Paul hangd himself two weeks after being discharged.
Meanwhile the Health chiefs say they will carry out the recommendations.
Money's already been set aside.
As the Authority, they accept responsibility, but do they accept things went wrong?
They will carry out the areas for action.
Families who'll be watching to see what changes are made say they only want to make sure further tragedies are avoided.
A woman with cancer has been summoned to court for refusing to pay a poll tax surcharge of just over fourteen pounds.
Marjorie Roper and her husband say they've already paid their poll tax once, and shouldn't have to clear the debts of those who've refused to pay at all.
The council say they must pay up.
Clare Lafferty reports.
STROUD Gloucestershire
MARJORIE ROPER
MARCUS HUNNYBELL Solicitor
JOHN ROPER
Voice over
Marjorie Roper from Stroud should have appeared in court this morning.
She'd been summoned there for refusing to pay a poll tax surcharge of £14.52.
Mrs Roper and her husband have already paid more than £290.
But Stroud District Council now wants the extra money to cover for the people who haven't paid ANY of their poll tax.
The couple say that shouldn't be their responsibility.
Mrs Roper has cancer and was too ill to go to court.
So her husband John and his solicitor went in her place.
After just 5 minutes inside the pair were out again.
this for nothing it creates a disrespect for the law.
Sroud District Council refused to comment on the Ropers case other than to say it had acted completely correctly in all its dealings with the couple.
Meanwhile they're waiting for another summons to pop through their door.
Ford staff plan strike over redundancies
FTSE up 6
The hundred shares index closed up six point eight at two nine five six point seven 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty three and down at two marks, thirty eight.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodbye.
A theatre has doubled its size by buying and renovating the houses next door, at a time when most theatres are making cut-backs.
The Theatre in Chipping Norton was once a Salvation Army Citadel, and now plays host to touring shows, panto, cabaret and films.
But in such cramped conditions, working there HAS to be a labour of love.
CHIPPING NORTON/Oxfordshire
TAMARA MALCOM/Director
SIMON KUNZ/Gate Theatre
Voice over
If your eyes should wander from the action on the stage at The Theatre in Chipping Norton, they might fall on an unusual dedication on the walls.
’ These stones were laid by 100 of those who through great persecution, boldly and conscientiously served their God.’
The theatre was originally a Salvation Army citadel, built when the Sally Army came to the town in 1888.
’ Dancing rooms have been compelled to shut up shop, public houses have been emptied, desperate characters reclaimed and a corps of 100 brave salvationists has been formed.’
Inside the citadel, the rules were no liquor, no rioting, no gambling and no public dancing.
But in 1963 the Salvation Army decided to pull out of Chipping Norton.
The citadel bacame a furniture warehouse, before it was bought by Tamara Malcom and her husband in 1973 and they applied to convert it into a theatre.
Frantic fund-raising and hard work lead to the opening of the theatre in 1975 by Edward Fox, John Alderton and Tom Baker.
The first production was a panto.
The Theatre's annual panto has become something of a cult, with people coming from as far away as Amsterdam and Geneva to see this year's’ Mother Goose.’
Each year, sumptuous sets are especially created and the Theatre commissions its own original scripts.
Not all the show that come one tour are so well received.
But while the audience can relax in relative comfort in the mini auditorium which seats 200, staff and performers have always had to work in rather cramped conditions in tiny dressing-rooms and offices that still have the old wall-paper on the bedroom walls.
The Malcoms bought the cottage nextdoor in 1974.
It houses the changing-rooms, toilets, offices and the bar, thereby avoiding having liquor in the ex-citadel.
The latest addition is number 7 Godards Lane.
The building on its other side the Theatre has raised £230,000 to buy and convert it into dressing rooms, store rooms and even a rehearsal room in the attic.
It's heartening for actors like these from the award-winning Gate Theatre company to see a theatre expanding at a time when many they play in are threatened with closure.
Meanwhile, Tamara Malcom is contemplating the next step for the Theatre — in what will be her new office.
Even now she's not sitting on her laurels.
The next step is to raise yet more money to renovate the other side.
As they say, the show must go on.
The international rock star Bruce Springsteen has spurned the major venues in London to play a concert here in the Central region.
It's part of his British tour in May and sixty thousand fans are expected to cram in to watch him.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Milton Keynes
ANDY PHIPPS/Managing Director
Voice over
Born in the USA, star of New Jersey and the World.
Now Bruce Springsteen is coming to Milton Keynes.
He'll appear at the Renamed National Bowl, now part owned by the Sony Music empire.
Springsteen, the man they call The Boss will baptise the 60,000 capacity stadium in May.
The Stadium management thinks it's a major coup.
Male speaker
it's absolutely wonderful that he's coming here to launch the National Bowl in May
They're especially pleased because artists of Springsteen's stature normally head straight for Wembley and stay there for a week.
Tickets went on sale on Friday and such is the demand, that there's talk of a second concert.
The stadium was built by the old Milton Keynes Development Corporation and has played host to major stars in the past.
David Bowie appeared there 2 years ago and Michael Jackson has also performed.
The 8 acre bowl is a reclaimed landfill site which is aiming to become one of Europe's premier entertainment venues and not just for rock music.
Male speaker
The National Bowl is one of what we hope will be a series of venues all over Europe and we hope this one will become the first stop for major artists as they come to Europe
They have licenses for 10 performances this year going through until September.
The whole site is being substantially upgraded to include a permanent stage, dressing rooms and catering.
All the promoters have to do is turn up with the act.
It's yet another refinement to Arena rock and possibly another step further from the fans.
It's a long time since you could go to your local corn exchange and see international artists for ten bob.
Now you have to come to somewhere like this, mix it with sixty thousand people, pay over twenty quid, and not forget to bring your opera glasses.
I'm a third of the way towards the stage 
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
A unique centre has opened to help small businesses develop new technology they otherwise could not afford.
It's the result of years of work by scientists at a nuclear establishment which is branching out to stay financially viable.
WESLEY SMITH/Harwell
Dr STUART NELSON/AEA Technology
1948
EDWARD LEIGH MP/Technology Minister
BJORN THUNDAL/Swedish Businessman
Voice over
The Technology Transfer Centre at the Harwell Laboratory in Oxfordshire will help companies worldwide do the necessary research to expand and improve their work.
It cost £4 million to build.
For a fee, companies can use the facilities here to experiment on improvements to their products without the worry of investing in costly equipment themselves.
He says Harwell has now expanded from dealing solely with the field of nuclear physics.
These pieces of precision engineering show just what the machinery here is capable of producing.
The cubes were made from a single piece of metal.
The facility was opened by the Technology Minister, Edward Leigh.
He explains how new technology can make some products, like artificial limbs, lighter.
A group of senior industrialists toured the new site with a view to using the facility.
He says he may use the facility.
If Harwell succeeds in encouraging clients to use the centre it should see existing technology used for new purposes and keep the banks happy.
(HARRIET AD LIB BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, a businessman hoping for thin times ahead.
The computer diet that could mean fat profits.
Plus, look out, here comes The Boss.
Glory Days are here again.
Welcome back to Central News.
If you've tried the F-Plan diet, the Cambridge diet, hypnosis, liposuction or even having your jaw wired, all without success, then how about the computer diet?
A software engineer who freely admits to being plump and has tried every diet in the book claims to have invented a programme that's guaranteed to keep those extra pounds off.
ROBIN POWELL/Lydiard Millicent
STEVE SOWERBY/Inventor
LINDA WEBB/Dietician
Voice over
Computer programmer Steve Sowerby has a weight problem.
Not a big problem, but enough of one to have tried and failed for several years at everything from Weightwatchers to F-Plan.
Until one day he decided enough was enough.
The result is a programme called Foodbase.
Thought to be the first computerised nutritional system in the world, it tells you exactly what to eat and how much of it.
Its applications are endless.
Steve and his wife use it to keep the weight off and ensure their 3 young daughters get the balanced diet the experts say they need.
But Linda Webb, a dietician at the Princess Margaret Hospital in Swindon, doubts whether computer dieting will catch on.
To find out what potential customers think of Foodbase, we asked Steve to set up stall in a local health food shop.
Female speaker
I was impressed by the information on minerals, carbohydrates, fat, and so on.
Female speaker
I think it's one of the best ideas for ages.
Voice over
The programme costs about £50 and with it comes a handbook, that includes etiquette tips like chopping up food into a sensible size before putting into your mouth.
With Dad around, the Sowerby girls have to mind how as well as what they eat.
Football, and Swindon Town step up their promotion challenge at Southend tonight…and they'll be hoping for more than Oxford and Hereford got last night…
Both were beaten…
Oxford lost 3-1 at Luton and Hereford went down one-nil at home to Crewe 
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
Voice over
It is 4 defeats in a row for Oxford United.
The alarm bells will be ringing soon if this goes on and the sooner they get out of this bad patch, the better.
Luton took an early lead with a goal from David Preece, which took a deflection as it sailed into the net.
Things were looking brighter at half-time, thanks to an equaliser from Nick Cusack, who flew through the air with the greatest of ease, to knock home his 6th goal of the season.
A 1-1 draw looked on the cards; looked a good bet for Oxford, until 13 minutes from time, Luton's top scorer, Phil Gray struck a deadly blow.
Again, the ball took a deflection as it flew in past Paul Reece.
There was worse to come 2 minutes from time.
No question about the quality of this goal from Luton.
A super strike; Scott Oakes the scorer.
Luton 3-Oxford 1, the final score.
The 3rd division game at Hereford was a shocker.
It must have been United's worst performance of the season.
They were a disaster.
Crewe weren't much better, but at least gave things a go.
The only goal came just before half-time.
Crewe centre half, Darren Carr got the header as the Hereford defence stood and watched.
There was no joy, no relief in the second half.
Crewe might have had a couple more.
United never switched themselves on.
For the fans, it was switch off.
Tonight, it is Swindon against Southend.
The £500,000 deal taking David Kerslake to Leeds went through this morning, so there has to be a reshuffle.
Nicky Summerbee will probably move back into defence and Paul Hunt come in at number 7 for his first full league game of the season.
Civil Rights campaigners have attacked government plans for a clampdown on gypsies and New Age travellers.
The new measures are in response to the public outcry over illegal rave parties such as the one at Castlemorton Common last year.
But the civil rights organisation, Liberty, says the proposals would be unworkable and would violate the European Convention on Human Rights.
May 1992/IAN MACLAREN/Reporting
ANDREW PUDDEPHATT/Liberty
ROSE WILSON/Gipsy
THOMAS WILSON/Gipsy
JOHN DAVIES/Landowner
SID RAWLE/Travellers' Leader
Voice over
When 20,000 travellers invaded Castlemorton Common last May, it turned a picturesque part of Worcestershire into a shanty town.
There were angry complaints from nearby residents of noise, drug-taking and theft.
The Government promised new legislation.
It's now proposing to make it a criminal offence to park a caravan on land without consent.
But while that WOULD hit the so-called New Age Travellers, it would also affect thousands of ordinary gypsy families.
Local councils would also have greater powers of eviction and be free of their legal duty to provide gypsy caravan sites.
The organisation Liberty claims the proposals are in breach of international law.
Gypsy families, who've camped for 70 years on sites like this one near Hereford, say they have no desire to give up their way of life.
And the landowner, who fought a High Court battle to allow gipsies to camp on the site, says new laws would mean a return to the bad old days.
Gypsy leaders who lobbied parliament today had this to say to the government…
But gipsies and travellers can expect little support fromk Tory MPs whop maintain the nusiance and distress to local communties must be stopped.
Liberty warn they'll go to the European Court to protect the rights of Travellers.
The Government says it'll consider all responses to its proposals before they're implemented.
The country's first helpline for police officers facing complaints from the public is already busy taking calls.
In one county alone, around five hundred complaints a year are made against officers…but only one in ten are upheld.
RICHARD BARNETT/Cheltenham
PC MARTIN RODDY/Gloucestershire Police
WAYNE WRIGHT/Police Federation
Voice over
PC Martin Roddy, based at Charlton Kings in Cheltenham, has found the policeman's lot is often not a happy one.
In the past 5 years, while making arrests or breaking up fights, he's suffered a broken nose, a fractured collarbone and a serious back injury.
But he says just as worrying, is the string of unjustified complaints made against him by members of the public.
Around 500 complaints a year are made against officers in Gloucestershire by members of the public.
Fewer than 50 are found to be jusstified.
Now the county's Police Federation has set up a helpline to give advice to officers facing complaints.
A federation representative is on call 24 hours a day by mobile phone.
The helpline has already been used by a number of worried officers.
For PC Roddy and hundreds of other officers, the helpline means they no longer have to face the trauma of unjustified complaints alone.
The country's first local referendum on the Maastricht Treaty is to be held in Worcester…but the city's MP says he'll ignore the result.
The voters are also being asked about a number of other issues.
The organisers say it's to help politicians guage public feeling…but the MP says he doesn't want to know.
SANDY BARTON/Worcester
ANITA KNITTEL/Volunteer
GEOFF SOUTHALL/Worcester Referendum Society
PETER LUFF MP/Con Worcester
Ballot papers were being checked today, ready for delivery to every home in the city.
Volunteers like Anita Knittel, taking two weeks holiday to help out.
Female speaker
’ It's important, because the Government are tending to ignore people today.
There are 6 questions here.
A topical one is 'do you think the Government should ratify the Maastrich treaty?'
People are interested, they should vote.’
Voice over
The newly formed Worcester Referendum Society set up a news conference to publicise the ballot and explain why it's so important.
Male speaker
’ We feel that our political representatives require more guidance than they are currently getting.
At least the local MP will have irrefutable evidence of the way his local constituents feel about matters.
And I hope that he will take note of what we have to say.’
Male speaker
’ No, I won't.
Obviously it will shake my thinking on these matters.
But I believe we live in a representative democracy, not one where we're delegates of our constituents.
We are sent to Westminster to exercise our judgement on their behalf.’
Voice over
Questions ranging from Maastricht to fox hunting were chosen, by ballot, for the referendum.
Few of the people we asked either understood the treaty or favoured a ballot.
Worcester's MP says he knows his constituents views and the referendum is a waste of time.
The society say they'll inform him anyway.
And they plan to send copies to the Prime Minister, just in case the people of Worcester can influence national opinion.
In Central News tonight.
Back to the scene.
Jury sees the spot where couple were left in a burning car.
We're delighted.
Parents' joy as Becky Blandford regains consciousness.
And unworkable.
Gypsies say clampdown on travellers will breach human rights.
ANNE DAWSON
CLARE LAFFERTY/Birdlip
November 1991
November 1991
Voice over
Judge, jury and barristers left Bristol Crown Court and travelled to the Barrow Wake beauty spot near Birdlip in Gloucestershire.
The Prosecution alleges that it was here, on a night in November two years ago that Pauline Leyshon and her boyfriend Ivor Stokle were bundled into a car which was then set alight and pushed over the edge of the hill.
Leyshon and Stokle managed to escape from the burning car, but they both suffered horific burns.
The three defendants were also at this morning's viewing.
The Prosecution alleges that Stokle's former girlfriend, Shiela Stroud from Staunton carried out the murder attempt with her boyfriend Mark Evans, and a hired hitman Norman White.
Prosecuting counsel told the jury they'd hatched the plot to claim insurance money, and to avoid giving Stokle his share of the house in Staunton he'd bought with Stroud.
This afternoon, the jury was taken to the house.
It's alleged that Leyshon and Stokle were lured here and tied up at knife point, before being transported to the hill.
Evans, Stroud and White have all pleaded not guilty to attempted murder.
The trial continues back at Bristol Crown Court tomorrow.
The Marchioness of Blandford has regained consciousness after her hunting accident.
Becky Blandford's still in intensive care after suffering a serious head injury, but is now making considerable improvement.
Her parents have today been able to speak to her, but it's clear she still faces a lengthy recovery.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
DAVID WILSON/Hospital Manager
LIZ BUTTLE/Physiotherapist
Last Monday
Voice over
Becky Blandford is now out of a 4-day coma and able to talk to staff, according to officals at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford.
Her parents spent over 2 hours at her bedside this morning, her mother, Linda Winnington Ingram able to speak to her.
Her father, Peter Few Brown said they'd had a good visit.
He said Becky's a lot better, but is complaining of a headache.
Hospital officials say the progress is encouraging.
For the moment, Becky remains in intensive care, after falling from her horse on Saturday.
She may be moved into a general ward soon.
Neurosurgeons have successfully moved a blood clot from her brain and are keeping a close watch on her.
For the moment, they've no idea what long term injuries may be.
It's likely she could face lengthy physiotherapy and recovery may be slow.
The Marchioness hasn't yet been able to see her baby son George, nor has she had a visit from her estranged husband, Jamie Blandford, currently banned by the High Court from seeing her.
In a newspaper interview, he's criticised his father, the Duke of Marlborough as thoughtless and insensitive, for going hunting just 2 days after his daughter-in-law's accident.
Meanwhile, Becky's family and friends are hoping the improvement in her condition continues.
A woman manager at Long Lartin top security prison has been suspended after reports that she had a relationship with an inmate.
The prisoner is a convicted drug smuggler.
An inquiry is now being carried out by the governor.
KEITH WILKINSON/Evesham
The woman is civilian member of the prison's middle management team.
She was suspended last week.
An investigation is being carried out by the Governor of Long Lartin, Peter Atherton.
His report will be passed to the Area Manager, who will decide whether any further action is to be taken.
The woman is said to have had a relationship with Antonio Luciani, who is serving 20 years for drug offences.
Luciani is one of more than 100 prisoners highlighted in a report by the pressure group, Liberty, as being possible victims of miscarriages of injustice.
He has now been transferred from Long Lartin prison to Bullingdon Prison at Bicester.
A statement issued by the Governor says:’ It would be improper to comment until the outcome of the investigation is known.’
A man who carried out a series of indiscriminate attacks on people he thought were students has been jailed for seven years.
In the most serious incident he battered a Russian student unconscious.
The judge said it was one of the gravest attacks he'd come across.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
Det Insp DAVID BUCKINGHAM/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Andrew Davis was described in court as extremely nasty.
The jury heard he carried out the attack on a post graduate Russian student as she cycled home across Oxford's Port Meadow last July.
Davis from Richmond road in Oxford knocked her unconscious, threw her cycle into the river and then posed as a good Samaritan, pretending to comfort her, before attacking her again and trying to strangle her.
22 year old Katherine Monastyrskaya managed to struggle to a road where she was helped to hospital by passers by.
She suffered a fractured jaw, concussion and multiple cuts and bruises.
Detectives praised the help they received from the public, saying the artist's impression of Katherine's attacker helped greatly to bring about a conviction.
Sentencing Davis to seven years imprisonment, Judge Francis Allen told him.
You attacked, knocked out and severely injured your victim.
In part two: Sorting the men from the boys.Remittance Man takes the big one on day two at Cheltenham.
Heavy going…another fall for Swindon in the promotion race.
And scouting around…the ten million pound appeal to update Baden Powell's dream.
TIM RUSSON
DAVID NICHOLSON/Trainer
Voice over
And finally, the Scouts are trying to update their image to recruit more members from inner cities and ethnic minorities.
It's part of a ten million pounds appeal to show people that there's more to scouting than singing round camp fires.
So, as Mark Kiff reports, the new image includes an up-to-the minute rap anthem.
SCOUT ASSOCIATION VIDEO
PAUL JACQUES County Commissioner Oxfordshire Scouts
Voice over
It's more pop promo than Gang Show, that's for sure.
This video by the Scout Association has been made to launch it's ten million pounds fund raising campaign.
The motto is’ Be a scout, not a lout’and is aimed at getting youngsters out of trouble and into the scouts.
Traditionalists might be appalled, but deep in the Oxfordshire countryside, things are very much as they were.
Making camp fires is still one of the most popular of scouting activities.
But now the Scouts are looking to modernise their image.
Male speaker
We have this dilemma.
The scouts do exciting and hazardous things, but they're sometimes shy about admitting that they're in the scouts.
Voice over
Activities like climbing and abseiling have kept membership of the scouts at a healthy level.
700,000 youngsters nationwide wear the scouts badge.
One in four men in this country has been a scout, but the camp site image has remained the same; despite the fact that the short trousers and wide hats went out 20 years ago.
Male speaker
There's no more finger nail inspections and things like that.
We now have to raise money, in more fortunate areas like Oxfordshire to help provide scouting in the inner cities.
Voice over
Today's scouts proudly wear cooking and computer badges as well as the more traditional activities of camping and sports.
What Baden Powell would say to a rap anthem, one can only guess at.
But the decision seems to be a hit with the scouts.
So in the words of the rap, it's down to the real nitty gritty to keep the flames of the scouting movement burning bright.
Oust’ wretched Tories’says Ashdown
FTSE down 52
The hundred shares index closed up down fifty-two point four at twenty-five, twenty-two point four.
The pound is up at one dollar seventy-two, and up at two marks eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
A legal expert is calling for changes in the law following another case in which a patient is claiming medical negligence more than twenty five years after first seeing a doctor.
A secretary is seeking High Court permission to sue three doctors who she says failed to spot a hip deformity when she was a baby.
She says they condemned her to a lifetime of pain and disability.
The GPs deny negligence.
This report from Gareth Furby.
HIGH COURT/London
DONALD HARRIS/Centre for Socio-Legal Studies
Voice over
Katherine Colgrave from Kidlington in Oxforshire walked into court with her mother: the hip deformity at the centre of the case causing her to limp.
She's claiming damages from three GPs who saw her as a baby more than thirty years ago: Dr Kenneth Saunders, Dr Patrick Smyth, and a Dr Novakowski, who has since died.
The claim there is against his estate.
Dr Smyth's address was given in court as Beaumont Street in Oxford.
And Dr Saunder's given address, Oxford Road, Kidlington, is a GPs surgery.
The High Court heard allegations that each doctor in turn failed to spot a deformity of the left hip.
One allegedly said it was an inflamed joint.
Katherine Colgrave's lawyers claim she only discovered in 1984 that she may have escaped disability if she'd been correctly diagnosed and treated soon after birth.
That was why she was sueing now.
But the doctors' lawyers augue the case cannot be allowed to go ahead after such a long delay.
But just a few weeks ago Keith Atkinson from Malvern in Worcestershire won the right to sue Oxfordshire Health Authority.
He says he was the victim of medical negligence twenty five years ago at Oxford's Radcliffe Infirmay when an unecessary operation is said to have left him severely disabled.
Normally a claim has to be filed within just three years.
Donald Harris is the director of a legal research centre at Oxford University.
And he says it is becoming more common for people to sue for medical negligence after a delay of ten, twenty, even thiry years -- but such course is fraught with problems.
He says the records could have been desroyed and the doctors involved could be dead.
Donald Harris wants the law changed so compensated is automatic.
But that reform will come to late for Katherine Colgrave.
She's now waiting for Mr Justice Buckley to rule whether or not she can go ahead with her case.
Three people have gone on trial in connection with the discovery of a multi-million pound drugs factory.
The defendants, two men and a woman, are accused of conspiring to supply the drug LSD.
Clare Lafferty reports.
WORCESTER
JANUARY 1991/SELLACK/Herefordshire
Voice over
On trial at Worcester Crown Court were thirty year old Jamie Ray, a Californian who'd been staying in England, James Lovelidge from London who's twenty seven and unemployed, and Michael Rock, a forty one year old French Canadian who was living in London.
All three are charged with conspiring to supply the controlled drug LSD between the thirty first of December ninteen eighty six and the second of February nineteen ninety one.
The charge follows a raid on Lawless Cottage in Sellack near Ross on Wye last January.
The jury was told that inside the house police found what they called an LSD factory capable of producing millions of pounds worth of the drug.
Ray was one of four people arrested on that day.
Two others have since pleaded guilty to conspiring to supply the drug.
Ray, Rock and Lovelidge all deny the charges.
The trial will continue tomorrow.
It's expected to go on for up to six weeks.
A man has appeared in court charged with murdering his wife.
Thirty-year-old Jitendra Jotangia was remanded in custody by Milton Keynes magistrates until later this month.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
The body of his wife Marla was found at the couple's home on the Thursden estate in Milton Keynes yesterday afternoon.
The couple have a three year old son who is now being looked after by relatives.
Seven people have been questioned by police investigating ticket fraud at the Cheltenham National Hunt Festival.
Detectives say a number of forged tickets are in circulation and advise against buying tickets from touts.
Five people have been released without charge.
Two others have been released on police bail.
One of the men accused of murdering a police informer has accused detectives in the case of being unprofessional, incompetent, corrupt and dishonest
Danny Gardiner, who denies the murder has told a jury that the police have a blinkered obsession with convicting him.
Tim Hurst reports from Winchester Crown Court.
Voice over
The countdown begins:Will this man be the first black Tory MP?.
Thirty years on.The hip patient who wants to sue her childhood doctors.
And scouting for a new image.
The Baden Powell boys say we're no softies.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Mr Taylor found himself under attack from members of his own party after he was first selected to stand.It blew up into a national row over allegations of racism before he was confirmed as candidate.
CHELTENHAM
JOHN TAYLOR/Conservative Candidate
WILLIAM WALDEGRAVE MP/Health Minister
NIGEL JONES/Liberal Democrat Candidate
PAM TATLOW/Labour Candidate
Voice over
John Major put the region's candidates and campaigners out of their misery at 1.00 p.m. and set the date.
Over in Cheltenham, the canvassing could't get going fast enough.
Just an hour later tory hopeful, John Taylor began his campaign with top level backing from Health Minister, William Waldegrave, visiting a old people's home which has opted out from the local authority.
John Taylor became one of the best known prospective parliamentary candidates when some local tories objected to his selection.
He's confident he can put that behind him.
And the Minister was prepared to predict great things for the candidate should he win.
Meanwhile as the campaign begins the liberal democrat candidate is about to spend a lot less time with his family.
Just 5,000 votes short last time, there's everything to fight for.
And Nigel Jones says local knowledge will be the key weapon.
Meanwhile Labour insist Cheltenham is now a 3 horse race with issues not personalities at the forefront.
And even when the festival's over all eyes will be on Cheltenham to see who is first past the post.
So, the runners are under starter's orders.Between now and polling day attention will shift away from Westminster to the individual seats that the parties have targetted for victory.
JON LANDER/Political Editor
Voice over
Nationally the opinion polls have Labour and Conservative running neck and neck.
But here in the Central South area the real contest is between the Tories and the Liberal Democrats.
In 1987 the Lib Dems came second to the Conservatives in two thirds of the seats and this time they look like the main challengers.
All eyes of course will be on Cheltenham where John Taylor will be trying to prove that being black is not a bar to becoming a Conservative Member of Parliament.
But a swing of less than four per cent would win the seat for Liberal Democrat Nigel Jones.
The Lib Dems have been gaining ground in Cheltenmham for some years.
and regard it as one of their best prospects in the region.
Colin Shepherd, the Hereford Conservative, has got them breathing down his neck too.
A swing of a mere one and a half per cent would win the seat for Liberal Democrat Gwynoro Jones who was Labour MP in the early seventies.
Home Office Minister John Patten faces a serious challenge in Oxford West and Abingdon.
he's vulnerable to a swing of four and a half per cent to the Liberal Democrats.
This is a real battle of the heavyweights with Sir William Goodhart, the law reform campaigner, for the Liberal Democrats and Bruce Kent, the former catholic priest and CND leader, for Labour.
And will it be curtains for Coombs in Swindon?
Simon Coombs is the only Tory in the Central South area seriously threatened by Labour.
He can be unseated by a swing of 3.6 percent to Labour — and that's the kind of swing we're seeing in the opinion polls at the moment.
Since tha last election the Boundary Commissioners have divided Milton Keynes into two constituencies because the old ones were getting to big.
On the face of it the two seats should split evenly between the two big parties — North east to the Conservatives and South West to Labour.
But the Lib Dems think THEY can take North East because they beat the Tories soundly in the local council elections last year.
So in spite of the Conservatives domination of the area, we can expect some exciting contests in this election and perhaps even some upsets.
031192programme
Stabbed to death…a man is found murdered in his own garden.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
RICHARD BARNETT/Stonehouse
FRAMPTON ON SEVERN/Gloucestershire
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire Police
ARTHUR WILLIAMS/Neighbour
EASTINGTON/Gloucestershire
REG HOPCRAFT/Barman
MARTIN POLLARD/Employer
Voice over
The body of Richard Miles was found by his mother Freda, lying in the back garden of their cottage at Newtown near Stonehouse in Gloucestershire.
His blue Vauxhall Astra car was on the drive where Mr Miles had parked it after driving home for lunch yesterday.
He left the car body repair factory where he worked at Frampton on Severn at around 1:30.
Two hours later he was dead.
The murder weapon…a knife…was found near the body.
And today forensic teams have been searching for further clues to help catch the killer:
Male speaker
Police are wanting to find out the events leading up to the death, and work out the motive for the killing.
Voice over
Neighbours were shocked by the tragedy:
Male speaker
Everyone in the village is shocked, you don't expect such things to happen in a quiet backwater.
Voice over
Richard Miles led a quiet life…and used to go for a drink a couple of times a week with friends at the Kings Heads in the village of Eastington, about three miles from his home.
Male speaker
He used to come in for a couple of drinks.
He was very quiet and spoke to no one.
Voice over
Mr Miles had worked as a panelbeater for Martin Pollard Bodyshops in Frampton for ten years:
Male speaker
People at the bodyshop are devastated.
He didn't have an enemy in the world.
Voice over
As police search for a motive for the killing, one possibility they haven't ruled out is that Mr Miles could have disturbed a burglar.
But they say as yet they've found no signs of a break in at the cottage.
A court has been told that the idea for an elaborate murder plot, in which a couple were pushed over a cliff in a blazing car, may have come from a film on satellite television.
A Crown Court jury saw an extract from the film said to have been watched by two defendants a fortnight before the alleged murder attempt.
Two men and a women have denied charges of attempted murder.
GRAEME BOWD/Bristol Crown Court
November 1991/BIRDLIP/Gloucestershire
Voice over
A mother of triplets, who almost had one of her babies snatched by a bogus health worker, has been talking about her ordeal.
Police have warned that the woman may strike again and have asked parents to check the identity of all visitors before letting them into their homes.
LIZ HANNAM/Swindon
KAREN COULTHARD/Mother
KEN COULTHARD/Father
Insp SAM WELLER/Swindon Police
Voice over
Karen Coulthard tucks up her triplets before their afternoon sleep, safe in their own home.
But two days ago that appearent safety was threatened when a bogus health worker said she was making a four monthly check.
Luckily the real health worker had examined the babies only the day before, and Karen, who was already suspicious, asked for identification.
The woman fled.
Female speaker
In that split second we came that close to loosing one of them.
I was upstairs with the other two, she could have just taken the other one
Male speaker
It didn't sink in until after she had gone.
Who knows what would have happened if Karen hadn't asked for identification.
Voice over
What's worried the Coulthard's is that the woman knew so much about their family.
She knew they had triplets and their approximate age.
Karen fears this may have been because of the news coverage the triplets had when they were born.
The police are warning the bogus worker may strike again.
Male speaker
Karen acted in a very commendable way.
She asked for identification and we'd urge all parents to do the same.
The identification card should have a clearly identifiable photo and logo.
Voice over
The woman is described as slim, thirty-five to thirty eight years old, about five feet six inches tall, plain looking with blonde collar length hair.
She was wearing a short-sleeve cream blouse, a blue knee length skirt and black briefcase.
A couple who were alleged to have stolen from residents at the private nursing home they ran have been charged with theft.
GLOUCESTER
Roger Skelding and Kathy Staddon were barred from Heighton House in Gloucester after the allegations were made.
They will appear before magistrates later this month.
Gloucestershire County Council, which is responsible for registering private nursing homes, has issued a notice proposing to revoke the home's certificate of registration.
An insurance company has pulled out of a plan which would have created fifteen hundred jobs near Swindon.
LYDIARD TREGOZE/Wiltshire
Lloyds Register of Shipping was to have set up a large administration centre next to Junction (16) Sixteen of the M-Four, but it's chosen a site in Hampshire instead.
Swindon Chamber of Commerce says the decision is disappointing.
Welcome back to Central News.
A remarkable woman pilot has returned to the skies where she learned to fly half a century ago, reliving wartime memories of Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire.
(Harriet next)
Peggy Lucas was one of the first women to fly Spitfires and went on to become the first woman in Britain to hold a commercial pilot's licence.
Now she's written a book about her flying adventures.
KIM BARNES/Kidlington
PEGGY LUCAS/Pilot
Voice over
Nearly fifty years ago Peggy Lucas walked out across an airfield to fly a Spitfire for the first time…now she's about to come bang up to date with a helicopter.
During the war Peggy was one of just 17 women selected for the Air Transport Auxiliary…collecting and delivering aircraft around the country.
Peggy was a natural.
These are familiar sights.
Peggy, now 74, was born in Oxford.
She trained as a pilot at Haddenham near Aylesbury and regularly flew around the area.
After the war she was the first woman to hold a Commercial Pilots Licence, although she had difficulty finding a job.
In her new book, she looks back with affection on her wartime adventures.
Football, and after six wins in seven games Swindon Town's promotion charge has been held up by struggling Southend United.
At the Roots Hall Ground in Essex last night they held Town to a one-all draw 
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
Voice over
It was one of those nights for Swindon…player manager Glenn Hoddle pulled a muscle in the kick-in and dropped out at the last minute…and with David Kerslake having gone to Leeds the defence looked a little shaky…
Swindon were off colour…
Southend have been struggling all season…just as well because Town could have been punished by a better team…
They were still made to suffer though…
Southend took the lead after 64 minutes…thanks to some sharp shooting from Pat Scully…
The goal was just the shock needed to get Town moving and they were back in the match just four minutes later…goal poacher Steve White who scored a hat-trick last saturday was there again to make it one all…
Southend could and should have won it near the end when once again the Town defence got itself in a tangle…
Fraser Digby was trying to save the day when he gave away a penalty…
But he won in the end…a brilliant save from the kick kept Southend out…gave Swindon a point and took them back upto fourth in the first division
A fund-raiser planning to tour Europe in a Reliant Robin has been told that the feat won't earn him a place in the record books — because he's one wheel short.
John Lawer, who hopes the trip will raise thousands of pounds for charity, is accusing the Guinness Book of Records of discriminating against the world's most famous three-wheeled car.
ROBIN POWELL Swindon
JOHN LAWER Driver
JOHN HINTON Navigator
Voice over
Negotiating the Magic Roundabout in Swindon can be hair-raising at the best of times…for a Reliant Robin driver, it's like dicing with death.
For John Lawer — three-wheeled and proud of it — being treated like a second-class motorist is the price he pays for the car he drives.
But now his gaily-coloured runabout's being given the runaround by the Guiness Book of Records.
Norris McWhirter and friends have told Mr Lawer and his navigator John Hinton, that the twenty-country tour of Europe they're planning, won't make them record-breakers — even if they get to San Marino.
That seems unlikely.
The Guiness Book of Records told us: Unfortunately we cannot accept this attempt as a category for the book.
If the attempt is successful, it would constitute a unique occurrence, not a record.
The car's manufacturers are taking it on the chin.
Reliant said it was surprised to hear the Robin was considered unworthy of its own category, adding that 49 000 previous owners can't be wrong.
Meanwhile John Lawer insists he won't be giving up on his epic adventure or his one-man campaign against three-wheel discrimination.
So before retaliating the next time you're overtaken by a vehicle with fewer wheels than yours, remember — Reliant Robins have feelings too.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Yeltsin debates with hardliners
FTSE down 3
The hundred shares index closed down three point three at two nine five three point four 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty three and down at two marks, thirty eight.
Welcome back to Central News.
A remarkable woman pilot has returned to the skies where she learned to fly half a century ago, reliving wartime memories of Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire.
(Harriet next)
Peggy Lucas was one of the first women to fly Spitfires and went on to become the first woman in Britain to hold a commercial pilot's licence.
Now she's written a book about her flying adventures.
KIM BARNES/Kidlington
PEGGY LUCAS/Pilot
Voice over
Nearly fifty years ago Peggy Lucas walked out across an airfield to fly a Spitfire for the first time…now she's about to come bang up to date with a helicopter.
During the war Peggy was one of just 17 women selected for the Air Transport Auxiliary…collecting and delivering aircraft around the country.
Peggy was a natural.
These are familiar sights.
Peggy, now 74, was born in Oxford.
She trained as a pilot at Haddenham near Aylesbury and regularly flew around the area.
After the war she was the first woman to hold a Commercial Pilots Licence, although she had difficulty finding a job.
In her new book, she looks back with affection on her wartime adventures.
Football, and after six wins in seven games Swindon Town's promotion charge has been held up by struggling Southend United.
At the Roots Hall Ground in Essex last night they held Town to a one-all draw 
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
Voice over
It was one of those nights for Swindon…player manager Glenn Hoddle pulled a muscle in the kick-in and dropped out at the last minute…and with David Kerslake having gone to Leeds the defence looked a little shaky…
Swindon were off colour…
Southend have been struggling all season…just as well because Town could have been punished by a better team…
They were still made to suffer though…
Southend took the lead after 64 minutes…thanks to some sharp shooting from Pat Scully…
The goal was just the shock needed to get Town moving and they were back in the match just four minutes later…goal poacher Steve White who scored a hat-trick last saturday was there again to make it one all…
Southend could and should have won it near the end when once again the Town defence got itself in a tangle…
Fraser Digby was trying to save the day when he gave away a penalty…
But he won in the end…a brilliant save from the kick kept Southend out…gave Swindon a point and took them back upto fourth in the first division
A fund-raiser planning to tour Europe in a Reliant Robin has been told that the feat won't earn him a place in the record books — because he's one wheel short.
John Lawer, who hopes the trip will raise thousands of pounds for charity, is accusing the Guinness Book of Records of discriminating against the world's most famous three-wheeled car.
ROBIN POWELL Swindon
JOHN LAWER Driver
JOHN HINTON Navigator
Voice over
Negotiating the Magic Roundabout in Swindon can be hair-raising at the best of times…for a Reliant Robin driver, it's like dicing with death.
For John Lawer — three-wheeled and proud of it — being treated like a second-class motorist is the price he pays for the car he drives.
But now his gaily-coloured runabout's being given the runaround by the Guiness Book of Records.
Norris McWhirter and friends have told Mr Lawer and his navigator John Hinton, that the twenty-country tour of Europe they're planning, won't make them record-breakers — even if they get to San Marino.
That seems unlikely.
The Guiness Book of Records told us: Unfortunately we cannot accept this attempt as a category for the book.
If the attempt is successful, it would constitute a unique occurrence, not a record.
The car's manufacturers are taking it on the chin.
Reliant said it was surprised to hear the Robin was considered unworthy of its own category, adding that 49 000 previous owners can't be wrong.
Meanwhile John Lawer insists he won't be giving up on his epic adventure or his one-man campaign against three-wheel discrimination.
So before retaliating the next time you're overtaken by a vehicle with fewer wheels than yours, remember — Reliant Robins have feelings too.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Yeltsin debates with hardliners
FTSE down 3
The hundred shares index closed down three point three at two nine five three point four 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty three and down at two marks, thirty eight.
Some of our most famous cheeses could be drastically changed if a new recommendation from Europe comes into force.
The European Parliament is planning to ban the use of almost all colourings in traditional foods.
If it goes ahead Double Gloucester might never be the same again.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Aldbourne
JO HALE/Cheesemaker
GILL DRAYCOTT/Shopowner
Dr CAROLINE JACKSON MEP/Con
Voice over
There aren't many British Cheeses which don't have some colouring added to them.
Double Gloucester and Red Leicester stand out, but even the common cheddar has a dash of something to take away the paleness.
Now all that could end if The European Parliament has its way…and that worries local cheesemaker Jo Hale.
Female speaker
It's vital.
My cheese was originally coloured to give it character, to make them identifiable.
It makes no difference to the taste
Voice over
Jo makes North Wiltshire, a cheese dating back to the twelfth century.
She, in common with most British cheesemakers, uses a tropical tree root dye called anotte.
Just a few drops can make a startling difference to a complete batch of cheese.
But The European Parliament has voted to get rid of added colourings in cheeses throughout the community.
And that will hit Britain hard if it becomes community law.
Cheesemakers have already stopped using traditional dyes like carrot or beetroot juice because they've been banned.
If they have to stop then British cheese will lose all it's character say cheese insiders.
Female speaker
it can be confusing with sucha range of chesese. people always know what to look for by the colour.
Anyway it would be boring if everything is plain white
Voice over
The thought of pale cheese is making some Euro Mps red in the face.
There must be no cheese colour bar in the European Community.
Female speaker
it's bossy food syndrome, it's politicians thinking nanny knows best
Voice over
The Euro Parliament cannot make community law, it can only recommend.
But it has a strong voice…and it isn't just directed at cheese.
They're targetting food colourings across the board, not even cocktail cherries are safe.
An MP says he's confident that the case of two men, jailed for life for killing a drugs dealer, will be reopened.
Home Office officials are now re-examining the case, in the light of new evidence.
ABI DONALD/Reporting
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Voice over
Campaigners, calling for the convictions of Tony Poole and Gary Mills to be quashed have been given renewed hope after Gloucester MP Douglas French, met with Home Office officials.
Poole and Mills were jailed for life for the murder of Gloucester drug dealer Hensley Wiltshire in the city's Conduit street, they've always protested their innocence.
Mr French claims a key witness was never called to give evidence and he's now met with Home Office minister, Michael Jack to explain why he thinks the convictions are unsafe.
Theres now hope that after three years in jail, Poole and Mills will once again get a chance to defend themselves, in court.
A Cotswold village is in turmoil over plans by the National Trust to develop a tourist attraction.
Local people say they're already swamped by visitors to Snowshill Manor, a sixteenth Century house, but the National Trust say their plans are designed to ease overcrowding in the village.
IAN MACLAREN/Snowshill
DAVID BROWN/National Trust
TERRY KING-SMITH/Parish Chairman
Voice over
Snowshill, Gloucestershire.
Population 175.
It nestles in an unspoilt Cotswold valley.
An area of outstanding natural beauty.
But the village is also a tourist trap.
65,000 visitors a year alone are attracted to the 16the Century Snowshill Manor House and its gardens.
But at the height of the season, visitors virtually swamp the village, causing major parking problems in the narrow streets.
To try to ease the overcrowding, the National Trust has bought a 43 acre farm site nearby, to cater for visitors…
But some villagers believe the National Trust's developement plans are blatant commercialism…covering an area as big as the village itself…
They want the planners to think again…
If the plans go ahead, there are fears that up to 80,000 visitors a year will converge on Snowshill…ruining the character of the village and make life more of a misery for the residents.
But the tourists are not convicned about that…
vox
The main attraction in Snowshill is the Tudor Manor House, owned by the National Trust
Dating back to 1500, it belongs to the National Trust and houses a remarkable collection of unusual treasures, collected by its rather eccentric former owner, Charles Wade.
A man who liked to dress for every occasion…and with a fascinating taste for everything from Japanese culture to the history of the bicycle.
Little did he know his curious collection would one day be attracting tourists by the thousand.
(AD LIB BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the wartime woman pilot returns to the skies:
That's it from Central News for now…
Tonight Central Lobby is looking at Britain's disappearing hedgerows — and an ambitious project to reverse the trend.
The idea is to establish a network of hedges across Britain, as corridors for wildlife.
A pilot project is starting in Gloucestershire, where parish councils are being urged to get involved by’ adopting’hedgerows.
That's Central Lobby with Judy Laybourn, Sir Robin Day and me at 10.40.
(ad lib)
Red for Danger:Anti nuclear group says waste drums are a hazard.
On ice.
Coca cola plant is halted before it's built.
And just not fare: Cabbies take a stand over rank bad planning.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
The site involved is part of the Harwell nuclear plant in Oxfordshire.
Harwell says it's own readings are much lower and insist there's no danger to the public.
But the finding has worried council officers who now want urgent talks with Harwell.
Gargy Patel reports.
HARWELL/Oxfordshire
PAUL MOBBS/Banbury Environmental Research
SIMON READ/Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
Drums of radioactive waste stored just a few feet behind a fence that seperates the Harwell site from a public footpath.
Environmental campaigners using their own Geiger counter say readings taken from the fence are around a hundred and five counts per minute…five times higher than normal for the area.
They say it's irresponsible to store radioactive waste where it can be a public danger and a safety risk.
The Banbury environmental group also accuses Harwell of dumping radioactive waste drums on a disused gravel pit behind their pumping station in nearby Sutton Courtenay.
Harwell denies the drums are radioactive.
It also disputes the groups readings.
The Geiger counter may not have been properly calibrated.
Regular checks by it's own monitoring team show only normal background radiation levels.
And they say people using the footpath are in absolutely no danger.
But the concerns have prompted the county council to act.
Officers now want more information about Harwell's waste management, and they say it should be more publicly available.
Harwell says it's satisfied it provides as much data as possible, but the plant is willing to listen to any council proposals.
Meanwhile, campaigners like Paul Mobbs say they have to battle to get hold of detailed figures.
They'll continue to keep watch on Harwell from the other side of the fence.
The Coca-Cola company has shelved plans to build the biggest bottling factory in Britain, just hours after getting planning permission.
The one hundred and fifty million pound development would have created up to seven hundred jobs.But Coca Cola says it can't be built yet because of the recession.
This report from Gareth Furby 
NORTHAMPTON
ROY TALBOT/Northampton Borough Council
Voice over
Over the past twelve months another three thousand eight hundred and seventy six people have joined the dole queues in Northampton.
Seven per cent of the working population…more than nine thousand people are now unemployed.
But for a few hours today there was hope.
The planners had finally given permission for Coca-Cola to build a bottling plant on this fifty acre site.
It would have meant seven hundred vacancies and work for the jobless.
They say it's great news and the town needs jobs.
The plan was for a plant bigger than one already operating at Wakefield in Yorkshire.
Northampton would have produced Coca-Cola for the whole of Southern England.
For two years planning permission had been delayed after claims from nearby villagers that the development could damage the enironment.
The European Commission even intervened saying an assessment of environmental impact hadn't been carried out properly.
But just this week the Government told Northampton Council it had no objection to a second look at Coca-Cola's plans.
And last night the council gave its approval, building work could start within the next few months.
This was a planners reaction this lunchtime.
He says it is just what is needed in Northampton to get things moving again.
But just a few hours later Coca-Cola issued this statement:
Tonight Northampton Council said it was suprised, but the planning permission will last five years, and it still hopes Coca-Cola will move in when the economy improves.
A used car dealer is offering a ten thousand pound reward to track down arsonists who've attacked his premises for the second time in two weeks.
In the latest fire, twenty five cars were destroyed.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
JULIAN CLEAVE/Owner
Voice over
This is the second time in the last 2 weeks that Julian Cleave has surveyed the aftermath of an arson attack.
This time more than 20 cars were burnt out.
Mr Cleave's car salvage business has been doing well and he's recently moved to these new, bigger premises.
A fortnight ago arsonists got inside the building and started a fire.
Luckily that was quickly detected by alarms.
But now they've struck again.
Mr Cleave says he can only assume it's a grudge attack:
He says that he's got no idea who's responsible.
He was devastated when he discovered his premises had been attacked for the second time.
Now Mr Cleave says he's offering a reward to try and catch whoever's responsible:
He says he's offering £10,000 reward, he wants to know who's behind the attacks, not just who carried them out.
The garage owner is also installing more sophisticated video surveillance equipment and alarms to help prevent a repeat of last nights arson attack.
The Queen will make history tomorrow when she attends a unique church dedication service.
She'll join with Britain's protestant and catholic leaders at a brand new city church which will be run jointly by all the main christian denominations.
Mike Rowbottom has been looking at the history of this remarkable experiment in Christian co-operation.
MILTON KEYNES Buckinghamshire
Canon DAVID GOLDIE Church Of England
Rev ELIZABETH WELCH United Reformed Church
LIZ JAMIESON Counselling Co-ordinator
Voice over
When the Queen takes her place in the Church of Christ the Cornerstone tomorrow, it will mean much more than the dedication of another place of worship.
She will sit alongside The Roman Catholic Cardinal Hume, the Archbishop of Canterbury George Carey and three other protestant church leaders.
All 5 Christian traditions will use the new church and the Queen's presence is being seen as cementing unity after centuries of conflict.
The church scores a number of firsts.
The circular worship area is only party of it.
Seating 500 it provides a centre of services of all denominations and a concert venue.
It looks like a theatre with a balcony and circle.
Some might say gods.
Smack in the middle of Milton Keynes the £1m building sets out to be more than a church.
There's a cafe not just for the congregation, but for anyone wanting to drop in.
A special area has been built where 8 counselling services come together under one organisation.
And potential users can ignore the church all together if they want.
In the end these activities and services are an extension of what can be found in a church hall.
What is different is a flat designed for the disabled where they can gain confidence to live outside
The church of Christ the Cornerstone has been open since the beginning of the year, but tomorrow will see the start of a new era.
Maxwell brothers should be punished by Commons
FTSE down 28
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-eight point eight at twenty-four, ninety-three point six.
The pound is down at one dollar seventy, and down at two marks, eighty-five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
War has broken out between taxi drivers and a bus company over a taxi rank.
The bus company wants to park its buses there.
But the taxis say it'll destroy their trade.
While the two parties fight it out, the only victors are the travelling public.
As Clare Lafferty reports.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
TED LANE/Taxi Drivers Association
BILL BISHOP/Stroud Valley Bus Co
Voice over
War has been declared in Stroud in Gloucestershire.
The front line is this taxi rank in the town centre.
Taxis have been parking here for more than thirty years.
But now the bus company wants to take it over.
It says it's be a convenient spot for passengers to pick up their buses.
But the taxi drivers say if they're forced to move on they'll loose the four thousand fares they currently pick up here each week.
While the two sides fight it out, the only winners so far are the travelling public of Stroud.
Because as part of their battle plan the taxi drivers are offering them free rides.
Most of the town's sixty taxi drivers are offering the free rides…as signified by a large T on the windscreen.
They say they'll do whatever it takes to save their livelihood.
The bus company says the taxi drivers are over reacting.
Steps are now being taken to get both warring factions around the negotiating table.
But while they're saving bus fares and travelling in the comfort of a car, the people of Stroud don't care how long the war goes on.
An investigation has begun into the death of a woman run over by a coach.
OXFORD
The bus went out of control in the centre of Oxford, crossed a pedestrian island and pinned the young woman, under the wheel.
Firemen had to lift up the bus before ambulance officers could try to rescue her, but she died at the scene.
The woman, twenty-seven year old Kate Webb, worked for a local firm of solicitors.
The driver was taken to hospital suffering from shock.
A High Court Judge has ruled that a woman CAN sue three doctors, who she says failed to spot a hip deformity when she was a baby.
Katherine Colgrove, who lives at Kidlington in Oxfordshire, is now thirty-three.
She claims she could have been treated soon after birth, but has suffered a lifetime of pain and disability.
The negligence claim is denied.
Inspector Morse is a Liberal Democrat.
His sidekick Sergeant Lewis is a Labour voter.
So says the man who plays Lewis in the series.
With general election campaigning well and truly off the starting blocks, actor Kevin Whately has joined a Labour candidate on the campaign trail.
OXFORD
INSPECTOR MORSE/Zenith for Central
KEVIN WHATELY/Actor
Voice over
The general election marks the end of some distinguished political careers.Five Central South MPs will not be standing this time round, including two former top Conservatives.
MARGARET THATCHER MP/Former Prime Minister
TIMOTHY RAISON MP/Con Aylesbury
Voice over
In part two: What a finish!
The Gold Cup is a thriller right to the line.
And Bless This House.The church that's a theatre…that's a cafe…that's fit for a Queen.
TIM RUSSON
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Racecourse Manager
MIKE TEAGUE/Gloucester and England
CHRIS COLEY/Business Organiser
JILLY COOPER
Voice over
A group of World War Two paratroopers are planning to re-create the airborne drop over Arnhem in Holland in 1944.
Scores of veterans, who're now in their seventies, will make the jump, next September.
It'll be fifty years since the ill-fated attempt to secure the bridgehead at Arnhem, which was immortalised in the film, A Bridge Too Far.
IAN MACLAREN Reporting
BINFIELD HEATH Oxfordshire
GEOFF HOLMES Organiser
ROBIN HOLBURN Arnhem Veteran
BILL GAMMONS Arnhem Veteran
Voice over
More than 10,000 paratroopers made the drop into Arnhem.
Operation Market Garden was the Allies attempt to secure the bridgehead behind German lines, as the enemy pushed towards the Rhine.
But the troops were forced onto the defensive when they were caught by the fire of several crack Panzer regiments, which hadn't been spotted by Allied intelligence.
An operation that could have ended the War early, failed.
Thousands lost their lives.
Nearly fifty years on, a group of survivors are preparing to re-create that jump into Arnhem.
Up to 80 of them hope to make the drop.
The event's being organised by Geoff Holmes.
He was 25, and a defence platoon corporal, during the ill-fated operation, but full of confidence now…
The veterans are convinced they're fit enough to make the jump…though some of them will do so in tandem with instructors…
Every veteran has a story to tell, Robin Holburn was 19 when he landed in Arnhem after parachuting from a glider.
Others who made it to within a hundred yards of the bridge…count themselves lucky to have survived…
The organisers are now raising the money to help re-create their own version of a Bridge Too Far…but this time they're confident of a happy ending.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Russia on brink of revolution
FTSE down 37
The hundred shares index closed down thirty seven point five at two nine one five point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty three and up at two marks, thirty eight.
(ad lib)
Red five is missing…the professor is back…that's motor racing speak for no Nigel Mansell and the return of Alain Prost…
Yes its Grand Prix time again…the new season starts in South Africa on Sunday…
Simon Garrett's on the grid 
FRANK WILLIAMS
RUBENS BARRICHELLO
Voice over
Williams from Didcot in Oxfordshire the champions of 92 are the favourites for 93…but what will life be like without Mansell…will Prost be back to his best…can new boy Damon Hill set the world alight
Frank Williams says
After Williams comes Benneton from Enstone…they've signed up Ricardo Patrese to partner Schumacher…and watch for a young Brazillian by the name of Rubens Barrichello…he's the new wizz kid in the Jordan team…
Rubens says
Back on the grid for the first time in three years is derek warwick…he's racing for the Milton Keynes Footwork team
Derek says
so the race is on…eight months and 16 rounds to the chequered flag
Before the cars race in South Africa the athletes will be running in Canada…the world indoor championships get underway tonight…
We’ ve a Central South girl to follow she's Lynn Gibson from Oxford who's off the blocks first in our action round-up 
Voice over
In a few hours time in Toronto Lynn Gibson will be racing for Britain in the 800 metres…
Lynn runs in the colours of the Oxford City club…tonight's going to be quite something…its Lynn's senior international debut
Lynn says…she couldn't have wished for a bigger meeting in which to make her first run for Britain…she's been training hard since the end of the track season and is in good form
The other big indoor championships is at Bletchley Leisure Centre this weekend…its the British Rythmic Gymnastics Competition…juniors and seniors start tomorrow…the finals are on Sunday…
Ice hockey action is at Milton Keynes on saturday the Kings are playing Slough on Sunday the Oxford City stars are at home to Trafford
The Wantage white horses swim club are off to the Palace tomorrow…that's the Crystal one…world number one Mark Foster is coaching them for the day…
Buckinghamshire speedway ace Simon Wigg is gearing up for the new season with a new club…he's signed up for Coventr
Next week Central South will be celebrating its biggest sporting event of the year…
Cheltenham's Gold Cup week…from Monday thro' till Thursday we'll be there to bring you all the colour…the action and excitement…we're off and running tonight with one of the local heroes…one of the favourites…one of the best in the land…who is Racing Gold 
DAVID NICHOLSON
Voice over
David Nicholson says there's pressure every day…
Sunday's the only day off and he wakes at 4:30 most mornings…
Race horse trainer…easy life…you've got to be joking…steeplechasing is all of life always has been to David Nicholson…he was born and bred…turned out and trained on the gallops at Prestbury…
His racing home now is Jackdaws Castle at Ford in Gloucestershire…a horses palace…but next week the man they call the Duke will be leading the pilgrimage to Cheltenham
David Nicholson says he lived on the end of the racecourse for 22 years and his father lived there longer than that…for him Cheltenham is the best three days racing anywhere in the world and he loves it
David Nicholson reading out names of horses…
If you follow form this year's national hunt festival should be a feast for the Nicholson team…he's enjoying his best ever season…a record 80 winners have won over half a million pounds worth in prize money…stable jockey Richard Dunwoody is leading the chase for the championship…and the secret of all this success
David Nicholson says his yard is a fantastic place…all the horses and all the staff are more relaxed because there's no roads to worry about and there's plenty of room for them to roam…the horses are eating more and training hard
Given the right ground…20 Nicholson horses will be running at Cheltenham…they'll be going in 17 of the twenty races…good old Waterloo Boy runs in the Queen Mother…
Another Coral goes for the Gold Cup…then there's Wonder Man…
Kadi…
Strong Beau…
Now Your Talkin…
Dreamers Delight…
They're all a delight for David Nicholson…
He won the Gold Cup with Charter Party back in 88…that was a dream…
David Nicholson says he had tears in his eyes and was almost speechless when he won the gold cup
With so many horses off to Cheltenham…the Nicholson challenge is more like a cavalry charge this year…
The Duke will lead them all out and hopefully lead somee lucky ones back into the winners enclosure…you'll know when…you'll hear the cheers ringing out for miles around
and you could be there at Cheltenham on Thursday for the big day…we’ ve two club badges to be won in our special Gold Cup Competition 
Voice over
Cheltenham on Gold Cup day glitters…the best in the land are there to race for the richest prize…we've three questions to ask you in our competition…first is about jockeys…
Dunwoody…
Scudamore…
Pitman and McCourt four of the best but one of them has never won the Gold Cup…
Which one…
Second question is about trainers…which trainer has won two Gold Cups in the last ten years…there's only one…and we want the name
Third and last is about horses…we all remember Desert Orchid winning the Gold Cup in 89 but which Herefordshire trained horse finished second…
Answers on a postcard by first post Wednesday to Gold Cup Competition…
Central South…
Abingdon…0X14 1SA…we’ ll be running the quiz again on Monday…drawing the winners on Wednesday night
One of Oxford's two remaining women-only colleges has tonight decided to admit men for the first time in a hundred years.
Students at Somerville College say they're disappointed…but not surprised.
JESSICA FOWLE/Oxford
JENNI BORG/JCR President
Voice over
The students were in mourning when Somerville's Governing body met last month.
The best they could hope for today was a stay of execution -- but a short statement this evening confirmed that men would arrive in the autumn of 1994.
Somerville was founded in the 1880s under its first Principal, Miss LeFebvre.
Later students included Lady Thatcher who studied Chemistry there.
But the College says it's now as a mixed college the Somerville can best function and encourage academic excellence in women.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd ran the gauntlet of demonstrators today as he launched a lecture series at the region's newest university.
The lectures are named in his honour and organisers hope to attract big names in the future.
But it's been claimed that the cost of the visit would have been better spent easing student poverty.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
DOUGLAS HURD MP/Foreign Secretary
CHRIS MORAN/Socialist Workers Students' Society
NICK RAY/Debating Society
Voice over
No doubt the Foreign Secretary and Witney MP would have been more surprised had there been no protest to greet him…but as demonstrations go this was fairly peaceful.
Douglas Hurd came to the newly christened Oxford Brookes University…formerly the Polytechnic…to inaugurate an annual lecture series…named for him…
200 students paid 2 pounds each to hear the Foreign Secretary talk about what he calls the soul searching and introspection going on around the world.
But the students union has criticised the expense of a high security ministerial visit at a time of student hardship…
Meanwhile students at the lecture got the chance to pitch questions at the minister on a range of subjects from Maastricht to the loss of his private life.
The 3-year old Debating Society wanted a high-profile launch for their celebrity lecture series.
Now they hope he'll help pull in other big names.
They've already approached Jimmy Carter and Richard Nixon who can also be sure of a similarly lively welcome.
(AD LIB BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, Gold Cup fever strikes again.
We're off to spot some winners, and there are two tickets to be won for the big race
Plus, A Bridge Too Far Revisited.
The Arnhem veterans planning to drop in again.
Welcome back to Central News South.
Coming up later, the wartime paratroopers planning another jump into Holland…fifty years on.
But first, with a busy programme of sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
The County Ground should be bursting with people…and bubbling with excitement tomorrow as Swindon take on league leaders Newcastle United…it's got to be one of the games of the season…one of the great battles…
Six wins in eight have taken Town into the heart of the promotion race…last week they pumped four past Watford…
Steve White slammed a hat-trick…
Newcastle though have been flying all season…on top of the table since September they've lost just one of their last ten league games…some thought they were beginning to slip…five goals against Brentford last weekend proved that Kevin Keegan's team are still the ones to beat…
STING
Town's team revolves around Glenn Hoddle he's having a fitness check in the morning…
Adie Viveash is standing by to deputise…
It was a nil-nil draw at St. James Park…
Newcastle have won ten away…
Town have only lost two at home…whatever the result tomorrow it should be a thriller
At the Manor Ground…
Oxford United are facing their own big challenge…four defeats in a row has dropped them back into the bottom half of the table…last home win was this one against Millwall…tomorrow they should…they must dish out the same treatment to struggling Southend
STING
All first teamers are on standby…18 in the squad…there'll be no John Durnin he's suspended…but Les Phillips is almost certain to be called back into first team action…
Southend are one off the bottom…but they've given some of the top teams a run for their money this season…
In division three Hereford are off to Chesterfield…they need cheering up…so lets give them a boost by showing their last win…three goals they nailed into Northampton
Local rugby has a big match tomorrow as well…there's another round of league matches…the one we're interested in is at Franklin Gardens…
Northampton against Gloucester 
Voice over
Eight matches gone…won 3 lost five…four matches to go…2 at home…2 away…2 wins needed to avoid relegation…they’ re the facts and figures which sum up the season for the Cherry and Whites…
Runaway wins against Newport and Bridgend has boosted confidence but the crunch is coming up…time for Gloucester to fight their way out of trouble
STING
Coach Keith Richardson has named his team but its being treated as classified information he wants to keep Northampton guessing…007 has the day off but morese code from Kingsholm tells us skipper Ian Smith will be back in the team…
No secret about the last time Gloucester played Northampton…the saints won 17-10…the cherry and whites should have shredded this film
Five pence a year.
A father's contribution to his family welfare.
And the battle is lost…
Somerville college takes men from next year.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Almost a week after Murray Pugh was murdered, his parents faced a news conference today.
Murray's father appealled for anyone withholding important information to consider the anguish his family is going through.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
JOHN PUGH/Murray's Father
NEVIS PUGH/Murray's Mother
Det Supt PETER SHAYLE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Murray Pugh's mother, father and younger sister travelled to Cheltenham this morning to appeal to the people there to help find Murray's killer.
Murray, who was twenty four and a trainee teacher was murdered last Saturday night as he walked through the town with friends from his college rugby team.
A blue Ford Sierra pulled up alongside them.
Two men jumped out.
There was a scuffle and Murray was stabbed in the chest.
Today Mr Pugh talked about how much his son had enjoyed life as a student in Cheltenham.
Forty police officers are working round the clock trying to find Murray's killer.
They believe the blue Ford Sierra which was found abandoned in the car park of a pub in Leckhampton, holds the key.
Anyone with information is asked to contact the murder incident room on O two four two, two five O, four O five.
The victim of an alleged murder plot told.
a jury how he and his girlfriend were kidnapped, tied up and pushed down a hill in a burning car.
Ivor Stokle said he'd never forget that night as long as he lived.
The couple only survived because he managed to kick open the car door at the last minute.
GRAHAM BOWD/Bristol
November 1991/BIRDLIP/Gloucestershire
Voice over
A court has ordered that an estranged father of two should pay just five pence a year towards his children's welfare.
His former wife says the ruling is a mockery.
One of the children says it brands her as worthless 
SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
CHARMAINE MARSDEN/Daughter
SUSAN THOMAS/Ex-wife
ARTHUR MARSDEN/Ex-husband
Voice over
Arthur Marsden told Oxford magistrates he's no money.
So they cut his maintenance payments from four pounds a week to the minimum five pence a year.
His son Alan will soon be 17 and ineligible for support.
But daughter Charmaine has two years to go.
She and her mother are appalled
Female speaker
I think it's really disgusting I think I'm worth more than this
Female speaker
I was stunned and very angry that five pence could be put on a child's life.
Idon't think it's right, my husband's remarried and there is an income coming in I always thought the child came first
Voice over
The ruling was made because five pence is the minimum the court can award while keeping the maintenance order active.
The idea is should Mr Marsden find work his payments can be readjusted
Male speaker
I wasn't going to court to get the order reduced, just stopped for a while until I get a job.
In the end I'd have paid it back anyway.
They've cut it down and agreed I pay the arrears back at a pound a week.
What more can I say about it
Voice over
The government says it wants to make fathers living away from their children financially responsible for them.
New tougher controls come into effect next month.
Sue Thomas feels the law in this case has been made a fool of
Female speaker
It's making a mockery of it, it's showing one father can get away with what another father can't.
I don't think there's anything I can do.
The system has beaten me
Voice over
Mr Marsden's previous four pound payments covered the children's bus fares to school and back.
Five pence a year will go less far.
It could buy this lolly…five chews…or a fifth of a Mars bar
Three members of a Colombian drugs cartel who used Oxford language schools as a cover have each been jailed for ten years.
Richard Ifill and Francisco Marulanda were arrested while waiting to meet a shipment at Heathrow Airport.
Together with George Liacopoulous they recruited Colombian students as drug runners.
The couriers signed on for courses at two language schools in order to get visas, but were caught when one had his baggage searched at Heathrow.
A hospital which had been threatened with cuts is now to be expanded.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
Services at the Horton General Hospital in Banbury have been saved by a decision to invest in a new maternity unit.
The accident and emergency unit has also been reprieved.
Campaigners against the proposed cuts say it's a major victory.
A new test for TB has been devised which could save the lives of badgers.
It's thought that badgers can pass tuberculosis to cattle, but until now the only known test for TB involved killing the badger first.
The new test can be done without harming them, as Ken Goodwin reports.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
LIBRARY PICTURES
GORDON McGLONE/Nature Conservation Trust
Voice over
Badgers like these, appealing as they are, could be responsible for spreading the lung disease TB to cattle.
Badgers are periodically tested for the disease by the ministry of agriculture.
To do this the badgers are trapped, then killed, before being tested back in a laboratory.
In 1990, eight hundred badgers were killed in this way, many of those were TB free, but by the time that was discovered the badgers were already dead.
The method has been roundly critisized by many conservationists.
He says TB is a problem with badgers, but killing every animal which is caught just so that it can be tested for the illness isn't the answer.
Now a new method has been developed in which badgers can be trapped, and tested on site, the results being available immediately.
If the animal is free of tuberculosis, it can be released unharmed.
He says this is good news, it'll save a lot of badgers lives.
The ministry of agriculture has carried out successful trials on the new tests but says the government has yet to make a final decision on wether to fully adopt the new system.
A group of children have taken up a campaign for a footpath outside their school.
They say if one isn't built soon…somebody could be killed.
They feel so strongly about the dangers they've sent letters and pictures to the local council.
Erika Barnes reports.
WANBOROUGH/Wiltshire
CAROLINE COOPER
GARETH BETCHELL
ZOE JAMES
DAVID SELLICK/Chairman/Parent Teacher Association
EMMA LAW
Voice over
It's a graphic concern.
Children at Wanborough primary school near Swindon are so worried about the hazards they experience on the way to school, they're calling for a new footpath.
And they're going straight to the top with powerful letters and drawings to the council.
when building work on a new housing estate was underway.
Now Thamesdown Council is being asked to find the money to finish the job.
Male speaker
On this bit there's no pavement so I have to walk in the road.
There are nettles and we get scratches.
Female speaker
There could be crashes.
There's already been one.
Children could be killed.
Male speaker
We've got a problem where a local building firm who own part of the land need to get together with the local council to sort something out.
They have a moral obligation to build a path.
Voice over
However it's funded, the children want something done soon.
Female speaker
Dear Mr Westgate, I think we should have more footpaths or we might have a good chance of being killed.
I think we should have more signs too.
Please please make this happen.
From Gemma Law aged 10.
This could happen.
Voice over
The recession…and no Desert Orchid…have been blamed for a drop in attendances at this year's Cheltenham's racing festival.
Despite a strong turnout of punters from Ireland, even the pubs say they had to work harder to take money.
One bright spot however…police say crime was down too.
Tim Hurst reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Racecourse director
CHRIS GILES/Peter's Bar
SUE SIMMONS/Rotunda Bar
Voice over
Almost 120,000 people went through the turnstiles at Cheltenham this week; that's 7% down on last year.
But crime fell too, pick-pockets got away with £6,000, compared with £12,000 last year.
15 arrests were also made in connection with forged tickets.
The drop in punters is being blamed only partly on the recession.
Retail trade in Cheltenham is traditionally quiet during Race Week, because shoppers heed traffic warnings about congestion and traders say this year was much the same as last.
Publicans have mixed feelings about their business in the last 3 days.
Fewer visitors there may have been, but those who did make it from Ireland said their traditional farewell to the town's Queen's Hotel last night.
So there'll be one racing certainty for Gold Cup week next year, the Irish will be back.
In part two: Men of Courage.A crunch match for Gloucester in the title race.
Hitting the mark: Can Oxford United keep up their winning ways?
And breaking a cardinal rule.The Queen ends four centuries of church division.
I dealt drugs in jail.
Prison denies claims by accused murderer.
Good for the earth…bad for the engine.
The case against unleaded fuel.
And a moment in history.
The Queen and the Cardinal under one roof.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
The jail's governor is describing the allegations as rubbish.
He says no inmate sees mail before prison staff.
But prison reformers say experience shows Gardiner's claims could well be true.Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
BRIAN SHARP/Assistant Governor
ADAM SAMPSON/Prison Reform Trust
Voice over
Danny Gardiner made the claims while being questioned at Winchester crown court where he's pleading not guilty to the murder of police informer Chalky White.
Mr Gardiner said that while he was in Gloucester prison in 1988, he recieved packages of cannabis posted by his estranged wife Maggie.
These were intercepted by a trustee prisoner working in the mail room, who removed them before prison staff examined the post.
But Gloucester prison's assistant Governor says that's nonsense.
He says prisoners never have, or ever will work in the prison mail room.
No prisoner touches mail before it's been examined by staff.
But the campaigning group the prison reform trust says it's not impossible for drugs to get into prison this way.
He says that it has been known for drugs to be smuggled in large packages.
The prison reform group says one problem is a lack of treatment for drug addicts in jail.
He says that prisoners who are addicts face the problem of drug withdrawal, and so the demand for drugs is often high.
He says that it would be foolish to think drugs taking doesn't go on in prison, but he confident drugs are not a big problem in Gloucester jail.
Whatever the strength of Danny Gardiners allegations about drug dealing in jail, it's clear that staff at Gloucester prison are happy that there's no major drug problem behind the prison walls.
Lead-free petrol is bad for your car's health, according to motor mechanics who say they're repairing dozens of cars which have been damaged by it.
They say older cars are hard to adapt, whatever the makers say.
Nick Clark reports.
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
STEVE BUNCE/Motor Engineer
KEITH JOHNSON/Managing Director/Johnson's Engines
TONY MATTINGLY/Automobile Association
KEN BARNES/Society of Motor Manufacturers
PETER CROFTS/Car Owner
Voice over
Mechanic, Steve Bunce is finding more and more work for himself with cars which have been driven on unleaded fuel and which are running into trouble.
The kind of symptoms; sluggish cars and poor performance.
The kind of repair cost in excess of £500.
Male speaker
You can adjust them, but in the long term it does damage them.
Voice over
The tell-tale signs of erosion here inside the cylinder head, plus obvious coking up all evidence of damage caused by unleaded petrol, used by unsuitable cars.
Many of the cars being repaired have been converted to accept unleaded according to manufacturers guidelines which suggest a quick correction of engine timing will do the trick.
That, say mechanics is not enough.
Male speaker
the engine will seem to run well but there will be damage.
Voice over
The mechanics say the only way any but the most modern of engines will run smoothly with unleaded is a full internal conversion costing more than £300.
The alternative they say is just stick to four star.
Despite the mechanics' worries motoring organisations say they are confident lead-free means trouble free.
A view backed up by the Automobile Association.
Male speaker
As long as you follow manufacturers' guidelines you should be all right.
Voice over
Lead-free petrol has of course only been popular in recent years.
It's environmental benefits may be undisputed, but it seems its suitability for the car engine has now come into question.
One of Britain's largest shoe companies is axing a (125) hundred and twenty five jobs and says another (275) two hundred and seventy five are under threat.
NORTHAMPTON
The receivers were called in by Burlington International in Northampton today and all (400) workers sent home.
The company has been losing more than a million pounds a month and blames the collapse on cheap foreign imports and the recession.
Flowers have been laid at the spot where ten people were killed in one of Britain's worst motorway crashes.
M4/Berkshire
The flowers were placed alongside a cross of daffodils growing at the scene.
They were planted by emergency crews called to the accident a year ago today on the M4 in which dozens of cars collided in thick fog.
The Queen has broken a four hundred year old taboo by attending a service with all the leaders of England's christian churches.
It marked the dedication of a new city church…but it was also the first time a Roman Catholic cardinal had preached before the Monarch since the time of Henry The Eighth.
Mike Rowbottom was there.
MILTON KEYNES Buckinghamshire
Cardinal BASIL HUME
Dr GEORGE CAREY Archbishop of Canterbury
Voice over
The Queen's arrival at the New Church of Christ the Cornerstone in Milton Keynes was the beginning of more than just another royal visit.
The leaders of Britain's main christian churches were there to greet her in this first city church devoted to united worship.
It was especially sweet for Roman Catholic Cardinal Basil Hume.
Today he was able to achieve something not done since Henry the 8th fell out with the Pope.
Male speaker
this is the first time a cardinal has preached before an English monarch since the Reformation
The Queen is head of the Church of England but today her presence in the congregation was seen as a royal nod of approval for the church unity movement or ecumenism.
Male speaker
it's very significant that the Queen is here today.
She lends support to the ecumenical cause.
It's not the first event of its kind, but itis the largest
The church stands in the centre of Milton Keynes and will be the venue for all official religious ceremonies for the town.
It hosts the Anglican, Roman Catholic, United Reform Church, Methodist and baptist traditions and many of the services will be shared like today.
But the Church is much more than a place of worship.
There are areas built for specialist counselling services.
And there's a purpose built flat for the disabled.
Here they can get used to living in the community.
The Christian churches have spent nearly thirty years getting step with each other.
The Queen's visit today, may well have seen them finally marching forward.
Mother brands Ulster killers’ scum’
FTSE down 17
The hundred shares index closed down seventeen point three at twenty-four, seventy-six exactly.
The pound is up at one dollar seventy-one, and down at two marks, eighty-five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Hello.
NICK CLARK
Tonight…there's horseracing, badminton, football.
First though it's rugby and crunch time in the Courage League tomorrow.
Gloucester play Northampton in a match crucial to both clubs' chances of claiming the Division One title.
Voice over
Gloucester are hoping history will be on their side tomorrow.
The game will be Northampton's 50th visit to Kingsholm.
The Cherry and Whites have won 43 of them.
In a close encounter last season, Gloucester pipped Northampton by 7 points to 6.
Pete Jones scored the game's only try.
After their crushing defeat at Bath two weeks ago, Gloucester will be looking to recapture the form they showed earlier in the season against the likes of Leicester.
Then the Cherry and Whites were unstoppable.
The temperature at Kingsholm tomorrow will be hot.
Gloucester's pack will be aiming to steamroller their way to success.
Bad news for Gloucester on the injury front.
Skipper Ian Smith and prop Pete Jones, their 2 Scottish internationals, are both out of the game.
Otherwise it's a full strength team, with Bob Philips back from injury.
Tony Windo and Paul Ashmead replace Smith and Jones.
The top of the Courage League shows just how important tomorrow's game is.
Northampton are right up there in second place.
Gloucester have a game in hand, but are 3 points off the pace.
Their championship hopes depend on a win.
Football a full league programme tomorrow…
Oxford United, Swindon and Hereford all in action.
Mark Kiff has the details.
Voice over
Oxford's uphill battle against relegation continues tomorrow at Barnsley.
Last week's 5 goal success against Swindon will gee United up.
It was a derby match to remember, especially if you're a United fan; defeating the old enemy for the first time in years.
Brian Horton has a stable team at last.
He's named the same side which has started the last three games.
United have now won three of their last 5 games and drawn the other two.
Barnsley's recent form is even better, with 4 wins out of 6.
Despite their improving results, United are still in the relegation zone.
The fight to stay up looks like being a long one.
Swindon would doubtless rather forget the Oxford match.
It's not often you score 3 goals and end up on the losing team.
A hatrick of goals tomorrow at Newcastle would go down a treat.
Glenn Hoddle's team is likely to show several changes.
Fraser Digby replacing Nicky Hammond in goal.
Micky Hazard should be back from injury.
Swindon have suffered three consecutive defeats.
Since Kevin Keegan took over at Newcastle, they've enjoyed 3 wins out of six.
Hereford's form becomes even more unpredictable.
Last Saturday, they lost to this goal at home to lowly Doncaster and then won 2-0 at Halifax on Wednesday.
Tomorrow Maidstone travel to Edgar Street.
The Hereford team shows the return of Peter Heritage after a one match suspension.
Time for just one more goal from last Saturday.
Joey Beachamp again.
More tomorrow please.
Central South's badminton star Julie Bradbury is having mixed fortunes at the All England Open at Wembley.
The former English national champion is now out of the singles competition but has reached the semi-finals of the doubles.
Here's Robin Powell.
JULIE BRADBURY
Voice over
The Building Society secretary from Bladon in Oxfordshire had a good start to the tournament, reaching the third round for the first time.
Victim number one, Anna Lao from Australia.
On to the second round and the Dane Gita Summer; an easy win for our girl, Julie winning in two games eleven three, eleven seven.
Next though to one of the top seeds, Korean Bang Soo-Hyun; before the match Central South's first lady of badminton knew the challenge ahead.
She ssad: It'll be a tough game.
Indeed tough it proved, the Korean out-classing Julie and taking the match eleven three, eleven seven.
But this has been a year when the English selectors, with the Olympics in mind, have encouraged Julie to concentrate more on her doubles play.
She's teamed up with Gill Clark and they're current national doubles champions.
Female speaker
I've been working hard with Gill to get into top form for the Olympics so singles play has taken a bit of a back seat.
Voice over
Here at the championships Gill and Julie have now reached the semi-finals.
Tonight at 8.00 p.m. they take on a Chinese pairing in their bid to reach the final tomorrow.
And next week Julie Bradbury will be representing England in an international against Korea.
Now to a look at what's been happening and what's coming up.
Mark Kiff again.
Voice over
The Oxford City Stars have reached the playoffs in English League Division One.
That gives them the chance for promotion to the British League, where they could face Swindon and Milton Keynes.
Success too for the Oxford Hawks Hockey club.
Their men's team has won the Peroni South title.
They now could join the National League.
Budding gymnastics champions will have somewhere new to practise their talents from in Aylesbury.
A new club is opening with a gymnastics display at Rayburns Close…the action gets underway on Wednesday at seven thirty.
And the Silverstone Race Circuit saw the launch today of the first British-powered Formula Three Car since the 1970s.
Swindon Racing Engines have developed a Vauxhall Power Unit to take on the Japanese.
A good omen is the fact that the last man to drive a British engined Formula Three car was Nigel Mansell.
Finally horseracing…and Cheltenham rolled out another vintage year this week…a good one too for local horses and trainers.
Gloucestershire's David Nicholson bagged two wins…while Wantage jockey Graham McCourt steered Royal Gate to victory in the Champion Hurdle.
So with another national hunt festival over let's take a last look back at Cheltenham nineteen ninety two.
Voice over
Hello.
NICK CLARK
Tonight…there's horseracing, badminton, football.
First though it's rugby and crunch time in the Courage League tomorrow.
Gloucester play Northampton in a match crucial to both clubs' chances of claiming the Division One title.
Voice over
Gloucester are hoping history will be on their side tomorrow.
The game will be Northampton's 50th visit to Kingsholm.
The Cherry and Whites have won 43 of them.
In a close encounter last season, Gloucester pipped Northampton by 7 points to 6.
Pete Jones scored the game's only try.
After their crushing defeat at Bath two weeks ago, Gloucester will be looking to recapture the form they showed earlier in the season against the likes of Leicester.
Then the Cherry and Whites were unstoppable.
The temperature at Kingsholm tomorrow will be hot.
Gloucester's pack will be aiming to steamroller their way to success.
Bad news for Gloucester on the injury front.
Skipper Ian Smith and prop Pete Jones, their 2 Scottish internationals, are both out of the game.
Otherwise it's a full strength team, with Bob Philips back from injury.
Tony Windo and Paul Ashmead replace Smith and Jones.
The top of the Courage League shows just how important tomorrow's game is.
Northampton are right up there in second place.
Gloucester have a game in hand, but are 3 points off the pace.
Their championship hopes depend on a win.
Football a full league programme tomorrow…
Oxford United, Swindon and Hereford all in action.
Mark Kiff has the details.
Voice over
Oxford's uphill battle against relegation continues tomorrow at Barnsley.
Last week's 5 goal success against Swindon will gee United up.
It was a derby match to remember, especially if you're a United fan; defeating the old enemy for the first time in years.
Brian Horton has a stable team at last.
He's named the same side which has started the last three games.
United have now won three of their last 5 games and drawn the other two.
Barnsley's recent form is even better, with 4 wins out of 6.
Despite their improving results, United are still in the relegation zone.
The fight to stay up looks like being a long one.
Swindon would doubtless rather forget the Oxford match.
It's not often you score 3 goals and end up on the losing team.
A hatrick of goals tomorrow at Newcastle would go down a treat.
Glenn Hoddle's team is likely to show several changes.
Fraser Digby replacing Nicky Hammond in goal.
Micky Hazard should be back from injury.
Swindon have suffered three consecutive defeats.
Since Kevin Keegan took over at Newcastle, they've enjoyed 3 wins out of six.
Hereford's form becomes even more unpredictable.
Last Saturday, they lost to this goal at home to lowly Doncaster and then won 2-0 at Halifax on Wednesday.
Tomorrow Maidstone travel to Edgar Street.
The Hereford team shows the return of Peter Heritage after a one match suspension.
Time for just one more goal from last Saturday.
Joey Beachamp again.
More tomorrow please.
Central South's badminton star Julie Bradbury is having mixed fortunes at the All England Open at Wembley.
The former English national champion is now out of the singles competition but has reached the semi-finals of the doubles.
Here's Robin Powell.
JULIE BRADBURY
Voice over
The Building Society secretary from Bladon in Oxfordshire had a good start to the tournament, reaching the third round for the first time.
Victim number one, Anna Lao from Australia.
On to the second round and the Dane Gita Summer; an easy win for our girl, Julie winning in two games eleven three, eleven seven.
Next though to one of the top seeds, Korean Bang Soo-Hyun; before the match Central South's first lady of badminton knew the challenge ahead.
She ssad: It'll be a tough game.
Indeed tough it proved, the Korean out-classing Julie and taking the match eleven three, eleven seven.
But this has been a year when the English selectors, with the Olympics in mind, have encouraged Julie to concentrate more on her doubles play.
She's teamed up with Gill Clark and they're current national doubles champions.
Female speaker
I've been working hard with Gill to get into top form for the Olympics so singles play has taken a bit of a back seat.
Voice over
Here at the championships Gill and Julie have now reached the semi-finals.
Tonight at 8.00 p.m. they take on a Chinese pairing in their bid to reach the final tomorrow.
And next week Julie Bradbury will be representing England in an international against Korea.
Now to a look at what's been happening and what's coming up.
Mark Kiff again.
Voice over
The Oxford City Stars have reached the playoffs in English League Division One.
That gives them the chance for promotion to the British League, where they could face Swindon and Milton Keynes.
Success too for the Oxford Hawks Hockey club.
Their men's team has won the Peroni South title.
They now could join the National League.
Budding gymnastics champions will have somewhere new to practise their talents from in Aylesbury.
A new club is opening with a gymnastics display at Rayburns Close…the action gets underway on Wednesday at seven thirty.
And the Silverstone Race Circuit saw the launch today of the first British-powered Formula Three Car since the 1970s.
Swindon Racing Engines have developed a Vauxhall Power Unit to take on the Japanese.
A good omen is the fact that the last man to drive a British engined Formula Three car was Nigel Mansell.
Finally horseracing…and Cheltenham rolled out another vintage year this week…a good one too for local horses and trainers.
Gloucestershire's David Nicholson bagged two wins…while Wantage jockey Graham McCourt steered Royal Gate to victory in the Champion Hurdle.
So with another national hunt festival over let's take a last look back at Cheltenham nineteen ninety two.
Voice over
On the eve of his Budget, the Chancellor is being warned that thousands of jobs will be lost of he puts VAT on books and newspapers.
Until now, they've always been exempt, but booksellers and newspaper owners say knowledge should NOT be taxed.
GARETH FURBY/Oxford
JULIAN BLACKWELL/Blackwell's Books
DR HELEN WORKMAN/University Librarian
ANITA SYVRET/Editor
Voice over
It's taken 114 years to build up Blackwells from a one-room shop to today's multi-million pound business.
But tomorrow, with just a few words, the Chancellor could deal the company a body blow.
VAT on books could cut sales by a 5Th and up to 200 jobs in Oxford may be at risk.
He says they've worked hard to build the company up.
He's as angry as it is possible for a human being to be.
University libraries are one big customer.
But if books cost more, Oxford Brookes University, for example, simply won't buy as many.
She says the students won't be able to afford to buy so many books as well, so they'll be more dependent on the library.
There hasn't been duty on books since 1860, when it was seen as a tax on knowledge.
And today's book buyers agree.
He says the country will suffer.
He says people will just buy less.
The regional newspaper industry may also lose sales.
Nationally, 2,500 jobs may be at risk.
Today the Gloucestershire Echo was preparing for the worst.
She says sales could fall 10% if they put their prices up by 5 pence.
It would be very bad news.
The booksellers say its basic economics.
And if the Chancellor hasn't learnt his lesson, thousands of jobs will go.
A charity stunt team which drives volunteers through a tunnel of fire has been warned by experts that it's dicing with death.
Its latest display was performed without even a fire extinguisher, but a top stuntman has warned that the act is highly dangerous.
GRAEME BOWD/Gloucester
ARNOLD PEARCE/Gloucestershire Fire Service
MIKE GOUGH/Amateur Stuntman
ROY ALON/Film Stuntman
Voice over
A School sportsground in Gloucester was the scene for the latest show by the No Limits stunt team.
They promised to drive two riders through twelve hoops of blazing straw.
In fact there were only four, but that looked quite enough for the two dare-devils who'd volunteered to take part.
Neither of them had done anything like this before.
vox pops 
To set light to the straw the team were using a mixture of petrol and spirits.
To put it out, if something went wrong, there were two buckets of water and a soggy blanket.
So why no fire extinguishers?
The organiser said he didn't believe in them.
vox pops 
At last the big moment.
The riders are not strapped to the car in any way and it's clear that falling off would have serious consequences.
For a brief moment it looked as if someone was on fire.
In fact there were no injuries.
But after seeeing the pictures one of Britain's top stuntmen expressed serious doubts about the safety of the act.
Roy Alon who appeared in many of the James Bond films said the team were playing with fire.
Also concerned are the Gloucestershire fire service who suggested the organisers should take professional advice.
As long as the performers are not paid, displays like this require no approval from the local authorities.
Safe or not it wasw clear that the crowd enjoyed it, and the team did raisd eight hundred pounds for charity.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News, our Cheltenham Gold Cup preview.
Plus, happy days are here again.
Swindon march on towards the Premier league.
And, first signs of life.
Hospital technology, down on the farm.
Death of a smuggler.
Soldier's parents demand the return of his body.
An accident waiting to happen.
Charity stunt team warned…you're playing with fire.
And jobs will go: Warning to Lamont over VAT on books.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Roger Morrison's parents can't explain what he was doing.
The Moroccan authorities won't release the body until investigations are complete, but the family want to start arranging a funeral.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Abingdon
PATRICIA MORRISON/Roger's Mother
Family Wedding Video
PAUL GOSS/Roger's Friend
Voice over
Private Roger Morrison's body was washed up on a Morroccan beach 10 days ago after his speedboat had been fired on by local police.
He's understood to have been smuggling cigarettes from Gibraltar into the Spanish Enclave of Ceuto.
Now the Moroccan authorities are holding onto the body and that's angered Private Morrison's Abingdon based family.
Female speaker
It's been a week now.
Why don't they release the body, there's no need to hold on to it
The soldier's mother was in Gibraltar on holiday when she learned of his death.
She went to Morrocco with Roger's wife Elizabeth where they eventually found the body.
Female speaker
They asked me if it was my son, I said yes and I went out to tell Elizabeth.
She started to cry
Roger Morrison was 26 and married with a young child.
He joined the Gibraltar Regiment in 1989, after moving to the Rock from his family home in Abingdon.
He had recently suffered an injury to his knee and was preparing to be discharged.
On the night he died, he was in a speedboat about 10 miles South of the Spanish Enclave, Ceuto and into Morroccan waters.
Local reports suggest he was carrying 20 cases of cigarettes from Gibraltar to Spanish territory where they can fetch 3 times the price.
The tobacco trade has become part of Gibraltar culture and is legal there, but not at the other end.
Private Morrison's boat was fired on when he ignored warning shots.
A companion in the boat was rescued by another speedboat.
Roger's Abingdon friend, Paul Goss, went to Gibraltar for what he thought would be a funeral.
He finished up trying to piece together what happened.
Male speaker
Roger was full of life.
He would do anything to have a laugh, he lived for today not for tomorrow
The Foreign Office says the body is being held while a police investigation is carried out.
The British Forces in Gibraltar say it's virtually out of their hands.
Male speaker
We can't be responsible for the conduct of Mr Morrison who was off duty.
He was engaging in a hazaradous pursuit at him own risk
But for the time being, Private Morrison's family, already overcome by grief, can only wait and hope his body will be released to them soon.
One of the victims of an alleged murder attempt has told a court how she was tied up, beaten and forced into a car which was then set alight and pushed over a hill.
Pauline Leyshon said her clothes were burning and some actually melted on her body.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Bristol
November 1991/BIRDLIP
Voice over
Pauline Leyshon arrived to give evidence on the fifth day of the trial at Bristol Crown Court.
Norman White, Mark Evans and his girlfriend Sheila Stroud are all charged with attempting to murder Mrs Leyshon and her boyfriend Ivor Stokle.
It's alleged the couple were kidnapped and forced into a car which was then set alight and pushed off a hill at Barrow Wake in Birdlip.
Mrs Leyshon told the court how she and Stokle had gone to a house in Staunton to meet Evans and Stroud.
She said while they were talking a black man came into the room and threatned the couple with a knife.
She said they were tied up, thrown into the back of a truck and driven to barrow Wake.
There the court heard they were forced into a car which was set alight and pushed over the edge.
Evans, White and Stroud all deny the charges.
The trial continues tomorrow.
Detectives are trying to find two men who may have witnessed a murder in a quiet country hamlet.
They're still trying to establish a motive for the stabbing of Richard Miles, who was found dead in his garden.
TIM HURST/Stonehouse
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
Richard Miles, 29 years old, who worked as a panel beater, was found dead in parents' garden.
He'd been stabbed once.
He'd returned to the house where he lived with his parents for lunch, last Wednesday.
He didn't return to walk and he was found dead by his mother.
Detectives want to trace two people; one of them a scruffy man with a centre parting seen on the towpath of the Stroudwater canal behind the house on the afternoon of the killing.
The other, an elderly man of military bearing seen nearby.
Either of them may have seen the killer.
Richard Miles was a known user of cannabis, but police have no reason to believe his death was drugs-related.
A man has admitted knocking down and killing a cyclist after drinking more than five pints of lager.
David Adams was hit by a a van at Witney in Oxfordshire.
He left a widow and four young sons.
December 1992/WITNEY/Oxfordshire
Thirty one year old labourer Martin Clarke pleaded guilty at Oxford Crown Court and sentencing was adjourned.
A man arested in Blackpool is being questioned about the murder of a student in Cheltenham.
Murray Pugh, a trainee P-E teacher, was stabbed to death last weekend.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Police interviewed five hundred people on Saturday in the search for witnesses.
A vet has borrowed medical technology normally seen in maternity hospitals and is using it on farms to bring more certainty to lambing.
He's using ultrasound scanning to discover if ewes are pregnant.
RICHARD BARNETT Chilton
DEREK STOAKES Vet
BRIAN LLOYD Farmer
Voice over
Scott the collie has his work cut out as he rounds up the sheep at Camp Farm.
He's helping to drive in the ewes for a mass ante natal clinic.
During the day, Vet, Derek Stoakes will be checking 800 ewes to see if they're pregnant.
He's using a veterinary ultrasound scanner adapted from machines used in maternity hospitals.
After using the probe on the sheep's belly and looking at the monitor screen, Derek can tell within seconds if a ewe is pregnant.
Ewes in lamb are marked with blue paint, the others are marked green.
Male speaker
Scanning is becoming increasingly popular.
It's a very fast way to check pregnancies.
Voice over
For farmer Brian Lloyd, it makes good commercial sense to have his flock scanned.
At a time of rising costs, he can make sure extra feed only goes to ewes that are in lamb.
Male speaker
Ultrasound scanning is a great help.
Before farmers had to take pot luck over whether their ewes were pregnant.
Voice over
Farmers are facing increasing uncertainty about the future, but at least Brian Lloyd knows how many lambs he'll have.
And the news is good.
720 of his 800 ewes turned out to be pregnant.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Death toll over 100 in US storms
FTSE up 6
The hundred shares index closed up six point five at twenty-nine, twenty-two point four.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-three and down at two marks, thirty-eight.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back to Central News South: Coming up in a few minutes, the farmer who's taken maternity hospital technology and adapted it for the lambing season.
But first, at the start of one of the biggest weeks in the racing calendar, we're off to Cheltenham, to join Tim Russon.
TIM RUSSON
GLENN HODDLE/Swindon Town
KIM BARNES/Reporting
JOHN PAYNE/Oxford Co-Promoter
GEOFF BARBER/Supporters' Club
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Racecourse Director
RICHARD PRICE/Trainer
TOM PRICE/Owner
Voice over
hello there…yes we've come to Prestbury Park as Cheltenham readies itself for Gold Cup Week…we'll be looking ahead to the festival in a few moments and also giving you the chance to win two tickets for the big day…first the weekend action and the big race in football…the chase for promotion
Swindon Town against Newcastle United…the battle of the giants…the County Ground was bursting with its biggest crowd in years to see the gladiators of the first division…
the game was more of a head on crash than a classic…
lots of hard tackling…neither side were prepared to surrender…
Newcastle the league leaders looked as tough as old boots…
Swindon tried to play their game but in the first half didn't have much joy…
United have fought hard to get to the top and they're in no mood to let promotion slip…
they took the lead just before half-time…simple goal which asks question of the swindon defence…
David Kelly thumped it home…and the Geordie lads were away celebrating…
the real drama came at the start of the second half…with two Town goals in four minutes…first Steve White went flying in the box…a penalty which Paul Bodin knocked in…
then came controversy…and dispute…watch for Steve White he clearly handles the ball on his way through…the ref didn't see it…wouldn't give United a free kick and within seconds from a corner the match was over…
Colin Calderwood ran in to hit the winner…
Swindon 2 Newcastle 1…a great day for Glenn Hoddle's red and white army
Glenn Hoddle says it was a big win and rewarding after a week in which they've had to sell a player and have been troubled by lots of injuries…
STING
The sun was shining at the Manor Ground…but Oxford finished under a cloud…the silver lining was the form of some of the young players especially Matthew Keble who was making his debut…
United's goals have dried up though…and they could do with a man like Southend's Stan Collymore who hit the winner 12 minutes from time…he's worth over a million pounds…and left Oxford penniless on saturday…
Oxford 0 Southend l
STING
Up at Chesterfield…
Hereford fell again…only one goal in it…they're always so close are United…but not close enough on the attackers for the winner which was scored by Morris in the first half…
Chesterfield 1 Hereford 0
Now rugby union's league season is coming to the final fences…three games to go and there's better news of Gloucester…the Cherry and Whites who've been fighting off the threat of relegation all season won at Northampton on saturday and should be safe…
Northampton sixteen Gloucester 21 was the score at Franklin Gardens…the Cherry and Whites won by two tries to one…
Simon Morris and Paul Holford were the scorers…
Packman got Northampton's…
Watch the win…enjoy it and listen to words of wisdom from Gloucester coach keith richardson
keith richardson says that most people thought Gloucester were going to lose but it was a great win…they looked like a different side and played exceptionally well and were lifted by the supporters
Now we've good news and bad news for speedway fans…the good news…
Oxford Cheetahs will be racing next season…the bad news it'll be in the second division without the stars
At tapes up next month there will be a team on the track at Oxford Stadium…albeit in the second division…
Worcestershire businessman Tony Mole has pledged an undisclosed sum to keep the wheels rolling for three years…
John Payne co-promoter says that last Friday the speedway club was finished so Mr. Mole has saved the day…
Supporter Geoff Barber says it's good news and a relief to be racing
But there's only one rider left…all the others went in search of better deals after a row over new payscales…
Calls have gone out today to find seven riders double quick…
John Payne says the ambition now is to get back into the first division
well all other sport has to take a back seat this week…there's only game to follow that's racing…only one place to be Cheltenham…and Central South is here racing gold…
STING
When a circus comes to town they send in the stars…so who better than Desert Orchid to lead the festival parade into Cheltenham…
Dessie…one of the greatest of all the Gold Cup winners was in town to get the racing week off to a flying start…
Up at the racecourse the sun was shining brighter than ever…
Prestbury Park's been having a heat wave…gallons upon gallons of water are being pumped onto the course to make the going good…
An army of 2000 have been reporting for duty…tables to set…glasses to clean…crates of bottles to wheel in…
The budget will be blown out of the skies tomorrow as the betting tops the million pound mark…
There are still tickets and badges on sale…the message from Cheltenham come and enjoy yourself
Edward Gillespie the course's managing director says there's lots going on…its more a spring rights meeting…and there's something for everyone…
The horses started arriving this morning…the Irish were first in…they're supporters are pouring in all week…
The quietest place today will be the busiest place tomorrow…the jockey's room was deserted…who's names will be scrawled on the winners wall this year…well the first big race is the Champion Hurdle…and a fairy tale winner would be a seven year old mare called Flakey Dove…home is a farm on the outskirts of Leominster in Herefordshire…along with the ducks…chickens…sheep and cattle the Price family have 12 race horses…
Flakey Dove is something special…
Richard Price's grandfather Tom bought a horse for twenty five pounds at Ludlow Market in the fifties…from that they bred Red Dove who in turn bred six more winners…
Flakey Dove is the grandaughter the latest in a long line of local champions
Richard Price says he wishes he knows what the secret of the dove family is…they're just good horses and Flakey Dove is the best they've had…she's going to Cheltenham to see how good she really is…
Tom Price says its absolutely marvellous a dream come true
Flakey Dove is 33-1 for the big race…the whole of herefordshire is one her
It would be quite something to see Flakey Dove and the Price family in here tomorrow…quite something to see you here on Thursday for the Gold Cup…here’ s your chance…we've two tickets to be won in our special competition…
There are three questions…
Dunwoody…
Scudamore…
Pitman and McCourt four of the best jockeys but one of them has never won the Gold Cup which one…
The second question is which trainer has won two Gold Cups in the last ten years
The third question is which herefordshire trained horse finished second to Desert Orchid in the Gold Cup in 89
answers by first post on Wednesday
good luck with that and we'll see you tomorrow…if the sun is shining the Gold Cup will be off and running with a sparkle
Mail order violence…police condemn weapons by post booklet.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
CLARE LAFFERTY/Burleigh
NEVILLE SMITH
ROGER KNAPMAN MP/Con Stroud
Supt PHILIP SULLIVAN/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
KITS
When Neville Smith unexpectedly got a copy of the catalogue through the post he thought it was just another piece of junk mail.
When he took a closer look he was horrified.
Some of the more sinister weapons advertised in the catalogue include a hair brush that can be transformed into a knife; a pen that conceals a dagger; and manuals that explain how to make bombs out of household items.
Mr Smith's MP is concerned that this kind of material might get into the wrong hands.
That's a sentiment echoed by the Gloucestershire Police force.
Provided there's nothing visibly offensive on the cover, it's not illegal to send catalogues like this through the post.
And the distributors deny they're encouraging violence.
The Home Ofice says it will now investigate these catalogues.
But in the meantime one can quite legitimately be sent to you.
Even if you haven't asked for one.
A seventeen year old girl was seriously injured when the stolen car she was riding in crashed into a tree.
It happened less than two days after a fourteen year old girl from Birmingham was killed in a joyriding incident.
Police say it's yet another example of young people putting their own lives in jeopardy.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Milton Keynes
Det Sgt ALAN YOUNG/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The girl was one of three passengers being driven by a seventeen year old in a stolen white metro.
It eventually collided with a tree on the Lakes Estate in Milton Keynes after a high speed police chase over two miles.
The injured girl and another fifteen year old girl travelling in the back with her, were taken to Milton Keynes General Hospital.
Male speaker
First of all it's a against the law but after that these youngsters quite often don't know what they're doing when they get into a car and they are lethal
Voice over
The incident happened late last night and was less than forty eight hours after fourteen year old Sally Cattell died at the wheel of a stolen car in a crash in Erdington, Birmingham.
The Milton Keynes Police first spotted the white Metro close to Bletchley Town centre.
They gave chase along Drayton Road where they reached speeds of up to seventy miles an hour.
The metro turned into the Lakes Estate and eventually drove down Melfoot Avenue where it reached a dead end.
The car crashed into a tree.
The seventeen year old girl suffered head injuries and was kept in hospital, her fifteen year old companion had a broken arm and was discharged after treatment.
Male speaker
Joyriding is completely the wrong term for it.
Just ask the parents of some of the drivers who've killed themselves and see what they call it.
It won't be joyriding
Voice over
A third passenger, aged fifteen, has been charged with aggravated vehicle taking, and another seventeen year old youth has been arrested this afternoon.
The funeral's taken place of a pensioner killed in his own home.
It's more than two months since Jim Eggleton was murdered and police say they're still no closer to solving the case.
They believe a neighbour could be harbouring the killer.
Home Video/JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
Ch Insp JOHN REEVE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
70 year old Jim Eggleton was killed in his own home.
He'd enjoyed Christmas, spending it with friends.
A few days later his body was found at his council house in the Oxfordshire hamlet of Russell's Water near Henley.
He'd been beaten around the head and his throat had been cut.
A retired van driver, he was a popular man and many friends and relatives attended his funeral at Caversham in Berkshire today.
But there's still a feeling of unease amid police suggestions that someone from the village could be covering up for the killer.
Male speaker
We still feel someone in the the local community knows something and isn't coming forward.
It may be they sa Mr Eggleton with somebody shortly before he died or someone came home with bloodstained clothing.
We desperately need that person to come forward.
Voice over
It's now been more than two months since Mister Eggleton was killed.
Mounted police have combed a National Trust estate at nearby Christmas Common, but have still drawn a blank in their search for the murder weapon or any bloodstained clothing.
The offer of a £10,000 reward, for information leading to a succesful conviction, remains outstanding.
Now detectives can only hope that publicity surrounding the funeral will encourage someone to come forward and help them catch the murderer.
A man's appeared in court charged with the murder of a student teacher.
Murray Pugh was stabbed to death in Cheltenham just over a week ago.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
A teenager, who received a (25,000) twenty five thousand volt shock when he scaled an electricity pylon, is seriously ill in hospital.
The incident happened close to a railway line near Northampton between Harlestone Village and Church Brampton.
The man, who's(18)eighteen, is being treated in the Stoke Mandeville Hospital for sixty percent burns.
A solicitor's clerk has appeared in court with five others accused of conspiring to pervert the course of justice.
But his boss has asked for an investigation into what he called evil and wicked aspects of the case.
January 1993/TIM HURST/Cheltenham
TIM ROBINSON/Solicitor
Voice over
The charges follow a hammer attack on an off-duty policeman in Cheltenham in January.
Two people are awaiting trial in connection with the attack, but 5 others, including Howard Banton, chief clerk for a firm of solicitors in the town, have appeared in court at Cheltenham, accused of conspiring to pervert the course of justice by plotting to persuade a witness to withdraw a statement.
They had been arrested yesterday and held in custody overnight.
Gloucestershire police say they've received Mr Robinson's complaints and they'll be dealt with formally under complaints procedures.
Meantime, all 5 defendants have been granted bail until April 27.
A tiny wartime airfield that grew into Britain's biggest military airport now has its story recorded for posterity.
Its been told in a book by aviation writer Wilf Pereira who served in the RAF in World War Two and remembers when it was a strip of grass at daily peril from German bombers.
GRAEME BOWD/Brize Norton
WILF PEREIRA/Author
Group Capt BRIAN POULTON/Base Commander
Voice over
Today Wilf Pereira was guest of honour at the air base which he probably knows more about than anyone else.
At the age of 71, he's written the definitive book on Brize Norton which was little more than a field when he joined the RAF 53 years ago.
Wilf spent the war fishing downed airmen out of the North Sea.
Today he flew over it again.
This time on a VC 10.
These planes form the backbone of Brize Norton operations and Wilf ride in the cockpit as the the took on fuel from a tanker, also from Brize.
It wasn't quite the kind of flying that went on in 1940.
(HARRIET AD LIB BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, we're backing the winners at Cheltenham,
Welcome back to Central News: coming up in a few minutes, the sheep farmer who's opened his farm yard to the public for the lambing season.
But first, at the start of one of racing's biggest events, we're off to the opening day at Cheltenham to join Tim Russon.
TIM RUSSON
TONY MORRIS/Landscape Contractor
FRANCIS SOSHARDAMADON/Head Chef
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Racecourse Director
Voice over
An enterprising sheep farmer is opening his gates to the public during the lambing season.
The idea is to give townspeople a taste of the countryside.
Between now and Easter, thousands are expected to take up the invitation.
ROBIN POWELL/Sevenhampton
RUPERT BURR/Farmer
MARGARET CLARKE/Teacher
JOANNA BURR/Rupert's Wife
Voice over
It's 5.30 a.m. in the morning and a baby lamb is about to see daylight for the very first time.
Dawn can be hectic during lambing; the warmth of the day helps the new-born lamb survive its first few hours and staff work round the clock in case something goes wrong.
Rupert's surviving on 5 hours' sleep a night.
This spring, about eighteen hundred lambs will be born on his farm near Swindon and thousands of people are expected to come and watch.
Among the first to take up Rupert's invitation; a party of 90 children from Lethbridge Junior School.
It's a family effort.
While her husband shows off his lambs, Joanna Burr demonstrates spinning to another group of children in the visitors' centre next door.
The Burrs' is just the sort of tourist venture that Thamesdown Council's trying to promote.
Sevenhampton was where novelist Ian Fleming once earned a living writing about a secret agent called James Bond and Rupert likes to think that Roves Farm is helping to put the village back on the map.
Meanwhile there are 40 more lambs each day to keep Rupert busy and he's always grateful for help at feeding time.
Finding your feet can be thirsty work and after all, being the centre of attention so early in life requires a lot of bottle.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Finally tonight…a look at the main points of Chancellor Lamont's budget…
VAT on home fuel and power
FTSE down 3
And in the city…the hundred shares index closed down three point one at two nine one nine point three 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty four and up at two marks, forty.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodbye.
Sharp decline in Britain's output
There's been a sharp decline in Britain's industrial and manufacturing output raising fears among economists that the recession may be deepening.
Major promises recovery on Conservative return
The Prime Minister dismissed the figures saying the economy was set to recover should the Conservatives return to power.
Kinnock appalled by worse figures than expected
For Labour, Mr. Kinnock has said he is appalled by the figures which he claims are worse than he expected.
Ashdown warns of slide to slump
And the Liberal Democrat Leader, Mr. Ashdown, has warned the country faces the prospect of sliding from recession into slump.
Family badly hurt after train hits van
A mother and her four children have been badly hurt when a train hit their van on an unmanned level crossing.
De Klerk confident of referendum victory
In South Africa, President De Klerk has predicted victory in the referendum over his plans to scrap apartheid.
FTSE up 20
The hundred shares index closed up twenty point five at twenty-four, ninety-one point two.
The pound is up nearly two cents at one dollar, seventy-three and up at two marks, eighty-six.
Finally, The Princess Royal has been visiting a special dog training unit in the region.
LEWKNOR/Oxford
She toured the Hearing Dogs for the Deaf centre at Lewknor near Oxford where dogs are taught to act as ears for deaf people.
The dogs, mostly mongrels, undergo a four-month training programme before being placed with a deaf person.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back: It's St Patrick's Day, and one of the regions' most talented musical families is celebrating with a fantasy voyage into the past.
It's a literary journey told by the wife of Bee Gee Robin Gibb.
She's been researching the myths and legends of the Irish.
Erika Barnes reports.
THAME/Oxfordshire
DWINA MURPHY-GIBB
ROBIN GIBB
Voice over
It's a meeting of musical and mystical souls.
Robin and Dwina Gibb at home in Thame in Oxfordshire.
The couple live in a 13th century prebendary with a magic and a mood of its own.
Female speaker
It has all kinds of ghosts from the past.
We wanted to recreate it as it was and gave the house a medieval feel.
Male speaker
It has a great atmosphere; a sense of permanence.
The house is greater than you are.
We're custodians; it's very peaceful.
A place which has had 500 years of prayer.
Voice over
It's an inspiration for their creative talents.
For Robin, a place to put mind to music.
And a chance for Dwina to pen to paper.
An artist and a writer who's now centre stage with publication of her first novel.
Cormac the Seers; a fantasy tale of one of the legendary high Kings of Ireland.
It's a celebration of all that's good about her homeland.
(and about a former life).
Female speaker
It's not just about a King, it's about a way of life.
I have to know everything and fling myself into the 3rd century.
(might use…
I think I did live before in Ireland)
Voice over
And the writing won't dry up after the story of Cormac is told.
Dwina's next effort is a joint effort teaming up with Robin.
This time to tell a 20th century tale.
A spoof story of the music industry using the experience of a pop master and the wit of the Irish.
An unlikely combination in an unlikely setting.
It could well be a best seller.
A section of canal derelict for forty years is to be reopened after the installation of four new lock gates.
It's taken twenty years of work by volunteers.Tim Hurst reports.
STONEHOUSE/Gloucestershire
KEN BAILEY/Stroudwater Trust
Voice over
Engineers are installing four new lock gates on the Stroudwater Canal, at Stonehouse in Gloucestershire, a canal which once connected the River Severn to the River Thames.
A half mile section reclaimed by volunteers will then be flooded and opened to pleasure craft.
The Stroudwater Canal, built more than 200 years ago, has been derelict since the 1940's.
Now Stroud is likely to be reconnected to the national canal network by the turn of the century.
It will take another 20 years to complete the original link between the Severn and the Thames.
Football news now…and after losing their last four matches, Swindon Town are opting for a more defensive policy in tonight's home game against Tranmere Rovers.
Out of the side go Argentine International Nestor Lorenzo and striker Shaun Close.
They're replaced by Tom Jones and Nicky Summerbee.
And Swindon are about to sign Republic of Ireland international Gary Waddock from Queens Park Rangers on a month's loan.
He's expected to make his debut against Southend on Saturday.
While England's cricketers are looking for a big win against Zimbabwe in the World Cup in Australia tonight, a younger generation are also hoping for success in a tour of the African country.
The schoolboy team will set off at the end of the month.
Nick Clark reports.
TONY PULLINGER/Dragon School
TOM LEADBITTER
Voice over
There's a rigourous routine of hard practice before the party from the Dragon School in Oxford head off for the African continent.
Amongst the players the son of actor Jeremy Irons, Samuel, described as a hard-hitting early order batsman and a superb competitor.
Indeed all the team will need their best competitive spirit in what they know will be a challenging tour.
The Zimbabwean national team may be at the foot of the world cup table, but youth cricket is coming on apace.
At the helm coach Tony Pullinger, former Worcestershire player and once on the staff at Lords.
Male speaker
I think it will be hard but we'll cope.
Male speaker
I think it's going to be really hot.
Voice over
When the Dragons first eleven set off for the sun in a couple of weeks time they'll be taking with them a pretty impressive record, just 2 defeats in the last seven seasons.
Zimbabwe beware.
A package of unpublished music manuscripts by one of the country's most eminent composers of brass band music has been rediscovered fifty years after it was written…and as Clare Lafferty reports, its about to have its first performance.
GLOUCESTER
DEREK BROADBENT/Brass Band Enthusiast
Voice over
The tune is called Zig Zag and it was written more than than 60 years ago.
But until recently, no one knew this piece of music even existed.
It's one of around 60 manuscripts unearthed when Wright and Round, a music publishing company, moved to new premises in Gloucester.
The package had laid undiscovered there for nearly 50 years.
Finding it caused quite a stir in the brass band world.
Zig Zag was written by John Greenwood, considered in brass band circles to be one of the greatest composers of his kind.
He's now dead, but Wright and Round has ensured his music will live on by publishing the piece.
The Flowers band, based in Gloucester, is the only brass band to play.
A man has appeared in court accused of attacking a woman in a graveyard.
Gary Smith, who's thirty one and from Oxford, was charged with indecent assault 
OXFORD
Further extensions to the Japanese Honda car plant near Swindon have been approved.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Thamesdown Borough Council have approved plans to extend three buildings at the plant at South Marston in spite of objections from nearby residents.
The council say the development is essential to Swindon's economy.
Businesses say the closure of a motorway bridge is ruining their trade.
A section of motorway had to be shut when it was discovered that the bridge was structurally unsafe.
But hotels and garages along the route say that if the bridge isn't repaired soon, many of them will go out of business.
Ken Goodwin reports.
ROSS-ON-WYE/Herefordshire
JO BAKER/Guest House Owner
TONY DAVIES/Garage Manager
JULIO CONTRERAS/Hotel Owner
Voice over
Jo Baker's guest house in Ross on Wye hasn't seen much trade recently.
About this time of year she'd have expected business to be picking up, but instead it remains ominously quiet.
According to Jo, this is the reason.
A bridge on the M50 motorway was closed last month when engineers carrying out checks spotted cracks in the metalwork.
The resulting diversions caused chaos in some areas, but took traffic away from others.
Businesses which rely on passing trade in ross on wye say they've suffered most:
She says that fifty percent of her trade is from passing traffic.
The bridge closure is affecting many businesses.
Just down the road this garage has seen a drastic cut in takings.
He says the garage is losing about nine thousand pounds a week in takings, most of which came from lorry drivers who are now using other routes.
This Welcome break restaurant has suffered such a drop in trade that staff have agreed to work on short time, with a cut in wages, to try and keep it going until the bridge reopens.
Local hotel owner Julio Contreras is worried that if the bridge stays closed for much longer, some businesses, already ravaged by the recession, will close.
He says that there soon won't be many businesses left!
The recession has taken it's toll; they need passing trade to survive.
In a statement the department of transport says:’ It's a complex repair operation, but engineers are working round the clock and hope to have the bridge at least partially opened by early April, providing they don't encounter any major problems.’
Jo Baker's message to the department of transport is simple:
She says please just get on with it and repair the bridge as soon as possible.
Businesses which rely on traffic for trade can only hope that the message doesn't go unheeded.
A farmer who's been fighting for years to KEEP gypsies on his land has been given the go-ahead after a public inquiry.
But he's still furious at the conditions laid down by the Department of Environment which he must agree to before the gypsies can stay.
Nick Clark reports.
HEREFORD
JOHN DAVIES/Farmer
KEN EVANS/Gypsy
Voice over
(Gypsies have camped on this land for generations.
Landowner John Davies has been happy to keep up the tradition.
But for twenty years a south hereford district council has tried to get them evicted.
Mr Davis has spent thousands of pounds fighting in court for the gypsies' rights to stay.
He's even been threatened with jail.
Last year the Department of the Environment was brought in to settle the case.
Now Mr Davies is told the gypsies can stay, but only for five years.
And only those gypsies that are here already, or their dependents, can use the site.
Male speaker
I reject the decision.
Voice over
The gypsy site does have support from local villagers, four hundred signed a petition to keep it running.
The gypsies themselves are puzzled by the apparant determination of the council to evict them from a site well away from public view.
Male speaker
I don't understand why the council should act like this.
Male speaker
The council are renowned for their nad treatment of gypsies.
Voice over
Mr Davis does regard the Department of the Environment's decision as a step in the right direction.
But he's not prepared to compromise on what he regards as a moral issue.
For him the fight goes on.
What the Department will do now following Mr Davis' rejection of their decision remains to be seen.
Meanwhile South Hereford District Council wouldn't comment beyond saying they stand by their wish to have the gypsies moved.
In part two: Spirits Having Flown: Mrs Bee Gee on the ghosts and legends of Ireland.
Ready to roar.Cricket's young dragons learning to breathe fire.
And, a blast from the past.
The music that's finally being aired, fifty years on.
Easy pickings.
Expert reveals serious flaws in museum and gallery security.
It shouldn't have happened.Anger over the chemical fire that closed off a town.
And, no way out: Wheelchair wife trapped after council takes away her ramp.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The special investigation was carried out by a private detective commissioned by Central News South.
Police have admitted that there are easy pickings for thieves at some museums and galleries, and they're warning them to take extra precautions.
This report from Gareth Furby.
THAMES VALLEY POLICE HQ/Oxfordshire
Sgt JIM HILL/Thames Valley Police
EDWARD REILY-COLLINS/Antiques Dealer
KEITH WHITING/Independent Security Consultant
Voice over
For eight years this detective has specialised in investigating the theft of art and antiques.
This month has been one of the worst he can remember.
Stolen in Oxford: antique jewellery worth up to £60,000; a 15th century painting valued at £15,000; and even two bronze busts from an Oxford College valued at £4,000.
He says it's unfortunately easy pickings so it's on the increase.
Descriptions of the stolen items are now being circulated to every museum in Britain.
And police are hoping to question these two men.
But it's possible the antiques and art may have already been shipped out of the country.
Some antique dealers now believe they're confronting a new form of organised crime.
He believes it funds drug dealing and he wants the Home Office to take it seriously.
Today Central decided to test security at two Oxford institutions targeted by thieves earlier this month.
Keith Whiting is a independent security consultant.
His first tour of inspection was at the Ashmolean museum.
It was completely unannounced and our cameras stayed outside.
Here two men managed to forced open a display cabinet to steal jewellery despite closed-circuit camera surveillance.
And the security expert's verdict: could do better.
He says someone with a screwdriver or wire cutters could take the picture and walk out of the door.
Then it was onto Christ Church Picture Gallery.
Here thieves removed a picture from the wall and police believe they then walked out with it hidden under a long raincoat.
Its security rating today; very poor.
In fact it's wide-open to further thefts.
He says the security people had their attention drawn away from the closed circuit television system when they should be watching.
Tonight Oxford University issued this statement:
But as far as this security expert is concerned, unless Oxford University tightens up on security, and fast, more of its treasures will inevitably be stolen.
A local councillor is claiming tonight that the chemical works which was completely burned out in one of the region's biggest fires for decades, had been a fire risk for some time.
More than twenty four hours after the incident, firemen are still making the building safe, but they've denied suggestions that the chemicals involved were a serious potential hazard.Julie Dolphin reports.
YESTERDAY/BANBURY/Oxfordshire
DAVID COWAN/Cherwell District Councillor
PETER OWEN-SMITH/Oxfordshire Fire Service
Voice over
At its height, 130 firefighters were trying to control the fire at Gilkes Mill in the centre of Banbury.
It began at the Altovar print works when a pipe carrying oils and chemicals at 180 degrees celsius leaked.
The liquid burst into flames and within minutes the whole building was alight.
All 14 people who were working inside escaped unharmed.
But a councillor for the area and former mayor says the building WAS a fire risk.
Ceretainly I'm very concerned that there may be other companies in this town as equally fire hazardous.
Tonight the Health and Safety executive said it was investigating the fire and added that prior to this incident their’ information was that the company didn't use materials subject to the Highly Flammable Liquids and Liquified Petroleum Gases Regulations, which impose controls on the use of highly flammable materials in factories.’
The burnt-out remains of the mill are still in the process of being demolished and fire crews expect to be there for at least another day.
A ramp that made it possible for a disabled woman to get in and out of her home has been demolished by the local council.
Builders had put the ramp in free of charge, but the council said it was too steep.
Now they're asking the woman to pay nine hundred pounds towards the cost of a new one.
Tim Hurst reports..
COLEFORD/Gloucestershire
ROSINA PALMER
NORMAN DAVIS/Director of Housing
FRED PALMER/Husband
Voice over
One small step for the able bodied, but an impossible barrier for Rosina Palmer, confined to a wheelchair at her home at Coleford in Gloucestershire, since an operation last year.
Even more daunting is a flight of 5 steps to her front gate.
When two builders heard Forest of Dean District Council wanted £900 towards the cost of a ramp, they built 3 free of charge.
All but one have been demolished by the council.
Forest of Dean council say the ramps were too steep, it'll cost more than £3,000 to build a better ramp across the Palmers garden and regulations insist the Palmers must make a contribution.
Ideally the Palmers should be rehoused.
The Palmers have been promised a back door ramp to get Mrs Palmer into the garden in case of fire, but no ramp to get her down the 5 garden steps into the street.
The Malvern Hills have provided inspiration for many artists and musicians over the decades.
But one artist is so entranced by their beauty that he's painted nothing else for the last six years.
Now his work is being featured in a special exhibition.
ELIZABETH O'REILLY/Malvern
DAVID PRENTICE/Artist
David Prentice has spent some of the happiest times of his life visiting the Malvern hills.
As he was growing up, he was brought here from his Birmingham home to the hills by his parents and grandparents.
The hills have now become his life.
He's painted them continually for the last 6 years.
They're now the focus of more grown up feelings.
He's concerned about environmental issues and the destruction of the planet he says that's his reason for carrying on working.
He's spent most of his life teaching.
He was the head of fine art at the school of art for 20 years until he gave it all up to paint fulltime.
He hit the headlines when he won the prestigious Singer and Friedlander Sunday Times Watercolour Prize in 1990, with a painting of the Malverns called January Bonfires.
An exhibtion of his work is on at the Midlands Arts Gallery and you can also see his work at the Malvern Festival at the end of May.
He says it is natural for an artist to be concerned with the environment, as he's exposed to it so often when working outside.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Oldest person in Britain dies at 115
FTSE down 29
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-nine point four at twenty-eight, eighty-nine point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-five and up at two marks, forty-one.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The Marchioness of Blandford has been moved to a private hospital as she continues to make a good recovery from a riding accident.
The accident happened almost two weeks ago during a meeting of the Heythrop hunt near Becky Blandford's Oxfordshire home.
Neurosurgeons at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford successfully removed a blood clot from her brain.
She's now been transferred to the nearby private Acland Hospital.
A health service trust has broken new ground in caring for people with Alzheimers disease.
It's teamed up with a charity to start a purpose-built home for sufferers.
The home will be officially opened by the Duchess of Gloucester tomorrow.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Stone
MAY CURTIS/Resident
RON STAKER/Executive Director
PHIL CLARKE/Community Health Trust
Voice over
Sufferers from Alzheimers Disease can't cope at home.
They have failing mental powers and poor memories.
The answer until now has been to put them in geriatric units.
But the Aylesbury Vale Health Authority is pioneering a new approach.
It's made a partnership with a charity, the Brendoncare Foundation, to look after them.
Female speaker
It's wonderful here.
I was on my own at home)
Voice over
May Curtis has Alzheimers.
She's been at centre since February and is 77.
The purpose built centre at Stone Near Aylesbury has round the clock nursing cover.
All 30 residents have either Alzheimers or senile dementia.
Male speaker
It's a completely different environment.
It's a modern purpose built, very low key operation.
We're able to give them the care they need.
Voice over
The health service paid one point eight million pounds for for the building and it's run by the charity.
The bills for the 23 NHS residents are paid between social security and the health service.
7 patients are private.
Male speaker
We're not hiving off our responsibilities.
This is a partnership which works to the benefit of the patient.
Voice over
The health service residents were originally in the now closed St John's Hospital where they lived in wards with up to twenty people.
Now they have their own rooms.
The partnership depends heavily upon the generosity of the charity, but it's seen as the way forward in care for the elderly.
A group of women lumberjacks have held a reunion in the woodland where some of them worked during World War Two.
The female foresters, nicknamed lumberJILLS, played a vital role in the war.
More than three thousand worked in woodland throughout the country to ensure British industry never ran out of timber.
RICHARD BARNETT/Reporting
WESTONBIRT/Gloucestershire
PAT PARKER/Lumberjill
BETTY ANDERSON/Lumberjill
LYNN PRICE/Lumberjill
JOAN THOMAS/Lumberjill
Voice over
To the War office, they were the Women's Timber Corps.
But they soon became affectionately known as the lumberjills, an army of 3,000 women making sure the war effort was never hampered by a lack of timber.
The women did everything the forestry men had done before them, including felling trees for telegraph poles and pitprops.
Today, a dozen veteran lumberjills were reunited 50 years on at Westonbirt Arboretum near Tetbury, where some of them had worked.
They planted a tree to replace one of the hundreds they'd chopped down to help the war effort.
Then the real hard work began; a chance to renew acquantance with a backbreaking two handed saw.
Female speaker
It was hard work but they were happy times.
Voice over
A walk through the arboretum soon turned thoughts to life as a lumberjill half a century ago.
Betty Anderson, has never forgotten the time she spent at Westonbirt.
Female speaker
Despite the war, it was the happiest period of her life.
Voice over
The lumberjills worked long, arduous shifts felling up to 8 trees each a day.
They wore with pride the badge of the timber corps; crossed axes.
Female speaker
Women should never have done such heavy work.
But the timber was needed for the war effort.
Voice over
But even in the darkest days of the war, there was time to laugh, especially over the Government issue underwear.
Female speaker
The underwear was so silly, they posed for a photograph.
Voice over
The Women's Timber Corps always felt they were undervalued.
But today at least, the lumberjills were no longer the forgotten army.
(HARRIET AD LIB BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News…when Irish eyes are smiling.
St Patrick's day, AND Gold Cup week, in true Waterford style.
Welcome back to Central South.
Coming up in a few minutes, the artist who's had a six year love affair with the Malvern Hills.
So fascinated has he become that he's painted nothing else in all that time.
But first racing, and to Cheltenham, for day two of the Gold Cup meeting.Tim Russon is our man at the course 
TIM RUSSON
TONY O'HEHIR/Racing Writer
ANDREW PORTER/Landlord
MICHEAL DONOVAN/Bank Manager
Voice over
WATERFORD/Ireland
JOSH GIFFORD/Winning Trainer
Voice over
In Central News tonight.
Rundown, or closure?
Fears for a rail service afterf a leaked report.
Stuck for clues.
New drive for a lead in garden murder.
And back in the swing.
She's a lumberjack…and she's okay.
Goods Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
Detectives have been stopping and questioning drivers about the murder of a man who was found stabbed in his garden.
So far there's been a poor response to their appeals for information, and they still haven't established a motive for the killing.
HARRIET RYLEY
ROBIN POWELL/Newtown
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
7 days after Richard Miles's death, the police are hoping that passing motorists can provide them with vital clues.
Mr Miles, a 29-year-old panel beater, was found dead in the garden of the home he shared with his parents.
He'd been stabbed.
Detectives admit they haven't made much headway.
No stone was left unturned; officers stopped every single vehicle travelling on the A419 between Newtown and the M5.
There was a price to pay — huge tailbacks in each direction.
Male speaker
I've been here exactly an hour now.
Male speaker
I can't help these people.
Obviously someone's been killed, but I don't know any more than that.
Male speaker
I don't mind the wait — it's all overtime.
Voice over
Richard Miles is known to have used cannabis, but the police say they've no reason to believe his death was drugs-related.
Anyone who may be able to help them in their inquiries is urged to contact Stroud Police Station.
There are fears tonight that the future of the Oxford to Worcester rail line is in doubt.
A leaked British Rail report suggests that the Cotswold line is to be run down.
Campaigners say it's the first step towards closure, but BR says it's actually planning to spend more money on the line, not less.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
KEITH BILL/Save Our Railways
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
PETER LUFF MP/Con Worcester
Voice over
A centuries-old road bridge which is a protected landmark, has been badly damaged by a tractor which smashed through the parapet.
The driver jumped clear as his vehicle fell into the river below.
TIM HURST/Pershore
Pc NORMAN BATHAM/West Mercia police
Voice over
Eckington Bridge, which crosses the River Avon near Pershore in Worcestershire will be closed for at least two days, while temporary repairs are carried out.
A tractor and trailer was being driven across the bridge, when a wheel came off the tractor and it veered through the stone parapet.
Divers were called to attach recovery cables to allow tractor and trailer to be pulled clear of the water.
The driver, from Kempsey near Worcester, had jumped clear and was found by rescue workers.
The bridge, owned and protected by English Heritage, will eventually be rebuilt with the original stones, once they've been recovered from the river bed.
A Formula One racing driver has started court proceedings to recover more than a million dollars from a team which has hit financial trouble.
Ivan Capelli drove for the March team for five seasons, but says he's still owed the money in unpaid wages.
GARETH FURBY/BICESTER
JOHN WATSON/Former Driver
IAN PHILLIPS/Former Managing Director
Voice over
Ivan Capelli claims he hasn't been paid by March F1 since May 1991.
The Italian driver quit later that year, after five seasons with the team.
But today his lawyers applied for the company to be compulsorily wound-up.
The March name has been part of the racing scene for some twenty years, attracting top drivers including Nikki Lauda and James Hunt, and winning three grand prix in the 70s.
But the team hit financial troubles following a buy out by a Japanese company Leyton house.
And since October last year there've been a series of applications at the High Court in London for the company to be wound up.
Several smaller creditors have already been paid off, but the latest demand is huge.
March F1 now has until April 21 to agree payment, or to prepare to fight the case.
Former British grand prix driver John Watson hopes they will survive.
He says there've been stories about a buyer but it hasn't happened yet.
And a former manager at the company hopes the racing industry will rally round.
He says they've done well to keep going.
But the company accepts in effect it has just five weeks to find half a million pounds.
Otherwise the High Court will order the final curtain to fall on one of motorsports most famous names.
A labourer has been crushed to death by a cement lorry.
MIDDLE BARTON/Oxfordshire
He was caught under the lorry wheels on a building site at Holliers Farm near Middle Barton in Oxfordshire.
Health and safety officers have launched an investigation.
A fifteen year old boy has been charged following a crash in which two girls were seriously injured.
MILTON KEYNES
It happened in the Bletchley area of Milton Keynes, when a car crashed into a tree.
The two girls who were travelling in the car were both taken to hospital.
The fifteen year old has been charged with aggravated vehicle taking and a seventeen year old is being questioned by police.
Trail of destruction…police pursue teenage joyrider across three counties.
Free them…relatives call for release of men jailed for murder.
And NHS pledge…
Labour's Robin Cook promises hospital extra cash.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Ch Insp MALCOLM COLLIS/Thames Valley police
Voice over
The stolen Peugeot 505 was chased by police across three counties before finally being stopped on the M-one near Milton Keynes.
The stolen car was driven away from the Thornby Children's Home in Northampton last night by a thirteen-year-old boy with four passengers aged between eleven and fourteen.
It was involved in an accident in Warwickshire and was then followed along the M-6 and down the M-1 through Northamptonshire and then Buckinghamshire.
Police say the car was driven recklessly…
On one occasion, the car drove inside a coned off area of roadworks.
The teenagers were finally stopped near junction 14 of the M1 near Milton Keynes when a police landrover blocked their way.
The stolen car collided with the land rover, bounced off it and then hit another police car.
All three vehicles were extensively damaged…
Miraculously, no-one was hurt.
Police say dealing with such situations presents them with a dilema…between safety and
All five teenagers were arrested and taken in for questioning.
But, Northants police say they can't prosecute because they are under.
A court's been hearing how a four year old girl was found battered and half-starved after her parents locked her up in a bedroom for months on end.
The parents have admitted assault and cruelty.
Now the case has been adjourned for social inquiry reports.
Nick Clark reports.
OXFORD
Voice over
Oxford Crown court heard that the 4 year old girl who weighed only as much as a toddler half her age was found covered in bruises and under nourished.
Police and social workers called to her home in Bretch Hill in Banbury, found her on the floor of a filthy, stinking room, containing soiled sheets.
Her 29 year old father admitted assault, while her mother, aged 25 admitted cruelty.
A campaign has been launched to clear the names of two men serving life sentences for murdering a drug dealer.
Relatives of the men say they were wrongly convicted, as they had acted in self defence.
Clare Lafferty reports.
BIRMINGHAM
JANUARY 1989/Gloucester
GEORGE MILLS/Brother
Voice over
Campaigners gathered outside Winson Green prison in Birmingham to protest against the convictions of the two Gloucester men.
Tony Poole and Gary Mills are both serving life sentences for the murder, three years ago of Hensley Wiltshire.
Wiltshire, a known drug dealer had been stabbed in a fight at a flat in Conduit Street in Gloucester.
He was taken to the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital, but then discharged into police custody.
He collapsed in a police cell and died later in hospital.
Relatives of Poole and Mills say the two men were acting in self defence.
They want the case reopened.
No one from Gloucester police force was available to be interviewed about the case.
But a spokesman said that all the claims the family are making had been aired at the mens trial two years ago and rejected by the jury.
A man charged with the murder of his ten-year-old daughter has been sent for trial at Crown Court.
Unions representing Rover car workers have recommended acceptance of radical Japanese-style working practices.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
If accepted the package will affect workers at Rover plants in Swindon and Cowley.
For some staff it would guarantee jobs for life, and it would mean more flexible shop floor working as well as the end to clocking on.
And there would be no more compulsory redundancies.
The workforce will be balloted on the issue next month.
The number of recorded complaints against Thames Valley Police officers has fallen by (13) thirteen per cent over a year.
There were (674) six hundred and seventy four complaints in (19-91) nineteen ninety-one, compared with (734) seven hundred and thirty four in (19-90) nineteen-ninety.
OXFORD
Twenty eight complaints were upheld.
One officer was forced to resign, another had wages cut and a third was fined.
Football…
Swindon Town ended their dismal run of four defeats last night with a two nil win over Tranmere.
The result revives Swindon's flagging hopes of reaching the Second Division promotion playoffs.
Mark Kiff reports.
Voice over
There was no doubting Swindon's committment at the County Ground last night.
Dave Mitchell typifying Town's efforts to get back to winning ways.
Tranmere, just a point behind Swindon, were also chasing victory hard.
Jim Harvey's shot stretching Digby to the limit.
Next it was Nixon's turn in the Tranmere goal to pull off a spectacular save from Mitchell.
The match was dubbed the Battle of the Goal Kings: 36 goal Aldridge against 29 goal Shearer.
Deadly Duncan was the winner, striking the first blow in the 20th minute.
Battle lines were drawn and straight after the kick off Aldridge almost struck back; Digby to the rescue.
But it was Shearer, three minutes into the second half, who drew blood; a superb header for his 31st goal of the season.
Swindon thought they should have had a penalty.
Big Daddy would have been proud of this tackle on Dave Mitchell, but the ref waved play on.
Aldridge had one last chance to strike for Tranmere, but could only find the post.
Shearer last night's goal king and Swindon back on the promotion trail.
The league table shows they've got a lot of work to do though.
They're still only tenth, despite last night's three points.
On Saturday they play Southend at the County Ground, a game they must win.
A new musical has opened in the West End…six months after its succesful launch in the region.
’ Moby Dick’is the latest production from Cameron Mackintosh who brought us such favourites as’Cats’,’Miss Saigon’and’Phantom of the Opera’.
The first night audience was so impressed with Moby Dick, it gave it a standing ovation.
And, as Harriet Ryley reports, Shirley Bassey was so impressed she's asked to record one of the show's songs.
SEPTEMBER 1991 OXFORD
CAMERON MACKINTOSH Producer
TONY MONOPOLY Captain Ahab
JACK TINKER Critic
SUSAN GEORGE SIMON McCORKINDALE
TOM ROBINSON Singer
Voice over
A huge illuminated whale has taken up residence just off Piccadilly —’ Moby Dick’is in town.
The show is a crazy tongue-in-cheek cocktail of Rocky Horror Show meets St.Trinian's, where a group of school-girls decide to stage Herman Melville's classic’ Moby Dick’.
But however mixed up the plot may be, there's no doubting the strength of the music:
Reactions from the critics this morning have been mixed.
The Guardian described Moby Dick as a’ beached whale’— but the Daily Mail's Jack Tinker was impressed:
Shirley Bassey was also there.
She liked it so much she wants to record one of the songs,’ Can't Keep Out The Night’.
As she left for the first night party, she just had time to tell us what she thought:
And that was certainly what the audience seemed to think of’ Moby Dick’at the curtain call, with a standing ovation and some joining is as the cast took a bow, it certainly is a whale of a tale.
Major vows more people power
The Conservatives have presented their Election manifesto with Mr. Major promising more power for the people and moves towards a lower tax rate.
Kinnock offers new start under Labour
Labour's manifesto was also launched and Mr. Kinnock promised to abolish the Community Charge immediately and replace it with a modified version of the old rates system based on ability to pay.
Ashdown says neither manifesto offers hope
On a tour of Essex, the Liberal Democrat leader, Mr. Ashdown, said neither the Labour nor the Conservative manifestos offers any hope for the future.
De Klerk delighted by majority vote for reform
South Africa's President De Klerk has welcomed victory in his referendum to end apartheid.
Jihad group bombs Israeli embassy
The pro-Iranian Islamic Jihad group has admitted it carried out the bomb attack on the Israeli embassy in Buenos Aires in which eleven people died.
High street sales rise
At home, high street sales have risen modestly for the second month running.
FTSE down 26
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-six point five at twenty-four, sixty-four point seven.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-three and down at two marks, eighty-five.
And finally, some good news now for all you Morse fans.
Work has started re-building one of the region's most well-known public houses.
28 NOVEMBER 1991/LOWER WOLVERCOTE/Oxfordshire
The Trout Inn at Lower Wolvercote near Oxford was severely damaged by fire last November.
The kitchen and first floor roof were virtually destoyed.
The pub has been featured in an episode of Central Television's beer-loving detective Inspector Morse.
It's hoped the Inn will be fully reopened in May.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
The shadow health secretary Robin Cook has launched Labour's campaign on the NHS with a visit to a hospital where some patients have to wait up to two years to see a consultant.
The hospital is asking for more money to clear the backlog.
Mr Cook pledged Labour would try to help if it wins the election.
This report from Gareth Furby.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
HUGH BARNET/Community Health Council
DAVID POKORA/Princess Margaret Hospital
ROBIN COOK/Shadow Health Secretary
Voice over
Labour knows to win power it must take Swindon from the Conservatives.
It needs a swing of nearly 4%.
If the latest opinion polls are to be believed, Swindon will return a Labour MP.
But today the man who wants to be next the Health Secretary did his bit for the local campaign.
Labour's Robin Cook visited the Princess Margaret Hospital.
Health Authority figures show some outpatients who've been referred by their GP to an orthapedic consultant there, may have to wait more than 2 years just to be seen.
And if the consultant decides an operation is required, as routine patients, they could face another wait of up to a further 2 years.
He says it is not in the interest of patients to wait so long to see a consultant.
The hospital is asking for an extra £350,000 to fund another orthapedic consultant and operations to clear the backlog.
He says they want more consultants to increase the work they do.
And today Robin Cook pledged that Labour would try to fund the post out of an extra £1 billion it says it will spend on the NHS.
He says it is not acceptable to have to wait for 2 years.
Robin Cook left promising more money.
But he knows if Swindon doesn't fall to Labour, he won't have the power to hand it out anyway.
Too many homes are being built in the countryside, according to conservationists.
Hundreds of thousands of acres have been swallowed up by developers since (1985) nineteen eighty five.
Instead, green campaigners want to see old industrial land used for the housing estates of the future.
Tim Hurst reports.
LECKHAMPTON/Gloucestershire
SWINDON/Wiltshire
HUGH DENHAM/Council for the Protection of/Rural England
GERRY WALKER/Cheltenham Council
STEVEN REEVES/Tarmac Properties
DAVID KENT/Thamesdown Council
Voice over
A housing development in what was green belt between Cheltenham and Gloucester may be an attractive place to live, but conservationists say it should never happen again.
New development in Swindon, on industrial land once occupied by old railway works, is an example of where the new estates of the future should be built.
Planners agree that that estate should never have been built.
They said no, but were overuled by the Government.
Planners and conservationists alike agree that the building of 600 homes at the old railway works in Swindon makes good use of the site, but such land is not always available.
All planning authorities are now drawing up rules to prevent new homes being built in surrounding countryside, so what will happen in Swindon when existing sites are exhausted?
Conservationists are fighting for tighter controls because new Government figures show that 38,000 acres of open countryside were swallowed up by developers in England, every year, for the 5 years between 1985 and 1990.
In part two: Horse race horror…top woman jockey crushed in fall.
Double strike…
Shearer puts Swindon on the winning trail.
And from Oxford to the West End…the musical that's a whale of a hit.
A top woman jockey is critically ill after being crushed by her horse in a National Hunt race.
Twenty two year old Pip Nash is being treated in intensive care for severe head injuries after the fall at Nottingham race track.
Nick Clark reports.
Pictures from SIS
SHEILA NASH/Mother-in-Law
031892programme
Voice over
Wantage jockey, Pip Nash had been leading the field in yesterday's Soar Handicap Hurdle, when her horse, Stone Madness fell at the tenth and rolled on top of her.
Unconscious Pip was taken to the Queen's Medical Centre in Nottingham where she's still being treated for head injuries.
Her husband, trainer Chris Nash rushed to her bedside after seeing the accident on television.
Last night the outlook was grim, but at the couple's stables near Wantage today, there's better news.
Although Pip's not yet out of danger her condition has improved.
Female speaker
She is better but not out of danger.
Voice over
As an amateur jockey Pip has had eight National hunt wins this season and had been challenging for the Ladies Championship.
She's had 13 wins in her National hunt career.
Sheila Nash also saw the accident on television.
Female speaker
She'd been in front, but then the horse fell and seemed to land on top of her.
Hopefully she'll bounce back soon.
Voice over
Pip is the latest of a number of women jump jockeys to be seriously injured on the race-course.
Jessica Charles-Jones also from Wantage has been in a wheelchair since an accident in 1988.
The racing world will be praying Pip Nash makes a full and speedy recovery.
(Tim Russon to ad lib)
IVOR GRIFFITHS/Orient Air
TERRY HARDING/Businessman
Voice over
The Irish invasion of Cheltenham takes a variety of routes.
A new airline operating between the heart of racing country over there and the top National Hunt Festival in the world over here believes getting there really is half the fun.
Orient Air's 7-seater, Piper Navajo flies twice daily between Waterford and Staverton.
Male speaker
Gold Cup week is always a good week for Cheltenham.
With an airport between Cheltenham and Gloucester running a scheduled service to Southern ireland for businessmen it's got to be a bit of a bonus, backed up by the rugby at the weekend so that does help.
Voice over
It's more like an air taxi than an airliner.
Passengers check in up to ten minutes before departure and enjoy the view.
But apart from racing, rugby and golf fans businessmen are Orient Air's staple.
Male speaker
Luxury, luxury, pure luxury.
The ferry is no comparison with waiting in the terminals it's a nightmare.
This is like Royalty here.
Voice over
This is Orient Air's first year in operation.
They hope when the 1994 festival comes round they'll have become a part of Cheltenham tradition.
JOHN YEADON Winning Owner
RICHARD DUNWOODY Runner-up
Voice over
JACQUIE BEDDOW
BBC Board of Govenors back Birt
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten point two at twenty-eight, seventy-nine point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-seven and up at two marks, forty-four.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Scientists have made a breakthrough in the fight against the genetic disease Cystic Fibrosis.
The new technique chemically changes the gene which causes the illness.
It could both prolong and improve the quality of the lives of sufferers.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Abingdon
SALLY HIRST/Mother
PAUL HIRST/Cystic Fibrosis Sufferer
Prof CHRIS HIGGINS/Cystic Fibrosis Researcher
Dr JEREMY HULL/Paediatrician
A Cystic Fibrosis sufferer faces a lifetime of constant physiotherapy to keep their lungs clear of mucous.
They frequently suffer chest infections and have a low life expectancy.
Paul Hirst, at 16, has known no other life.
The illness is caused by a defective gene and can affect all parts of the body, but the lungs are most vulnerable.
Female speaker
Whe he has a chest infection you can hear him wheezing from the next room
Male speaker
Every day I have to go through some sort of treatment.
It's a part of my life
Voice over
Now Cystic Fibrosis researchers in Oxford have come up with a potential cure.
Now they think they can cure the defective gene in the lungs.
Male speaker
gene therapy is a new technology.
We're now seeking permission to try this on humans
Tests have already been carried out on mice in Cambridge.
The results were analised at the Institute of Molecular Medicine in Oxford.
They found that by introducing a normal gene to substitute the defective one, the mice recovered from the illness.
The normal gene is preserved in tissue culture at the laboratory, tests are due to take place on humans in the Oxford area in the next few months.
The idea is that they'll breathe in the gene from an inhaler and it will attach to the walls of cells in the lungs.
There it will take over from the defective gene and form the right combination to allow fluids to leave the cells normally instead of collecting into a mucous.
Male speaker
it will be great for me, it will change my life
Not every cell is affected, but enough for the lungs to work efficiently.
Patients would still need to be treated every month.
Male speaker
This has been tested on animals on not humans so we don't know if it will work.
But if it does it will prolong the life of a sufferer
The technique is a long way from being proved but it's given hope to thousands
An entire town centre has been put under surveillance by nearly a hundred video cameras, in the battle against crime.
The system is said to be the most advanced in the world, and has already led to several arrests.
But there are fears in some quarters that it could infringe personal liberties.
Security video/GRAEME BOWD/Northampton
JOHN DICKIE/Council Leader
DAVID O'DOWD/Northants Chief Constable
Voice over
This man is about to steal the hubcaps from a car parked in Northampton town centre.
He takes out a screwdriver unaware that he has an audience.
Last year the town recorded 2,500 vehicle offences, many of them from central car parks.
In this case the offender was caught within minutes, his movements watched from a central control room a mile away.
Northampton claims to have the most advanced video system in the world.
It's ninety six cameras are remotely driven.
All the main streets are covered around the clock.
There's also a video record of every car using the main car parks.
The council say that video evidence which led to the arrest of suspects in the James Bulger case has proved the value of systems like this.
Male speaker
The events in Liverpool highlight what can happen at any time and I think a systerm like this gives people security.
Voice over
The scheme was officially launched by Earl Spencer who said his own car had twice been broken into in Northampton.
The organisation Liberty has expressed concern that such widespread surveillance could infringe personal liberties.
But police say the public have nothing to fear.
Male speaker
We don't wish to be obtrusive.
We are talking about people who are commiting acts of crime or disorder.
We will only use the evidence in relation to criminal matters.
Voice over
Most local people seem to agree.
’ As long as the police are doing their job I am all for it.’
’ We had a woman raped near us.
I think it is a brilliant idea.’
’ It is an infringement but I can see the need for it.’
The the scheme does seem to be working.
Only last night three men were seen breaking into a car.
They were later arrested.
(HARRIET AD LIB BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central South.
A flying start.
The little airline doing big business with the Irish for Cheltenham.
Plus, a flying finish.
Another Golden Year for the Gold Cup.
Welcome back to Central South, on the final and most important day of the Cheltenham Racing Festival.
And after a sparkling three days of racing, the Gold Cup itself provided a dramatic climax to the week.
Tim Russon was there.
TIM RUSSON
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Racecourse Director
TIMOTHY MATTOX/Washington DC
ANDREE CYPRES/Breeder of The Fellow
TERRY BIDDLECOMBE
Voice over
The Education Secretary has been in the region lending his weight to the Conservative campaign, and denying that the Government was to blame for school underfunding.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
WILLIAM ARMIGER/Headmaster/Crypt School
DAVID ABBOT/Headteacher/Pittville School
KENNETH CLARKE/Education Secretary
ANDREW SMITH/Labour Policy Spokesman
Voice over
The Education Secretary was due to visit a school today.
Instead he stayed on at a factory.
But his aides insisted he wasn't dodging the issue.
There just wasn't time for a school visit.
He was due at the Crypt School in Gloucester, an example of the apparent success of Government policy.
It's opting out of local authority control.
He says it's not elitist.
They say it should meen more financial control.
But for Pitville School in Cheltenham isn't opting out.
Gloucestershire County Council still pays the bills.
And it fears spending could soon be capped by the Government.
A school librarian's already been made redunant.
And several teaching posts may also go.
Even the school swimming could be drained because there's not enough money to heat it.
He says they may have to stop teaching some subjects.
They say their education will suffer.
But today the Education Secretary said the County Council was to blame and not the Government.
He says Gloucestershire County Council has been given more money.
And the Liberal Democrats
