The families of British soldiers killed by the American airforce in the Gulf War have won the first stage of their bid to find out what really happened.
The Coroner who will hold the inquest into the deaths, has agreed to sit with a jury…which relatives and their lawyers claim is vital.
Kim Barnes reports.
8 MARCH 1991/RAF BRIZE NORTON/Oxfordshire
OXFORD
TAMMY GROVES/Families' Solicitor
Voice over
9 British soldiers died in so-called friendly fire.
They were in a tank like this when they were fired on by American A10 tankbusters.
The bodies of the soldiers from the Royal Regiment of fusiliers were flown into RAF Brize Norton last March.
This means their inquests must be heard in Oxfordshire.
Now relatives want to find out exactly what went wrong.
Today lawyers acting for 6 families asked the Oxford coroner to hear the inquest into their deaths with a jury.
It was this argument which convinced the coroner, Nicholas Gardiner.
He said we are dealing with a conflict of evidence between two friendly countries but even friends can disagree.
The full inquests will be heard in May at the earliest, with families hoping at last to discover the truth.
A test pioneered by an Oxfordshire firm has convicted and jailed a man for raping and killing a schoolgirl thirteen years ago.
The technique hadn't been discovered when the crime was committed.
Although police suspected the man, they had no proof until now, as Harriet Ryley reports.
1978/BIRMINGHAM
Det Ch Insp ERNIE ROBINSON/West Midlands Police
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
PHILIP WEBB/Cellmark
Voice over
Candice Williams disappeared near her home in Birmingham in July nineteen seventy-eight.
She was later in a block of flats — she'd been raped, and strangled.
Yesterday Patrick Hassett was jailed for life for her murder.
He was a suspect at the time, but it took a scientific breakthrough ten years later, to convict him — a DNA profile test which was pioneered by Cellmark Diagnostics in Abingdon in Oxfordshire:
The DNA test gives an analysis of genetic make-up — by testing hair or body fluid samples.
The resulting pattern can be checked against another sample to give conclusive proof, as in this example of three suspects in a rape case.
Cellmark confirmed the Home Office analysis and Hassett was convicted.
The company is now working on a new test — Digital DNA typing, which gives an even more accurate result.
This new technique will revolutionise police computer records.
Digital DNA typing will be able to test even older, smaller and less well preserved samples.
The FBI is already trying out the test and the United States army has expressed an interest in being able to have a genetic record of all its personnel.
Here, the Metropolitan police are planning to feed all genetic records of known sex offenders into their computers next year — this will speed up considerably the time in which they can track down attackers.
In part two:Pulling out: Nuclear plant gives up its power source.
And speaking out: After all the misery, it's Cowley…the musical.
On the street.
Baby made homeless in row over housing benefit.
One step forward.New hope for truth about the victims of friendly fire.
And proof at last: Genetic testing solves a murder, thirteen years on.
GOOD EVENING:
ANNE DAWSON
The house where they were living has been re-possessed because the owner couldn't keep up with the mortgage payments.
WESLEY SMITH
In turn, the owner is blaming her local council for not paying out the full amount of housing benefits to her tenants.
It was that money that she used to pay the mortgage.
But the council insists that it has paid.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
TRICIA WADSWORTH/Tenant
LAURETTA BIRT-SMITH/Landlady
KEITH BIRTLES/Gloucester City Councill
SEAN DUFFIELD/Tenant
Voice over
Out on the streets; tenants who were on the receiving end of an early morning call from the bailiffs.
Their belongings are stacked unceremoniously in the garden, the locks on the doors changed.
The house they lived in has been repossesed by a finance company, making 10 people and a baby homeless.
She says that the bailiffs came very early and told everyone they had 10 minutes to get out.
The owner of the house and landlady, Lauretta Birt-Smith claims that Gloucester City Council's housing benefits department has delayed payments to her tenants.
This means they can't pay her any rent, so she can't pay the mortgage.
That's led to her finance company running out of patience and after several warnings, repossessing the house.
She says she wants the house back, the council should pay the benefits owed to her tenants.
A spokesman for Gloucester city council's housing benifits office says Mrs Bert-Smiths tennants have been paid:
He says that a substantial amount has been paid in benefits, it's not true to say that they owe the tenants a large amount of arrears.
But the tenants don't want to leave Mrs Birt-Smith, who they say makes them feel like family.
He says she's like a mother to them, if they need anything she always helps out.
A spokesman for Swift securities, the finance company which repossessed the house, says they deeply regret having to enforce the eviction, but it was the only course of action left open to them.
The last unemployment figures before the General Election have shown a sharp rise across the region.
More than two and a half thousand people lost their jobs last month, and another sixty jobs have gone today.
Nick Clark reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
STROUD/Gloucestershire
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Voice over
42 jobs are to go with the closure of accountacy firm KPMG Peat Marwick in Cheltenham.
The work will be transferred to Birmingham.
And book supplier D and P Seabrook is shutting its depot in Stroud with the loss of twenty one jobs, as part of an efficiency drive.
The losses coincide with figures showing a sharp rise in unemployment in the region.In Wiltshire, twenty thousand, six hundred and eighty seven people are now out of work.
In Gloucestershire, the total is 19,409.
In Buckinghamshire, it's 22,048.
In Oxfordshire, it's 18,128 people.
And in Hereford and Worcester, 25,158 people are out of work.
But there's better news in Swindon.
200 jobs will be created at the new headquarters of the Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of England, in the former rail works at Churchward.
And another 120 jobs may be created at EMI in Greenbridge.
The company, which makes compact discs, wants to start making cassettes.
Many of the recent job losses have come in the defence industry, largely because of the end of the Cold War.
SWINDON
Dr PETER SOUTHWOOD Defence Consultant
TOM KING Defence Secretary
Voice over
If Tom King was embarrased about today's 40,000 unemployment jump he didn't show it in Swindon.
This was a cabinet minister on the stump, pressing the flesh and banging the drum for Tory MP Simon Coombs defending a less than 5,000 majority.
But it was also the day an independent report suggested his defence cuts had led to far greater job losses than expected, especially in defence dependent areas like Gloucestershire where thousands have been made redundant from companies like Dowties and Smiths Industries.
Male speaker
the defence industry is suffering because no one knows what the governmentwants to spend
Voice over
The peace dividend has affected the whole region with airfield closures, the merging of the Gloucestershire Regiment, and reduction in contract work.
Nevertheless Mr King says it would be much worse under Labour.
Male speaker
The Government is still the biggest customer forBritish industry and has recently placed many defence orders.
It will continue to do so and is far more committed than either of the other parties
Voice over
The same day has seen unemployment figures increase to 2,647,000.
Male speaker
The figures are sad but we are in the middle of a recession
Voice over
The jobless figures were the first economic indicators to come out during the campaign, there are many more before election day.
Official confirmation of Royal separation
On the sixth anniversary of their engagement, Buckingham Palace has confirmed that the Duke and Duchess of York are to separate.
Duke and Duchess keep to routine
The Duke and Duchess went about their normal business and will continue to live under the same roof until the separation details are finalised.
Unemployment rises for 22nd consecutive month
The number of people unemployed has risen for the twenty-second month in a row, the figure now stands at two point six, five million.
Kinnock calls figures’ a terrible price’
Mr. Kinnock called the figures,’ a terrible price the country is paying for the Tory Government.’
Ashdown describes jobless total as’ devastating’
Mr. Ashdown called the rise,’ devastating’.
Major sees hope for improvement
Mr. Major said there were encouraging signs that the situation would improve.
FTSE up 2
The hundred shares index closed up down two point nine at twenty-four, sixty-seven point six.
The pound is down nearly two cents at one dollar, seventy-one and up at two marks, eighty-six.
(ad lib)
RUNS=0:10
Welcome back: another stage in the dismantling of Britain's first redundant nuclear power station has been achieved.
After three years' work the last consignment of nuclear fuel rods has been removed.
But other radioactive material will remain at the site until the (22nd) twenty-second century.
Mark Kiff reports.
BERKELEY/Gloucestershire
BRIAN GORNALL/Nuclear Electric
Voice over
The early 1960s: workmen prepare the site and buildings for Europe's first commercial nuclear power station.
Berkeley in Gloucestershire is about to appear on the nuclear map.
Today, this lorry load of spent nuclear rods represents history in the making again.
It's the last consignment of fuel to leave the site.
Berkeley has now become the first nuclear power station in Britain to have all its spent fuel removed.
The de-commissioning of the plant began in 1989.
It's taken nearly three years to complete de-fuelling.
But the operation lasted less time than thought and generated large savings for Nuclear Electric.
Male speaker
It's taken 14 weeks less than planned.
We've learnt a lot of lessons, which will be useful in the future.
Voice over
The company says more than 99.9 percent of Berkeley's radioactive material has now been removed.
Most of it in the form of these uranium rods.
But the power station will remain radioactive for decades to come.
Male speaker
There is still radioactivity at the site.
But it's well encased in the main reactors behind concrete.
Voice over
The station's 240 remaining staff saw off the last of the nuclear fuel elements.
The rods are on their way to Sellafield where the uranium will be recovered for future use.
Worcestershire's cricket team is making history by flying to Johannesburg to help the reunion of South African cricket with the rest of the world.
With them is Basil D'Oliveira, whose inclusion in an England squad originally led to sporting isolation for South Africa.
This report from Bob Hall.
KENT DURR/South African Ambassador
BASIL D'OLIVEIRA
The announcement last summer that South Africa 's twenty one year cricketing exile was over was in sporting terms an event of major proportions and significance.
Back in the late 60s and early 70s, Basil d'Oliveria had with some fine batting displays caught the eyes of England selector and displayed his talents on a world stage with the former Gloucester and Worcester bat, Tom Graveney given the mighty West Indians some headaches.
But when it came to touring South Africa, D'Oliveria became persona , officially labelled a Cape Coloured by South African authorities they said his inclusion in an England party contravened their apartheid laws.
England came home South Africa was kicked out of World Cricket.
But even then, D'Oliveria was optimistic.
Many feel that so called rebel tours such as the one lead by Mike Gatting in 1982 did more harm than good.Cricketers were accused of sacrificing sport and principles chasing sizeable pay cheques and on their return were unrepentant even when they got three year bans from international cricket.
This lunchtime, the South African Embassy in London's Trafalgar Square hosted a reception to give the Worcester party a suitable send off.
They 'll play five limited over matches in and around Pretoria all of which is music to the ears of the South Africans.
Cricket's world cup in Australia and the England A tour to the West Indies has denuded Worcester's squad but even without the likes of Hick, Rhodes Illingworth, there's no way South Africa feels its being short changed.
A car factory and its surrounding community are featuring in a play being performed at one of the region's theatres.
The writers spent a year talking to workers and visiting the factory to make sure their production was as authentic as possible.
Debbie Kelly reports.
OXFORD
EUTON DALEY/Pegasus Theatre
JUDY KENDALL/Co-Writer
Voice over
Rebuilding Jerusalem…a play about a car works…its influence on the community and the effects of the gradual closure of parts of it.
A mile away is the subject of their production…
Rover's Cowley works which has dominated this area of Oxford for decades…the play's writers talked to current and former workers.
he says, They all wanted to reminisce.
Once they began talking about their lives and history they had a lot to offer.
They talked about the happy and sad times.
All the actors are local people but the company wouldn't allow anyone from the works was to take part…she says, It was very disappointing initially but in some ways that makes it more important that we should go ahead with the project.
she says, Some of the lines in the play are very accurate.
We talk about the Japanese work practises which is exactly what is going on now.
Generations of the same familyes have worked at Cowley, in recent years the numbers employed have declined, two of the works are due to close he says, The opening of Act 2 is a song which dela swith the lethargy that is seeping in and coming to terms with being out of work.
It places it into a context of back in the 1930's when people would gather early in the morning and wait for the foreman to come along and pick out people who look suitable for work that day.
There is a lot of provocative images and statements that are made that we want people to challenge.
Welcome back: Still to come on Central South…the problems encountered by a group of abseilers when they tackled a six hundred foot power station chimney.
But first, swapping a week in the sunshine for much colder climes, here's Tim Russon with the sport.
TIM RUSSON
STEVE WHITE/Swindon Town
CHANTELLE GODDARD/Coach
RACHEL BRADRIDGE/England Champion
LEE BENFIELD/Slalom Ski Team
Voice over
Hello there…after all the excitement of Cheltenham we've come to the ski slopes today and we're still in England…where all will be revealed later…first lets catch up withe all the football news in our weekly paradeYou can't win em all…
Swindon Town's run of success nearly came to a stop at Luton on Wednesday night…you must have heard that favourite football cliche about there never being an easy game…it was one of those for Town…they missed Glenn Hoddle's influence and never settled against a Luton side that need the points just as badly to save themselves from relegation…
Luton had the best of the chances…should have scored at least one…thankfully Swindon managed to escape with a point…
you can see them on Sunday they're live on the Central Match…its Derby away at the Baseball Ground…
County are one of only two sides that have put four goals past Town this season…but when they lost just before Christmas they were going through their worst patch of the season…
they've been flying since then and last week's win over league leaders Newcastle was proof to all that Town are in promotion form
Steve White of Swindon says they've still got some tough teams to play but they are in good form and if they don't get into the play-offs it will be their fault
STING
Team news Glenn Hoddle is having a fitness check tomorrow…but there could be a call up for former England winger Brian Marwood who's on trial with the club…transfer speculation is linking Ross Maclaren with West Brom…its the dealine next week so watch this space…
on form Swindon are top dogs…they've only lost one game in two months…but Derby have the power to beat anyone…
five games…five defeats…one goal…that's Oxford's sorry story…over the last few weeks…their last win was at Wolves a month ago…the million pound man Joey Beauchamp hit the winner…
John Durnin's back in the team to play at Peterborough tomorrow…he's joint top scorer with eleven but hasn't hit the back of the net since Christmas…
STING
Oxford have to make changes…skipper Andy Melville wins a recall with darren Jackson out for the rest of the season…and there's a place too for Mickey Lewis with Jim Magilton injured…
the form book offers quite a contrast…
Peterborough are jogging along in midtable while United are slipping down…
into the third division and we're calling all Hereford fans…your team needs you…
United are just one point and one place off the bottom…its Gillingham at home tomorrow and that's a game they've got to win…so go and give them a cheer
STING
the full squad is on standby…will there be changes…
Steve Devine was on the bench last week as was Chris Fry and they're both pushing hard for recalls…
goal of the week…its the one scored against oxford at the manor last saturday by Southend's Stan Collymore…an unstoppable winner…
The football action on Central this weekend there's goals extra tomorrow tea-time and then the Central match live Derby v Swindon on Sunday…what else is going on here's our action round up…
One match missing this weekend is Gloucester's game against Cardiff at Kingsholm…its been postponed…the Welsh side have cried off with injuries and international call-ups…still plenty of rugby to see though…there's the National schools sevens at Iffley road in Oxford tomorrow and then on Sunday down the road in Marston there's a mini rugby festival for the youngsters…
the motor racing season gets into gear at Silverstone this weekend…with formula three action and saloon car racing on sunday…
the british rally championship gets going too…round one is in Wales…
Steve Bennett from Ross on Wye…and Kevin Williams from Herefordshire will be leading the Central South challenge
after horseracing's big festival we've got Greyhounds gala event this Saturday…six dogs will be racing in the pall mall final at Oxford's Cowley Stadium…five thousand pounds to the winner…its a good night…
one man who's already in the money…thankfully…is Olympic rower Steve Redgrave from Buckinghamshire…he's got a forty thousand pounds sponsorship deal with the Port of London to help him train for the next Olympics…solid gold…
there's rowing this weekend at henley…its the womens boat race…
Oxford against cambridge they take to the River at two
and back on winning form today jockey Richard Dunwoody two winners at Wolverhampton…they'll be celebrating at the Plough pub at Ford in Gloucestershire tonight…
Formal Invitation which took the 3; 40 is their horse
Its stopped snowing here but the temperature is still minus three and we're going out on the slopes now to join the Gloucester slalom ski-racing team
The Gloucester ski racing team are out on the slopes training all winter…except this time we're not high up in the Alps but right here in England in Telford in shropshire…this is artificial snow…its the only slope of its kind in the country…and to save money and time our young racers are coming here to train…
Chantelle Goddard the coach says it's nearly like snow…a bit hard but it gives the youngsters an ideal opportunity to train…
Most of her team have been trained on plastic slopes…
Gloucester's slalom racing team took to the slopes for the first in August coach Chantelle is a former all England champion
Chantelle says that the Gloucester area has lots of good young skiers and they weren't being given a chance so she formed the club and the response has been overwhelming…they survive thanks to parents but they are hoping to find a sponsor…it's not like a football team or tennis club because they have British champions
and one of those is sixteen year old Rachel Bradridge from Gloucester…she's the all england junior champion and is reckoned good enough to be a future olmpyic skier
rachel says she learnt to ski with Chantelle at Gloucester five years ago…she has been out to the snow a few times this season and to be good you have to be able to get out there but this slope is good…and almost like the real thing
as for the rest of the squad they're enjoying the english snow…
Lee Benfield says he's never skied on snow before but he's enjoying this and is looking forward to having a go on the real thing
how they make artificial snow is a secret…what's it like see for yourself…
here we are articifial snow it even makes snowballs…hope you've enjoyed our ski-ing this afternoon next week we're out on the River Thames for the Boat race
A top surgeon says the manufacturers of replacement hip and knee joints are making large profits at the expense of the Health Service.
He claims that doctors are bombarded with new and more expensive joints each year with no proof that they're any better than the cheap ones.
Now there are calls for rigorous tests to be introduced.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
CHRISTOPHER BULSTRODE/Surgeon
Voice over
These hip replacements could have cost anything from £200 to £1,500 each, but they've got one thing in common.
They've all failed.
A top Oxford orthopaedic surgeon says it takes up to ten years to measure the success of a joint, but the maunfacturers come up with new, improved versions each year.
With 40,000 hip replacements a year, making joints is big business, now mostly done by multi-nationals companies.
But no-one can predict how new joints will last.
Now there are calls for tough testing, like those enforced on new drugs.
The Dept of Health says’ we are aware of the problem and we've been pressing the medical profession to do something about it for some time.
We want improved guidelines.’
But surgeons say spiralling costs are forcing a slow down in surgery and its claimed patients are paying the price.
A one million pound restoration of an ancient abbey has come just in time to prevent part of the building collapsing.
Experts say a forty foot crack in a medieval transept wall could have led to disaster.
They're now using concrete joists to make it safe.
RICHARD BARNETT/Pershore
HOWARD DAWES/Pershore Abbey Appeal
OLIVER WEBB/Stonemason
Rev MICHAEL TRISTRAM/Vicar of Pershore
Voice over
The 40ft long deep crack in the wall of Pershore Abbey's south transept can still be clearly seen, although it's now been filled with cement.
It's the most obvious sign of the serious defects that need urgent attention.
On the outside of the same part of the Abbey, workers are busy renovating the exterior wall.
Experts say this whole section of the ancient Abbey was in imminent danger of collapse.
And a £1 million restoration fund has already raised £400,000 for vital repairs.
Male speaker
The wall was not tied in to the end gables.
Now it has been made safe.
Voice over
To make the building safe, concrete joists will tie the south transept wall to the massive main tower pillars.
That's the biggest and most urgent task facing the restorers, a company from Hay on Wye.
But they'll also have to replace some of the exterior stonework, badly weathered by hundreds of years of wind, rain and frost.
Stonemason, Oliver Webb is one of the team using their skills to renew the building.
He says the tools of the trade have changed little in more than a 1,000 years.
Male speaker
Little has changed since the days of the Egyptians.
Voice over
The work will take around 15 months to complete, but the Vicar says they're trying not to let it disrupt life at the Abbey.
Male speaker
The Abbey has a wonderful atmosphere.
Everyone who uses it has been very patient.
Voice over
The original north transept of Pershore Abbey collapsed in the 1680s and was never rebuilt.
Today's guardians of the Abbey are just thankful the south transept hasn't suffered a similar fate.
(GARGY AD LIB BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central South.
It's Desert Orchid versus Red Rum.
The racing clash of the century, but nobody even breaks into a canter.
Plus, now he knows how Santa feels.The airman who got stuck up the chimney.
In Central News tonight.
Frozen to death.
Gold Cup punter found dead after drinking spree.
Are they evading tax?
Inquiry into hunts which deal in animal skins.
And a little tied up…the abseiler with a knotty problem.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
GARGY PATEL
The man's partly-clothed body was found by a school caretaker early this morning.
At first the police treated his death as suspicious, but a post mortem has now revealed he died from hypothermia.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
PETE HILL/Caretaker
Chief Insp BILL GASKINS/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
The body was found in the playing field of Pittville School in Cheltenham, less than a quarter of a mile from the Gold Cup racecourse.
The school grounds had been used as a car park during yesterday's race meeting.
A Home Office pathologist was called and pupils at the school were turned back and the school closed after a caretaker found the body beside tennis courts at breakfast time.
The body carried no identification and was dressed only in boxer shorts, trainers, a shirt and tie and jacket.
Police at first believed the death could be suspicious and used dogs to search the surrounding area.
A later post mortem showed the man had been drinking and died of hypothermia during the night when temperatures dropped to — 2.
Later today the body was identified as that of a 23 year old man from Cheltenham, who'd been seen at the race course last night.
The Inland Revenue is investigating allegations that huntsmen are evading paying tax on a million pound trade in animal skins.
The League Against Cruel Sports set up an undercover operation which it says proves that some hunts make up to twenty thousand pounds a year without paying tax.Huntsmen say the League is resorting to desperation tactics.
Library Pictures/ABI DONALD/Reporting
PETER PONTING/League Against Cruel Sports
NICK HERBERT/British Field Sports Society
Voice over
According to the League Against Cruel Sports, most of the country's huntsmen trade in animal skins and at least half contacted by undercover League Investigators, are said to have admitted not declaring income from skins to the Inland Revenue.
The investigators set up a bogus export company and contacted more than 130 Hunts.
In a report, they claim that Huntsmen collect dead animals from local farms, feed their hounds on the raw meat and then sell the skins to dealers.
It's estimated that the trade is worth up to £1.5 million a year, with huntsmen collecting, on average, around £5,000 a year and in some cases as much as £20,000.
According to the League dozens of Hunts and Huntsmen don't declare their income from skins.
These include the Bicester with Whaddon Chase Hunt.
Others named are the Ludlow Hunt; The Royal Agricultural College Beagles in Cirencester; North Cotswold Hunt and the Vale of Aylesbury Hunt.
A second list details Hunts and Huntsmen accused of only declaring part of their income.
This includes Heythrop Hunt, of which the Duke of Marlborough is a member and the Vale of White Horse Hunt.
Others who allegedley stated they were either paid in cash or wished to be paid in cash included the Berkeley Hunt, the Cotswold Hunt and the Worcestershire Hunt.
It was confirmed in a Commons written reply today that the Inland Revenue is investigating the claims.
Details of the inquiries are confidential, but the British Field Sports Society has accused the League Against Cruel Sports of desperation tactics.
The League is now calling on the Government to set up an inquiry into the disposal of farm animals which fail to go through the proper slaughter-house and food production system.
A sixteen year old has been raped as she was leaving a friend's party.
She was assaulted as she waited to meet her mother.
NICK KEHOE/Northampton
Det Chf Insp TONY LAY/Northamptonshire Police
The girl was attacked after leaving this club in Northampton just after 11 p.m. last night.
As she waited for her mother to pick her up, she was approached by a man who tried to kiss her.
At first she thought he was just fooling around, but he quickly turned vicious.
Police are appealing for witnesses and would also like to speak to anyone who was at the club last night.
The attacker was black and aged between 17 and 20.
In Central News tonight.
Frozen to death.
Gold Cup punter found dead after drinking spree.
Are they evading tax?
Inquiry into hunts which deal in animal skins.
And a little tied up…the abseiler with a knotty problem.
The attacker was black and aged between 17 and 20.
Well, the Gold Cup meeting may be over for another year, but two of the most popular racehorses for decades were back at Cheltenham today to compete against each other for charity.
Red Rum and Desert Orchid were meeting for the first time.
But neither of them worked up much of a sweat.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Racecourse Director
Voice over
The two legends came together for a race in aid of the charity, Comic Relief.
While the crowds were thrilled to see them together, the horses seemed a little unsure.
For Desert Orchid, it was a return to the course where he won the Gold Cup.
For Red Rum it was new territory.
The 3 times Grand national winner never raced at Cheltenham.
But even at the grand old age of 28, he was keen to give it a go.
Both horses have been in bad health recently, so the organisers made the course as easy as possible.
Just one furlong, no jockey and they couldn't go faster than a walk.
It was neck and neck until just yards from the finishing line, when Dessie faltered, letting Red Rum pass the post.
Win or loose, both horses came first with the crowds at Cheltenham today.
It's yet to be seen whether Jodami, yesterday's Gold Cup winner will ever achieve the status of these two greats.
Eight daredevils have conquered a six hundred foot power station chimney, by abseiling down it for charity.
The stunt took eighteen months to set up, and was only for those with a strong head for heights.
But in the end, they almost fell foul of one tiny little knot in a rope.
GARETH FURBY Didcot
DAVID LEWIN Pilot Officer
Flt Lt RAY DORAN Team Leader
Voice over
For the team from the auxilliary airforce, this was their Everest, all 654ft.
He says he's doesn't know if his legs will stand it when he walks over the lip.
The way up is easy.
It's the ride down that takes the courage.
It was the moment Flight Lieutenant Ray Doran from Abingdon had waited 18 months for.
He gives a commentary as he walks down.
He says its hard work.
About halfway down there was a problem.
He says there's a knot.
The Flight Lientenant had to use his teeth.
It took him 20 minutes to make it down safety and it's an experience he's not keen to repeat.
He says it was like Aliens in space, no one can hear you scream.
All the men were sponsored, and its hoped the stunt has raised about £2,000 for charity.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
More aid calls for Bosnia
FTSE up 20
The hundred shares index closed up twenty point four at two nine zero zero point one .
The pound is up at one dollar, forty nine and down at two marks, forty three.
That is all from us for now.
Our late bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
(3)
Queen's Press Secretary regrets separation row
The Queen's Press Secretary, Charles Anson, has apologised to the Queen and the Duchess of York for a row after the announcement of the Yorks' separation which suggested that the Duchess may have been unsuitable for Royal life.
Inflation rate stays at 4
The monthly inflation rate has remained at four point one per cent, but it is below the German annual inflation rate for the first time since nineteen sixty-seven.
Major describes inflation figure as’ remarkable’
Mr. Major said that the inflation figure was remarkable in a way not seen for many years.
Kinnock says Tories devastated economy
Mr. Kinnock claimed that the Government is suppressing inflation by devastating the economy.
Ashdown talks of disappointment for Tories
Mr. Ashdown said that the inflation rate must be a grave disappointment for the Government.
FTSE down 11
The hundred shares index closed down eleven points at twenty-four, fifty-six point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy but up at two marks, eighty-six.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Thirty two thousand would-be undergraduates are checking their applications to university in case they've been lost because of a computer fault.
Admissions staff say students shouldn't panic as no-one will lose a place.
But some sixth formers aren't convinced.
Clare Lafferty reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
KARL McEWAN/Pupil
MARK SMITH/Pupil
PHILIP OAKLEY/UCCA
NIGEL BROWN/Careers Adviser
Voice over
Mark Smith and Carl McEwan are busy revising for their A-levels at Abingdon College in Oxfordshire.
They say that's stressful enough.
But now they've got got the additional worry of discovering that the applications they made to various universities and polytechnics back in October may never have been sent.
It's all because of a computer error at the Cheltenham based University Central Council on Admissions.
All university applications have to be processed through this system.
The fault means that £32,000 may have been lost.
The boys are very concerned.
Male speaker
I'm really worried because we're running out of time.
Voice over
Staff at UCCA say the fault has now been corrected but all applications made before November are being double checked.
Careers teachers are advising worried pupils to contact the colleges they applied to directly.
Meanwhile staff at UCCA say universities and polytechnics have until the end of May to contact potential students.
And they point out that the applications being checked are a tiny percentage of the 340,000 dealt with this year.
In part two: Sport…with the family that mortgaged the house to build a gym
On the Crest of a Wave:Three out of four for the Central South powerboats.
And the gang's all here: A backstage guide to some talented scouts.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Oxford and Swindon…
First stop is for gymnastics…this week the sport celebrated the opening of a new centre at Aylesbury 
CHRIS ADAMS/Chief Coach
JOHN ATKINSON/British Gymnastics Director
Voice over
now this year's world powerboat championship is under way and the british challenge is down to local drivers 
JOHN HILL
Voice over
we're going to stay afloat now for news of a top European win for the Laser firm of Banbury.With the help of computers and fashion, their sailing craft are on the crest of the highest wave you ever did see 
RICHARD SIMMONDS/Laser
MARK GOODALL/Designer
Voice over
the end of the football season is on the horizon…and time is running out for both Oxford and Swindon…this weekend they're both at home 
Voice over
its a big and busy weekend for all sport…
Mark Kiff has the highlights 
Voice over
It's now forty years since the Oxford Gang Show first took to the stage.
In that time, it's grown from a cast of just twenty, to over two hundred.
It's also graduated from a tiny hall in the early days to the professional stage, playing to an audience of over a thousand.
Among them last night, Harriet Ryley.
OXFORD
TONY HILLS/Stage Manager
BILL GREENOUGH/Producer
Voice over
Curtain up on the 40th Oxford Gang Show, an annual event which means months of frantic organisation and jolly hard team work for those taking part; a ritual of devotion from backstage helpers and an early taste of stagefright for aspiring young performers.
He says they get to sing and dance, it's fun.
He says you have to be devoted or you'll be kicked out!
This is the man behind it all, Ralph Reader, a successful composer in the thirties who agreed to write songs for the scouts to perform and his material is still used today.
The first gang show performed by Oxfordshire cubs and scouts was in 1952 in a tiny hall in Oxford with primitive props.
He says when they started they had to improvise and some of the lights on the stage were just tin boxes.
The brownies and girl guides weren't allowed to join in until 1969.
She says she thinks it was sexist when girls couldn't take part.
The boys say they don't bother the girls if the girls don't bother them!
Behind the scenes it's mayhem, with a cast of two hundred running back and forth between dressing room and stage during a two hour show.
The gang show does, it has to be said, have a reputation for a certain jolly amateurishness.
Male speaker
Absolute rubbish!— it's the best amateur-professional show.
Male speaker
Some of the material is a bit dated, but it's fun.
Female speaker
Each year more people want to be in — some are always disappointed.
Voice over
For the last 14 years the show has been put on at the Apollo Theatre, with adoring parents almost filling its eighteen hundred seats as those true troopers give their all for the gang show.
Kelly goes home:Amazing recovery for heart and lung transplant girl
Narrow escape: B-Fifty two's in near miss over North Sea.
And, absolutely fuming: Parents anger as school allows smoking.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
But her strength has amazed her family, and doctors at London's Great Ormond Street hospital.
Kelly herself says it's great to be going home.
Her mother says she just can't believe it.
Kim Barnes reports.
GREAT ORMOND STREET/London
KELLY GOOD/Transplant Patient
SANDRA GOOD/Mother
Dr BRUCE WHITEHEAD/Transplant Consultant
Voice over
An investigation's been launched into how three American bombers from an airbase in the region were involved in a near miss with a helicopter over the North Sea.
Aviation experts say the planes were flying at low altitude on a special maritime training mission.This report from Debbie Kelly.
RAF FAIRFORD/Gloucestershire
LIBRARY PICTURES
PHILIP BUTTERWORTH-HAYES/Interavia Magazine
Voice over
Five American B52 bombers flew into RAF Fairford two weeks ago to take part in a Nato training exercise.
Operation Teamwork, a maritime exercise taking place in area between Iceland an the North of England.
The incident at the centre of the investigation took place in the North Sea 65 miles from Sunburgh in the Shetland Isles.
The pilot of a puma helicopter flying between the Magnus Oil platform and another platform when he saw two bombers ahead of him.
He took avoiding action but came close to a third.
He said, The area was not officially controlled by radar.
I believed the military had notified pilots that a military exercise was taking place so the pilopts were on general alert.
The bombers were practising the tactics and techniques for attacking ships and as a result, were flying lower than normal at 2,500 ft.
The Civil Aviation Authority has launched an investigation and will look at the pilots reports.
Male speaker
It is the responsibility of the pilots to keep an eye out when the air space is not controlled.
It always will be their responsibility and there is very little we can do about that.
Voice over
The Nato operation ends today and the bombers are due to leave Fairford, returning again in June for another exercise.
Parents say they're furious over a school's decision to allow its older pupils to smoke.
They've criticised the headmaster, and say he should impose a complete ban on cigarettes.Mike Rowbottom reports.
CULHAM/Oxfordshire
TOM HOYEM/Headmaster
CAROLINE HOFMAN/Student Chairman
JAMES WOOD/Student
HANS SPOOR/Parent
Generations of schoolchildren have smoked furtively, behind the bikesheds, or in the cloakrooms…but they've never had school approval…until now.
The European School at Culham says older students can smoke if they want, the pupils are happy, the parents are fuming.
(He says people smoked in secret before anyway)
There are over eight hundred pupils at the school which caters for students from the European Community.
It's one of nine scattered through Europe and until recently was the only one not allowing smoking.
The headmaster, former Danish Politician Tom Hoyem, says he's passionately opposed to smoking but feels the issue is not being confronted by banning it.
Male speaker
We know they smoke in secret, let's bring the whole issue into the open
Voice over
There are strict rules governing smoking: only those over 16 and with parental permission can do it.
And then only by the school tennis courts away from the rest of the school.
Female speaker
If smoking is allowed it stops people doing it in secret and making it into a clever or fashionable thing to do
Male speaker
It's responsiblebecause it brings it under control
Voice over
The policy is being coupled with a strong anti smoking campaign involving the whole school
Only seven students have parental approval to smoke…although the school admits there are plenty of so called ILLEGAL smokers.
But while the school and students may approve, parents are furious.
Male speaker
Bringing it into the open condones it
Voice over
The school is out of the step with the rest of Britain where smoking is banned completely.
If pupils feel they want to smoke there they'll have to stick to the bikesheds.
They all play this week…tomorrow Oxford are at home to West Ham…
Hereford go to Colchester…on Wednesday its Swindon versus Bristol City…next stop for us is The Tideway in London and the countdown to this year's Boat Race…
SAM BENHAM/Oxford Cox
JOE MICHELS/America
BORIS MAVRA/Zagreb
BRUCE ROBERTSON/Canada
PHILIPP SCHULLER/Germany
MARTIN HAYCOCK/Cambridge Cox
Voice over
At just 7 stone 7, Sam Benham won't be rocking the Oxford boat, but her call up as cox has caused a few ripples and waves down on the Thames.
Oxford the red hot favourites have made 3 changes to their lineup in the run up to this year's race and Sam was only told she was in the boat at the weekend.
Sam Benham says…
Sam is the smallest in this year's race.
The biggest is the Oxford President and Olympic champion, Matthew Pinsent.
At today's weigh-in, he tipped the scales at just over 15 stone.
Oxford are the heavier crew.
That should work in their favour and this year, they have the world will watching, with no fewer than 6 different nationalities rowing.
Cambridge have one of their best crews in years.
Coxing them is Martin Haycock from Wallingford in Oxfordshire.
And this is Cambridge's secret weapon; new look oars.
Oxford are sticking to their old blades and the experts reckon they'll be sharp enough to win on Saturday.
and on Friday we'll be revealing the secrets behind Oxford's winning run…now for the cheers and tears of international sport…celebrating today is 
DAVID LAWRENCE/Gloucestershire
Voice over
This the pain of pace bowler David Lawrence first time round when he fractured his knee cap while bowling for England…
And this is the pain of David Lawrence second time round…in hospital after a breakdown in training…
The man all cricket knows as Syd was all set for action…after a year long fight for fitness…and then on saturday in the gym fate struck again
good luck Syd get well soon…finally tonight top international volleyball is coming to Oxford this week 
Voice over
Fans of volleyball reckon its the fastest…hardest court game of all…this week two of the world's top teams Latvia and Lithuania have come to town to take on the might of England and the pick of the nation's universities…on tuesday…wednesday…and thursday they'll be battling it out in the gym at Iffley Road in Oxford and then on Friday they they head for the finals at the american airbase at Upper Heyford
Hundreds of kites have been brightening up the skies at a national kite festival.
It attracted everyone from stunt flying professionals to kids with an old plastic carrier bag and a piece of string.
The organisers hope the event will become an annual attraction.
IAN MACLAREN Milton Keynes
STAFFORD WALLACE Kite-Flying Champion
NEIL HARVEY White Horse Kite Flyers
CHRIS MURRAY Organiser
Voice over
It's cold and wet; not ideal kite-flying weather.
But it won't take the wind from the sails of these enthusiasts.
Campbell Park, Milton Keynes, is the venue for the first of what the organisers hope will become an annual British Kite Festival.
The experts can handle complex 4-line stunt kites, capable of a dizzying array of party tricks.
This EEC sponsored kite was pulled in all directions.
But predictably, didn't move much.
Busy Indian fighting kites can fly a mile high, or buzz the crowd.
Stafford Wallace, a UK champion, says they help him relax.
And once you've started, you can't stop.
Even a novice can pick up the art with a little practice.
The organisers say kite-flying is a green sport and the event ties in with a workshop course run for local schoolchildren on the arts and the environment.
And if you can't afford a kite, you can always make your own, although it doesn't necessarily guarantee a successful flight.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Chunnel details announced
The Transport Secretary, John McGregor, has announced the route of the Channel Tunnel rail link.
It will pass through Folkestone and Ashford then under the Thames to London.
BR workers to strike
Rail workers have voted for a twenty-four hour strike over job losses.
Arrests at picket violence
Fourteen people were arrested during violence between four hundred pickets and police at the Timex factory in Scotland.
Yeltsin controls media
Boris Yeltsin, has issued a decree placing the Russian media under his control to stop what he says is interference aimed at curtailing press freedom.
Space Shuttle launch aborted
The launch of the Space Shuttle, Columbia, has been aborted just three seconds before lift-off.
Hope for bomb victim
Doctors say there is now a glimmer of hope for the survival of the twelve-year-old Warrington bomb victim, Timothy Parry.
FTSE down 36
The hundred shares index closed down thirty-six point two at twenty-eight, sixty-three point nine.
The pound is down slightly at one dollar, forty-nine but unchanged against the Mark at two marks, forty-four.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
An alleged hitman accused of pushing a young couple over a cliff in a burning car has claimed he was at home smoking drugs at the time.
Norman White said he had no motive for trying to kill Ivor Stokle and Pauline Leyshon, and described the evidence of his two co-defendants as a pack of lies.
GRAEME BOWD/Bristol
Voice over
Norman White has been under cross examination as the trial at Bristol Crown Court comes in to its third week.
Today he admitted serving 2 and a half years in jail for violent assults on women.
One of his girlfriends needed 18 stitches after White attacked her with a knife.
But he denied attempting to murder Ivor Stokle and Pauline Leyshon by pushing their burning car over the edge of a cliff with the couple still inside it.
White said he was at home smoking drugs when the attack took place.
Two other defendants also deny attempted murder.
Sheila Stroud and Mark Evans are said to have hired White as a hitman.
They stood to gain from an insurance payout on Stokle's death.
The trial continues.
A court has been told how a former player with Swindon Town Football Club tried to blackmail his ex-chairman over tax-free payments to staff.
The player has denied demanding two thousand pounds to keep his mouth shut.
TIM HURST/Bristol
Voice over
Stephen Tobin played for Swindon Town, the court was told, in 1986 and 87, after his release from Dartmoor prison.
He played mostly for the reserves, he was paid cash, it was said, while drawing the dole.
Former club chairman Brian Hillier, who last year served a prison sentence for cheating the taxman over cash payments to players, told the jury at Bristol Crown Court, Tobin had tried to blackmail him 2 years ago, demanding £2,000 to keep silent about cash payments.
Mr Hillier said the threats had been made in a phone call to him in 1991, a phone call that was taped by the police.
That tape was played to the jury.
In it Tobin said he needed a bit of cash, a loan.
He'd tried everywhere else in Swindon, and if he told the Inland Revneue, it would be a nail in the coffin.
Hillier could depend on his silence.
After the call Tobin was arrested at a phone box in Swindon.
Brian Hillier agreed with the defence suggestion that he had nothing to fear from any so-called threats, he had already resigned from the club and he was awaiting trial for cheating the taxman.
The case is expected to end tomorrow.
(WES AD LIB BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central South.
Second time unlucky for David Lawrence.
The England bowler fractures that knee again.
And, let's go fly a kite.
Why it's cool to be gone with the wind.
Welcome back to Central South.
In a few minutes, we'll be off kite flying at a national festival.
But first, after a weekend when Swindon Town came down to earth with a bump, here's Tim with the sport.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
The first division promotion race won't end until the play-offs in May.
So for Swindon there's still a long way to go.
Question is, can Glenn Hoddle's team last out?
Have they got the power?
Can they handle the pressure?
Losing at Derby yesterday afternoon was a set back, but it wasn't a disaster.
As far as chances went, Town were on top.
Former England winger, Brian Marwood who's on trial could have celebrated his first game with a hat trick, but County keeper, Martin Taylor was on top form and by keeping Swindon out and keeping his own team in the game he was the match winner.
Town were not at their best, that's for sure, but they still threw enough at Derby to win.
In the second half, they were on top again, but just couldn't get the first goal, which was always going to be vital in such a close battle.
It was Derby who got the break and 2 goals in 5 minutes finished things off.
First man to strike was Paul Kitson.
Moments later, Town were in trouble again, when Viveash dived in for a challenge and gave away a penalty; an expensive tackle, as Mark Pembridge slammed home the kick, which Fraser Digby almost saved.
Town came straight back with a goal.
Good one too, from Defender, Shawn Taylor, but they ran out of time chasing the equaliser.
Derby 2 — Swindon l.
The hearts of hopes of Oxford fans must have stopped beating at Peterborough on saturday when their team went a goal down, after 35 minutes as Sterling banged one in. 5 defeats in a row has been dreadful.
6 would have been disaster.
But just before half-time, Joey Beauchamp ran to the rescue; a valuable goal this one.
It gave United a point and stopped the slide.
Peterborough 1 — Oxford 1.
After 4 defeats in a row.
Hereford were due a break as well and sure enough, they got it against Gillingham at Edgar Street.
Great win, this one.
It was set up by Leroy May, after only 5 minutes.
Second goal came just before half-time.
Abraham got the bounce of the ball and made the most of it with a cracking shot.
United wobbled a little bit in the second half when Gillingham came back with a goal from Crown.
But they finished as kings by scoring a third 8 minutes from time.
Some strike too from skipper, Derek Hall.
Hereford 3 — Gillingham 1.
In Central News tonight.
Stop the ravers.
Police moves after teenager dies at LEGAL party.
What went wrong?
Three rugby fans killed in light plane crash.
And return of the joyriders.
Are they really under control?
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Twenty one year old Lee Russell collapsed at the all-night event which was billed as Dance Planet.
He was dead on arrival at hospital.
Two more men were taken from the hall by ambulance, and one of them is still on a life support machine.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
BIRMINGHAM
Chief Supt JOHN JASPER/West Midlands Police
OXFORD
DENISE BROWN/Party-goer
Cllr MARION ARNOTT-JOB/Licensing Committee
Voice over
This was the party which left one man dead and one on a life support machine — an all night rave billed as Dance Planet and held at the Humming Bird club in Birmingham.
Once considered a passing craze, events life this continue to attract thousands of young people, many of whom regard the taking of Ecstacy as an essential part of the entertainment.
Police believe the tragic death of 21 year old Lee Russell may be linked to drug abuse.
He was taken from the club unconcious and was dead on arrival at hospital.
Two other men also collapsed.
One is still on a life support machine.
Police believe many of the ravers were on drugs.
Dance Planet was run from an office in Oxford.
The organisers have obtained a licence for three more events at the same venue.
But today there was no-one at the office which appeared to have been burgled.
Neighbours said the raves were run by this man, known as Icks.
But no-one knew where he was.
Following the events of the weekend events police are trying to stop the other raves taking place.
There's also concern that the hall was overcrowded.
The organisers had approval to sell two thousand tickets but some party goers believe there were more ravers than that.
Local councillors will meet later this week to decided whether the organisers licence should now be revoked.
Last year Ecstacy claimed the lives of at least fourteen people, some of them at rave parties.
But if licenses for legal events are refused there are fears that raves will simply go back to the disused warehouses where the craze began.
Police have now named the three rugby fans who were killed when their light aircraft crashed into a field.
Pilot Timothy Gower and his two passengers were returning from Dublin after watching England play Ireland.
Air accident investigators are now trying to establish what caused the crash.
KEN GOODWIN/Sevenhampton
IAN DAVID-STARKE/Eyewitness
RUPERT BURR/Farmer
Voice over
The single-engined Socata plane lies with it's nose embedded in a field.
It crashed yesterday afternoon on a farm at Severnhampton, near Swindon.
Its 3 occupants were Pilot Timothy Gower, a married man from Kent, Dr Robert Williams, from Maidenhead, and Martin Collinge from London.
Accident investigators have been at the scene this morning trying to piece together what happened.
The plane was en route from Dublin to Biggin Hill, when it developed problems over Wiltshire.
The pilot radioed that his navigation systems had failed.
He was directed towards a glider landing strip, but he appears to have clipped a tree and then crashed on farmland.
He says that he heard the plane's engine cut out.
Just a few hundred yards away and at first, oblivious to the crash, were dozens of visitors to the farms lambing open day.
He says that he'd heard the plane flying around, but didn't realise that it had crashed, until the police sealed off the farm.
After crash investigators had finished the painstaking work of examining the scene for clues, the plane was partly dismantled.
The wreckage was then taken to the air accident investigation unit at Farnborough.
It could be several months before they are ready to say what caused the crash.
A senior police officer is insisting that Oxford's joyriding problem is under control, despite an outbreak of nine incidents over the weekend.
An MP has called for an inquiry into the causes of teenage car crime, but police say there's no reason to panic.
ABI DONALD/Oxford
BILL BUCKINGHAM/City Councillor
Chief Supt DAVID LINDLEY/Thames Valley Police
Library Pictures
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
Voice over
2 nights ago, this residential area of Oxford was turned into an illegal race track.
These stolen cars were being driven at high speed by drivers in their teens and police cars were pelted with stones by a crowd of onlookers.
All that's now left to show of the nights activity, are the tyre marks on the road.
But local people won't forget the evening in a hurry.
There were 9 separate incidents in Oxford on saturday night and crowds of people turned up on the Blackbird Leys estate and in Rosehill to watch the stolen car displays.
Yet despite the activity, police say they've got the situation under control.
It's thought that the weather has something to do with the renewed joyriding.
There was a surge in so-called hotting displays 18 months ago, during the warm summer nights, when people turned up from all over the country to watch.
It seems the young drivers like to play up to an audience.
Now the area's MP is calling for a full inquiry into why this is still happening.
The Home Office says it HAS acted to curb joyriding;’ It's brought in a new law and is going to double sentences.’
The Home Office has also put in half a million pounds into car crime prevention schemes like the Trax project in Oxford, which gives young offenders the chance to play with cars legally.
Whether or not there's an inquiry into the weekend disturbances, police say if they're to avoid scenes like this, they need more support from the public and the courts.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
KEN GOODWIN/Sevenhampton
Voice over
The single-engined Socata plane lies with it's nose embedded in a field.
It crashed yesterday afternoon on a farm at Severnhampton, near Swindon.
Its 3 occupants were Pilot Timothy Gower, a married man from Kent, Dr Robert Williams, from Maidenhead, and Martin Collinge from London.
Accident investigators have been at the scene this morning trying to piece together what happened.
The plane was en route from Dublin to Biggin Hill, when it developed problems over Wiltshire.
The pilot radioed that his navigation systems had failed.
He was directed towards a glider landing strip, but he appears to have clipped a tree and then crashed on farmland.
He says that he heard the plane's engine cut out.
Just a few hundred yards away and at first, oblivious to the crash, were dozens of visitors to the farms lambing open day.
He says that he'd heard the plane flying around, but didn't realise that it had crashed, until the police sealed off the farm.
After crash investigators had finished the painstaking work of examining the scene for clues, the plane was partly dismantled.
The wreckage was then taken to the air accident investigation unit at Farnborough.
It could be several months before they are ready to say what caused the crash.
A rave party organiser is under investigation after a legal event left one man dead and another in a coma.
Police say there was widespread drug-taking at the party.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
BIRMINGHAM
OXFORD
DENISE BROWN/Party Goer
Voice over
A senior police officer is insisting that Oxford's joyriding problem is under control, despite nine incidents over the weekend.
There have been calls for an inquiry into the problem.
ABI DONALD/Oxford
Chief Supt DAVID LINDLEY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
2 nights ago, this residential area of Oxford was turned into an illegal race track.
These stolen cars were being driven at high speed by drivers in their teens and police cars were pelted with stones by a crowd of onlookers.
All that's now left to show of the nights activity, are the tyre marks on the road.
But local people won't forget the evening in a hurry.
There were 9 separate incidents in Oxford on saturday night and crowds of people turned up on the Blackbird Leys estate and in Rosehill to watch the stolen car displays.
Yet despite the activity, police say they've got the situation under control.
It's thought that the weather has something to do with the renewed joyriding.
There was a surge in so-called hotting displays 18 months ago, during the warm summer nights, when people turned up from all over the country to watch.
It seems the young drivers like to play up to an audience.
Now the area's MP is calling for a full inquiry into why this is still happening.
The Home Office says it HAS acted to curb joyriding;’ It's brought in a new law and is going to double sentences.’
The Home Office has also put in half a million pounds into car crime prevention schemes like the Trax project in Oxford, which gives young offenders the chance to play with cars legally.
Whether or not there's an inquiry into the weekend disturbances, police say if they're to avoid scenes like this, they need more support from the public and the courts.
A court has heard that a former Swindon Town player tried to blackmail his ex-chairman over tax-free payments to staff.
He has denied demanding money to keep quiet.
TIM HURST/Bristol
Voice over
Finally…there's doubt over the cricketing future ofGloucestershire fast bowler David Lawrence…he's fractured his knee again 
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
DAVID LAWRENCE/Gloucestershire
Voice over
This the pain of pace bowler David Lawrence first time round when he fractured his knee cap while bowling for England…
And this is the pain of David Lawrence second time round…in hospital after a breakdown in training…
The man all cricket knows as Syd was all set for action…after a year long fight for fitness…and then on saturday in the gym fate struck again 
RUNS=0:05
Rugby and last year's losing finalists in the Provincial Insurance cup have earned themselves another crack at it.
It's Twickenham once more for Bicester RFC who are through to the final again after seeing off Altrincham Kersal in the semis.
Voice over
Coventry rugby Club the venue for the Bicester army to charge on to their second succesive Twickenham final.
All of Bicester it seemed were there, but Kersal, clearly in athletic mood weren't going to make it easy.
Indeed at first Kersal enjoyed the run of play and their half-time lead should have been more than 6 points, fly half Neil Pearson out of sorts, he missed 4 penalties.
But in the 21st minute Kersal took the lead, Dominic Leach making the score.
So 6-0 down at half time plenty of work to do, Bicester fly-half Neil Smith began the come-back; 6-3.
Then with Bicester on the brink of a pushover try, Kersal infringed, the scores levelled from the penalty.
With 9 minutes to go, Bicester were 9-6 up and in complete command.
Twickenham re-visited was guaranteed when scrum half Stuart cassidy broke through for Gary Linieres to score.
A great Bicester win 15 points to 6.
And the final will be played on Saturday April the fourth.
Bicester's opponents are Bradford Salem, the side who beat them in the final last year.
Now then Worcestershire's county cricketers are in South Africa on tour.
In their first game the Transvaal beat them by fifty runs.
But as Bob Hall reports from Johannesburg, the OCCASION was more important than the result.
BASIL D'OLIVEIRA
Voice over
Now to one of the oldest races in the greyhound racing calendar.
The Oxford Stadium was the venue for the Pall Mall final which brought the best out of a local dog.
Voice over
There's always plenty of atmosphere at the dogs; plenty of money exchanging hands too.
the pundits reckon more than a £100,000 resting on the Pall mall alone.
the rain's falling but no-one's bothered.
All eyes on the track as the dogs get their pre-race showing.
And here's Deanpark Atom, an Oxford-trained bitch who at five to one, got the champagne corks popping.
The hare was running and the Atom lived up to her name and blasted clear.
She never looked like being caught and beat the favourite Hencliff Ben by five and three quarter lengths.
A good win for the Oxford trio trainer, Tony Meek on the left, assistant Robert meek and owner, John Jones.
Finally tonight, to another form of racing.
Bit quicker this kind.
Yes motor racing and Nigel Mansell of the Didcot-based Williams team claimed his second successive win in the world drivers' championship in Mexico.
Mansell led from start to finish.
Team mate Ricardo Patrese came in second, while Michael Schumacher of the Witney-based Benetton team made it a Central South hat-trick.
Pictures courtesy BBC SPORT
A church is so short of money that the vicar is asking his flock to bring their own bread and wine to services.
The Reverend Derek Sawyer needs to make nine thousands pounds worth of savings, so these cuts are just the start.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
Rev DEREK SAWYER
Voice over
The offertory at St Aldates Church is going to be very different from now on.
The communion wafers and wine, have been replaced with a wholemeal loaf and a bottle of home brew.
It's all in the name of economy.
Reverend Sawyer needs to make nine thousand pounds savings to get his church out of debt.
Asking parishioners to bring their own bread and wine is just the start.
Reverend Sawyer says like everything else, his church is being hit by the recession.
But there are other factors to blame.
St Aldates hundred or so parishioners already contribute around two hundred pounds a week towards church funds.
But they're happy to make this extra offering.
Reverend Sawyer is praying that these measures will help fortify the congregation and the the church coffers.
Britain's trade
Britain's trade gap narrowed in February to seven hundred and fifty million pounds from eight hundred and fifty-eight million, but the figures are worse than expected by City analysts.
Kinnock condemns trade figures
Mr. Kinnock said the figures were,’ dreadful’.
Major believes recovery on the way
Mr. Major said the figures proved recovery was on the way.
Lib Dems say Tories failed to help manufacturers
The Liberal Democrat Trade Spokesman said the that the Conservatives had failed to help the manufacturing industry.
FTSE down 15
The hundred shares index closed down fifteen point six at twenty-four, forty-one point zero.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy-two and up at two marks, eighty-six.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
A unique clinic has opened where children with special needs will receive acupuncture and counselling.
It's been named after rock star Steve Winwood, who helped raise funds for the centre.
Debbie Kelly reports.
SEVEN SPRINGS/Gloucestershire
STEVE WINWOOD/Musician
GERRY HALL/Acupuncturist
CLARISSA MITCHELL/Playground Founder
SHASHI GHUBURRUN
Voice over
A spectacular opening to the £65,000 clinic designed as a counselling centre and to treat children with special needs; the clinic's being named after the rock musician Steve Winwood, who raised funds for the centre where his wife Gina is a voluntary helper.
The Seven Springs Playground is a day centre opened ten years ago, children from seven counties attend…the new clinic will be a centre for complementary medicine where children can be treated by acupuncturists…
Shashi GHurburran is one of the first people to benfit from acupuncture.
The centre hopes that Shashis success is just the first at the new Winwood clinic.
In part two: Up and Atom.
Dogged determination from Deanspark.
Up and away.
Oxford United continue their escape attempt.
And just hard up.The church where communion means’ bring a bottle.’
Hello.
NICK CLARK
Plenty of goals from the weekend's football coming up, plus greyhound racing, cricket and Twickenham revisited for one of the region's rugby clubs.
First though it's to the Manor ground where tonight Oxford United's annual general meeting has been reconvened and the news is Kevin Maxwell has been re-elected as chairman.
MANOR GROUND/Oxford
News just in Swindon Town striker Duncan Shearer has signed for Blackburn Rovers for three quarters of a million pounds.
Shearer, who is Swindon's top scorer with thirty two goals this season agreed terms with Blackburn's manager Kenny Dalglish this afternoon.
The club say they are already looking for a replacement.
And Shearer got his name on the scoresheet for Swindon in Saturday's win against Southend.
Meanwhile Oxford United showed FA Cup semi-finalists Portsmouth a thing or two, but no such luck for Hereford.
Here's the best of the action.
Voice over
United did well to win this match.
Portsmouth had the running most of the game; they went ahead controversially 4 minutes after the break.
Was Veysey fouled?
Darren Anderton scored the goal and Veysey needed a fair bit of repair work.
Here it is again.
It's Portsmouth striker, Colin Clarke who collides with Veysey, leaving the way open for Anderton.
Goal allowed Portsmouth one up.
Anderton was unlucky not to put Portsmouth two in front.
He beat Veysey again, but not the woodwork.
United looked out of the game.
But things turned Oxford's way after sub Gary Bannisetr came on and in the 71st minute solid tackling gave Mickey Lewis the chance to put Joey Beauchamp through.
He finished with perfection.
9 minutes later Jim Magilton found Trevor Aylott in acres of space; his finishing too was spot on.
2-1; Portsmouth's first defeat in 8 games.
United's good work continues.
At the County Ground, Swindon Town battled their way back amongst the play-off contenders.
Duncan Shearer scoring his 32nd of the season; that goal equalling a 25 year old club record.
Southend equalised on the half hour, Town's defence split and Asnah's chip defeating Digby.
In the seconnd half Swindon stepped up the pressure and then a controversial penalty with Mitchell chasing there's a mix-up in the box and in the melee, the referee blows up for a penalty saying Southend number 3 had held back Mitchell.
Thank you very much, said Paul Bodin who made no mistake from the spot.
7 minutes later, Swindon made sure of keeping their promotion hopes alive.
Shearer beat the offside trap and squared the ball for Mitchell to tap in. 3-1 to Town.
Hereford united travelled north to Rochdale, only to slip to 17th in the 4th division.
Rochdale took the lead in the 19th minute.
Mark Payne the scorer.
Hereford equalised early in the second half through richard Jones.
But Rochdale took command from then on, Morgan gave them the lead and then a Flounders penalty making it 3-1.
Staying with football, news tonight that Swindon have offered the use of their ground to crisis-hit Aldershot.
The Hampshire fourth division side, which is more than a million pounds in debt, have been given notice to quit their own ground.
Here's Martin Graham-Scott.
JOHN POLLARD/Club Secretary
Voice over
Every match for fourth division Aldershot at the moment almost seems set to be their last.
The makeshift team of veteran professionals and apprentices haven't been paid for three months and the club must find a quarter of a million pounds to guarantee survival.
Today Swindon Town threw the club a possible life-line, offering Aldershot the County Ground for their match against York City this Friday.
The idea was the brainchild of Swindon club secretary John Pollard who worked at Aldershot for three years.
Male speaker
It was just an idea we had to help.
Voice over
Whether or not Aldershot need to take up Swindon's offer of hospitality depends on a high court hearing on Wednesday.
An advertising poster for the clothing company Benetton which features a burning car has been put up close to a housing estate notorious for joyriders.
The company's been accused of deliberate provocation.
Police fear the poster could encorage joyriding, and some objectors want it banned, as Gareth Furby reports.
COWLEY/Oxford
BARBARA GATEHOUSE/Oxford Council
SUE MCFARLANE/Joyride Victim
CAROLINE CRAWFORD/Advertising Standards Authority
Voice over
This is Benetton's latest poster.
Not a item of clothing in sight.
And it's close to Oxford's Blackbird Leys Estate, notorious for joyriding since last September's trouble.
It's the only site in Oxford.
The choice of location does not appear to be a coincidence.
The poster has also been put up closer to other inner city trouble spots — the Meadowell Estate in Newcastle for example.
Barbara Gatehouse is a councillor from Blackbird Lees.
She says it's an encoragement to joyriders.
Sue McFarlance's Mini Metro was stolen from outside her house.
The next day it was found dumped two miles away.
Joyriders had written it off.
She says if they think a big firm is prepared to print such picture it may encorage them.
After many complaints Benetton withdrew its controversial baby poster.
The Adverising Standards Authority is now asking poster contractors to remove Benetton's latest hoardings.
But it has few powers if they refuse.
She says they can't take legal action.
They rely on the industry to cooperate.
Tonight no one was available from Benetton to comment.
But a spokesman for the firm which organised the poster campaign said it should come down within the next five days.
A twenty-one year old man has appeared in court charged with attempting to murder a four week old baby boy.
OXFORD
The second full week of the election campaign has begun with Labour concentrating its firepower on the issue of unemployment.
Shadow Employment Secretary Tony Blair visited one of the region's jobless blackspots,
CINDERFORD/Gloucestershire
TONY BLAIR/Shadow Employment Secretary
CHICK GRAIL/Grail Engineering
Voice over
The shadow spokesman for employment chose Grail engineering in cinderford for his visit to the forest of dean.
It's a succesfull company which has thrived during the recession — isn't it just the sort of firm in fact that the conservatives could claim credit for helping?
He says that he feels most workers would think that they have survived despite the conservative government, not because of it.
Grail engineering employs forty people, and is currently training twelve apprentices.
But despite the firms success, it's owner Chick Grail feels that not enough has been done to help industry.
He says that industry has been neglected, what's needed is more investment, and more help for industry.
Cinderford stands in the heart of the forest of dean, an unemployment blackspot.
The jobless total has risen by forty four percent in a year: just around the corner from grail engineering evidence of firms which haven't made it through the recession, and empty industrial units where firms have yet to try.
But would things be any different with a change of government?
He says that labour would offer a partnership with industry, working alongside and promoting training and investment.
Whatever party forms the next Government, people like Chick Grail hopes they'll do much more to keep the wheels of industry turning.
A flood warning has been issued for the River Wye in Herefordshire, where farm crops are already threatened by drought.
In places the river is fifteen feet above normal, and some farmers have been warned to move stock from low ground.
But even a flood will do little to ease the drought.
Only a month of rain will get things back to normal.
This report from Gareth Furby.
ROSS-on-WYE/Herefordshire
MARTIN BOYNTON/Farmer
LIZ BOYNTON/Farmer's Wife
NIGEL POWELL/Ministry of Agriculture
JOHN BANNISTER/Weather Department
Voice over
Clouds heavy with rain over Herefordshire.
But not a drop falls.
And for this farmer the drought goes on.
His crop of Winter Barley may look healthy.
But soil is dry and warmer than usual.
And the barley is growing too fast.
Less water also means, not enough fertiliser is being taken up.
And this year's harvest could be poor.
He says the last few months have been some of the driest since records began.
The farm also grows blackcurrants for the company which produces the drink Ribena.
The plants are flowering several weeks too early.
She says blackcurrants need a lot of water.
And because they have flowered early they could be damaged by frost.
Britain is now experiencing the longest drought on record since 1745.
Although most people won't be affected until the summer.
Many farmers are already watching their fields turn green too early.
He says the general public will really notice when the farmers start using water sprinklers.
He says the problem is the water table has fallen too low.
Some farmers are now asking for help from higher powers.
He says he is praying for rain, but isn't yet resorting to a rain dance.
He says the sun will only shine on him if it rains for at least a month.
Cot death mix-up.
Grieving parents get the wrong body to cuddle.
Completely motiveless:Anger over attack on ninety one year old woman.
And, sheer provocation:Does this Benetton poster encourage joyriding?
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
A hospital has began an inquiry into how the parents of a cot death baby who were encouraged to cuddle their dead child were given the wrong body to hold.
The hospital involved has admitted it was an appalling mistake to make.
WESLEY SMITH
Ian and Janette Knapman had been advised to take time to say goodbye to their four month old son, but were left cradling another couple's baby.
An inquiry has begun to make sure that it doesn't happen again.
Clare Lafferty reports.
CHURCHDOWN/Gloucestershire
IAN KNAPMAN/Father
JOYCE KNAPMAN/Baby's Aunt
LOUISE BODEN/Gloucestershire Royal Hospital
JEANETTE KNAPMAN/Mother
Voice over
Ian and Jeanette Knapman's four month old son Michael was a victim of cot death.
In order to help them come to terms with the loss, the grief stricken couple and their close relatives were encouraged to go and see their dead baby and pay their last respects.
So Jeanette, Ian and his sister in law went to the mortuary at the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital.
But as they cuddled the dead baby they realised that it wasn't their child.
When staff at the hospital realised their mistake they quickly brought out the right baby.
But Michael had just undergone a post mortem and the Knapman's say he wasn't properly prepared.
The hospital authorities today apologised unreservedly for the mistake and said an inquiry was underway to find out how it was ever allowed to happen.
Those words offer some assurance to Michael's mother.
Relatives of a ninety-one year old widow left battered in her own home are pleading for the public to help catch her attacker.
The woman suffered broken bones, and was robbed of just sixty pounds.
Police say it's the worst assault they've seen, and they're asking for information from the criminal underworld.
Kim Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
MYRA JONES/Daughter
Det Chief Insp LEN CURTIS/Wiltshire Police
HODSON/Wiltshire
PAM DAWS/Grandaughter
Voice over
91 year old Hilda Jones was left with a broken jaw, cheekbone and arm after being beaten up in her own bathroom.
She was found by her daughter.
Police have condemned the brutalattack as completely motiveless.
The attacker ransacked the house but got away with just £60.
It's the second time this month, Mrs Jones has been robbed; this tied cottage has been her home for 72 years.
Police want to speak to this man, who, shortly before the attack, asked neighbours where the Jones family lived.
He's said to be in his 50s, stocky wearing a beige jacket.
They also want information on cars seen parked in the village.
Detectives believe it is a local crime.
Now they're asking for help from Swindon's criminal underworld.
Mrs Jones' family say she's coping remarkably well, but they're horrified at her injuries.
Hilda Jones, hasn't been able to give much information about her attacker.
All sides are hoping someone else will.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
The campaigners travelled to London to hand in a twenty five thousand signature petition to the Prime Minister.
(WES TO READ NEXT)
WESLEY SMITH
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
HOWARD WILLIAMS/Teacher
LAWRENCE MONTAGUE/Headmaster
CHELTENHAM
LONDON
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem Cheltenham
Voice over
Howard Williams has been teaching music at St Peters School in Gloucester since 1973.
But by August, he'll be out of a job.
He's one of around 150 teachers who've had letters from the County Council warning that he's to be made redundant because of spending cutbacks.
The Council has to make savings on its budget of nearly £10 million to meet Government targets.
Male speaker
It's a shock to lose your job.
The future for education is bleak.
Voice over
The Headmaster at St Peters shares his music teacher's gloomy prediction education.
Male speaker
The cuts will seriously affect education, especially for the younger pupils.
Voice over
At Pittville School in Cheltenham, parents and pupils launched an airborne protest at the education cuts.
They released 368 balloons; one for every school in the County.
Parents from the school joined hundreds from all over Gloucestershire on a trip to London to lobby Parliament.
They were met by Cheltenham MP Nigel Jones.
Male speaker
He hopes during months of negotiations to come, the Government will give Gloucestershire permission to spend more.
Voice over
Meanwhile a petition opposing the cuts with 25,000 signatures was handed in to Downing Street.
But as yet the Government has shown no sign of relaxing it is a policy towards Gloucestershire.
It says other councils have stayed within their budgets without sacking teachers.
One of three people accused of trying to kill a couple by pushing a burning car off a cliff has told a court he was too frightened to intervene.
Mark Evans said it was a night of madness and thought he'd be killed next.
All three have denied attempted murder.
TIM HURST/Bristol
Voice over
Mark Evans has denied any part in a plot to kidnap the couple and stage an accident in a burning car at Birdlip in Gloucestershire in 1991.
Ivor Stokle and his girlfriend, Pauline Leyshon left the courtroom at Bristol, when Evans was questioned in detail about the night they'd survived their fall in a burning car, set ablaze and pushed, say the prosecution, off the cliff in an attempt to claim £138,000 in life insurance.
Evans and his girlfriend Sheila Stroud, from Staunton in Gloucestershire, have denied hiring a hitman, Norman White, to kill Mr Stokle and Mrs Leyshon.
It was White, said Evans, who kidnapped the couple and set fire to their car.
Evans did admit buying a can of petrol on the way to Birdlip, but he thought White would only use it as a threat to rob Mr Stokle, nothing too serious.
Hundreds of retired railway workers have been protesting at what they claim is a government plan to raid their pension funds.
Transport Secretary John MacGregor is considering a scheme to transfer half the assets of the rail pension funds to the Treasury when the network is privatised.
The Government says it would give the pensioners more security.
The pensioners say it's theft.
GRAEME BOWD/Swindon
WESTMINSTER
REG CLARKE/Retired Railway Worker
KENNETH LAWRENCE/Retired Railway Worker
GEORGE CALDER/Retired Railway Worker
JOHN PRESCOTT MP/Shadow Transport Secretary
PETER LUFF MP/Con Worcester
Voice over
A jobless bus driver is preparing to hit the trail as a Sioux Indian.
Jeff Starr has changed his name to Spotted Eagle and plans to tour the country dressed in full Red Indian regalia.
But not content with just looking the part, Spotted Eagle has spent thirty years studying the history and culture of the native American Indian.
IAN MACLAREN Reporting
JEFF STARR’ Spotted Eagle’
This is how the growing tribe of American Indian fanatics like to let their feathers fly at the weekends.
They're steeped in the music, dance and customs of Indian culture.
And they just love to have a Pow Wow.
For most of them, it is an exhilirating hobby.
And they pack away their regalia, during the week.
Not so, Jeff Starr, a former bus driver from Swindon.
At 54, he's determined to beat the dole queue and become a fully fledged Sioux Indian.
He's converted to their religion and has adopted the name, Spotted Eagle.
He can even recite a prayer in the language of the Sioux, albeit with a Wiltshire accent.
It's hard work being a Sioux.
Spotted Eagle's squaw, Vicky, spends hundreds of hours sewing on 180,000 beads onto each outfit.
This one is based on a design for a Sioux war-shirt.
Spotted Eagle takes his new lifestyle seriously.
By touring the country in a tepee and demonstrating traditional Indian skills, Jeff Starr hopes he can make a living and raise money for charities.
Fed up on the dole, he believes life as Spotted Eagle, will have more to offer for him and his family.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
1
Voice over
Up to fourteen hundred defence jobs are to go with the closure of the Portland naval base and a cutback in the workload at Portsmouth.
Clarke heralds Police changes
The Home Secretary has announced changes to place more responsibility for policing from headquarters to local stations, though there has been no announcement about the possible amalgamation of forces.
Delay in canoe enquiries
The Police are waiting to interview the survivors of the Dorset canoe tragedy in hospital to try to find out why four teenagers died.
Yelstin's democracy pledge
The Russian President, Boris Yeltsin, has sent a message to Mr. Major saying that Russia will not return to totalitarian rule.
China wants Patten removed
China has called on Britain to remove Chris Patten as Governor of Hong Kong in the continuing dispute over the colony.
Ford strike on Thursday
A strike by Ford Motor Company white collar workers will go ahead on Thursday due to possible redundancies.
FTSE down 2
The hundred shares index closed down two point eight at twenty-eight, sixty-one point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-eight and down at two marks, forty-two.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back to Central News: One of Europe's fastest growing towns may soon have its own university.
A research institute has teamed up with a local college to offer joint degree courses.
(Wes to read next) Their goal is to create a centre for scientific excellence.
And plans are already underway to build a purporse built campus before the end of the decade.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
SHRIVENHAM/Oxfordshire
Prof CHRIS BAYNHAM/Principal
CLIVE BRAIN/Principal
Prof GRAEME DAVIES/Higher Education Funding Council
Voice over
It might not boast the Dreaming Spires of its illustrious near neighbour, but now Swindon hopes it too can become a distinguished seat of learning.
The driving force behind the idea is the Cranfield Institute of Technology, which already supplies teaching and research for the Ministry of Defence at the Royal Military College of Science at Shrivenham.
Now it's signed a deal with Swindon College, agreeing to offer joint degrees, with a view to applying for University status.
Swindon College is one of the biggest further education colleges in the country.
Its annual enrolments exceed 25,000.
From September 1994, it'll run 3 joint degree courses — in business, computing and engineering.
College Principal Clive Brain says there's a growing demand for technological education and he's expecting large numbers of applicants.
Already, there are plans for a brand new campus on at Groundwell.
In the meantime, the Higher Education Funding Council needs to be persuaded to help fund it.
The Council's Chief Executive is certainly impressed.
Those potential students are all in favour of the idea.
Male speaker
The nearest Universities are Oxford and Bristol.
Voice over
It requires Governemnt permission to call a college a university.
If it's granted, Swindon University, or University College, Swindon, will soon become a reality.
A design revolution which took place around a hundred years ago is being celebrated in a new book about the Cotswolds.
Prodution of a remarkable variety of craft items transformed the area from a little-known rural backwater into a major export centre sending goods all round the world.
Tonight, in the first of a two-part series, we look at those crafts Hand Made in the Cotswolds.
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
MARY GREENSTED/Author
Voice over
When people in the 60s decided to get away from it all and live the good life in the Cotswolds they were treading a well-worn path.
100 years ago a legion of artists and craftsmen made the same journey.
Leaving London behind to set up workshops producing simple functional items, taking the beauty of nature around them for their inspiration.
Female speaker
The tradition comes from the end of the 19th century when a succession of designers and craftsmen discoverd the Cotswolds for the first time.
The area was neglected and run down, not the tourist area we think of today.
Starting with William Morris in the 1870s, a group of them found the medieval setting, craft traditions and stunning landsacapes they wanted in which to work.
Voice over
Mary Greenstead's book is accompanied by an exhibition at Cheltenham Museum.
They show how architects, furniture makers and artists bonded together in common cause.
The ethics of the movement involved using the best materials, simplicity of design and genuine craftsmanship.
Hundreds of workers were brought into the area from London.
Other locals were trained up.
The influx of outsiders put a poor country area into the forefront of design.
In Europe and America, admirers and imitators concentrated on Cotswold craft.
But the movement wasn't always welcomed with entirely open arms.
Female speaker
In Chipping Camden, where CR Ashby moved 150 people from the East end of London onto a small very peaceful country town in 1901, the reaction was stronger.
There were London and Camden prices charged in the shops and there was a lot of rivalry in local schools.
Voice over
Between the wars machines overcame the craftsmen.
Their wares were still admired, but they could never compete on bulk production or price.
Businesses folded and they all but disappeared.
But not before a little known hilly region of England had achieved world renown for quality and style.
And tomorrow night we hear more about the work of William Morris.
A piece of motoring history is being reduced to rubble with the demolition of one of Britain's oldest and most successful car plants.
Rover is concentrating all its car making on one site at Cowley and a business park will replace the assembly plant responsible for such famous models as the Morris Eight, the Morris Minor and the Maestro.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
Cllr BARBARA GATEHOUSE/Lord Mayor
BERNARD MOSS/Transport Union
Voice over
70 years
It's been surplus to requirements for 2 years, now that Rover has concentrated all its efforts on one site.
So Oxford's Lord Mayor was the first to wield the demolition hammer to help make way for a new business park.
Female speaker
I have mixed feelings.
This siter has been here a long time and is part of the area.
On the other hand, there will be a new park with jobs.
Voice over
The plant was first started by Lord Nuffield in 1924.
As the home of Morris motors, it's produced some of Britain's most famous cars, including the Morris Minor and the Montego.
But nearly 70 years on, the old plant must bow to change.
All car production has now gone over the road to what was the Body plant.
That's left 113 acres of land, so Rover's owner, British Aerospace, is turning it into a business park.
Car production still goes on at Cowley, but there is nostalgia for these old buildings.
Male speaker
Although we have moved production across the road, it's still a sad day for a lot of people.
Voice over
The development company hope to have the site cleared by September.
Then work begins proper on re-fashioning the old site into an enterprise to greet the new century.
A postal strike has stopped mail deliveries to twenty thousand homes and businesses.
It started when a man working in the sorting office was suspended for refusing to stand in for a colleague who'd gone sick.
HARRIET RYLEY/Abingdon
GERALD ROUSE/Postman
JEFF NAGLE/Area Manager
Voice over
It was do-it-your-self delivery for companies and residents in Abingdon this morning, while negotiations go on between the Post Office and striking workers.
He says this morning one of our postmen was asked to work a different shift to cover for a colleague who'd gone sick.
We each have our duties which we stick to every day.
He refused to do so and was suspended.
zwe then walked out.
He says it's part of the staff's contract that they work different shift from time to time— at times of crisis or if someone is sick we have to ask someone who knows the job to cover.
All 96 staff are out on unofficial strike.
They say they're also unhappy about the possible loss of overtime, which could mean losing up to fifty pounds a week for some staff.
Because today's mail had already been sorted before the dispute began, local residents and companies were able to pick up their post from the sorting office.
That won't happen tomorrow if the strike continues.
The Post Office says it hopes the two sides can come to an agreement at a branch meeting this evening.
A helpline which offers advice to people in debt is being inundated by calls.
Two and a half million people are saddled with hire purchase agreements and mortgages they can no longer afford, and although fewer homes are being repossessed the debts eventually have to be paid.
ABI DONALD/Berinsfield
JEFF LOCKYER/Debtor
ANDY LANE/Oxfordshire Money Advice Project
Voice over
4 years ago Jeff Lockyer was forced to give up work because of ill-health, he suffers from heart disease.
Without his salary from Pressed Steel in Oxford, he and his family saw no hope of clearing his debts which had mounted to £8,000.
It's estimated that there are over 2.5 million people in debt in Britain, their debts can range from getting behind on hire purchase agreements to substantial mortgage arrears.
In order to help people like Jeff Lockyer, the Oxfordshire money advice project has set up a Debtline which offers people advice on how to control their debts and pay back at a pace they can afford.
The line operates every Tuesday and gets dozens of calls, because, despite the fact that there have been fewer home repossessions over the last few months, the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux say that more people are getting themselves into debt.
In many cases, people owe money to a number of creditors and like Jeff, they don't think there'll be a time when they can't pay their debts.
The line is funded by the county council and has been sponsored by two Building Societies, The Chelsea and The Halifax.
A spokesperson for the Halifax says they got involved because’…the Oxfordshire Debtline was an ideal project to help people in financial difficulties, especially when the recession was deepening.’
The service has been a life line to Jeff Lockyer, he now has debts of a few hundred pounds, which compared to a couple of years ago, is an enormous weight off his mind.
(WES AD LIB BACKREF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News…an old railway town plans to build its own university…
Cricket now, and while England are getting ready to meet Pakistan in the final of the World Cup, there's another piece of sporting history being made over in South Africa.Worcestershire's players are preparing for the first of a five match series there, to help the country back from years of sporting isolation.
Bob Hall is with them.
BOB BLAIR/Transvaal Coach
BASIL D'OLIVEIRA
Four Romanians who are planning to set up a bakery in their own country have travelled to Gloucestershire to learn how to make the finest bread and cakes.
The four men have been given thousands of pounds worth of baking machinery.
Now they've got three weeks to learn how to use it, as Clare Lafferty reports.
WINCHCOMBE Gloucestershire
JANOS BUNTA Trainee Baker
ERIC WILLIAMS Crumbs Bakery
GAVRIL PANTEA Trainee Baker
Voice over
They've been in England for less than 12 hours but Janos Bunta and his Romanian friends are already up to their elbows in flour and pastry.
The four men want to open a much needed bakery in their home town of Marghita in Romania.
Staff at the Crumbs Bakery in Winchcombe are doing all they can to help.
Eric Williams who runs the Crumbs bakery has helped gather together thousands of pounds worth of baking equipment for his Romanian friends.
He thinks they show great promise.
The equipment will be sent out to Romania on Thursday morning.
If all goes according to plan the bakery should be up and running by May.
The Romanians are singing the praises of the people who've helped them.
Atlantis blasts off with first British male on board 
Kinnock challenges Major to TV debate on health
Neil Kinnock has challenged the prime minister to a television debate on the health service.
He called on Mr Major to reveal the governments real plans for the NHS.
FTSE up 17
The hundred shares index closed up seventeen point seven at 2458.7 twenty four, fifty eight point seven.
The pound is up at ($1.71one dollar seventy one, but down at DM2.86 two marks eighty six., Time allowed = 07:02
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Joyride terror: Shoppers run as stolen car races through busy street.
Find this man:New moves to catch a serial rapist.
And the suffering of the old.
New report says one in three is in constant pain.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
GARGY PATEL
POLICE RADIO RECORDING
Sgt TONY EVERIT/Thames Valley Police
MALVERN/Worcestershire
Insp GEOFFREY HARRISON/West Mercia Police
Voice over
A demonstration of how easy it is to break into a car.
Scenes like this are happening thousands of times every day throughout Britain, as cars like this one end up wrecked by joyriders.
This Astra was stolen by 5 teenagers, some of whom are thought to be as young as 13.
A recording of police officers chasing the vehicle through Milton keynes, demonstrates how dangerous the teenagers driving was, with the stolen car mounting a pavement and crashing though roadwork cones:
Police driver describes how fast the car is going, how it's driving on pavements.
In the end, police had to abandon the chase:
Police radio describes how they're giving up the chase because there are a lot of children about and it could be dangerous.
It's becoming an all to familar story for the police, in some parts of the region car related crimes have reached epidemic porportions, in the Thames Valley region for instance, there were 40,000 car- related crimes last year.
The police want tougher action taken against offenders:
He says that all to often it's the same people committing the crimes, theyaalso commit more while on bail.
Some forces in the region are trying to tackle car crime head on, with a message that's hard hitting:
West mercia police are taking this car onto the streets to show how easy it can be for thieves, but also how difficult it can be made for them.
One side of the car, the unprotected side, is wrecked by vandals.
The other side protected with the latest anti theft devices.
But police say getting the message to the public is only half the battle:
He says that politicians could put pressure on manufacturers to increase security in their new cars.
With so much car related crime it's a problem that won't be solved over night.
But with action from car manufacturers to increase security on new models and some common sense measures from car owners, police hope that scenes like this will become less common.
Police have more than trebled the reward on offer for the capture of a serial rapist.
They believe he's carried out several sex attacks in one town, and want to talk to other victims who may have been too scared to come forward.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Det Chief Insp STAN HORLOCK/Thames Valley Police
WPC KATE VANDERSTEEN/Family Protection Unit
RAPE VICTIM
Voice over
Detectives believe the same man is responsible for nine attacks in one area, the Fishermead Estate in Milton Keynes.
They have increased the reward for his capture from two thousand to seven thousand pounds…and they now have three artists impressions of the man.
There are fifty officers working on tracking down the rapist.
He doesn't appeart to have struck since the end of January but one thing worrying the investigators is that there may be more victims who are too scared to come forward.
That's why they want to reassure them of their treatment at the Police station.
There's a specially prepared flat staffed by trained policewomen and designed to try and reduce the stress of the victim's ordeal.
The flat allows victims to rest, talk, be examined, and try to come to terms with what's happened.
One victim was glad of it when she was raped last year.
There's no doubt police are worried by this serial rapist.
The fact that he may have gone to ground does not mean he won't attack again, and they want to catch him before he does.
The man responsible for tackling Britain's rising crime has been on the campaign trail in the region today.
Home Secretary Kenneth Baker strongly defended his party's policies on crime.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
KENNETH BAKER/Home Secretary
Voice over
High on the political agenda.
Kenneth Baker said law and order was one of the most common issues greeting him during this campaign.
He strongly denied accusations that Conservative policies had failed, leading to soaring crime figures.
He promised tougher measures to beat the criminals.
Wesley Smith
Welcome back: In a few minutes, we'll be meeting an author who's been back to his old school to sign copies of his book…and he's only TEN years old.
But first sport, and the biggest crowd of the season at the Manor Ground last night saw one of Oxford's best wins of the season.
And by beating
West Ham one-nil, United helped Swindon Town's push for promotion.
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
Voice over
With just 10 games to go, there's still everything to play for.
West Ham are one of the favourites to go straight up, but who can tell what the pressures of promotion will do to them in the final weeks.
The so-called West Ham academy plays more like the army these days.
They're hard and well drilled, but didn't have the fire power to break through United last night.
Oxford got better as the game went on.
They stirred into life just before half-time, when Mickey Lewis came as close as anyone could to scoring
In the second-half, United took control.
Joey Beauchamp sparkled on the right wing.
The Hammers defence started to wobble and the Manor began to bubble with excitement.
On the pitch, there were too many lost tempers.
West Ham's Julian Dicks got booked in this skirmish.
Oxford kept their cool though and came up with a winner 5 minutes from time.
After 5 defeats and a draw its just what the doctor ordered.
Skipper, Andy Melville was the man who burst the West Ham bubbles and this is the affect of United's 1-0 win.
At the top, 6 teams are clear.
First two go up; next 4 fight it out in the play-offs.
Swindon have just got to keep going.
At the bottom, the win kept Oxford out of trouble and they can't afford to slip down too far.
Only 4 points between them and the dreaded relegation zone.
Tonight it is Swindon against Bristol City at the County Ground.
Glenn Hoddle is fit and back in the team.
Former England winger, Brian Marwood keeps the number seven shirt.
In division 3, Hereford came unstuck again last night.
They went down at Colchester, an own goal from David Titterton put them behind after 7 minutes.
They held on 78 minutes, when Colchester player manager Roy McDonough made it 2-0.
United hit back with a goal from Chris Fry with just 4 minutes to go, but all hope of finding an equaliser was washed away two minutes later, when Abrahams hit a third for Colchester.
A hundred years ago the Cotswolds were transformed from a run-down rural backwater into a world-renowned centre for arts and crafts.
This explosion of creativity centred on William Morris…a writer, painter, politician, designer and businessman.
In the second of a two-part series, we visit his home…still filled with hundreds of beautiful artefacts which proudly boast they were Hand Made in the Cotswolds.
SIMON GARRETT/Kelmscott
DAN CHAPMAN/Custodian
Voice over
William Morris was so struck by this his first sight of Kelmscott Manor, that he immortalised it in his book, News from Nowhere.
From the 1870s the house on the Oxfordshire Gloucestershire border was his summer home.
It's full of his work and that of his friends.
Morris wrote endlessly and was even offered the post of poet laureate.
But his talents went much further.
Male speaker
Secondly, he was a designer whose work is hard to excel because of the inspirations he took from natural sources.
Thirdly, he was a politician and in the last 20 years of his life, he gave 3 political speeches a week in different parts of the country and wrote a number of books on the train going from one speaking engagement to another to avoid wasting time.
Fourthly, the one often forgotten, was his skill as a businessman.
He was a great businessman who ran a company which produced unique goods for 70 or 80 years.
Voice over
Much of Kelmscott's wealth was collected after his death by his daughter, May.
This drawing by Dante Gabriel Rosetti is her aged 9.
Rosetti, the founder of the Pre-Raphaelite painting movement shared the tenancy.
Morris's first tapestry is here and his fabrics and designs are everywhere.
But the house is dominated by images of his wife, Jane.
Male speaker
She was the Queen of the Pre-Raphaelite circle; she was the high point of feminine beauty.
Rosetti thought this as the leader of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.
Voice over
Rosetti's admiration for Jane was never hidden.
He produced 177 likenesses of her; a fascination which didn't escape her husband's notice.
Male speaker
Morris certainly, almost purposely spent part of the 3 summers that Rosetti and Jane were here in Iceland, leaving them alone here.
One is left to guess why.
Much of it isn't recorded in great detail, so one is left to read between the lines about the activities that were involved.
Voice over
Like those of the Arts and Crafts movement who came after him, he took his inspiration from nature, believed in using the best materials and dedicated craftsman.
He was a free-thinker and respected his wife's freedom.
Maybe that openness helped bring about final reconciliation.
Male speaker
The whole story has a sort of happy ending in that the family were here toward the end of Morris's life, united and together.
Voice over
Kelmscott Manor is now maintained by the Society of Antiquaries.
It's open to the public on summer Wednesdays, but numbers are strictly limited to preserve the building.
Its contents are priceless and its memories are of truly remarkable people.
Shock tactics are being used to make young drivers more aware of danger on the roads.
More than four and a half thousand people were killed last year in crashes that could have been avoided.
Now, ambulance crews have put together a video of some accidents which they'll be showing to young drivers.
Ambulance Video/ABI DONALD/Reporting
RICHARD EATON/Accident Victim
MIKE PILL/Oxfordshire Ambulance Service
PAUL STANDEN/Newly Qualified Driver
JOHN ORPIN/Driving Instructor
Voice over
A video nasty, but this time it's for real.
Ambulance crews witness scenes like these every day, now, after being called out to accidents that could easily have been prevented they're trying to do something about it.
This video has been put together by Oxfordshire ambulance service to warn young drivers of the dangers of getting behind the wheel.
Richard Eaton was in this car.
He had to be cut free.
The accident happened 8 weeks ago.
He suffered serious head injuries, lost his front teeth, suffered two punctured lungs as well as broken bones.
The other driver lost control of his car.
He'd just passed his test.
It's hoped the video will be distributed around young drivers so they can see what can happen if they take to the road without thought for safety.
Most young drivers have spent very little time behind the wheel before they pass their test and in many cases, they're the ones at fault when accidents happen.
2,300 people were injured in accidents in Oxfordshire last year, 58 people were killed.
A high percentage involved people aged between 17 and 24.
Many young drivers, like Paul Standen, may have passed their test, but have never been on a motorway.
Now Paul will think twice.
For Mike Pill and his colleagues at Oxfordshire ambulance service if the video can save one life, it'll be worth it.
A jury has been told that a woman accused of trying to kill her ex-boyfriend for the insurance money had no motive.
Her barrister says she would have made just two thousand pounds…hardly enough to hire a hitman.
TIM HURST/Bristol
Voice over
Sheila Stroud, of Staunton near Gloucester, is said to have hired hitman Norman White, from Gloucester, for £30,000 to kill Ivor Stockle and Pauline Leyshon by pushing their burning car off a cliff at Birdlip in Gloucestershire in 1991.
On the night the car was set alight, said Mr Pascoe, with Mr Stockle and Mrs Leyshon tied up inside and pushed off the cliff, she was terrified.
Stroud, White and a second man, Mark Evans, have denied attempted murder.
Evans has admitted buying petrol that night, but says White attacked the couple, tied them up and forced him and Sheila Stroud to drive to the clifftop.
The case continues tomorrow.
A new video that's intended to attract more tourists to Oxford has been condemned by city councillors.
They say it'll do little to bring long-term trade to the city, and will only encourge tour operators to use Oxford as a picturesque bus-stop.
Promotional Video/KATE GARRAWAY/Reporting
RICHARD WORMELL/Video Promoter
Cllr JOHN POWER/Oxford City Council
DAVID KING/Worcester College
Voice over
Oxford, the ultimate tourist fantasy.
The new video shows an idyllic world of imposing buildings and ancient streets seen through the eyes of a little girl who resembles Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland.
He says Oxford is a wonderland we wanted to sum up the traditional image with dreaming spires and punting on the Cherwell.
The promotors say the video will generate tourism.
But nearly 3 million people already come to the city every year and some argue traditional images attract only the short-term visitor, who spends little and uses Oxford as a colourful bus-stop.
He says Oxford needs another visitor like a drowning man needs water.
It'll only attract people who'll do little to help the economic life of the city and just make it horrendous for those who live here.
Traders in the city want a change in approach.
They say the day-visitor puts little money in their pockets.
Both say they want to get more people who'll stay longer.
The city's academics want to emphasise Oxford's entertainment facilities.
Academic says we need to encourage people to use more facilities rather than simply looking round the University.
The promotors say their video is a work of art that shouldn't be judged on how much trade it generates, but some argue unless Oxford breaks away from it's traditional image the tourists fantasy will never be a heaven for those who live and work there.
Wesley Smith
Still to come on Central News
The Oxford goal that gave a leg-up to Swindon.
Defeat for West Ham brings the Robins closer to promotion.
Plus, a star is born.
He's written a book, but he's only ten.
In Central News tonight.
Facing the lash.
Briton caught on alcohol charge in Saudi Arabia.
Suicide verdict.
Family fury after inquest on hanged prisoner.
And video nasty.
Shock tactics to drum safety into young drivers.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES
KEN GOODWIN/Reporting
CIRENCESTER/Gloucestershire
ANNA DEVINE/Wife
GEOFFREY CLIFTON-BROWN MP/Cirencester
NORMA JOHNSTON/Amnesty International
Voice over
Damien Devine was working in Saudi Arabia helping to train airport firemen.
Just before he was due to return home for Christmas, he was arrested and charged with possessing, manufacturing and selling alcohol, as well as operating a still.
Alcohol is strictly forbidden in Saudi Arabia.
His wife Anne says that he DID drink in Saudi, but would never have committed the more serious offence of running a still and selling its produce.
She says that although he did drink, he never ran a still or sold drink.
He was set up.
Mr Devine could face up to 300 lashes for the offence, his MP says that cannot be allowed to happen.
He says that Saudi culture is different from ours.
But they should not flog Mr Devine.
Amnesty International has long campaigned against flogging for whatever crime.
She says that flogging is an abuse of human rights.
Mrs Devine is hoping that the Saudis will be lenient with her husband.
She says she hopes they'll soon send him home.
No-one was available at the Saudi Embassy in London to comment on the case.
The family of a remand prisoner found hanged in his cell have called for a public inquiry after an inquest reached a suicide verdict.
David Pratley was left for hours without checks on his condition even though the prison knew he was a suicide risk.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
GEORGE TOLLEY/David's Stepfather
Voice over
Before today's inquest the dead man's family accused priosn authorities of a cover-up.
They weanted to know why David Pratley was allowed to hang himself despite warnings that he might try to take his life.
Tonight they said that question remained unanswered.
Charged with arson Mr Pratley was on remand at Bullingdon in Oxfordshire.
The jail is less than a year old and has been hailed as a model prison.
But the inquest was told that at night on B wing there was just one prison officer in charge of 120 inmates.
Mr Pratley had tried to hang himself in police custody following his arrest.
On other occasions he had taken a drugs overdose and slashed his wrists.
Prison officers had been told that he was a suicide risk.
But despite this he was placed in a cell by himself and left unchecked for long periods.
The officer on duty on the night he died Tony Strong said it was not normal practice to peer on prisoners through the cell doors because this was considered an invasion of privacy.
The following morning he was found suspended by a makeshift cord.
He'd been dead for several hours.
The coroner Nicholas Gardner described Bullingdon as a modern jail with good facilities.
At the start of the hearing he told the jury that no-one was on trial and it was not their job to blame anyone.
They returned a verdicty of suicide.
But after the hearing Mr Pratley's family said they were not satisfied and called for a public inquiry.
Male speaker
There's a good chance that someone could go into prison in similar circumstances and the same things would happen again.
Nothing can bring David back but I'm trying to stop it happening to someone else.
Voice over
Last year there were 41 suicides at prisons in England and Wales.
This is the first to occur at Bullingdon.
Tonight the prison had no comment.
The bells of an Oxford church are ringing again for the first time in three years.
Thanks to donations from parishioners, the six old bells of St Thomas The Martyr have been re-cast and re-hung.
But listen carefully, and you'll notice a change…the peel has GROWN.
KATE GARRAWAY/Oxford
STEPHEN IVIN/Bell-hanger
Father ROBERT SWEENEY/St Thomas the Martyr's Church
COLIN BANTON/Taylors Bell Foundry
Voice over
They say never ask for whom the bell tolls, but when Steven Ivin heard one ring out after the second world war he knew it tolled for him.
It was the start of nearly 50 years hanging bells in churches across the country, so when the 6 at St Thomas's in Oxford needed repairing, he told parishioners to ring the changes and let him install 4 extra ones.
Male speaker
I discovered there was room for 10 bells, so it was just too tempting.
Voice over
It's taken 3 years of planning, £16,000 in donations and bucketfuls of elbow grease to install the collection in the 12th century church and all for a parish of fewer than 700 people.
But even at a time when the church is under financial pressure, Father Robert Sweeney doesn't think they're being over extravagant.
He says that's nonsense we're just trying to brighten up the churches image in this drab end of the twentieth century.
Cast using traditional methods, the bells have the names of faithful parishioners inscribed on them.
I like to think my name will be hanging there for prosperity.
I think it's special to have the largest number of bells of all churches in Oxford.
I can't wait to hear them.
And she didn't have to wait long.
The bells rang out for the first time just a day after they arrived back at the church.
Steve Ivin hopes they'll ring in a new generation of bell enthusiasts.
Now, they say you know you're getting old when policemen start to look young.
But how should you react to a new book published by a boy who's just TEN years old?
What's more, he WROTE it when he was only SEVEN.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM Oxford
RICHARD McGILVRAY Author
PHILIP McGILVRAY Father
SARAH WORSTER Former Headteacher
Voice over
It didn't take long for Richard McGilvray to get used to being a celebrity.
Surrounded by admiring fans, the young author put pen to paper with an already practiced style, pretty slick for a 10 year old — especially considering he wrote his book when he was 7.
Male speaker
I got the idea when I was younger and lying in bed.
I would imagine things outside, then I just let my imagination go.
Voice over
The book, published by Methuen and called Don; t Climb Out Of The Window, sprang from a writing class at Richard's school.
It advises the reader not to leave their bedroom window at night because all sorts of pitfalls await them; crocodiles, ghosts, monsters.
The illustrations have been done by an adult artist, but taken from Richard'; s original ideas.
And there are plenty of those, there could be dozens more in the pipeline.
Male speaker
This is about a young boy who is trying to avoid going to the dentists so he comes up with a series of excuses to give his mother.
The first is that his shoelace is untied.
Voice over
Don't Climb Out Of The Window now has pride of place alongside the great authors at Blackwells bookshop in Oxford.
Richard could be turning his nightmares to profits, but his dad thinks they may have thrown away a fortune already.
Male speaker
He's written loads of books and weve probably thrown most of them away.
Voice over
Richard's former Primary school in Headington started his literary exploits.
And that's where he returned to sign copies today.
Male speaker
It's wonderful.
Male speaker
My favourites are the crocodiles.
Female speaker
He's very imaginative with lots of ideas.
Male speaker
It doesn't matter hoiwood you are, it's the quality of the book which counts.
Voice over
But while Richard loves what he does, he doesn't fancy it as a fulltime career.
He's set his heart on being the next Dr Who.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
South Africa admits nuclear bombs
South African President F.W.De Klerk has admitted his country built six nuclear bombs in the eighties.
He says they've since been dismantled.
Hopes fade for IRA victim
Hopes are fading for Timothy Parry, who received severe head injuries in the Warrington bombing.
The twelve year old didn't respond when taken off a ventilator.
Helicopter evacuation suspended
The UN evacuation of the besiged Bosnian town of Srebrenica has been suspended because of Serbian shelling.
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down point five at twenty-eight sixty point six.
The pound is unchanged at one dollar forty-eight $1.48) but down at two marks forty-one DM2.41.
Time allowed = 07:28
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back:Nominations for candidates in the general election closed just a couple of hours ago.
Tonight, we begin our series of reports on the key marginal seats in the Central South Region which any party aiming for Government needs to win.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
KEVIN WILSON/Labour
BARRY LEGG/Conservative
CHRIS PYM/Liberal Democrat
PHILLIPPA ECCLES/Chamber Of Commerce
CAROLINE FIELD/Green Party
Voice over
Rubbish is the sort of thing most of us would chose to forget about, but it's a burning issue in Milton Keynes.
In fact it's one area where local council politics may have an effect on the outcome of the general election.
The local Labour controlled council put through a scheme earlier this year to reduce rubbish collection to once a fortnight, they said because of the success of their recycling schemes.
It caused a huge rumpus which has its effects even now.
The fact is no-one knows what's going to happen in the two new Milton Keynes constituencies.
They are virgin territory.
They have been formed from the former Milton Keynes seat held by Conservative, Bill Benyon for 22 years.
It may be possible to gues the outcome in the northeast, but the Southwest is anybody's and all three main parties have their eyes on it and local issues are being played to the maximum.
They are seen as: The rubbish issue, unemployment, health, the end of the Development Corporation, and undeveloped areas of the town.
25 years ago most of the constituency didn't exist.
What there was of it was represented in Parliament by Labour MP Robert Maxwell.
Now it's an industrial and commercial centre which thrived during the 80s and is feeling the recession in the 90s.
There's 7% unemployment and the town is punctuated with vacant business premises.
Labour and the Conservatives have pitched high profile candidates into this unknown quantity.
Local man Kevin Wilson stands for Labour.
He is a 38 year old teacher with 15 years experience in Milton Keynes.
He was the leader of the Labour controlled council which came into conflict with the the Government over poll tax last year.
They were eventually capped by £2 million.
He believes they will win in the new town areas where they already have the local council seats sewn up.
The Conservatives are putting up a big fight.
They have company director, Barry Legg, a former member of Westminster City Council and currently co-founder and treasurer of Conservative Way Forward, a group of Tories dedicated to preserving Margaret Thatcher's ideas and policies.
He lives in London, but has a base in Milton Keynes and says they have support across the constituency.
The Liberal Democrats are fielding Chris Pym.
At 63, he works at the Open University and is another member of the local council.
He is the cousin of the former Foreign Secretary, Lord Pym and is concentrating his campaign on local issues, particularly health.
He says they have strength in the old towns.
The economic outlook is likely to be a heavy influence, one thing concerning a lot of people is the winding up of the Milton Keynes Development Corporation.
The body formed to construct and attract busienss to the town.
It's claimed there's still an area the size of a town left to be built on.
The Green Party is pitching in with policies on Rubbish recycling and transport.
Their candidate is Caroline Field, a 28 year old social worker.
Technically it's not a marginal because it's the first time it's been fought.
But it's being treated that way and a tough fight is promised.
Mike Rowbottom reporting.
There's one other candidate in Milton Keynes South West,
England's dreams of winning the cricket World Cup for the first time ended in disappointment today with defeat at the hands of Pakistan.
One of the keenest spectators was Gloucestershire fast bowler David Lawrence.
He missed the tournament because of a knee injury, so he turned to commentating on television.
Mark Kiff went to get his verdict on the game.
Pictures
DAVID LAWRENCE Gloucestershire and England
Pakistan win Cricket World Cup by 22 runs
FTSE up 6
Voice over
The hundred shares index closed up six point two at twenty four sixty four point nine
The pound is up at one dollar seventy three, and down at two marks eighty five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Twenty leading British scientists have called for a change in Government to reverse what they call a dramatic decline in the standard of British scientific research.
They don't name their preferred political party, but leave no doubt about their opinion on twelve years of the Conservatives.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
OXFORD
Prof DENIS NOBLE/Heart Specialist/Oxford University
Prof ROGER CASHMORE/Physicist/Oxford University
ALAN HOWARTH/Science Minister
It's here that breakthrough's in the fight against diseases like cancer have been made.
But in a letter to the Times, a group of scientists, including many from Oxford, claim that over the past twelve years, the lack of funding given by the Conservative government has led to a’ dramatic deterioration in the quality and depth of British science.’
Professor Denis Noble is at the forefront of research into heart disease.
He's relatively well funded…not by the government…but privately, by the British Heart Foundation.
But he still needs to go to the United States to get the computer equipment he needs.
Other research doesn't attract private money…the Daresbury Laboratory near Manchester is the only lab in the country for nuclear research…but that's closing at the end of the year.
The Tories, however, maintain that British science remains in good health.
The authors of the letter don't name their preferred political party…but warn that unless more money is made available, Britain's reputation as a world leader in scientific research will be undermined.
The Free Miners of the Forest of Dean were brought in to the general election campaign today, with a warning that their livelihoods could be ruined by imports of cheap foreign coal.
They've been digging coal in small private mines in the area for centuries 
BREAM/Gloucestershire
DONALD JOHNS/Forest Freeminer
YORKLEY/Gloucestershire
CLLR CLAUDE MORGAN/Ward Councillor
FRANK DOBSON/Labour Energy Spokesman
Voice over
The Forest of Dean freeminers have been hauling coal by hand for 700 years.
Their method of working is sympathetic to the environment, but 20th century economic realities have put all but a handful out of business.
Now this mine will soon close, leaving just one other remaining.
Male speaker
The mine's almost worked out now so we'd have to move anyway; we would have started another, but it's just not economically viable.
Voice over
The miners blame cheap imports of subsidised coal from Europe for their problems.
Todays visit from Labour Energy spokesman, Frank Dobson, was meant to reassure them that British mined coal would take preference under a Labour Government.
With 300 years of coal reserves still under the ground here, there are still young Foresters hopeful of a traditional future down the pit.
But this could soon be the more familiar face of coal production in Gloucestershire.
British Coal have permission for an opencast mine at Yorkley in the Forest which will yield 80,000 tonnes in 3 years.
Permission for the development was granted in the teeth of opposition from a vigorous local campaign.
Male speaker
We don't want it to happen, but it seems now whatever we do we can't prevent it.
Voice over
Labour say they'll give local people the right to reject such schemes in future, but admit the Yorkley development may have already gone too far to stop.
Male speaker
The trouble is British Coal may already be contractually too far advanced; what we can and will do is stop them extending the scheme, not by planning, but by policy making.
Voice over
Mr Dobson pledged to reduce coal imports in future, claiming that everyone in the industry in this country suffers because of it.
But that may well come too late for Donald Johns.
In part two: The divided city.Milton Keynes gets two MPs instead of one.
And Missing Syd.
World Cup misery for England without Lawrence.
Getting worse:RSPCA says legal loophole is prolonging animal curelty.
Get in touch:Pleas from the wife of a missing farmer
And getting out: Forest freeminer quits over imported coal.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
In the past year, there've been a record number of convictions for cruelty.
But the RSPCA says a loophole in the law means it can't stop one of the worst offenders from owning animals, despite his appalling record.
This report from Gareth Furby.
OXFORD
DAVE HOBBS/RSPCA Inspector
SUSAN COOMBS/New Owner
MICHAEL COOMBS/New Owner
5 MARCH 1991
DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA Chief Inspector
Voice over
Convictions for cruelty to animals nearly doubled last year in the Thames Valley.
And today the RSPCA held a news conference to highlight some of the cases.
This lamb's leg was tangled with twine and swollen so badly it had to be put down.
The owner had already been convicted for cruelty — but hadn't been banned from keeping sheep.
He says he finds it's galling that that animals have suffered and they need not have.
Nine months ago Tessa the Collie was found starving in a back yard in Aylesbury.
Today she's much better but still affected.
She says she's not used to living indoors.
He says she's scared by household clocks.
But by far the worst case is that of Brook Farm at Winslow in Buckinghamshire.
When inspectors raided the property last year — they found neglected, sick or starving animals.
Thirty five had to be humanely destroyed.
The farmer Colin French, who'd already been prosecuted five times, was given a suspended jail sentence and banned from keeping four species of farm animal for fifteen years.
But today the RSPCA returned to the farm and found the fields were far from empty.
He says the animals are in a pretty poor condition.
There's dangerous items lying around which could cause injury to the animals…
Because of a loophole in the law — even though he's banned from keeping animals — the Colin French still own them provided someone else, a stokeholder for example, takes custody.
This afternoon Colin French declined to explain why he had chosen to exploit this loophole.
He says mind your own business and go away.
After the worst year on record for cruelty to sheep and cattle — the RSPCA is now campaigning for that loophole to be closed.
A police investigation has been launched into claims that two men were wrongly convicted of murder.
Gary Mills and Tony Poole are serving life sentences for murdering a drug dealer.
They claim they were acting in self defence.
Clare Lafferty reports.
JANUARY 1989/GLOUCESTER
BIRMINGHAM
VAL HUGHES/Anarchist Black Cross
Voice over
Gary Mills and Anthony Poole from Gloucester are serving life sentences for the murder, three years ago of drug dealer, Hensley Wiltshire.
Wiltshire was stabbed in a fight at a flat in Conduit Street in Gloucester.
He collapsed in the cities police station and died later in hospital.
Mills and Poole admit fighting with Wiltshire, but say they were acting in self defence.
Last week their friends and relatives staged a demonstration alleging that police covered up evidence that would have supported that claim.
They say officers didn't call a vital witness who was in the room where Wiltshire was stabbed.
And they claim another woman in the room had drug charges against her dropped in return for supporting the prosecution case.
Today police began an independent investigation into these allegations.
The mens families have welcomed the inquiry, but the Anarchist Black Cross, a support group for prisoners, has doubts.
Gloucester police deny all the allegations made against them.
Police say they're baffled by the mysterious disappearance of a twenty nine year old farmer.
The last anyone heard from him was a week ago when he called his brother to say he'd had an accident and was going to hospital.
There's been no sign of him since.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
JENNY WADLAND/Missing Man's Wife
TIM WADLAND/Brother
Sgt ROGER MASTERS/Northamptonshire Police
Voice over
The last time 29 year-old Simon Wadland's family heard from him was a week ago, when he called to say he'd been in an accident outside a Banbury Bank and was going to the local hospital.
Then he disappeared leaving the running of his 200 acre farm in the hands of his distrought wife and friends.
Female speaker
It's completely out of character.
I wish he would just phone or write a letter to say he was all right.
Voice over
Mrs Wadland's husband disappeared during the lambing season, the busiest time of year for them at their farm in Woodford Halse, Northamptonshire.
All that's known is that Mr Wadland had an appointment with his bank last Wednesday.
His family believed he was going to pick up a bankers draft, but he never showed there and he never reported to hospital.
Police know nothing of any accident.
Today they tried to reconstruct what they think might have been his movements before the disappearance.
His brother, Tim drove a pick up similar to Simon's and parked it in one of Banbury's main car parks.
Male speaker
It now seems he might have gone because of financial worries
Female speaker
Business is tough at the moment, but he loves this time of year, lambing is his favourite time and he's a really good shepherd.
Voice over
Police questioned motorists as they came in.
Male speaker
It's been an encouraging response, quite a few people remember seeing him here.
Voice over
It may be that money worries are behind the disappearnce, but there's no firm evidence to support that and police are carrying on with the investigation because there may yet be another explanation.
Drug users say they could be at increased risk from AIDS after a decision to stop giving them free clean syringes.
Pharmacists say that they were promised payment for the service.
But now the health authority has refused the money, the handouts will stop.
KEN GOODWIN/Cheltenham
JAMES/Addict
GLOUCESTER
BILL MALLINSON/Pharmaceutical Committee
Library Pictures
Voice over
James has been a heroin addict for 5 years.
Now he's on a rehabilitation programme, trying to ween himself off drugs.
He says it's vital that drug users have access to supplies of clean syringes.
He says that if you're desperate, you'll use anything.
For the last 5 years, chemists in Gloucestershire which display this sign have been operating a needle exchange system.
Drug users can swap their dirty needles for new ones, paid for by the Health Authority.
The chemists say they were promised that they'd be paid for providing the service, but so far they haven't seen a penny.
To make matters worse, they've discovered that chemists in other parts of the region ARE being paid.
He says that it's a situation they find unacceptable.
Clean needles will still be available to addicts, but only from drugs project centres like the one in Cheltenham.
But even with everything that's known about the risks from AIDS, James is convinced withdrawal of the pharmacy service will encourage some addicts to take risks.
He says a drug addict isn't goint to travel 20 miles for clean syringes.
He'll use what he can get.
The south west Regional Health Authority said in a statement that cash has been paid to chemists in some areas to encourage new outlets for needle exchange.
They're now going to consider the points raised by pharmacists in Gloucestershire.
Animal rights campaigners have targetted the biggest livestock market in Europe.
A secretly-filmed video details what are claimed to be breaches of regulations meant to protect animals.
The film makers say it shows routine insensitivity to livestock, but experts say they're wrong.
Animal Aid Video/MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Banbury
ANDREW TYLER/Campaigning Journalist
GRAHAM HILL/Oxfordshire Trading Standards
Chief Insp DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
Voice over
Livestock at markets is supposed to be protected by law says the pressure group Animal Aid.
But they insist the legislation is being routinely breached.
They commissioned an undercover video of many of Britain's biggest livestock markets, including Banbury, to back up their case.
At Banbury, they say they found cattle being prodded with unnecessary force, a calf slipping up on a concrete surface and a pig being forced into a pen with a kick.
All of this was against the Welfare at Markets Order of 1990 says Animal Aid.
The undercover filming was done by campaigning journalist, Andrew Tyler.
Male speaker
Animals come here and the only contact they have with man is a prod or a kick and that combines with the stress of the journey and the noise.
Voice over
The video and an accompanying report have been sent to the Agriculture Minister, John Gummer.
Male speaker
Grossly insensitive handling of calves, pigs, sheep, cattle and poultry appears commonplace.
Male speaker
This market wasn't built to deal with the numbers of animals passing through it.
More people want to eat meat and the two don't square up.
Voice over
The 1990 act is enforced by Oxfordshire Trading Standards Department at Banbury on every market day and the RSPCA is there two days a week.
Both organisations admit there may be occasional breaches, but says that Animal Aid is still on shaky ground.
Male speaker
We would take issue with the calf slipping over, but there isn't much of a case for excessive force used in the prodding.
Male speaker
There are authorities working there in conjunction with the market to make sure the animals are properly looked after.
Voice over
Banbury Market say that if there is a problem with the concrete standing area where the calf slipped it will be addressed immediately.
Otherwise they have installed non-slip surfaces throughout and they have an exemplary record backed up by the Government.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News
Recovery begins at home.
Recession busting with The Troubleshooter.
And fit for a Prince.
A second coming for the Oxford Messiah.
In Central News tonight.
An insult.
Widow's anger as drink-drive killer gets 21 months.
No more clean needles.AIDS fear as exchange scheme is scrapped.
And the wrong end of the stick.
Experts say secret video doesn't prove cruelty.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
David Adams was killed while cycling home just ten days before Christmas.
It's the second time van driver Martin Clarke has been convicted of drink-driving.
He'll actually serve ten months and one week in jail.
SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
CATHY ADAMS/David's Widow
Chief Insp DAVINA LOGAN/Thames Valley Police
ALAN BORLAND/Martin Clarke's Solicitor
Voice over
31 year old, Martin Clarke from Curbridge near Witney had already admitted causing David Adams death by careless driving.
The accident happened 10 days before Christmas.
Clarke was 3 times over the drink drive limit after 5 pints of lager.
It left Mrs Adams to look after four children aged from 9 years to just 10 months.
She's appalled by the sentence which will see Clarke released in under a year.
Female speaker
It's just disgraceful, I can't believe it.
How can life be so cheap?
I just feel totally insulted.
Voice over
Clarke was convicted of drink driving ten years ago and banned for 18 months.
Female speaker
It wasn't his first drink driving offence after all.
They just gave him a slap on the wrist then and that enabled him to go out and kill my husband.
I just can't see why the system gave him a second chance.
If the law had been a bit tougher in the beginning just maybe it wouldn't have happened, maybe I'd have my husband here, maybe my children would have their father with them.
Female speaker
I personally feel very disappointed with the sentence.
Most of us feel the same way.
Only this week, Lord Chief Justice Taylor been commenting on the need to look at sentencing and I think this case highlights that need is very, very urgent indeed.
Voice over
Clarke's solicitor said his client knew he'd done wrong and must be punished, but he said he hoped to make amends to Mr Adams' family in the future.
Male speaker
Mr Clarke's obviously devastated by what's happened with the death of Mr Adams.
He will do all he can to make amends in some small way for the family's loss and what they've suffered.
Voice over
Hopefully when emotions have settled down, he might be able to make an offer to them when he's released.
Female speaker
Well he can't bring him back can he.
That's the only thing he could do.
Voice over
Sentencing Clarke to 21 months in prison and a 3 year driving ban, Judge Francis Allen said,’ nothing this court can do can remedy the harm that you caused by your decision to drive that day.
Mr Clarke's solicitor said as it was the first time the new offence had been tried under the 1991 Road Traffic Act they would be considering an appeal against sentence.
A man is under police guard in hospital tonight after a stolen car crashed while being followed.
A woman driving the other car involved in the accident is being treated for face and chest injuries.
Fire Service Video/KATE GARRAWAY/Pusey Woods
Insp MIKE TRUMPER/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
It took fire and ambulance crews nearly an hour to cut Hilda McClanachan free from the wreckage of her Peugeot car.
She'd been driving along the A420 Oxford to Swindon road at Pusey woods, when she was hit head-on by a stolen Vauxhall Cavalier.
The Cavalier was torn in two by the impact.
Police say they'd tried to flag down the stolen car and were following, not chasing it, when it crashed.
Male speaker
It's yet another incident of car crime in the County and we're treating it very seriously.
Voice over
Hilda McClanachan, who's from Faringdon suffered injuries to her face and chest and was taken to Oxford's John Radcliffe hospital.
Her neighbours have been shocked by the accident.
It's difficult to put into words how sad something like this is.
Male speaker
I think the police should clamp down on joy-riders.
Voice over
Police are now waiting to interview the 25 year old man who was driving the stolen car.
He's being treated for back and head injuries.
A woman accused of hiring a hitman to murder her former boyfriend has denied that she wanted him killed.
Sheila Stroud, who's one of three co-defendants, wept in the dock, as she told a jury how her ex-lover was tied up, and pushed over a cliff in a burning car.
JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
November 1991/BIRDLIP/Gloucestershire
Voice over
It was the first time Sheila Stroud from Staunton in Gloucestershire had given evidence in her trial at Bristol Crown Court.
She and her boyfriend, Mark Evans are accused of hiring Norman White from Gloucester for £30,000, intending that he should kill Ivor Stokle and Pauline Leyshon, so that they could collect insurance money on Mr Stokle's life.
The money, £108,000, would've been paid out from a mortgage protection policy Stroud and Mr Stokle had taken out when they bought a bungalow together.
In the dock, Stroud said White attacked Mr Stokle and his new girlfriend, Pauline Leyson during a meeting at her home.
White then forced her to drive the couple to the Barrow Wake beauty spot at Birdlip Hill in Gloucestershire.
There they were tied up and pushed over a cliff in their burning car.
Stroud said she'd been terrified throughout.
She denied offering money to White to carry out the killing, after seeing a film showing a similar murder attempt.
Ivor Stokle and Pauline Leyshon managed to escape from the car, but suffered horrific burns.
Stroud, Evans and White all deny two charges of attempted murder and the trial continues.
Anne Dawson
Welcome back: Still to come, the last-minute preparations for a performance of the special Oxford version of Handel's Messiah.
Prince Charles will be the guest of honour.
But first, the renowned business troubleshooter Sir John Harvey-Jones is helping traders in his home town to beat the recession.
The former chairman of ICI has been offering advice to everyone from fruit sellers to factory owners.
Together, he says, they can help the town thrive again.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Ross-on-Wye
Sir JOHN HARVEY-JONES/’ Troubleshooter’
JANET COX/Ross Trader
BARRY JONES/Ross Trader
Voice over
Sir John Harvey-Jones is best known as a troubleshooter for multi-million pound companies.
His latest challenge is on a smaller scale, but it's much closer to his heart.
He's been called upon to help his hometown of Ross on Wye beat the effects of the recession.
The small market town has been hit very badly.
In the last 6 months, it's suffered more than 500 job losses.
Now Sir John has got together with all the local traders to form The Ross Initiative, an action group to pull the town out of the doldrums.
Sir John pays regular visits to the traders to offer advice.
He says the key to recovery lies in advertising the town and attracting investors.
Traders are grateful for Sir John's help.
The traders still face a struggle.
But with an ally like Sir John, they're optimistic about the future.
Football now, and with just nine games left of the season, Swindon Town have strengthened their promotion challenge with a win over Bristol City at the County Ground last night.
Town won by two goals to one.
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
COLIN CALDERWOOD/Swindon Captain
Voice over
With the finishing post in sight, all Swindon have to do is keep going and there are no signs of them letting up.
They saw off Bristol City without too much trouble.
New boy, Brian Marwood gave them the lead; his first goal for the club and it couldn't have come at a better time.
It was down to a miskick by City Manager, Russell Osman, but it was no more than Town deserved and Marwood took the chance brilliantly.
That was midway through the first half and Town should have gone in two up.
They say two heads are better than one, but this time Taylor and White couldn't find the net and City held out.
Just before half-time, Bristol defender, Matt Bryant got sent off, after being booked twice and that gave Swindon an even bigger advantage.
Using the extra man, they controlled the game at a stroll and no doubt the Swindon fans were ready and waiting for a massacre.
It never happened.
The only bloodshed came when Leroy Rosenior chopped down Steve White in the box to give away a penalty, which Paul Bodin slammed home for his 8th goal of the season.
Whether Swindon eased up, or Bristol picked up, it is hard to tell.
But City came back with a late goal from Rosenior.
Swindon 2 — Bristol City 1.
The final score and here's how the first division stands now.
It is hard to see any other teams breaking into the top 6, but West Ham and Newcastle can still be caught.
Final verdict on last night comes from Town skipper, Colin Calderwood.
Colin Calderwood says they're delighted to win and its important to pick up 3 points because the teams around them are also winning.
Swindon are going to keep fighting.
A historic revival of one of the greatest works of choral music has just begun in front of Royalty.
A special Oxford version of Handel's Messiah is being performed, almost two hundred and fifty years after the Hallelujah Chorus was first heard in Britain.
ABI DONALD Oxford
EDWARD HIGGINBOTTOM Director
Voice over
The choir of New College Oxford prepares for one of it's most important performances.
Tonight Prince Charles is in the audience at the Sheldonian Theatre for a gala performance of the Oxford Messiah.
The Oxford Messiah is a special version of Handel's original work and was written in 1749 for a one-off performance at the the Sheldonian.
Tonight, that evening of nearly 250 years ago, will be recreated.
The choir can achieve an exact reconstruction of the performance because the original manuscript of Handels Oxford Messiah still exists, just over the road from the Sheldonian Theatre, in the Bodleian Library.
Even the programme that went with that performance has been kept.
But this score has proved invaluable.
Tonights performance is part of a nationwide series of concerts to celebrate the 250th anninversary of the first British performance.
Choirs all over the country, in less impressive surrounding than the Sheldonian will be giving their versions of the famous work.
And tonight, New College Choir will be hoping to get the Royal seal of approval as they let the music speak for itself.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Father and 4 children die in fire
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven point eight at twenty-eight, fifty-two point eight.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-seven and up at two marks, forty-two.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Rugby, and in the Courage League at Kingsholm last night Gloucester narrowly avoided defeat at the hands of London Irish.
Nick Clark was watching.
Voice over
Despite missing 7 first team regulars Gloucester got off to a flying start.
Excellent handling, giving winger, Simon Morris a 3rd minute try.
4-0 up and with the pack apparantly in tremendous form it looked as if Gloucester would sew up the game in the first half.
But it was not to be.
London Irish fought back with plucky resolve, a well taken high pass put winger, Mike Corcoran through.
The Irish nine, 4 up at the interval.
The lead was extended by Rory Malone picking up the loose ball 7 minutes into the 2nd half, 15-4 down.
The cherry and whites had it all to do.
London Irish as resilient in defence as effective in attack.
But as the final quarter began, Gloucester at last started to match the Irish vigour, a drop goal from Mike Hamlin bringing them within reach of the opposition at 15 points to 10.
Then in the final 6 minutes, Gloucester's forward pressure told making the way for winger, Jerry Perrins.
A crucial conversion from Nick Marment gave Gloucester a flimsy one point lead.
And more was to come, flanker Paul Ashmead piling over to seal it.
Final score; 22 points to 15.
Politics and showbusiness have collided head on during the election campaign with one of the country's leading Conservatives coming face to face with himself…or at least his Spitting Image.
Michael Heseltine took time off from the campaign to meet his rubber double and Mike Rowbottom was there.
OXFORD
MICHEAL HESELTINE Environment Secretary
SPITTING IMAGE Central Television
ANNE HESELTINE
Voice over
Mirror Mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all.
Michael Heseltine, Environment secretary and former Prime Ministerial candidatem, was certain which he prefered when he met his Spitting Image Alter Ego.
Male speaker
It's a warning of what can happen to me if we have five years of a Labour Government.
It's the first time i've seen it
Voice over
The puppet is an exhibit at a cartoon gallery in the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford and the real Mr Heseltine just happened to be passing through.
He was in surprisingly good humour, considering how much he's suffered at the hands of the puppet.
That wasn't too bad.
He has been pictured in a Tarzan suit with a helicopter hovering over his head.
Mr Heseltine had tried to buy the puppet at one stage, but he failed.
Food for for thought for Mrs Heseltine.
2 ringers don't make a right, although they might make a mainstream centre left traditional Conservative.
Which one should she choose?
Rubber face or smoothy chops?
Female speaker
I don't think I'd want it in the house, it might be confusing if I walked into a gloomy room with it
It was only a fleeting visit, the real election beckoned the Cabinet Minister back to duty.
How he must have wished to have been in the puppet's place, no policies, work and no strings attached.
BMA brands health reforms a failure
Tyson gets six years for rape
Former World Heavyweight boxing champion Mike Tyson has been jailed for six years for raping a former beauty queen.
Drug dealers begin 109 year sentence
FTSE up 7
The hundred shares index closed up seven point three at twenty-four, seventy-two point two.
The pound is down at one dollar seventy-two, and up at two marks eighty-six.
Finally, back to Buckingham Palace.
And it wasn't just the hedgehog's best friend who was honoured by the Queen today.
Arthur Daley was given a royal treat when he picked up his OBE.
For actor George Cole from Stoke Row in Oxfordshire, the role is a nice little earner.
He told the Queen how he once made the cast salute her as she drove past.He didn't have his Minder with him today, but he did bring 'er indoors.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Welcome back: Tactical voting is expected to play a major part in the general election, as Labour and the Liberal Democrats try to oust the Conservatives in marginal seats.
That's certainly true in Oxford West and Abingdon, where the Lib Dems are hoping to woo the Labour voters they need to take the seat from the Tories.
Sir WILLIAM GOODHART/Liberal Democrat
JOHN PATTEN/Conservative
BRUCE KENT/Labour
Oxford University's presence has led to claims that this seat has the most sophisticated electorate in the country and it's what makes the contest in Oxford West and Abingdon so interesting.
The combination of town, gown and countryside mean that the result here is more difficult to call because of the much practised ploy of tactical voting.
The constituency was created only nine years ago and includes the historic heart of Oxford, its leafy residential streets in the north of the city as well as Abingdon, Radley and Kennington.
Anywhere else this would be natural Conservative territory, the kind of constituency where they weigh rather than count the true blue votes, but the university changes all that.
Defending the seat for the Conservatives is Home Office minister John Patten who has been in parliament since 1979.
Seemingly always on the verge of promotion to the Cabinet he has a high profile at Westminster and is known for attracting a lot of publicity.
This is his daily morning campaign meeting where the progress of the election is monitored and it's those tactical voters that dominate the discussion.
Male speaker
He looked at me and said’ Last time I voted Liberal Democrat and the time before that I voted Liberal Democrat, but this time it's serious so I'm going to vote Tory.’
Voice over
Last time round he took more than forty six per cent of the poll — almost 4,000 votes ahead of the SDP's highly-active candidate Chris Huhne.
He's not standing this time and has been replaced by one of the Liberal Democrats' top backroom boys Sir William Goodhart.
The brother of a Tory MP he helped negotiate the merger between the 2 Alliance partners and has chaired the committee running the new party's annual conference ever since.
Like most Liberal Democrats he's been emphasising education, as his presence greeting parents outside a school in Oxford's Jericho demonstrated.
Male speaker
You know about Liberal Democrat policy to put a penny on the income tax for education.
What do you think of that?
Female speaker
Great.
It's about time someone did something.
Male speaker
Yes, good.
Voice over
Where Sir William might be seen as a diffident, slightly academic figure Labour's Bruce Kent dives into campaigning with enthusiasm.
A former priest, he hit the headlines as secretary and then chairman of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
He's left the priesthood now, but has a national profile which has lifted Labour's campaign locally and made him instantly recognisable to many as he attempts to persuade them that he's the new broom they need.
Male speaker
It's getting rid of this Government that I'm concerned about.
Will you give me a vote and I'll try and get rid of the Government, all right?
Voice over
With just 15% of the vote Labour came a bad third at the last election, but a recent opinion poll, commissioned by the Liberal Democrats, revealed a surge in support for Mr Kent at the expense of Sir William — narrowing the gap between the two parties from 22% to 7%.
So what is going to happen on April the 9th?
Male speaker
We came very close to doing it at the last election.
We were within 5,000 votes and I think when people see how nearly effective the amount of tactical voting was and when they see the Tory support slipping, they will come very strongly over to us.
Male speaker
Local opinion polls are very interesting to me.
There have been 2 by local newspapers and both show our support more or less the same as it was back in 87 with a substantial drop in Liberal Democrat support and a substantial rise in support for Labour.
I think there will be a healthy scrap for 2nd place in this constituency.
Male speaker
The Liberal Democrats refuse to exclude the possibility of forming a pact with the Tories so many people know that a vote for the Liberal Democrats could actually be a vote to keep the Tories in power.
So I don't think we are going to be squeezed.
I think we are surging ahead.
I know we have doubled our support in the last 2 weeks and that's the way we are going.
Voice over
Also standing is Green Mike Woodin who grabbed almost a quarter of the vote in last year's council elections.
His workers stress they are aiming to win the battle of ideas in the campaign and a substantial increase on their 1987 tally of 1.5%.
A more independent verdict came from the Oxford Times, which predicted:’ The Oxford West and Abingdon seat is likely to be a neck-and-neck sprint to the finish between the Tories and the Liberal Democrats with Labour a more spirited also-ran.’
But the waters in this campaign are deep and the cross currents of tactical voting mean that no one can be certain of the outcome, until the votes are counted.
Simon Mares reporting.
Three other candidates are standing in Oxford West and Abingdon.
They are: Roger Jenking for the Official Liberal Party, Susan Nelson for the Anti-Federalist League, and Geoffrey Wells for the Natural Law Party.
Give us our money back: Twenty million in pensions lost at Maxwell's helicopter company.
Too dangerous: Warning over Britain's first private prison.
And, taking the Michael.Mr Heseltine meets his Spitting Image
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Now they're blaming the government, saying it should have warned them against transferring their pensions into Maxwell's hands.
They've formed an action committee to try to recover the funds.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
OXFORD
KEITH GREGSON/British International Helicopters Ltd
Voice over
Prison reformers say Britain's first privatised jail will be too dangerous a job for the company planning to run it.A leading security firm based in the Central South region will provide the guards at the jail.
Opponents strongly condemn the idea, but the company says it can provide a cleaner, more efficient jail, better for staff and inmates.
Gargy Patel reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES
BROADWAY/Worcestershire
EVERTHORPE/Humberside
JIM HARROWER/Managing Director/Group 4
LIBRARY PICTURES
Dr DICK HOBBS/Howard League for Penal Reform
LIBRARY PICTURES
Voice over
Privatised prisons have already been introduced in America.
Inmates are allowed out of their cells for up to 12 hours a day, provided with daily showers and change of clothing with modern facilities.
Supporters claim it makes jails easier to manage.
Now one of Europe's leading security firms, Group 4, based in the Cotswolds, will run Britain's first privatised jail.
The Wolds remand prison in Humberside is due to open in 10 days.
Opponents condemn it for making profit from punishment.
Group 4 says it's providing a badly needed service.
It's not the first time privately employed guards are being used.
Magistrates courts in Hull already use a private firm to process prisoners.
The Home Office says all staff will be strictly vetted.
Training will be carefully controlled and under the terms of their contract the company is still accountable to the Home Secretary.
But the Prison Officer's Association has reacted angrily.
Members have been instructed not to intervene in any dispute at the Wolds.
Critics say privatising prisons is short-sighted and dangerous.
Opponents point to the example of the Harmondsworth detention centre near Heathrow, also run by the multinational Group 4.
They say information about conditions, staffing and daily routine is difficult to obtain.
But Group 4 says Harmondsworth and the Wolds cannot be compared.
Campaigners are calling for more safeguards, especially with further privatised jailsbeing planned.
Maenwhile, Group 4 says it will bid for any future contracts.
A magistrate has appeared in court accused of attempting to gas his wife with car fumes.
Cranog Jones, who sits on the Cheltenham bench, was charged with administering noxious gas to his estranged wife at their home in Brockhampton in Gloucestershire.
Jones, who's forty three, and now lives at Wyman's Brook in Cheltenham, appeared at a special court hearing in Cirencester.
The press were not admitted to the court and the case was adjourned.
Wine from the cellars of Robert Maxwell's former home has being auctioned for more than ninety three thousand pounds.
The late tycoon's high quality collection was stored at Headington Hill Hall near Oxford.
More than three thousand bottles were sold, including (772) seven hundred and seventy-two magnums.
The collection had been expected to fetch up to eighty thousand pounds.
The Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown has been in the region promoting his party's ideas on education.
He spoke to a packed meeting at the Oxford Union, but the event had all the hallmarks of an American-style political convention.
OXFORD
PADDY ASHDOWN/Liberal Democrat Leader
Voice over
The man behind the renowned St Tiggywinkles animal hospital has been honoured by the Queen.
Les Stocker, who first came to public attention by caring for hedgehogs, went to Buckingham Palace today to receive his MBE.
Gareth Furby reports.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
LES STOCKER MBE/St Tiggywinkles
SUE STOCKER
Voice over
In part two: Tactical weapons: The Tory seat that sinks or swims with the floating voter.
And one's a puppet…one's a politician.Can Mrs Heseltine spot the difference?
The Prince of Wales has been talking of his love for his country home at Highgrove in Gloucestershire.
The Prince is a devoted farmer and gardener, and a new book describes the Highgrove estate as a monument to his love of organic farming.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM Reporting
CHARLES CLOVER Co-author
Pictures From Anglia Television
Voice over
Highgrove is much more than the house which the Prince Of Wales has made his country home.
It's become a preservation tank for Britain's myriad wildflowers and a model for the way the Prince thinks farming should be going.
That's the message to come from a new book on Highgrove co-written by the Prince and environmental journalist, Charles Clover.
Male speaker
It's a practical example of his own philosophy.
People will look at it and see if it has relevance for them.
Voice over
The 300 acres of farmland and garden he took over 13 years ago, have been turned into a monument to organic production.
The Prince uses Highgrove in a way that he couldn't use his other lands in the Duchy of Cornwall because they're tenanted.
And he takes a particular interest in his garden.
Male speaker
It might be an idea to take down some of those trees.
Male speaker
They do screen the farm buildings.
Male speaker
The idea was to make the farm buildings look good enough not to have to screen them.
Voice over
The book is taken from a forthcoming Anglia TV programme and includes lengthy descriptions of how Highgrove has developed.
Prince Charles makes clear his outlook and attitude.
The last words of his opening contribution say: I feel sure that the time will come when people will ask why we didn't do more in this day and age to preserve those wise traditions that form mankind's lifeline with the profoundly mysterious laws of the universe.
Translated into reality, it means a self-contained sewage treatment garden plant and a haven for Britain's natural flora.
Male speaker
The Prince is always digging something in or pullng something out.
He's endlessly fascinated by his garden and constantly changing it.
Voice over
Prince William and Prince Harry are encouraged to take an interest as well because they, like Highgrove, are where Prince Charles believes the future of the country and the Royal family lies.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Fishermen blockade harbour
FTSE up 0
The hundred shares index closed up nought point one at two eight five two point nine 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty nine and up at two marks, forty three.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
our action round-up this week starts in Cheltenham where we can toast the new junior European Chuckball Champions 
Voice over
Chuckball is a mixture of basketball and handball…invented in Switzerland its now taking a hold in this country…its a non contact sport but is played at a hundred miles an hour…and top dogs are Cheltenham's Junior Team…they've just won the European Championship…a big deal…
Coach Jim Gardner says it is a big deal because Cheltenham hasn't got too many champions and more and more people are playing the game
If it's high speed sport you want…then the final of the Perestroika 93 Volleyball tournament at Upper Heyford in Oxfordshire tonight should not be missed…teams from Latvia…
Lithuania…and England have been battling it out all week…
Latvia and Lithuania have some of the best players in the world…but the good news is that England are on the march…
they beat an international students team in the semi-final and now face Latvia in the final…
the speedway season gets going tomorrow…
Swindon Robins take off at the Abbey Stadium against Exeter…
Oxford city stars wind up their league season on Sunday with a match against Sunderland…
and for racing fans…there's point to point tomorrow…the Grafton are meeting north of Banbury cross at Mollington
It's the boat race tomorrow…and with sixteen wins in seventeen years…and six victories in a row the Oxford boat club can claim to be the most successful team in British sport…so how do they do it…what's the secret of their success…we can reveal all tonight its down to Heather and Bert…and a piano player called Kate…they're all in our Friday Feature 
STEVE ROYLE/Director of Rowing
HEATHER BOXER
MATTHEW PINSENT/Oxford President
BERT GREEN/Boatman
Voice over
We're not on the river, we're not in the gym, we're in a big old family house in London, because this is where Oxford's runaway success is planned and carefully prepared year after year.
For the two weeks before every boat race, the home of Heather Boxer becomes the Oxford headquarters.
The crew become part of the family.
Heather does the cooking.
They all do the fetching and carrying.
A happy home is one of the secret's behind the Oxford story.
Steve Royle says the pressure out on the water can run high, but as soon as they get to Heather's, they can relax.
She lets them come and go as they please and it is good for the crew.
Heather Boxer says she makes them do the washing up and she enjoys their company.
They eat a tremendous amount in the weeks running up the race and she cooks everything fresh.
Matthew Pinsent, the president, says that it is a home from home and you can see how everyone is so relaxed.
Out on the river, Oxford bring into player their other secret weapon.
Bert Green's the name; a waterman on the Thames for over 40 years.
He drives the launch and tells the crew and of course, the cox, the fastest way to the finish.
Steve Royle says that Bert has won them many boat races.
The water changes from year to year and it is quite a skill knowing where the tides flow are running.
Bert Green says he doesn't know every wave and ripple, but he does know the winning route and he keeps that a secret.
He's always supported Oxford, but never makes a prediction on the boat race.
If, or rather, when Oxford win the 139th boat race, you'll hear and rightly so, of the rowing skills of Matthew Pinsent, possibly the finest oarsmen ever to compete.
Of the dedication and devotion of one of the best crews, of the coxing genius of Sam Benham, of the brilliance of coaches like Mike Spracklen and Pat Sweeney.
You'll hear nothing of Bert Green's boating brains, or Heather Boxer's cooking, or of a piano player called Kate Boxer.
They're the ones who've really got the blue boat in fine tune.
the next sporting feast after the Boat Race…is the Grand National…that's next Saturday…fancy going to Aintree to watch it…you do…well here's your chance 
Voice over
We've two of the best tickets to give away for Grand National day.
So watch closely.
Simple question.
How many jockeys, trainers and horses can you spot in the next 30 seconds.
We want all the names.
Got them all?
Send them on a postcard to Central South at Abingdon, where our postcode is OX14 1SA.
Closing date is next Wednesday.
We'll be running the competition again on Monday night.
A family which has run the same pub for two hundred and fifty years is holding a week of celebrations…
Georgian style.
The highlight was a spectacular banquet — with authentic recipies from the period.
KEN GOODWIN/Washbourne
STEPHEN FARBROTHER/Landlord
VANESSA FARBROTHER/Landlady
Voice over
There's a distinctly Georgian atmosphere at the old Hobnails Inn at Washbourne near Tewkesbury.
Landlord, Stephen Farbrother and his wife Vanessa have organised a Georgian banquet to celebrate 250 years of their families association with the pub.
It all started in 1743, with ancester Timothy Shurey.
Since then the pubs passed down through sons, daughters, cousins and nephews to it's present day owners.
Mr Farbrother and his wife have researched their week of Georgian events thoroughly — visiting museums to get a flavour of the lifestyle.
He says people of the period had a hard life, but when they celebrated they did it in style.
But it's in the kitchen where most of the work's been done.
She says they've got dozens of dishes from the period.
But that's not all.
She says there are dishes like Licky Pie, squab pie, beef cooked in straw, lamb baked in rosmary.
Plus dozens of sweets.
The Hobnails regulars have joined in by wearing period dress.
There's a touch of elegance about many of the costumes, except when you try to sit down.
She says she's having trouble with her dress.
But for others the food is the star attraction.
They say that the food is very rich, but luckily they've got plenty of room in their dresses!
The pubs owners are hoping their families association with the Hobnail Inn will continue — a cousin is now thinking of taking over when the present owners retire.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News
Oxford's secret weapons.
The cook, the boatman, and the piano player helping the Dark Blues to another victory.
Plus, the secrets of a Royal Garden.
A guided tour of Highgrove.
Anne Dawson
Welcome back.In a few minutes, we'll be going inside the Highgrove Estate, for a look at Prince Charles's garden.
But first, with news of two big sporting events looming, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Oxford United step into the promotion battleground tomorrow, when they take on Portsmouth at Fratton Park.
The game at the Manor was one of the matches of the season.
5-5 was the final score, with Oxford proving they can take on and tackle the best.
Pompey are third in the table and are now going all out for a top two place and automatic promotion.
United are 16th and still need the points to wash away any fear of relegation.
14 players are travelling.
The question mark is over the fitness of Jim Magilton.
He'll have a final fitness test in the morning.
Portsmouth are on a great run at the moment.
They've won every game since losing at Swindon, who of course are right behind them in the table.
Tomorrow though, Town have got to deal with their bogey team; Brentford.
They've already played them twice this season and lost both times.
Third time lucky.
Town have two injury worries, but Dave Mitchell looks almost certain to pass his fitness test.
There's a bigger doubt though, over Martin Ling, who's got a calf strain.
Swindon have it on form.
Brentford won at Grimsby in the week and that was their first victory for weeks.
Hereford are at home tomorrow.
They've got Bury.
United still need the points to pull clear of the dropping zone.
United are playing a new man tomorrow.
Daren Rowbotham has joined on loan from Birmingham and leads the attack.
He was quite a hot shot with Exeter a couple of seasons backs.
Goal of the week.
Special offer.
3 for the price of one.
A winner from Oxford's Andy Melville, an opening goal for Swindon's Brian Marwood and a thunderbolt from Hereford skipper, Derek Hall.
Who goes up and who goes down in the rugby union leagues has still to be sorted out too…
Gloucester haven't escaped relegation yet but they should be well on their way to safety if they can win at Kingsholm this weekend 
Voice over
One more win would just about see the cherry and whites safe for another season in the first division.
This victory over Northampton two weeks ago, was a brilliant boost.
A bonus too.
They weren't expected to win at Franklin Gardens, but then again Gloucester are at their best when the challenge is toughest.
And the team that beat Northampton lines up to face Orrell tomorrow, which means Laurie Beck keeps his place at scrum half even though Hannaford is fit.
The league table shows you how important the game is.
It is what they like to call a 4-pointer.
Last season, Gloucester won and lost to Orrell.
Here's the match they took.
It was in the cup.
25-16 was the score.
That'll do nicely tomorrow.
In Central News tonight.
Freed.Driver who killed his best friend is told you've suffered enough.
The law's too soft.
Chief constable says too many of the guilty get off.
And a Prince among farmers.The secrets of Highgrove revealed.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The court heard that Mr White may have lost control of the motorbike because of his guilt over the accident that killed his friend.
He was given two hundred hours community service for causing death by reckless driving.
The judge said he'd already been punished a thousand times.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
PETER WHITE/Defendant's Father
MAUREEN WISE/Victim's Mother
Voice over
Too many guilty people are going unpunished, according to the chief constable of the Thames Valley.
Charles Pollard says soft sentencing is letting criminals get off lightly, and he's calling for urgent reform of the criminal justice system.
SIMON GARRETT/Witney
GRAHAM TOWNSEND/Stabbing Victim
CHARLES POLLARD/Chief Constable
WALLINGFORD/Oxfordshire
GARETH ASTLEY/Ram Raid Victim
Voice over
Graham Townsend finally felt well enough to go back to work this week.
9 months ago, he was stabbed 6 times in a robbery at his clock shop in Witney.
Before Mr Townsend was off the life support machine 3 men were in custody.
Male speaker
They caught them within 5 days.
I thought that was terrific, but the sergeant in charge had to take 5 months over paperwork to get them into court.
It's such a waste of time when they could be tracking down criminals amount of time.
Voice over
Mr Townsend's frustration is shared by Thames Valley Chief Constable Charles Pollard.
In his annual report he says: The confidence of police officers in our trial system is now so low urgent reform is needed.
Male speaker
It started with the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
There were many good things which we supported in that, but it's gone too far and become too bureaucratic.
It should be getting at the truth quickly and at the moment, there's an awful lot of paper to get there.
Voice over
Sentencing is also a cause for concern.
Leigh Spencer served 150 hours community service, after taking part in an attack where a passing jogger was stabbed.
Pensioner, Ivor James died in a hit and run.
Driver, Stephen Reynolds received a 3-year sentence.
He'll serve half of it.
The increase in offences varies across the force area.
Milton Keynes and Banbury are actually seeing less crime.
In Aylesbury and Oxford areas the rates have increased by 10 and 11%.
But worst hit is the area stretching from Witney to Wallingford with a 20% rise.
This was the scene at Astley's Hi-Fi shop 4 years ago, when ram raiders struck.
Since then thieves have been back several times with cars and sledgehammers
Male speaker
I understand that the police resources are stretched, but a greater police presence in the town would go some way to discourage this sort of attack.
Male speaker
The crimes we must respond to have gone up 70%, incidents have risen 20%, they all take time and the danger is it's taking bobbies away from patrolling their communities.
What we're trying is to work through a variety of things now to insure we get as many bobbies as possible back on the beat.
Voice over
Mr Pollard says without a review of court procedures and a cut in paperwork, it will be very hard to make policing as visible as the public demands.
A newborn baby is in a critical condition after her mother was involved in a car crash.
DURSLEY/Gloucestershire
Carol Watkins, who was nine months pregnant, suffered head and pelvic injuries when her car collided with a transit van at Dursley in Gloucestershire.
Her baby was delivered by Caesarian section at Gloucestershire Royal Hospital.
Health and Safety officials have begun an investigation after a workman fell into a concrete silo.
Ambulance Service Video/LONG CRENDON/Buckinghamshire
It took fire crews almost an hour to rescue Robert Stanley who fell fifteen feet into the vat at Long Crendon in Buckinghamshire.
Mr Stanley had been carrying out routine maintenance work.
Prisoners are using computers to translate books into braille for the blind, as part of a jail's rehabilitation programme.
And the unique project has just been given the Royal seal of approval.
Princess Anne has been to see the inmates at work…behind bars.
TIM HURST/Worcester
GLOUCESTER
RORY COBB/RNIB
MAGGIE VERDEYEN/Teacher
Voice over
Blind children at a college in Worcester can't wait to get their hands on the latest batch of adventure stories, translated into braille by computor.
The work is done by prisoners at a unique computor workshop inside Gloucester jail, visited this afternoon by Princess Anne.
She's patron of the Butler Trust, a charity which rewards positive prison work.
The braille translation system was installed in the prison by staff at the Royal National Institute for the Blind at Worcester.
Prisoners at Gloucester apparently became bored translating school textbooks — now they've been switched to teenage adventure stories — to the delight of the pupils.
The braille workshop in Gloucester prison is designed to rehabilitate inmates, as well as helping blind and partially sighted children.
Bitter feud…
Tory agent quits his party in row over loan for house.
Tug of love…mother's fight to keep children in England.
And behind bars…puppy is seized in rabies scare.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
LIBRARY PICTURES
VICTOR BURGE/Former Conservative Agent
DAVID WALKER/Member/Conservative Association
ARTHUR TITHERINGTON/Member/Conservative Association
Voice over
Victor Burge served the conservative party for seventeen years…but now he's resigned, seriously ill with cancver he says he can't face the pressure his party chiefs are putting him under.
He came to West oxfordhsire to become Douglas Hurd's right-hand man four years ago.
officials lent him thirteen thousand pounds to enable him to move south and buy this house.
It was an unsecured loan…now they want him to secure it against the house.
The party's threatened legal action…local party members are horrified…
Party Chairman Tony Picking said today Mr Burge has been ill for a long time and resigned in February.
But he would't comment further saying the association is suspended during the election campaign and we have nothing else to say.
Meanwhile Mr Burge is living on state benefitsVictor Burge served the conservative party for seventeen years…but now he's resigned, seriously ill with cancver he says he can't face the pressure his party chiefs are putting him under.
He came to West oxfordhsire to become Douglas Hurd's right-hand man four years ago.
officials lent him thirteen thousand pounds to enable him to move south and buy this house.
It was an unsecured loan…now they want him to secure it against the house.
The party's threatened legal action…local party members are horrified…
Party Chairman Tony Picking said today Mr Burge has been ill for a long time and resigned in February.
But he would't comment further saying the association is suspended during the election campaign and we have nothing else to say.
Meanwhile Mr Burge is preparing for a struggle.
A young mother fears she may lose both her children in a battle for custody with her American husband.
Teresa Leinen flew back to Britain after her marriage broke down.
But now her husband's lawyers are asking the High Court to order her to put the children back on a plane to the United States.
This report from Gareth Furby.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
TERESA LEINEN/Mother
RICHARD SHARP/Mother's Solicitor
Voice over
Teresa Leinen met and married her husband in just three months.
He was an American airman, and she moved to United States.
But earlier this year she told him she wanted a divorce.
She says she hoped things would improve but they didn't so she tried to start a new life.
Three weeks ago she flew back to Britain with her children, three year old Sean, and one year old Ashley.
But her husband wants them back.
And his lawyers are pointing to a multi-national agreement on child abduction called the Hague Convention.
She says she feels she's being punished even though she's only trying to do what's best.
The case will be heard in London's High Court the week after next.
He says once an order is made the children have to be put on a plane.
The children are too young for the courts too consider their wishes.
He says he would rather stay with mum.
Mrs Leinen fears if they are flown back to the United States she'll lose custody forever.
In Britain she's eligible for legal aid to help her fight the case.
But in the United States there's no such thing.
If she wants to fight on she'll have to pay and she says she hasn't enough money.
A puppy which may have rabies is being held at a quarantine kennels in the region.
The animal was seized after being brought ashore illegally from a foreign ship.
Ken Goodwin reports.
NEWHNAM-ON-SEVERN/Gloucestershire
NEWPORT/Gwent
GUY TAMPLIN/Kennel Owner
Voice over
This is the cross breed puppy which sparked off a rabies alert.
The animal is being kept at quarantine kennels after being siezed at Newport docks.
It was spotted being walked on the quayside by a crewman from this Croatian ship.
Dog handlers wearing protective clothing, caged the dog and it was brought to kennels at Newhnam on Severn.
He says when it was brought in it was salivating and aggressive.
He says that none can get close enough to examine it properly becasue it tried to bite them.
It's thought the dog was a stray, which originally boarded the ship in Japan.
Crewmen who allowed the dog off the ship in Britain, were breaking the country's strict anti-rabies laws.
Mr Tamplin says the dogs future is uncertain.
He says that he's heard the shipping companyw ant to re-export the dog, but it would be a brave man who risked trying move the animal in it's present condition.
The 3 month old puppy will stay at the kennels until health experts decide what to do with it.
If vets can get close enough, they could test the animal for rabies.
If they can't, it may be a matter of waiting to see if other symptoms develop.
And speedway action returns to Oxford tonight as the Cheetahs try to takes the sting out of the Coventry Bees for the second time in a week.
Much of the weekend sports action though, ISN'T so close to home…
Voice over
Gloucester travel north for a crucial league clash against top of the table, Orrell.
After their midweek success against London Irish earlier this week, their championship chances looked slightly more promising.
But because of injury, they'll be making 5 changes from this winning side, making tomorrow's task quite formidible.
Swindon will go wild if their ice hockey team win promotion to the Premier League.
The Wildcats are looking for early success in the play-off campaign when they play host to Bracknell tomorrow and travel to Basingstoke on Sunday.
The Oxford city stars begin their promotion programme with a tough double header at Streatham Redskins and Medway Bears.
Meanwhile Worcestershire's cricketers are keeping their cool on their tour of South Africa.
In their second match they beat Northern Transvaals target of 222 for 2, thanks to a second wicket partnership by Curtis and Weston.
Back home, down on the river.
Oxford University are looking in good shape for Sunday's womens boat race.
They've recently beaten Cambridge and are hoping it'll be the start of a dark blue rowing double.
The men do battle next weekend.
When Cheltenham goes to the polls on April the ninth, it'll attract international attention…for three reasons.
It expects to be the first constituency in the country to declare a result, it may be the first Liberal Democrat gain, or it may elect Britain's first black Tory MP.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
FEBRUARY 1991
JOHN TAYLOR/Conservative
NIGEL JONES/Liberal Democrat
PAM TATLOW/Labour
Voice over
The 3 main parties regard Cheltenham as a glistening prize, although the Tories and the Liberal Democrats say it's a two horse race.
Officials planning the counting of votes at the Town Hall are in a race of their own; to be the first in Britain to declare a result.
Add to that the probability of either Britain's first black Tory MP, or the first Liberal Democrat gain of election night and it's easy to see why Cheltenham has grabbed the imagination of the political pundits.
To the casual visitor Cheltenham is a thriving shopping centre, a centre of affluence which attracts all the best names.
But Cheltenham has been hit by the recession, the signs are there, fuelled in part by the so-called peace dividend.
In the past, some of Britain's best known defence contracters have provided secure long term employment in the constituency, but thousands have been made redundant in the last two years.
There are rumours too that jobs will go at the town's largest employer, the secret listening base GCHQ.
Looming over the town, Cheltenham's tallest employer, Eagle Star, had losses last year of almost 400 million pounds, although there, redundancies may be avoided by retraining.
Against this background, black barrister John Taylor is defending a 1987 Conservative majority of less than 5,000.
Mr Taylor's selection as candidate 15 months ago threatened to split the local party, when some said he was wrong for the town.
Eventually he was backed by an extraordinary meeting of every party member, but not before he'd become the best known candidate in the country.
He sees jobs as a key issue.
The Tories acknowledge they have a fight on their hands against Nigel Jones for the Liberal Democrats.
They've increased their share of the vote in Cheltenham in every General Election since 1974.
Last year the party won overall control of the borough council, when they polled more votes than Tories and Labour combined.
They say they've nursed the constituency to a point where they regard it as one of the most winnable in the country; certainly the bookies make them favourites.
On the other hand the bookies rank Labour's candidate as the outsider in the Cheltenham race at 33 to 1.
Pam Tatlow believes she too has nursed the constituency, but she'll have to pull off the shock of the night to win.
In 1987 Labour polled only 7.5%, just 5,000 votes.
The voters of Cheltenham turn out in large numbers for a General Election -in 1987 the figure was almost 80 percent.
In the run-up to April the 9th, they seem no less keen.
The other candidates fighting Cheltenham are…
Tim Hurst reporting.
There are three other candidates in Cheltenham.
Major says taxes and wealth are the issues
FTSE down 24
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-four point three at twenty-four, forty-seven point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar seventy-three, and down at two marks, eighty-five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Do-it-yourself decorators and cowboy builders are ruining Britain's historic towns, according to planning watchdogs.
They say so-called home improvements can kill off the tourist trade.
Tim Hurst reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
CIRENCESTER/Gloucestershire
GERRY WALKER/Cheltenham Council
CHRISTOPHER RATCLIFFE/Manufacturer
Voice over
Replacement windows and doors, like these in a Regency terrace in Cheltenham in Gloucestershire, should have no place in Britain's historic towns, according to the planners and yet there's no law to stop it happening.
Shop fronts can be decorated without permission, breaking away from the original design.
Cirencester too is being spoilt by DIY efforts at improvement, says the English Historic Towns Forum, set up by planners who want more control.
The planning chiefs of Cirencester and Cheltenham are members of the Forum and they don't like what they see happening in their own back yards.
Householders in Cheltenham though disagree, to them it's a matter of taste and cost.
One manufacturer of modern doors and windows in Gloucestershire says he goes out of his way to offer finishes and styles in keeping with older properties and his work helps conservation in another way — his frames don't use timber from the rainforests.
The planning forum is to lobby Parliament for toughter laws.
Otherwise, they say, historic towns will be changed forever.
In part two: Back on track…the Robins tune up for another season.
One to watch…the town that's bound to grab the election headlines.
Welcome back:
ERIKA BARNES
GLENN HODDLE/Swindon Manager
Voice over
The year: 1969.
The match: Swindon against Arsenal in the League Cup Final at Wembley; another goal for the great Don Rogers.
He entered Swindon's record books, scoring 32 goals for the club in a single season.
Last week at the County Ground Duncan Shearer put his name alongside Roger's with a typical piece of clinical finishing.
Who'd have bet against him breaking Roger's record?
No one probably except Blackburn's Kenny Dalglish who swooped on Monday to make Shearer and Swindon an offer they couldn't refuse.
Town's fans are angry at losing the club's leading scorer.
But what does team manager Glenn Hoddle have to say?
Voice over
Tomorrow Swindon take on FA Cup semi-finalists Portsmouth at Fratton Park.
Pompey won three two at the County Ground in November and are chasing hard for promotion themselves.
Swindon will be hoping dreams of Wembley distract Portsmouth.
Hoddle's been in the transfer market to make up for Shearer's loss.
Terry Gibson, on loan from Wimbledon, lines up front with Mitchell.
Martin Ling is back in the squad after injury.
Portsmouth are seventh in the table, just two places above Town.
Swindon are looking for their third consecutive win.
It should be a tight game.
The last time Oxford played fellow strugglers Bristol City you could barely see the pitch.
Paul Simpson's goal was enough for a one-one draw.
Brian Horton's likely to name the same side that beat Portsmouth last week.
Bristol City have come good just when it matters, winning their last two.
But Oxford have lost only one of their last seven.
The fight to stay up is getting more difficult each week.
A win for Oxford would take them above City.
Only one way to end the roundup this week.
Deadly Duncan at his best.
And Hereford United are at home tomorrow to Carlisle.
It was out with the old and in with the new for the start of the speedway season in Swindon.
New riders, new bikes and a new race night.
RON BYFORD/Co-Promoter/Swindon Robins
MITCH SHIRRA/Captain/Swindon Robins
JAN O PEDERSEN/Cradley Heath
Voice over
The Robins are back in their nest.
Tuning up for another season of speedway in Swindon.
It very nearly didn't happen.
Demotion from the league last year spelt financial disaster.
It ruffled so many feathers, the Robins were reinstated.
It means 44 years after that very first meeting at the Abbey Stadium, the fans still have something to cheer about.
And it signals the end of a long, uncertain winter for teams bosses.
Male speaker
It was very frustrating.
It has been my life.
And it's great to see it carry on.
Voice over
This season a change in the points rule means the Robins can strengthen their side.
They've called back the likes of former World finalists Jimmy Nilsen and Captain Mitch Shirra.
Now, rather than sliding to the bottom of the league, they hope to be accelerating to the top.
Male speaker
The main thing is to get consistancy.
Last year we were at the bottom; we can forget about that.
We'll be looking at the top 3 in the league and possibly the Gold Cup or Knock Out Cup.
Voice over
The first outing of the season against a well rehearsed Cradley Heath, showed the potential of the new line up, but it wasn't quite alright on the night.
The Robins were on the losing side, 43 — 47.
World Champion Jan O Pedersen was star of the night.
His maximum brought with it one of the fastest race times ever seen in Swindon.
Male speaker
It was a brilliant night out.
The track is the best I've ever seen.
Voice over
I wish every track was like this.
Clearly it all adds up to a great season ahead for the fans, who fought to keep speedway in Swindon.
A deserted Victorian mansion tucked away in the Cotswolds has been awarded a repair grant by the Getty Foundation.
Only a handful of such grants are made each year, and Woodchester Mansion's success is all the more remarkable because the building was only ever half-finished 
SIMON GARRETT Nympsfield
JAMIE VANS Woodchester Mansion Trust
Voice over
Started in 1854 Woodchester Mansion was the brainchild of a 21 year old architect who apparently spent all his patron's money.
Work ended abruptly after a few years — the builders didn't even bother to take their ladder away.
Now it's hoped to restore it to its unfinished state and open a unique college for stonemasons.
The Getty grant of £21,000 will go towards repairing a badly rain-affected staircase.
Male speaker
It's money for preparation for the next phase of building work which is to restore the Grand Stair and the rainwater system which has failed.
It's the first major project.
Voice over
The name of William Leigh, Woodchester's owner, is punched into the plasterwork in one of the rooms.
It seems he gave the fledgling architect his head.
Everything is stone.
The bath is cut from a single block.
The gargoyle shower heads which never saw running water.
The Gothic style of the mansion has made it an ideal film set in the past.
At the time, it was just a tomb for Leigh's money, thanks to his young designer's fancies.
Male speaker
He was local and only 21.
His name was Benjamin Bucknall and he was an enthusiast about stone and that was apparent by his use of it all over the building.
He used it whereever he could and in some places where he shouldn't like in the rainwater system.
Voice over
Trust members hope the initial Getty grant could open the way for more donations later.
When the restoration is complete, Woodchester will have a practical purpose.
Male speaker
The Trust has acquired the building on a 99 year lease from Stroud District Council.
The idea's to repair the building to its unfinished state and use the repair programmes to help teach stonemasonry and building conservation.
Voice over
The house is lived in now.
A colony of endangered horseshoe bats roosts in the rafters.
Part of the tenancy even demands sufficient livestock grazing the valley to provide enough dung for enough flies for the bats to eat.
There are local rumours about hauntings.
Perhaps William Leigh stalks the corridors waiting for his house to be finished.
That's something which will never happen.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
British tipped for Oscars
FTSE down 6
The hundred shares index closed down six point four at two eight four six point five 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty nine and down at two marks, forty two.
only two matches left of rugby union's league season and Gloucester need to win at least one of them to save themselves from relegation…on saturday they went down to Orrell at Kingsholm…the score 8-13 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
Voice over
Both teams needed to win this match and in the first half, there was only one winner; Gloucester.
Tim Smith put them ahead with a penalty and then scored a great opening try.
All this with hooker, Dave Kearsey off the pitch and out of the game with an injury.
It looked good for the cherry and whites, as they turned round at half time with an 8-0 lead.
But that was it.
Gloucester stopped there.
At the start of the second half, Orrell were back in the match.
England scrum half, Dowi Morris, was the man who did the damage.
We wormed and wriggled his way through to touch down and the rot set in.
A conversion and 2 penalties from fly-half, Ainscough took Orrell to victory, despite a late charge from Gloucester.
Here's the league table now.
The bottom 4 all go down.
So Gloucester are in a dangerous position and the pressure's on.
Coach, Keith Richardson says there is pressure, but they should win one, if not both of their last 2 games.
He said they played well in the first half, but then things went wrong in the second half, when Orrell had a bit of luck in scoring after a knock on.
so we've got long red faces in Gloucester…while in Oxford we've got dark blue flags flying at half-mast from the boathouses…yes the unthinkable happened on saturday…
Cambridge won the boat race 
MARTIN HAYCOCK/Cambridge Cox
MATTHEW PINSENT/Oxford President
Voice over
Town Crier…
the Boat Race is a great British sporting occasion…untouched and untroubled by the march of time…no ticket touts or trouble…just thousands and thousands of people lining the banks of the Thames…the watches too…the boat race is still something special…
American lady says its two schools rowing against each other…true amateurs and its wonderful
The Oxford crew arrived to cup final welcome…complete with police escort…there wasn't a balcony or rooftop to spare…everyone was showing their colours…the old boys came in their caps…
An Oxfordshire man…
Martin Haycock from Wallingford wearing the light blue as Cambridge cox…led his crew out…they were already celebrating having won the toss…
Oxford came next they went out as favourites and were confident of pulling home first…
But the record books of course will show it was Cambridge's year…worthy winners in a time of seventeen minutes…
and were they happy…you bet…
For Oxford…the boat race blues it always hurts more when you lose…
The wallingford buy who'd steered Cambridge home was carried shoulder high…
Martin haycock says they had a terrific start and after that it was rythm rythm all the way
Oxford were beaten but not broken…and president Matthew Pinsent showed the true mark of a sportsman as he faced defeat…
Matthew Pinsent says it was Cambridge's race…
Oxford can't grumble they've been winning for 15 years…its Cambridge's turn but Oxford will be back on top next year
this week we're looking ahead to another great sporting event…
The Grand National…and you could be there at Aintree…we've two tickets to be won in a special competition 
Voice over
We've two of the best tickets to give away for Grand National day, so watch closely.
Simple question.
How many jockeys, trainers and horses can you spot in the next forty seconds?
We want all the names.
Got them all?
Send them on a postcard to Central South at Abingdon, where our postcode is OX14 1SA.
Closing date is this Wednesday.
We'll be drawing the winner out of the hat on Friday night.
A judge has ordered a fish farm to compensate a group of anglers for ruining their fishing season.
He says the farm allowed RAINBOW trout to escape into a stretch of river reserved for BROWN trout.
The anglers say the rainbows were too easy to catch.
ROBIN POWELL/River Kennet
ROY BRODRICK/Angler
JACK AINSLIE/Fish Farmer
Voice over
For decades, the River Kennet near Marlborough was one of the best trout-fishing waters in the world; until 4 years ago, when several hundred rainbow trout escaped from this fish farm at Mildenhall.
Rainbow trout are more docile and easier to catch than the more popular brown trout and members of the Savernake Fly Fishing Club complained that the arrival of the rainbows ruined their season.
They decided to sue the farm for negligence and today they won an historic test case at the County Court in Swindon.
His Honour Mark Dyer said the fish farm was well aware that that particular stretch of river was reserved for brown trout.
Nevertheless, he added, it had failed to take the necessary steps to prevent an escape of rainbow trout.
He ordered the farm's insurers to pay 10 500 pounds in damages.
Savernake's fly-fishers say it's a victory for anglers everywhere.
But the owners of the fish farm — Gale and Ainslie Limited — insist they weren't negligent.
The case is the first of its kind in legal history and is bound to set a precedent.
Trout-fishing on the Kennet is now more or less back to normal, but anglers say that other rivers are still affected and anyone else who spoils their fun in future can expect to pay for it.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central…the lighter side of the boat race blues.
The one Oxford person celebrating a Cambridge win.
Plus, half-way house.
American money for the mansion that will never be finished.
Welcome back: In a few minutes we'll be visiting the Victorian mansion that isn't finished yet, and has just been given a grant to ensure that it never will be.
But first, with all the weekend's sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Don't mention the name Brentford to Swindon and their fans again this season.
Talk about a bogey team.
In 3 games, Town have lost 2 and drawn one and on top of that had two players sent-off on Saturday.
It all looked good at the start, but trouble came when Steve White went into a challenge with Brentford's Keith Millen.
Violent conduct was the crime, but Swindon will appeal.
There was worse to come just minutes later, when striker, Dave Mitchell, who'd already been booked, charged carelessly into a tackle.
A sending off for him too, which brought quite an outburst from manager, Glenn Hoddle.
He told his number 9 what he thought of him.
Hope you can't lip read!
With 9 men, Swindon then had to hold out and hold Brentford off.
There were some heart-stopping moments in the Town goalmouth, but they survived and nearly ran off with a win.
In the dying minutes, full-back, Paul Bodin burst through.
He could have won it, but everything considered, 0-0 was a good scoreline.
At Fratton Park, Oxford did their best to stop Swindon's promotion rivals, Portsmouth.
United nearly drew first blood, but they fell apart in the second half.
Pompey cruised home with 3 goals.
The first was a real horror story for Oxford full-back, Les Robinson, who scored one of the own goals of the season.
There was nothing United could do about the second; a great piece of football skill from Alan McLoughlin.
As for the third, well that possibly should have been stopped.
Reece couldn't hold the shot and Guy Whittingham ran in for his 40th goal of the season.
United were dead then, but they kept going.
Les Robinson came as close as he could to making up for his own goal, but it wasn't Oxford's day.
Portsmouth 3 — Oxford 0.
More crime and punishment at Edgar Street, where Bury skipper, Derek Hume got sent-off.
Watch the dark shirt in the middle.
As the referee's back is turned, the elbow goes in.
Guilty.
United took the lead midway through the first half.
An own goal to rival Oxford's.
Bury's Derek Ward was the unlucky man.
Within a couple of minutes, Bury had shaken themselves and Hereford up with an equaliser.
No stopping this one from England Youth International, Aide Mike.
Back came United with another.
The scorer, new signing, Darren Rowbotham.
He's on loan until the end of the season and could be quite a catch.
He didn't do too well at Birmingham, but when he was with Exeter, he was a real hot shot.
Hereford wrapped things up in the second half.
They got a third when Derek Hall was fouled and the Hereford skipper showed how penalties should be taken.
Pick that one out.
United 3 — Bury 1.
In Central News tonight.
Murder in the docks.
Ships impounded in hunt for woman's killer.
Wound up.
Receivers go in at Formula One racing team.
And the end of rainbow.
Victory for the brownies in the trout war.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Detectives believe the victim may have been attracted to the area by the arrival of foreign ships.
Several vessels are now being prevented from leaving the country while their crew members are questioned by police 
TIM HURST/Sharpness
BOGDAN MAJDA/Polish Sailor
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
Police divers worked through the night in the Sharpness to Gloucester canal at Sharpness docks, recovering the woman's body, after it was discovered half-submerged by walkers.
The body was taken away for a post mortem which revealed pressure marks on her neck, she had apparently been throttled.
A finger tip search of the surrounding area began early this morning and deserted warehouses nearby were searched by scenes of crime officers.
4 ships in the port, from Germany, Russia, the Bahamas and Greece have been ordered not to sail until detectives have questioned every crew member.
The woman has been identified as a 32 year old from the Bristol area, who'd been missing since early on Friday, but detectives won't name her until her family have been told.
There are no homes close to the area where the body was found, but workers in the docks area expect to be questioned by police.
The body was found on the day that celebrations were held to mark the 200th anniversary of the opening of the Sharpness to Gloucester canal.
And detectives have just confirmed the identity of the dead woman.
She's been named as Carol Clark, from Montpelier in Bristol.
The March Formula One motor racing team has laid off its entire workforce after the company was declared insolvent.
March has been in financial difficulties for some time and doesn't have a sponsor for this season.
The company still hopes to find a buyer, but the future looks bleak.
GRAEME BOWD/Bicester
NICK O'REILLY/Rothman Pantall
STIRLING MOSS/Former Grand Prix Driver
Voice over
A man has appeared in court at Milton Keynes charged with the murder of his wife.
Harvinder Mattu, aged twenty-eight, was remanded in custody.
The body of twenty three year-old Pardeep Mattu was found yesterday at a house on the town's Walnut Tree estate.
Police say she'd been strangled.
Fire investigators say an explosion which destroyed a flat WAS caused deliberately.
MILTON KEYNES
The window of the flat in Milton Keynes was blown out and everything inside was destroyed.
A fireman was slightly injured and a passer-by was overcome by smoke.
Fire investigators believe the living room was doused with petrol and set alight.
Witnesses have reported hearing someone running from the scene.
Experts on the effects of head injuries are calling for better treatment for victims.
Hundreds of people suffer brain injury every day, but the vast majority won't get the long-term help they need.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
JAMES BRADY/Shooting Victim
DEBORAH WEARING/Conference Organiser
GEORGE ZITNAY/US Head Injury Foundation
Voice over
James Brady is a survivor.
He fought back after being shot in the head, as the Press secretary beside Ronald Reagan during an assasination attempt.
Doctors expected him to die, but he didn't, although 12 years later, his brain injury has changed his life.
James Brady is just one of hundreds of experts and survivors at a top level conference on brain injuries.
Around 2,500 people in this country suffer a head injury each day, but over 70 per cent of the seriously affected will get no follow up treatment.
Facilities like the recently opened Russell Cairns Unit in Oxford are few and far between.
Deborah Wearing's husband has a severe brain injury.
Many Americans are attending the conference.
Services there are wider, with brain injuries about to be recognised in law.
As James Brady knows, the patient himself holds the key to recovery.
It's hoped the conference will help others take the first steps towards full re-habilitation. (1)
A bumpy ride: Major flies in to fight for a key marginal.
Stick with us: Defence losses would be worse under Labour.
And could they be innocent?.
New doubt over twenty men in top security jail.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Earlier, the Prime Minister suffered a bumpy landing in his plane at a local airport.
We'll hear from Mr Major shortly,
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
GLOUCESTER
Voice over
It seemed the Prime Minister was in danger of quite literally hitting the campaign trail when his specially chartered aircraft made a decidedly bumpy landing at Gloucestershire airport near Cheltenham.
But apparently unflustered by the incident, he was soon pressing the flesh with the party faithful in Cheltenham and rejecting any suggestion that his party may lose this key marginal seat.
One woman fainted in the crush as police fought to control a crowd of up to a thousand.
Then Mr Major adopted a piece of old-fashioned campaigning.
With his wife Norma beside him, he climbed onto a soapbox to put across his campaign message.
After lunch Mr Major arrived in Gloucester, which could become a three way marginal if the opinion polls are to be believed.
There he toured a canal barge, specially built to cater for the disabled.
Trusting to things mechanical for the second time today, he sank below on a hydraulic platform designed for wheelchairs.
To please the pack of cameramen and reporters following Mr Major on the campaign trail, Mr Major toasted his own success with a mug of tea, pleased apparently that the galley staff had got the colours right.
His campaign workers no doubt hope the tea will refresh the parts the other parties can't reach.
During his trip the Prime Minister paid a special visit to the Central South Gloucester studio, which is based in the docks.
As he'd spent most of the day campaigning in an area where thousands of jobs have been lost in the defence industry, I asked him why he shouldn't expect to lose votes on that issue.
Voice over
A report claims that twenty two inmates of a high security jail may have been wrongfully imprisoned.
The National Association of Probation Officers went into Long Lartin in Worcestershire to interview and examine the personal files of men who insist they're innocent.Anne Nankivell reports.
LONG LARTIN/Worcestershire
HARRY FLETCHER/NAPO
the Gloucester…
Bath cup semi-final is just one of many big events this weekend…at Aintree they race the Grand National…while on the Thames they'll be rowing the Boat Race…and today in London the Oxford and Cambridge crews were pulled together for the weigh-in…
Nick Clark reports.
GEOFFREY PAGE/Daily Telegraph
LIZ CHICK
Voice over
Out on the water by Putney bridge this morning, the relentless preparation continues.
The Varsity showdown is almost upon them.
And Oxford, since bringing in 20 year old Ian Gardiner to stroke position just a few weeks ago, are now edging ahead as favourites.
But Cambridge will take heart from today's weigh-in.
While the dark blues averaged 13 stone 7, Cambridge were 2lbs heavier per man and the heavier crew GENERALLY wins.
But the EXPERTS say the difference is of little consequence.
Male speaker
It doesn't make that much difference.
Voice over
Crucial to both crews' chances is the performance of the coxes.
Oxford's 20 year old Liz Chick is only the 6th woman to take part.
Female speaker
It's going to be tough, but I think we'll do it.
Voice over
And if Liz does steer the fastest line, she'll be keeping up a recent Oxford tradition.
They've only lost once in the last 16 years.
A painting by Gloucestershire and England wicketkeeper, Jack Russell, is being hung in the Imperial War Museum.
It comme morates the fiftieth anniversary of a famous commando raid, which changed the course of World War Two in the Atlantic.
Simon Garrett reports 
IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM/London
JACK RUSSELL/Artist
ROBERT MONTGOMERY/Raid Veteran
JOHN MAY/Raid Veteran
ALAN BORG/Imperial War Museum
Voice over
March 28th 1942 and a convoy of small British craft nears the occupied French port of St Nazaire.
Jack Russell's painting depicts the moment German searchlights alerted the shore batteries just too late to stop HMS Cambletown, packed with high explosive, ramming the dry dock.
It had been the only Atlantic refuge available to the battleship, Tirpitz.
Despite the heavy toll of dead and captured commandos, Tirpitz never threatened Atlantic shipping again.
The artist was determined to present an accurate picture.
Male speaker
The painting took about 5 weeks, but 4 weeks of that was research because I wanted to get every rivet right.
Voice over
For many veterans of Operation Chariot, this was their first sight of the model on which the raid was planned.
This German film shows the wreckage of the vessels that brought the commandos, but stops short of revealing the damage to the dock itself.
This was one of 5 VCs won in the raid which produced a record 80 decorations.
Jack Russell's painting inspires vivid memories of that moment of discovery.
Male speaker
It's so true to life, just like it was, I think it's tremendous.
Male speaker
We knew the German signals for the night, so we tricked them into holding fire until we were about a mile out, then all hell broke loose.
Male speaker
From a military point of view it was a tremendous success; imagine this hoard of adventurers going all that way and causing the trouble they did, it was like a story from’ Boy's Own Paper.’
Voice over
After the raid, successful attacks on Allied ships in the Atlantic virtually stopped.
De Gaulle said for the first time since their defeat, the French people had reason to hope for liberation.
Princess returns home to mourn father
FTSE up 5
The hundred shares index closed up five points at twenty-four, fifty-two point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar seventy-three, and up at two marks eighty-six.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Back on the campaign trail now, with a look at the battle ahead for another marginal Parliamentary seat.
Erika Barnes now reports on Swindon,
SWINDON/Wiltshire
BEN RANDELL-SLY/First-Time Voter
ANDREW BALDWIN/First-Time Voter
REBECCA BRINKLEY/First-Time Voter
SIMON COOMBS/Conservative
JIM D'AVILA/Labour
SIMON CORDON/Liberal Democrat
BILL HUGHES/Green
ROLY GILLARD/Monster Raving Loony/Party Party Party
Voice over
Waiting in the wings, Swindon's Parliamentary hopefuls looking for their chance to win over the electorate.
Here at New College their task is to woo an audience of first time voters who have a clear view of the vital issues.
Male speaker
The important issue is the economy to increase my job prospects.
Male speaker
Taxation is important.
They want to vote for the party which makes them better off.
Female speaker
The most important factor is education, student loans, grants etc.
Voice over
Swindon is one of the eighties boom towns which has had to shoulder the burden of recession.
Once it was easy to attract hi-tech business to replace the shut down railworks.
Now it's a town which is struggling to attract trade.
The constituency takes in much of the older heart of Swindon which contrasts with the newer expansion.
By the next election, the town will be split into two seats to encompass parts of the town excluded by the Swindon boundary.
If the Conservatives are going to get back into number 10, candidates like Simon Coombs are going to have to hold onto marginals like Swindon.
He's setting a brisk pace in the race for the electorate.
Since his win in 1987, Swindon has grown, changing the complexion of a town which gave him a majority ofjust 5,000.
Mr Coombs is telling voters that it's not the tories, but the labour local council who're harming the local economy.
Male speaker
Swindon has grown economically in the last 15 years and the unemployment level was down to a record low 2 to 3 years ago.
With the recession the local labour council has refused to go for new jobs and at the height of this, they sacked the man whose job it was to bring jobs to Swindon.
Voice over
Labour challenge that view and a determined to win back a seat they once held.
Their candidate Jim D'Avila blames Government spending restrictions for the problems faced by Swindon.
He's calling for a change in direction to kick start the economy.
Mr D'Avila says Labour will help people who're trapped by high mortgages and the property crash.
Male speaker
Labour want to take the shadow of gloom away.
The Government have been too negative.
We want £23 million from the sale of council houses released to get construction going.
If we build public sector houses we will give them the homes they need.
Voice over
The Liberal Democrat candidate in Swindon, Simon Cordon, knows the hardship of recession first hand.
He was recently made redundant.
He's visiting local businesses like this one which makes garden equipment to hear how they're coping with the drop in orders.
Mr Cordon says he wants to stop Swindon growing and protect firms in the future.
Male speaker
The problem isn't met by having an extra pound in their pockets through tax cuts.
It's getting real order books.
In the long term, Britain has to come into the next century with a partnership in Europe.
Voice over
The election is also giving a green light for policies about the environment.
Green candidate, Bill Hughes sees investment in more public transport as not only the key to an improved environment, but also to an improved economy.
Instead of more concrete, conjestion, pollution and unemployment, we are grappling with these issues at grass roots level.
Roly Gillard of the Monster Raving Loony Party Party Party isn't really making light of the election.
He's just warning voters of the political banana skins on route to the polling booths.
Male speaker
Unemployment could be solved by raising benefit money to £500 a week.
People would want to give up their jobs and there'll be loads of jobs for those who want them.
Voice over
Also standing in the Swindon constituency is Vincent Farrar, former accountant at Swindon Town football club.
6 candidates and a fascinating fight for a marginal seat.
For Swindon voters young and old, it'll be a nailbiter to the end.
In part two: Heavy going: Weighing up the competition for the Boat Race.
And Lest We Forget: A cricketer's tribute to the heroes of St Nazaire.
Hello there.
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Hereford play again tomorrow night at Burnley…on Wednesday Oxford go to Millwall…
Swindon to Sunderland…while they fight on Gloucester's rugby championship chase came to an end at Orrell on Saturday…the cherry and whites lost 18-12 
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
A team of cancer specialists is pioneering a new type of laser treatment which should help sufferers without the need for major surgery.
In some cases it's hoped patients will be in and out of hospital within a day.
WESLEY SMITH/Gloucester
HUGH BARR/Surgeon
Voice over
Doctors at the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital have already seen some success in their experiment.
They're eradicating tumours which might otherwise have to go untreated because they are inaccesible to the surgeon or unsuitable for other types of therapy.
Here they're operating on the patient's liver.
As long as the cancers are detected early enough, laser treatment can save lives.
The whole process is viewed on a TV monitor.
The Gloucestershire team are also using the new method of photodynamic therapy.
The patient takes a drug which reacts to laser light.
The drug then combats the tumour.
It could revolutionise cancer treatment worldwide.
The surgeon says that it can avoid major surgery.
Hopefully, it should see many forms of cancer treatable as simply as popping into hopsital for minor surgery.
That's all for now, but tonight on Central South we begin a series of special reports on community care.
On Thursday, the way we look after the less able people in our society will undergo drastic change, the biggest since the start of the National Health service.
GARGY PATEL/Reporting
Voice over
Care in the Community.
It's supposed to help the vulnerable, the elderly, frail, physically and mentally disabled.
For the last two years, the policy has been prepared to give all these people the chance to live a full and independent life, not in hospitals and institutions, but at home, as part of our community.
Some say most of the caring, as always, will fall to family and friends.
From April 1st, the responsibility for providing support will be transferred to local councils.
The councils say they're ready to take on the job.
But critics say it gives false hope to millions and they predict chaos, as local authorities run out of money and those on the edge, like the homeless, are squeezed out.
In the first of a 3-part series, we ask those on the receiving end what they think, as they ask the qestion, Who Cares?
Victim's father appeals for help
FTSE up 14
The hundred shares index closed up fourteen point five at two eight six point one 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty nine and down at two marks, forty two.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News.
Helping those who can't help themselves.
Just Who Cares?
We have a special report.
Plus, fighting the fraudsters.
Tightening up on your flexible friend.
Welcome back: One of the biggest changes to the National Health Service since it began will come in to force this week.
The responsibility for caring for frail, elderly and disabled people will move from health authorities to local councils.
(Harriet
Millions already rely on care in the community.
But critics say the changes will leave many worse off.
In the first of three reports Gargy Patel looks at those who depend on the service…and asks Who Cares?
SHARON MACE
DUCKLINGTON/Oxfordshire
KATH MANSON
WANTAGE/Oxfordshire
JIM/Homeless
MARTIN/Homeless
JO McGHEE/Carer
Voice over
For the last twenty three years Sharon Mace has seen the world from a disabled trolley.
Her mother fought for her to be educated at school like other children.
Because of her physical disability, she needs twenty four hour care.
But for Sharon the word care is often misunderstood.
Kath Manson is eighty five and suffers from severe arthritis.
She lives at home with her family.
As a retired deputy head teacher, having to be cared for was hard to accept at first.
It's a close family…
Kath's daughter Jo has two sons with learning disability.
Caring, she says, comes from those who want to care.
For many it's relying on others to speak up for them.
Sam is physically and mentally disabled and also blind.
She needs constant care, but she also needs people with patience and understanding to help improve her quality of life
But there are many who say no-one cares.
Oxford has one of the highest numbers of homeless people in the country…perhaps two to three thousand.
Around five hundred are put up in hostels each night.
Others are left to wander or sleep rough.
Many have a serious addiction or illness and have lived on the streets for much of their lives.
Care in the community is supposed to give the vulnerable, elderly, frail, and disabled the chance to live a full and independent life.
Over the last few years, the preparations have been laid to bring more people out of hospitals and institutions.
From April the first, the responsibility for providing that care moves from health authorities to local councils.
It's been hailed as the biggest change in social welfare since the birth of the National Health Service.
But who actually does the caring?
Mostly it's left to family carers.
One in ten people have some form of disability and need help.
It's estimated that one in three of us will end up caring for someone.
Tomorrow we look at the care that's provided and find out who does the caring.
A firm has come up with a new high-tech way to beat credit card fraud.
Cards falling into the wrong hands cost the industry three hundred pounds every minute.
Now it's hoped laser technology will protect customers and keep the fraudsters at bay.
KIM BARNES/Reporting
IAN ROBSON/De La Rue Card Technology
IAN STUTTARD/National and Provincial
Voice over
Credits cards; a shopper's dream, but a retailer's nightmare.
Card fraud is costing the industry £165 million a year and now the battle against it is taking a hi tec turn.
A Tewkesbury firm has developed a way of engraving both the customer's photo and signature onto the card.
Over 8 million cards are in circulation.
This is biggest single anti fraud measure since cards were introduced 25 years ago.
The National and Provincial Building Society will be the first to bring the new photocards in next month.
It's claimed that the laser-engraved cards are fraud-proof at a cost of £1.20 each to produce, compared with 25p for the old cards It's an investment that the industry hopes will beat the fraudsters hands down.
This Thursday marks the (75th) seventy fifth anniversary of the Royal Air Force, with almost (150) a hundred and fifty aircraft taking part in a Royal fly-past.
Some are coming from as far afield as Germany, so today, despite abysmal flying conditions, they all went up for a rehearsal.
GRAEME BOWD/RAF Brize Norton
Sqdn Ldr PAT FITZGERALD/Formation Leader
Voice over
Heavy rain and strong winds at Brize Norton…the sort of weather that would have grounded the seat of the pants flyers who launched the RAF in 1918.
But not of course the intrepid airmen who gathered for today's briefing.
The 75th anniversary flypast is one of the most ambitious displays the RAF has ever staged, ivolving more than a third of it's aircraft.
The planes from Brize will join others over Waddington and the Wash, before circling East Anglia for run in to RAF Marham in Norfolk.
With 148 aircraft taking part the plan requires split second timing.
But one thing hasn't changed since the early days — at low level the huge formation will navigate by map, despite the sophistication of their aircraft.
Male speaker
We have excellent navigation equipment but on the day it is back to basics.
Map reading, stop watch and checking marks on the ground.
If we are out on the day it will be because of human error but computers can't do it so accurately.’
Voice over
The scale of this operation is such that the rehearsal alone will cost more than half a million pounds in fuel.
Taking off from Oxfordshire the aircraft were soon engulfed in cloud.
But in Norfolk the weather had improved as the Brize formation of VC10s and a Tristar flew low over Marham.
The pilots will see little of the show, they look just at the planes around them.
But the Queen will see just about every past and present RAF aircraft a flypast which will go on for three quarters of an hour.
Today it was just a private performance for the Royal Air Force.
But the display went off without a hitch.
And they'll all be back to do it again on Thursday.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
University students have been moved to temporary accommodation after a stolen car crashed into a block of flats, demolishing a wall.
Two teenagers have been arrested, a third is being hunted.
SIMON GARRETT/Milton Keynes
ANTHONY McALOONE/Student
Sgt JUDY STEPHENSON/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
A stolen Vauxhall Cavalier smashed into the wall of a flat in Bedgeberry Place in Milton Keynes.
The site is part of student halls for De Montfort University.
No-one was inside at the time.
The block is now being sealed off and residents moved out while structural repairs are made
Male speaker
There's a few architecture students with expensive drawing boards and such so there must be thousands of pounds damage inside.
The walls had all collapsed and looked pretty flimsy.
It looked like it had been taken apart with a bulldozer
Voice over
The car had been chased up the M1 as far as Newport Pagnall by two Bedfordshire police patrol cars.
The Cavalier was being followed through Milton Keynes when it turned into the cul-de-sac and hit the wall at about 50 miles an hour.
A 17 and 18 year old escaped with no more than bloody noses.
Two passers-by stopped them getting away
Female speaker
They actually ran off from the car but were arrested.
We're looking for male youth of around 18 years of age, the rest are in custody still at Milton Keynes
Voice over
The flats will have to stay empty for several weeks
A man has held up a shop assistant at gunpoint.
It happened at Jardine's Chemist on the Pennyland estate in Milton Keynes.
He made off with an undisclosed amount of cash.
MILTON KEYNES
He's described as white, in his early twenties, slim and around five feet eight inches tall.
He was wearing a distinctive pink crash helmet.
A row of houses, which were bought up and then left empty by Robert Maxwell are to be sold again.
OXFORD
Work has started on redeveloping derilict land behind the houses on Botley Road in Oxford.
The DIY firm Wickes, and Toys R Us are building new superstores there, creating thirty five jobs.
The empty houses are expected to be re-occupied.
A group of charity workers feared missing in the Bosnian war zone have turned up safe and well.
Concern grew when they failed to return to base at an agreed time, after delivering aid to the besiged town of Travnik.
But today they contacted their colleagues in Oxford to say they'd been held up by blizzards.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
TIM WINTER/Bosnia Aid Committee
Male speaker
You're alright are you?
You're all safe and sound?
Voice over
The call from the former Yugoslavia that said they were safe an well.
Aid workers from the Bosnia Aid Committee of Oxford had apparently gone missing for 4 days in the war zone.
But it was the weather, not the fighting, that was to blame.
Male speaker
We took 3 days to get back.
The winds were that high.
They hadn't seen such bad conditions for 50 years.
Voice over
The volunteers had delivered aid to the Bosnian town of Travnik.
Besieged and beleagued town in desperate need of food and medical supplies.
They were lucky.
Others have failed to get through the treacherous terrain and past the warring factions.
The concern for their safety was understandable.
Male speaker
We were fired at on 3 separate occasions.
It's run of the mill.
Voice over
Apart from that, we had no further problems.
The alert highlights the difficulties that aid teams are encountering in Bosnia.
Male speaker
Bosnia is a telecommunications black hole.
We can't telephone.
We could equip them with two-way radios, but they would be confiscated at road checks.
Voice over
The Bosnia Aid Committee of Oxford has to weigh up the risks and the costs of each convoy.
Food and medical supplies against an efficient and smooth running operation.
They say they've got the balance right.
The 8 successful trips so far speak volumes.
But perhaps so too does the silence of the past 4 days.
A team of cancer specialists has developed a new treatment that reduces the need for major surgery.
By using a combination of laser optics and cancer drugs, it's hoped that some patients will be in and out of hospital within a day.
WESLEY SMITH/Gloucester
HUGH BARR/Surgeon
JOHN HEAD/Fundraiser
Voice over
Doctors at the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital have already seen some success in their experiment.
They're eradicating tumours which might otherwise have to go untreated because they are inaccesible to the surgeon or unsuitable for other types of therapy.
Here, they're operating on the patient's liver.
As long as the cancers are detected early enough, laser treatment can save lives.
The whole process is viewed on a TV monitor.
The Surgeon explains that they can view the process on a tv monitor by using an ultrasound fibre.
After an incision through the skin of as little as a centimetre long, a device known as an ultrasound probe and laser fibres are inserted directly into the centre of the tumour.
The laser heats up and destroys it.
The Gloucestershire team are also using the new method of photodynamic therapy.
The patient takes a drug which reacts to laser light.
The drug then combats the tumour.
It could revolutionise cancer treatment worldwide.
The surgeon says that it can avoid major surgery.
At the moment the equipment used here is borrowed from abroad because it is being used for experiment.
There have been some grants, but the team needs thousands of pounds more for its own unit.
John Head, from Huntley in the Forest of Dean, is a cancer sufferer and recognises the need for urgent help.
He's set up a fundraising appeal.
John Head says it is vital the money is found to help other cancer sufferers.
Early results are encouraging, but it'll be 3 to 4 years before the long-term results can be assessed.
Hopefully, it should see many forms of cancer treatable as simply as popping into hospital for minor surgery.
In Central News tonight.
Attacked with a bottle.
Two hundred and fifty stitches for street fight victim
Prostite murder.
She was on her way to meet a client.
And safe and sound.The long-awaited call from the Bosnian war zone.
