Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Steve Thomas was attacked while walking home from a night club, but can remember little else of the incident.
Police are interviewing a number of witnesses.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
STEVE THOMAS/Attack Victim
STEVE KAY/Friend
Det Con CLIVE MORTIMER/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
Still very shaken, Steve Thomas retraces his steps along County Road in Swindon.
It was here, on his way back from a night club in the early hours of the morning, that he was attacked by a man with a broken bottle.
Steve's left ear was half-severed and he required more than 250 stitches in a 5-hour operation.
Steve Kay, the friend he'd been out with, says it's just an example of how Swindon's becoming a dangerous place to live in.
Steve can't remember much about his attacker.
It's thought he may have fallen and hit his head on the kerb.
But the police are anxious the man is caught.
That man's described as about 6ft tall, clean-shaven with short dark hair.
He was wearing a motorcycle jacket and jeans.
Meanwhile, Steve's coming to terms with being scarred for life.
For the time being he's stopping in.
Never again, Steve says, will he walk around Swindon on his own late at night.
A prostitute found murdered in a canal was on her way to meet a customer when she disappeared.
Detectives say they now want to talk to all her former clients, and insist they'll be as sensitive as possible.
They also want to find her missing clothes.
TIM HURST/Sharpness
Det Chief Supt COLIN EYNON/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
Carol Clark was 32 years old, when she was found dead in the Gloucester to Sharpness canal at Sharpness docks on Sunday.
Dozens of foreign seamen in the port have been questioned and fingerprinted in the search for her killer.
They've also given blood samples for possible DNA matching.
Carol Clark worked the red light district of Bristol and she was last seen in the city on Friday evening.
60 detectives are working on the case and they've eliminated from their enquiries a man arrested and held overnight.
They want to speak to anyone who knew Carol Clark, including former clients.
Police are also searching Sharpness and Bristol for the dead woman's missing clothes; a brown jacket, a black polo-neck sweater and a denim mini-skirt.
She was found wearing only boots and underwear.
A ninety two year old woman has had her life savings stolen by two men who conned their way into her home.
They told her they were council workers who'd come to fix her doors.
But while one kept her talking, the other stole the five thousand pounds she had hidden in her wardrobe.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Hereford
MARY TANSHILL/Victim
Acting Det Sgt MARK NASH/Hereford Police
Voice over
92 year old, Mary Tanshill spent the day giving details of the theft to the police.
She told them that a man had knocked on the door of her home in Hereford claiming to be from the council.
He said he'd come to check the handles on her doors.
The men, who were both white have been described as looking very dirty and scruffy.
One was 5ft 8 and aged between 20 and 25.
He was wearing denim jeans and a denim jacket.
The second man was thinner; about 5ft 10 with dirty hair that had been gelled back.
A hotel owner has made rail enthusiasts the offer of a lifetime…to learn to drive their own steam engine.
He's combining a weekend break at his hotel with lessons at a nearby railway club.
Perfect if you like a mixture of luxury and elbow grease.
Mike Rowbottom has been sampling it.
BLUNSDON Wiltshire
JAKE SIMPSON Engine Driver
DAVID PEACEY Swindon and Cricklade Railway
FRANCIS YOUNG Hotel Owner
Voice over
There was a time when most young boys wanted to be engine drivers when they grew up.
Now they're older they can do it.
Voice over
Maybe not baggage, but you will need a lot of cash.
An enterprising hotelier reckons there could be hundreds of people…men and women…who'll pay to fulfill their childhood dreams, and learn to drive a steam train.
So for just under five hundred pounds you can spend the weekend at his upmarket country hotel at Purton with all day in the coal dust and grease of an old engine yard at the Swindon and Cricklade Railway.
They'll show you the ropes.
Male speaker
the train is a living thing when it has fire, water and coal
Male speaker
A lot of people will welcopme the chance to make their dreams come trfue
The novice engine driver is faced with a bewildering array of knobs, dials, pipes and levers, but there's two miles of track to play with…and a lot of train.
There will be plenty of time for the softhearted to recover back at the hotel.
(He says (Perople like their creature comforts and will enjoy coming back to the hotel)
The hotel offers all the normal comforts including a silver service breakfast…but the true train driver gets his meal the old fashioned way.
The
Coal flecked bacon and sausage will be a sharp reminder of reality in what's meant to be a complete surrender to fantasy.
Conservatives say they're proud of record on education
The election campaign has switched to education.
The conservatives have said they're proud of their record.
Labour promise more books better schools and more teachers
Meanwhile labour have promised more books, better schools and more qualified teachers.
Liberal Democrats promise two billion for education
The Liberal Democrats have already promised to spend an extra two billion pounds on education.
FTSE down 12
The hundred shares index closed down twelve point eight at twenty-four, forty point one.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy-four, and down at two marks, eighty-six.
That's all from us for now.
Our next news is at 10.30pm.
Goodnight.
(ad lib)
RUNS=0:10
Welcome back.
One of the Liberal Democrats' best chances of winning a new seat in next week's general election lies in Hereford.
Fewer than fifteen hundred votes separated them from the winning Conservative last time round.
In the latest of our election profiles 
HEREFORD
COLIN SHEPHERD/Conservative
JOSEPHINE KELLY/Labour
GWYNORO JONES/Liberal Democrat
Male speaker
I'd vote for anyone who'd promise to provide a good road link between Hereford and the motorway.
Female speaker
I think people in Hereford are worried about the poll tax.
Voice over
Those are the issues.
And these are the three main politicians who hope to sort them out.
Male speaker
I'm Colin Shepherd and I'm the Conservative Party Candidate for Hereford.
Female speaker
I'm Jo Kelly and I'm the Labour party candidate for Hereford.
Male speaker
I'm Gwynoro Jones and I'm the candidate for the Liberal Democrats in Hereford.
Voice over
The Hereford constituency has been a Conservative seat since 1931.
But with a Tory majority of just over 1400 in the last election, it's now one of the Liberal Democrats best hopes for 9th April.
But the Tories are putting up a hard fight.
They're wheeling out the big guns to help their campaign.
Colin Shepherd, the MP here since 1974 is playing on his constituents sense of regional identity to win votes.
In the Labour camp the issues are more fundamental.
Josephine Kelly has lived in Hereford for 15 years and is an ex mayor of the city.
She's concerned about how the recession is affecting the constituency.
In particular the area's unemployment rate which has doubled in the last 18 months.
From problems in the city to problems in the country.
40% of the people in the Hereford constituency depend on agriculture either directly or indirectly for their livelihood.
Gywnoro Jones claims the Conservatives have had little concern for these people.
So there was an Englishman, a Welshman and a Scotswoman all fighting for the Hereford seat in Parliament…and you'll have to wait until 9th April to hear the punchline.
Clare Lafferty reporting.
There's one other candidate standing in the Hereford constituency.
That's Chris Mattingly of the Green Party.
Three best-selling writers are backing an appeal by Oxfam for a million second-hand books.
The scheme from the Oxford-based charity hopes to recycle old books to help finance aid to developing countries.
Kim Barnes reports.
LONDON
MARGARET DRABBLE/Author
SUSAN HILL/Author
ROBERT CORNFORD/Oxfam
P
Voice over
Queuing for the bring and buy.
But this is a bit more upmarket than your usual jumble sale, with authors Lady Antonia Fraser and Margaret Drabble among the bargain hunters.
It's Oxfam's latest fund-raising wheeze; recycling, pure and simple, when you've read a book, pass it on.
Writers like novelist and children's author Susan Hill from Beckley near Oxford bring their own signed books to be auctioned later.
Meanwhile children bring outgrown favourites…hoping, like the writers to step up Oxfam's sales of second hand books.
The charity aims to raise up to half a million pounds from the scheme.
And a top money spinner will certainly be crime writer PD James, from Oxford…she brought in an enviable library.
But it doesn't have to be a blockbuster.
All books are welcome, and so are all purchasers, as Oxfam hopes the book appeal becomes a best seller.
The poll tax, and it's planned replacement the council tax have been targetted by Labour in the general election campaign.
The party claims that an average household 
GLOUCESTER
DAVID BLUNKETT/Lab Local Govt Spokesman
Voice over
Labours local Government spokesman, David Blunkett came to the transport and general workers headquarters in gloucester armed with a cheque: the sum on it, the amount labour says an average familly of two in gloucester would be better off by under their fare rates scheme, compared with how much they pay in poll tax.
He says the fair rates would be easy to collect, and fairer on people like pensioners.
Labours sums look like this: The nineteen ninety two poll tax for a household of two in Gloucester was five hundred and twenty one pounds.
The same household would pay, according to labours figures, three hundred and fifty six pounds under the fare rates scheme, a saving of a hundred and sixty six pounds.
Mr Blunkett also says the conservatives replacement for the poll tax, the council tax would still make families worse off than labours scheme.
Mr Blunketts message showed that even though the tories decided to scrap the poll tax, labour will still use it as a weapon in the election campaign.
The jury will consider its verdict tomorrow in the trial of two men accused of murdering a police informer.
The judge has told the jury he will consider a manlaughter verdict against one of the men.
Danny Gardiner from Stonehouse in Gloucestershire and Simon James from Minchinhampton near Stroud deny murdering
James has said he didn't know Gardiner was going to stab White.
The judge says if the jury believe that, they may consider a manslaughter verdict against James.
A senior detective has appeared in court in Buckinghamshire charged with conspiring to pervert the course of justice.
Detective Chief Inspector John Leicester-Finch appeared before Milton Keynes magistrates.
He was suspended from duty after alleged irregularities during a fraud and drugs investigation in Milton Keynes five years ago.
Appearing alongside him was Detective Constable Robert Turner who faced a similar charge.
Both men were remanded on bail.
A man accused of killing five children by reckless driving has appeared in court.
13 SEPTEMBER 1991/SWINDON/Wiltshire
The youngsters died after a car ploughed into a roadside bench at Akers Way in Swindon.
Shaun Gooch entered a plea of not guilty at Gloucester Crown Court to causing death by reckless driving, and also not guilty to driving whilst disqualified.
He's been bailed on condition he doesn't go within ten miles of Swindon.
A second man, Tony Gallagher, also entered a plea of not guilty to causing death by reckless driving.
The trial will be held at a later date.
A new kidney dialysis centre has opened which ends the need for sufferers to travel hundreds of miles every week for treatment.
The centre cost half a million pounds, and will treat up to fifty people.
Doctors say it will improve the quality of life for kidney patients.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
PEGGY KIRBY/Dialysis Patient
Dr RICHARD BANKS/Consultant Renal Physician
Voice over
For two and a half years Peggy Kirby has needed to use a kidney machine.
Her kidneys don't work properly so she needs to use the machine to take toxins out of her blood.
Peggy lives in Gloucestershire.
Until now there were no kidney machines available for her to use there.
So, twice a week she had the inconvenience of having to travel to Bristol for treatment.
So Peggy and the dozens of other people in Gloucestershire with kidney failure were glad to see the arrival of the county's first kidney dialysis centre.
Set up through a partnership between the NHS and private industry, the centre cost half a million pounds to build and can care for fifty patients.
Doctors say it'll improve their patients quality of life.
There are four machines in the centre at the moment.
That's expected to increase to thirteen before the Summer.
IN PART TWO: Who Dares Wins…the battle for hearts and minds in Hereford.
Turning over an old leaf: A new chapter in fundraising for Oxfam.
And joining the train set.
All steamed up over the real thing.
No room: Bed shortage halts some hospital admissions.
Still battling: Attacked pensioner loses an eye.
And, breakthrough: The new weapon in the fight against hepatitis.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The problem is blamed on a sudden rise in emergency admissions.
Staff have already set up eight extra beds, and other hospitals are preparing to help out.
Debbie Kelly reports.
OXFORD
TONY STAPLETON/Hospital General Manager
TOM RICHARDSON/Community Health Council
Voice over
Several operations have been cancelled at the John Radcliffe Hospital today…and more may be stopped tomorrow as staff struggle to cope with a sudden influx of emergency patients…officials say there is no single cause for the sudden rise in admissions…
Its the third time in as many years that the John Radcliffe Hospital has postponed non emergency operations…last year it was because of the Gulf War…
January 1990 because of a flu epidemic…in the three months from November to January this year…officials denied today's action was due to a shortage of funds,,
Health watchdogs say it indicates the tight martgins on which hospitals are required to run.
The hospital is asking GPs only to send in only urgent cases…further operations are likely to be cancelled over the next few days
A ninety-one year old woman, who was beaten up in her own home, has had to have her left eye removed.
Surgeons were forced to operate after an infection set in.
Police hunting for her attacker say they're saddened by the news.
Erika Barnes reports.
HODSON/Wiltshire
Det Chief Insp LEN CURTIS/Wiltshire Police
WOOTTON BASSETT/Wiltshire
Voice over
Hilda Jones is still battling…despite these horrific injuries.
She suffered a broken arm, jaw and cheekbone in the brutal attack, carried out by a man at her home in Hodson village near Swindon.
Whilst police have been investigating the savage crime…surgeons have been opearting on the savage injuries.
Today there was a new set back.
Male speaker
She's still very ill.
She had a restless night and is finding it difficult to sleep because of the memories of the attack.
Fem
Andale speaker
now we hear there's been surgery to remove one of her eyes.
Male speaker
We're very saddened by the news.
She suffered horrendous injuries and we're very sad that she's lost her eye.
Voice over
Thirty police officers are now working full time at an incident room in Wootton Bassett, in an effort to track down her attacker.
They've been encouraged by the response to a new artist's impression of a man seen in the village.
But they're still mystified by the motive for such a terrible attack on a frail old woman…
Unnecessary brutality for the sake of sixty pounds.
Male speaker
I can't begin to try to explain what is in someone's mind to do such a thing.
Female speaker
What do you think will be going through his mind when he hears of her latest setback.
Male speaker
Hopefully he'll have a spell of conscience.
If so I'd ask him to contact me.
Voice over
The man they want to trace is in his late fifties, about five feet five to five six.
Stocky, with a round face and thinning light coloured hair.
He had a London accent and wore a beige jacket.
Police need little reminding that they have to find a very brutal and sick man fast.
A new vaccine has been developed against Hepatitis A, which affects about ten million people world-wide each year.
The disease is most commonly caught by people on foreign holidays.
It's less dangerous than the often-fatal Hepatitis B, but it can last up to four weeks, while full recovery may take three months.
Kim Barnes reports.
NICK REDMAN/Hepatitis A Patient
Dr DICK MAYON-WHITE/Oxford Community Physician
Dr RHIANNON ROWSELL/SmithKline Beecham
Dr DICK MAYON-WHITE/Oxford Community Physician
Voice over
A sunshine holiday, with exotic food washed down by local water can leave an unwelcome souvenir — the disease hepatitis A. Not life-threatening, but with nasty symptoms and a recovery period of up to 80 days, guaranteed to tarnish the holiday memories.
Nick Redman caught the disease in Turkey and felt very poorly.
It's thought there are ten million cases each year.
But now there's a vaccine against the virus.
Scientists at Smith Kline Beecham have been working on Havrix for eight years.
Before the only option was a painfully large injection which didn't last.
As the England rugby squad prove, the new vaccine is straightforward.
It costs forty pounds and is aimed at travellers, people in contact with sufferers and those in the food industry.
But it's hoped that more people will choose to have it.
The manufacturers hope the vaccine means all holiday makers bring back from abroad is their snaps.
Police have opened a motorway service station to encourage drivers to take a break.
One in seven road accidents is caused by drivers falling asleep at the wheel.
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
PROFESSOR JIM HORNE/Driver Fatigue Expert
ARDLEY/Oxfordshire
PC TONY KING/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
This driver fell asleep in a motorway traffic jam.
By the time he was woken up, he WAS the traffic jam.
Two years ago tomorrow a family of four died when a driver fell asleep on the A420 and collided with them.
In October 1991 a woman was thrown from the cab of this van on the M40 and died.
Again the driver had dozed off.
Research at Loughborough University has shown one in 7 accidents is caused by drowsy drivers.
Male speaker
Too many drivers think they can wind down the window, sing a song, have a conversation and it'll go away, but I'm afraid it doesn't.
Voice over
The M40 is the longest road in Britain without services on it.
Since it opened 2 years ago, 7 deaths have been attributed to driver fatigue.
That's why Thames Valley Police have set up a temporary service station near junction 10.
They're handing out drinks, chocolate bars and advice on resting from the road.
Male speaker
Have a ten minute sleep, that's all it takes.
If you get tired again, stop again.
All these photographs tell a tragic story and people must pay attention to it
Voice over
The first permanent service station on the M40 won't open here until next spring.
Police here are publicising facilities within a few miles of the road.
But for many drivers using the road regularly the present situation is unacceptable.
Male speaker
You're always seeing inexplicable bumps, they can only be caused by people nodding off
Male speaker
You're often looking for somewhere, a garage or something off the motorway just for the toilet or a drink
Male speaker
I don't think they should open a new motorway without adequate facilities
Voice over
The police and the academics say driver fatigue accidents are happening more and more frequently.
The message is that drivers who don't break their journey, are in serious danger of not completing it at all.
It's been revealed that a prostitute who was found murdered was responsible for an eight year old boy dying of a drugs overdose.
1988
Carol Clark, whose body was found in the Gloucester to Sharpness canal at Sharpness Docks, was a registered heroin addict.
Six years ago Kieran Sheppard died after drinking a bottle of methadone that she left by his bed while visiting his parents.
A woman who claims to be a leading sheep breeder has been fined a thousand pounds for cruelty.
Magistrates were told that Julie Bury left some of her animals to starve, and even failed to remove the caracasses of those which died.
GRAEME BOWD/Witney
Voice over
According to her solicitor, Julie Bury is a leading breeder of pedigree sheep with almost 200 show prizes.
But the RSPCA who brought today's case told a different story.
Inspector Tracey Davenport found 160 animals in a small field at Standlake in Oxfordshire.
Many were starving and infested with parasites.
There were 6 dead animals and two sheep were in such bad condition that they had to be put down.
The court was told that Mrs Bury had more than 600 sheep at various locations.
She told the RSPCA that the animals in question were due to be moved to better grazing but she'd been too busy to do it.
She said her husband had made regular visits to the field, but a vet believed some of the dead sheep had been there for at least two weeks.
Her own vet Christopher Baxter said he was surprised and shattered by the RSPCA's findings.
The animals he'd seen had always been well looked after.
Mrs Bury admitted two charges of cruelty.
She was fined £1,000 and warned that further offences could lead to a ban on keeping sheep.
Since the flock was examined last year the survivors have recovered.
They're now in a larger field.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News…an education success story.
The problem pupils who've come back from the brink.
Plus, who cares for the carers?
Part two of our special report 
In Central News tonight.
Eighteen years each.
Burning car murder conspirators are found guilty.
Dying for some sleep.
Police move to combat driver fatigue.
And fined for cruelty.
The top breeder who left her sheep to starve.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
The judge described one defendent as the ringleader, another as a professional hitman, and the third as a repellent henchman.
Later in the programme we'll be talking to their two victims.
But first Tim Hurst reports on the end of the case at Bristol Crown Court.
Voice over
The verdict means Ivor Stokle and Pauline Leyshon can now begin to rebuild their lives.
The couple have had months of treatment for their terrible injuries.
Mr Stokle says he felt like killing the culprits when he first saw what they'd done to Mrs Leyshon.
She says she feels sorry for them.
KEN GOODWIN/Birdlip
Reconstruction
IVOR STOKLE
PAULINE LEYSHON
Voice over
Ivor Stokle and Pauline Leyshon return to Barrow Wake; a place where they were both almost burnt alive.
The beauty spot brings back horrific memories for the couple; memories of a night they were not meant to survive.
But for a combination of quick thinking, good luck and the skill of medical staff, neither would be here to tell the tale.
And those responsible might never have been brought to justice.
It's the first time they've visited the spot since that November night 16 months ago, the culmination of a plot motivated by jealousy and greed.
He says that being at Barrow Wake does bring back bad memories.
She says that she's still affected by what happened.
She's been having therapy.
Ivor used to share a house in Staunton with his former common-law wife, Sheila Stroud.
Before they split up, Stroud had already moved her new boyfriend, Mark Evans into the house as a lodger.
She had agreed that when she sold the house, she'd give Ivor his share — about £20,000.
But unbeknown to Ivor, Stroud had no intention of parting with the money.
Worst still, she was planning to cash in on Ivor's insurance policies.
And that meant Ivor would have to die.
And her jealousy and dislike of Ivor's girlfriend, Pauline, made her a target too.
November the 14th, 1991.
Ivor and Pauline were lured back to Stroud's bungalow at Staunton, on the pretext of discussing the cash settlement.
But when they arrived, they were attacked by Norman White, a hit man hired by Stroud and her boyfriend, Mark Evans.
The two were bundled into a van and driven to the local beauty spot, Barrow Wake, at Birdlip, which overlooks the city of Gloucester.
Then, still tied up, they were put back into their own car.
He says he realised something terrible was going to happen, but he never thought that they would actually set light to the car.
But Ivor was wrong.
He says that he had to think fast.
He kicked open the car doors and they both managed to get out, even thought they were on fire.
She says that she knew they were being pushed down the hill and she screamed when she felt the flames.
He says that he jumped clear with his hands over his eyes to stop them burning.
As the car continued to burn, White, Evans and Stroud fled, convinced that their job was done; that Ivor and Pauline were dead.
The police had been called by someone who'd spotted the flames.
Ambulances arrived, Ivor and Pauline were in safe hands.
A police investigation had begun.
Ivor and Pauline had suffered terrible burns and spent weeks at Frenchay Hospital critically ill.
He says that his face was badly burnt and it's meant he hasn't been able to take part in his favourite game of rugby.
She says that her scalp was badly burnt.
She says good hair is very important to a woman and losing hers has affected her deeply.
The physical wounds are beginning to heal, but what about the mental scars?
How do they feel towards those who consigned them to what could have been a violent and horrific death?
He says that at first he wanted to kill those responsible, but now he realises they'll suffer enough by losing their freedom.
She says she feels sorry for them.
At least her and Ivor still have their freedom.
Ivor and Pauline say the whole ordeal has brought them closer together.
They want to make a fresh start — to forget the night their lives almost ended in a ball of flames.
So Norman White, Sheila Stroud and Mark Evans are tonight beginning eighteen year jail sentences for attempted murder.
Their intended victims are now with our reporter Tim Hurst at a hotel in Bristol.
TIM HURST
IVOR STOKLE
PAULINE LEYSHON
Voice over
Welcome back: The number of children excluded or expelled from schools in the Central South area rose by forty-two per cent last year, yet the facilties to help them still vary widely.
In Northampton, a centre for partially-excluded pupils has a high success rate.
And in Gloucestershire, a project has just spent three years helping young children avoid problems in the future.
NORTHAMPTON
CLAIRE
JANE WRIGHT/Spencer Centre
EASTCOMBE/Gloucestershire
MARY WRIGHT/Elton Project
Voice over
Revising for exams is just as nail-biting for these 15 and 16 year olds as any others.
But taking them at all is a special achievement.
They've all been partially excluded from mainstream schools, where they found it hard to fit in.
Claire's enthusiasm is typical of students at the Spencer Centre in Northampton.
They're encouraged to think positively about themselves and their prospects.
All take exams and have cv's drawn up for them; a benchmark of their achievements both for them and prospective employers.
Three quarters of this year's 16 students have the option of a college place this September.
All the students spend two days a week at the centre, they also spend time at their original schools and on work experience.
Jane Wright who runs the centre says a common factor to all of them is trouble in forming relationships.
These are things the Elton project is also working towards.
There's nothing wrong with these children at Eastcombe Primary School in Gloucestershire — one of 111 schools which took part in the project over the last 3 years.
It was set up, after a government inquiry into discipline in schools.
Here the emphasis is on prevention, rather than cure.
The team working on the Elton project says it's had definite results — increasing some children's concentration and that they join in more than before.
But they also stress that if time and attention is not given to younger pupils, the cost could be great.
Now some news about ourselves.
Central Television has announced record pre-tax profits of just over forty one million pounds.
It comes on the same day a consortium, including Central, took financial control of ITV's national news service, ITN.
DAVID CRABTREE/Reporting
LESLIE HILL/Chairman
Millions of people spend their lives caring for someone who is elderly, disabled and vulnerable.
But should this be the job of family and friends?
Tomorrow, the new Community Care Act will make local councils more responsible.
In the second of her series, Who Cares?…
Gargy Patel asks Who Cares about the Carers?
CHIPPING NORTON Oxfordshire
FRANK MEALIN
BETTY HALL
JANET THORNTON Centre Manager
DUCKLINGTON Oxfordshire
JOHN McGHEE
JO McGHEE
IAN WHITE Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
Most of us would like to think of growing old gracefully, enjoying the years of retirement, surrounded by family and friends…but as we get older, it becomes more and more difficult to get about and meet others.
Without help, many elderly people would be left isolated.
The Centre is a shining example of how Care in the Community is designed to work.
It's a joint effort by the council, health services, local businesses and volunteers…the whole community.
But it's still unusual.
Many other places don't have resources like this to rely on.
For most people who need it, caring is done at home.
Only five per cent of elderly people live in residential or nursing homes.
The rest either have home help, or family and friends…the carers.
John McGhee had to give up his job to help his wife Jo look after her elderly mother and two sons who have learning disabilities.
Caring as a community has its costs.
Millions of carers argue that they bear the brunt of the job…without recognition, or proper payment.
Critics fear tomorrows changes in community care will mean some councils cope better than others in providing a service, so more people will slip through the net.
Helping the less able in society to lead an independent life is the key principle.
Tomorrow we look at who pays for community care, and is it really possible to give the kind of care that so many people need.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
1
FTSE up 17
The hundred shares index closed up seventeen point seven at two eight seven eight point seven 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, forty two.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Major attacks Liberal Democrats
Mr. Major has attacked the Liberal Democrats calling them,’ the semi-Labour party.
Liberal Democrats criticise rival party dogma
Meanwhile, the Liberal democrats have criticised both their rivals saying they put party dogma ahead of common sense in education.
Labour pledge to reverse prescription charge rises
Labour has pledged to reverse today's rise in prescription charges if it comes to power.
Life sentence for murderer filmed on TV
Albert Dryden, who was filmed by a TV camera as he shot dead a council worker, has been sentenced to life imprisonment.
Prince and Princess attend Earl Spencer's funeral
The Prince and Princess of Wales have attended the funeral service of Earl Spencer, the Princess's father, in Northamptonshire.
Policeman jailed for attacking driver
A policeman has been jailed for thirty months after he attacked a motorist and tried to cover up the offence.
FTSE down 31
The hundred shares index closed down thirty-one point five at twenty-four, o, eight point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-two and down at two marks, eighty-five..
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
WELCOME BACK: Labour goes into the general election holding only one seat in the entire Central South Region.
Oxford East was taken from the Tories last time round, but remains a marginal.
OXFORD
ANDREW SMITH/Labour
Dr MARK MAYALL/Conservative
MARTIN HORWOOD/Liberal Democrat
Dr DAVID BUTLER/Nuffield College
Voice over
A short walk across Magdalen bridge and you're in Oxford East territory, not the side of the city that draws the tourists but the Oxford of the Cowley complex and council estates.
It's the more industrial half of the city, away from the university centre and main shopping areas.
Just about wrested from the grip of the Conservatives by Labour in the last election, Oxford East is a red outpost in the Tory-blue electoral map of southern England.
Formed in nineteen eighty three, the constituency comprises the city east of the Thames and Cherwell rivers.
Within its boundaries Blackbird Leys, where the scenes of last summer sent law and order to the top of the political agenda.
Unemployment too is a word on people's lips.
In the last tenyears the workforce of the Rover works has dropped from 12,000 to 5,000.
With issues like that as a backdrop, the man setting out his stall to defend this marginal seat is Labour's spokesman on higher education, Andrew Smith.
Male speaker
We're going to do a lot for education.
Voice over
Mr Smith took the constituency at the last election by a majority of little more than twelve hundred, but believes his five years as MP will make his seat safe.
Male speaker
I did a great deal of work for my constituency as an MP and plan to do a lot more.
Voice over
The man behind the fight-back bid is the Tory GP Dr Mark Mayall.
He contested and lost Livingston in Scotland to Robin Cook in 1987.
Male speaker
Just calling to see if you're one of our supporters.
Voice over
Now Dr Mayall needs a two per cent swing to take this seat.
Male speaker
I think voters simply won't agree with Labour's policies.
Voice over
In the last election the Liberal vote here totalled sixteen percent, squeezed by the Labour and Tory battle for the constituency.
The Liberal Democrat candidate Martin Horwood this time is certain he can improve on that.
Male speaker
We've got a lot in mind for education and transport.
Voice over
With the Greens too hoping to increase their one per cent share of the vote, there's clearly a feeling that many voters here may be about to switch parties.
A view backed up by political analyst Doctor David Butler of Oxford's Nuffield College.
Male speaker
I thinkl Labour's majority will increase.
Voice over
That's the view of the political pundit, we'll see if he's right in just over a week's time.
Nick Clark reporting.
There are three other candidates in Oxford East.
They are: Dr Caroline Lucas for the Green party, Keith Thompson for the Revolutionary Communist Party, and Anne-Marie Wilson for the Natural Law Party.
NOW FOOTBALL, and the wet weather has affected one game tonight.
Swindon Town away against Sunderland has been postponed because of a water-logged pitch at Roker Park.
Last night, Hereford went down (2-0) two nil in their away match against fourth division leaders Burnley.
The game was settled with two quick goals midway through the first half.Liz Hannam reports.
Fifty Russian orphans have arrived in Britain for the trip of a lifetime.
In their own country the children lead very deprived lives.
They're treated as if they're mentally disabled and are sometimes even drugged.
But now they're being given the chance to play and learn like normal children.
Clare Lafferty reports.
MALVERN WELLS/Worcestershire
HEKMAT KAVEH/Abbey International College
OLGA PETROVA/Abbey International College
Voice over
The orphans started their first day in England with a hearty breakfast.
In their orphanges in Russia they're given just porridge and bread.
So these extra treats were very welcome.
Most of the children had never even seen a banana before let alone tasted one.
It created an immediate impression.
The children, all aged between about seven and thirteen, are guests at the Abbey International College in Malvern Wells.
They were invited here after staff heard of their plight.
Left abandoned in cold, damp orphanges with little food and no comfort.
The literal translation of the Russian word for orphan is’ small brain’.
The authorities treat the children as subnormal.
They refuse to educate them, and sometimes even take steps to pacify them.
For the next three months, these fifty orphans at least will have an insight into what Westerners regard as a normal childhood.
Taking a walk on the Malvern Hills the children were surprised to learn that the next highest point on the horizon is the Russian mountain range, the Urals.
And they were amazed to find how cold England was.
The weather may be cold, but the reception was warm.
The only problem now is how these children will cope when eventually they have to return to Russia.
The College only hopes that the Russian authorities will be shamed into improving conditions for them in their homeland.
The jury in the trial of two men accused of murdering a police informer has been sent to a hotel for the night, after failing to reach a verdict.
Alan Chalky White's body was found in a lake in Gloucestershire in nineteen eighty nine.Tim Hurst reports, from Winchester Crown Court.
Voice over
A seventy seven year old woman suffered a heart attack when five police officers climbed through the window of her flat.
They had a warrant to arrest her grandson who'd been visiting the pensioner at her sheltered accommodation in Cheltenham.
But she refused to open the door to them until her daughter was present.
A post mortem revealed she died from natural causes and the coroner ruled there was no need for an inquest.
But her family have now lodged a formal complaint with the Police Complaints Authority which is to investigate.
A company is going ahead with a one point two million pound contract to supply water filtering equipment to Libya despite increasing tension between Britain and Colonel Gadaffi's regime.
The company says it'll be shipping the equipment to Tripoli on Friday, despite a Foreign Office warning that Britons in Libya are being refused exit visas in the row over the Lockerbie bombing.Mike Rowbottom reports 
GLOUCESTER
PHILIP BAKER/Serck Baker
Voice over
It's a big order for the Gloucester based Sewrckn Baker Company.
Over a million pounds worth of water filtration kit, vital in the North African Desert, but being delivered ast a critical time in relations with the Libyan Government…but that's not going to stop them.
Male speaker
Wew've been working on it for a long time, polticals issues are nothing to do with us, we're a commercial company
Voice over
Tension has built up in Libya because of a refusal by their Government to surrender two nationals suspected of the Lockerbie bombing.
An air travel ban to Libya is due to come into force in two weeks time.
British citizens living there have been warned to get out if they think it necessary.
There are also reports of exit visas being refused.
Voice over
The Water filter equipment is due to be shipped from Gloucester Docks at the beginning of next week.
Male speaker
We'll take any signals from the UK Government but there haven't been any so far
The Foreign Office says there's no trade embargo in force and nothing preventing the shipment going ahead.
The funeral has taken place of Earl Spencer who died of a heart attack at the weekend.
The Princess of Wales led the mourners at the service, which her father had asked should not be too sad or mournful.
Simon Garrett reports 
GREAT BRINGTON/Northamptonshire
Centrepiece to the many wreaths, a bouquet of lilies, freesias and sweet peas from the Princess of Wales.
The words on the card…
I miss you dreadfully darling daddy, but I will love you for ever.
A large group of mourners had also gathered outside the 13th-century church of St Mary the Virgin in the Northamptonshire village of Great Brington.
Another wreath, of chrysanthemums, freesias and roses, was sent by the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Prince of Wales.
All through the service, a police helicopter hovered nearby and officers weith dogs kept watch on approach roads.
The princess had arrived at Althorp, the Spencer family seat earlier in the day.
Her father's coffin was escorted to the church by gamekeepers and esatet workers and was taken into the church precisely at 10 a.m.
In line with the Earl's wishes, there were three cheerful hymns.
The Lord's My Shepherd, Praise My Soul the King of Heaven and his particular favourite, onward Chistian Soldiers.
Although his body's been cremated, the Earl's remains will be interred in the Spencer family vault at St Mary the Virgin.
His final resting place alongside 19 generations of his family dating back before the Norman conquest.
IN PART TWO: A tale of two cities.
The other side of the dreaming spires.
And, on a clear day, you can see the Urals.
The Russian flag flies on the Malvern Hills.
Seal of disapproval.The school governor telling parents which way to vote.
Still deciding: Chalky White murder jury sent to a hotel.
And, laid to rest: Diana leads the mourners at Earl Spencer's funeral.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Mr Kirk says he's had very few complaints about the letter.
The Department of Education says it has no grounds to intervene.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
ROWLAND KIRK/Chairman of Governors
SARAH KNIGHTLY-BROWN/Parent
ANDY PENNINGTON/Liberal Democrats
Voice over
There are nine hundred and twenty pupils at the Pate's Grammar School in Cheltenham.
And every parent has just been sent a letter — which claims’ both Labour and the Liberal Demcrats have stated their intention to close down the remaining grammar schools.’
The author is Rowland Kirk, chair of both the school governors, and the Pates School Foundation.
He says he just wants to save the school from closure.
Cheltenham is a marginal constituency.
The Liberal Deomocrats hope to take several thousand votes from the Conservatives to win.
But approaching two thousand voters — the mothers and fathers of Pate's School pupils — could now be influenced by the letter.
Sarah Knightly-Brown has two children at the school.
She says many parents who would have voted Liberal now thinking about the school's future.
But Liberal Democrats in Cheltenham insist they have no plans to close Pates School, even though they favour comprehensive education.
He says Mr Kirk is just trying to influence the election and even the school headmaster wants nothing to do with it.
And Labour in Cheltenham say the leaflet is incorrect, misleading and biased.
They also have no plans to close the school.
But Mr Kirk is unrepentant.
He says if the school no longer has selective entry it will cease to be a Grammar School.
He says he's not supporting any particular party.
Today the school headmaster was unavailable for comment.
Tonight the Department of Education issued this statement.
The Liberal Democrat leader Paddy Ashdown has predicted his party will take both Hereford and Cheltenham from the Conservatives.
Mr Ashdown, buoyed up by the latest opinion poll results, has been touring both constituencies.
STAVERTON/Gloucestershire
ROSS-ON-WYE/Herefordshire
PADDY ASHDOWN/Liberal Democrat Leader
HEREFORD
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Paddy Ashdown and his campaign team made a smooth landing at Gloucester airport.
It was a good start to a day that had already seen the Liberal Democrats improve by two points in the latest opinion polls.
The party leader's first call was on the John Kyrle High School at Ross on Wye in the Hereford parliamentary constituency.
He was here to hammer home plans to spend more on education.
The main plank of a campaign he hopes will overturn the Conservative's slender 1,400 majority in the seat.
After a question and answer session with sixth formers, he spelt out why Hereford is an important battleground for the Liberal Democrats:
Male speaker
The Liberal Democrats have built up strong support and expect to win.
Voice over
As Mr Ashdown left the school he was mobbed by enthusiastic youngsters:
The Liberal Democrat campaign bus stopped next in the centre of Hereford.
Paddy Ashdown went on the now familiar walkabout and braved the scrum to canvass more support.
The hectic schedule ended in Cheltenham, where the Liberal democrats hope to overturn a Conservative majority of just under 5,000.
Mr Ashdown is predicting victory in both Cheltenham and Hereford.
Whether his party is a double winner…or remains the underdog…is in the hands of the voters.
Meanwhile, the Bishop of Oxford has accused all political parties of ignoring the issue of the Third World in the election campaign.
He says none of the parties can afford to ignore the fact that thousands of people die of starvation each week.
OXFORD
Rt Rev RICHARD HARRIES/Bishop Of Oxford
Voice over
Around the world thousands of people die of starvation each week.
The Bishop of Oxford says this is the crucial moral issue of the election campaign.
But so far he says, it's been ignored.
And he says our own economic worries aren't a good enough excuse.
When it comes to third world development the Bishop says he gives each of the three main parties two cheers.
He wants the conservatives to make more cash available, to reach UN spending targets.
He wants a firm pledge from Labour that they will honour plans for a Cabinet Minster with a development brief.
And he wants the Liberal Democrats to make the third world a high priority if they play a part in government.
He's urging them all to act and isn't worried that the politicians will accuse the church of interfering.
One billion people around the world live at or below starvation level.
The belief that there are no votes in concern for them won't wash with the Bishop.
He wants to see their future on our political agenda.
One of the country's oldest — and smallest — air bases has officially closed as part of defence cuts.
R-A-F Hullavington has been putting into practice its motto — Service To Many — for more than half a century.
ROBIN POWELL Hullavington
Wing Cdr MIKE CHAPPLE Station Commander
January 1992
Voice over
The end of an era — greeted by a steady downpour.
56 years after it opened, the men from the Ministry are turning RAF Hullavington into an army barracks.
In its time, Hullavington supplied parachutes for the entire RAF and kept British troops fed in the Gulf War.
There've been low points, too — not least the fire in January last year which destroyed an entire hangar and its contents at a cost to the Air Force of 40 million.
But most who've served there are proud of RAF Hullavington, many of them bitter about its passing.
Male speaker
We had everything here.
You'd have thought they'd choose somewhere else.
Male speaker
Tradition doesn't seem to mean much to the present Government.
Voice over
Until 12 months ago about 500 air force personnel worked here.
Now only a handful are left to pack their bags.
As they move out, the army moves in.
Hullavington will be home to the new Royal Logistic Corps — these support staff are preparing to fly out to Bosnia.
But today, its 75th birthday, belongs to the Royal Air Force.
The RAF isn't leaving Hullavington totally wothout trace.
Its Balloon Operation Divsion will remain — along with this inflatable model of a Soviet tank.
It's still used for target practice — a poignant reminder of the Cold War, the end of which heralded the last post for RAF Hullavington.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
UN to enforce no fly zone
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down point three at two eight seven eight point four 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty two and up at two marks, forty four.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The work of professional thieves has forced an Oxford College to close its doors to casual tourists.
Queen's College is now only admitting visitors in organised groups in an effort to put an end to a catalogue of crime.
WESLEY SMITH/Oxford
MICHAEL GAUTREY/Bursar
Voice over
Whatever the weather, tourists will flock to Oxford in their thousands every day.
Most are attracted by the splendour of the city's colleges, but they also prove a magnet for organised crime.
So, from now, Queen's will only admit visitors on official guided tours of by prior arrangement.
The Bursar explains that this is an extraordinary measure in extraordinary circumstances.
Some of the crime is committed by opportunists who wander into students rooms and take cash and credit cards.
In one case, there were 6 crimes in one day.
But more determined art criminals posing as tourists helped themselves to ornate craftwork from the chapel.
It can fetch a high price.
He explains that expensive candlesticks were stolen in the past and later found by Interpol.
The College does not want to use security guards for fear of disrupting college life.
It's the first time any Oxford college has felt the need to take such measures.
The Governing body will review the situation later in the year.
A company is stepping up trials of a new drug aimed at stopping the spread of AIDS.
It could mean that for some patients the disease can be held at bay.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
Dr GARY PATOU/British Biotechnology
Voice over
Scientists at British Biotechnology in Oxford are pinning their hopes on this second stage of trials of P24 VLP; the Aids drug has come through first stage trials in London aimed at finding out whether it has any adverse effects.
Now they'll be looking at whether it works.
Now the test will be broadened.
72 HIV positive patients in London, Antwerp and Amsterdam will take part in a 48 week trial aimed at guaging the effects of 3 different doses.
P24 isn't a cure.
It works by boosting the body's immune system and preventing the further development of the HIV virus.
P24 is only one of more than 80 AIDS drugs currently on trial.
It's results will be published at the end of next year, when scientists and patients will find out if it's more than just a ray of hope.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News…
Who pays for those who care?
On the day that Community Care comes into law, where does the money come from?
Plus, the sun sets on Hullavington.
The RAF pulls out after fifty years.
Anne Dawson
Welcome back.
From today, the way we look after elderly, disabled and vulnerable people undergoes a major change.
The responsibility now rests with local councils rather than the Government.
In the last of her series, Who Cares?
Gargy Patel looks at who pays.
Sir ROY GRIFFITHS/NHS Policy Board
WANTAGE/Oxfordshire
JILL PARKER/Care Manager
JULIA SINGLETON
IAN WHITE/Oxfordshire County Council
JILL PITKEATHLEY/National Council for Carers
JANET MACE/Carer
Voice over
It's marks the biggest change to social care since the start of the National Health Service.
Launched with hope and good intentions.
From today, the way we care for others who are less able will be taken over by local councils.
The Government is opting out.
The idea of bringing the elderly, disabled and mentally ill out of institutions to live independently in the community has been talked about for almost forty years.
The man who designed the changes in 1993 says the responsibility rests not only with Government, but with all of us.
At the Charlton Centre, the aim is to help people to help themselves.
Teaching those with learning disability, sometimes physically disabled as well, to adapt to the demands of society.
Perhaps the most controversial aspect of care in the community comes when people like this along with the mentally ill are given the chance to live in group homes.
For them it's independence, but others don't see it that way.
At the age of twenty eight, Julia feels ready to branch out on her own and live with friends in a shared house.
Community Care means community cost.
Over the next few years, a county like Oxfordshire will get fourteen million pounds from the Government to provide care.
Critics say the resources won't stretch, and they say it will inevitably mean higher council tax bills.
Those who depend on care fear the changes will make little difference.
We'll all need care some day.
Campaigners say perhaps it's not just the care that needs to change but our attitudes to those who need help.
Then they can have the quality of life they want, not the quality of life we choose for them.
In Central News tonight.
We won't take the tests.
An entire school boycotts government exams.
Held prisoner.
Was murdered prostitute taken captive?
And coming down.Charge capping cuts council tax by fifty five pounds 
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Parents say the tests are a waste of time and money.
Teachers say they're of no benefit.
But the education secretary says they're needed to assess a pupil's ability.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Stroud
LYN SEARBY/Parent
VIVIAN WARREN/Head Teacher
Conservative Party Broadcast
Voice over
This class of Design and Technology pupils at the Archway School in Stroud should be preparing to take a test in the subject.
But their parents won't let them.
Under Government rules the test is compulsory for all fourteen year olds, but 88% of parents have exercised their legal right to stop their children sitting it.
They say they've taken this unusual step because they feel the Standard Assessment Tests or SATS are worthless.
Parents also argue that by the time the results of the SATS are published their children will already have chosen their GCSE subjects.
So they won't even be of any use in helping them decide which subjects to specialise in.
The teachers have given the parents their full backing.
But in a party political broadcast last night, the Education Secretary John Patten defended the tests.
The pupils though are glad they don't have to take the tests.
Female speaker
I don't think they'd help us at .
Voice over
Archway is one of only a handful of schools in the country to have taken such a strong stand against the Government.
If others follow suit, then the feeling is the Department of Education may find it hard to justify sticking to a policy that PARENTS are actively refusing to accept.
A prostitute who was murdered and dumped in a canal may have been kept prisoner for twenty-four hours before she was killed.
Her boyfriend, who's been questioned by police but released, says she knew the dangers of her lifestyle.
Library Pictures/TIM HURST/Reporting
SHARPNESS/Gloucestershire
BRIAN/Victim's Boyfriend
Det Chief Supt COLIN EYNON/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
Carol Clark, a prostitute who worked the red light district of Bristol, was found dumped in the Gloucester to Sharpness canal at Sharpness docks.
She'd been missing for 24 hours, her disappearance reported by her boyfriend, himself arrested and questioned by police, but then released.
Carol Clark was found at Sharpness wearing only a distinctive pair of cowboy boots and underwear.
The 24-hour gap between her last sighting and her murder suggests she may have been held prisoner before being killed.
Police who're still searching for Carol Clark's missing denim clothing, also want to trace a blonde woman and a man seen on the canal towpath at midnight on Saturday.
Council tax bills in Gloucestershire could fall by fifty-five pounds because the Government is charge capping the County Council.
The authority plans to overspend this year and has been told to cut ten million pounds.
That would hit education, so the council says it might appeal.
ERIKA BARNES/Gloucester
MICHAEL HONEY/County Chief Executive
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Voice over
The budget was set and the bills sent out.
But Gloucestershire County Council knew deep down that Whitehall wouldn't be happy.
The plan was to spend £316 million this year on services like education and social services.
Anything less would mean big cuts; something which aroused strong feeling throughout the county.
But the Government today said the plans were too extravagant and the Council would have to cutback by £10 million.
That would mean implimenting the cuts the Council had tried to avoid, including making around 150 teachers redundant.
Male speaker
We would have had to make something like 10 million pounds in cuts, largely in schools and the Government would have ignored the protests against these wicked cuts.
Voice over
Gloucestershire County Council has been down this road before.
Last year it was also charge capped.
It appealled and won back some of the money.
This year it's likely to appeal again.
But one of the County's MPs is unsympathetic about the council's housekeeping crisis.
Male speaker
It's the only shire county in the country and one of only three of 419 authorities picked out and put in this category.
It's a dishonour to be a deliberate chronic overspender.
It's quite right what's happened to them.
Voice over
The charge capping means council tax bills will have to be recalculated.
The Government says they should go down by an average of £55.
Some bills have already been sent out and it'll cost the District Councils who collect the tax, thousands of pounds to correct them.
The County Council has 28 days in which to appeal, then it'll know for sure whether it's the budget or jobs which will have to be cut.
Welcome back: Defence was one of the decisive election issues of the nineteen eighties.
But with the collapse of the Soviet Union, the defence industry is in decline and shedding jobs.
In the first of four reports on the main election topics 
ROBERT DIXON/Former Commander/Gloucestershire Regt
MARTIN O'NEILL/Labour Defence Spokesman
TOM KING/Defence Secretary/
PADDY ASHDOWN/Leader/Liberal Democrats
CHARLES LOMAS/MSF Union
PAUL BEAVER/Jane's Defence Weekly
Voice over
The defence issue has changed since the last election.
According to opinion pollsters Harris it was the third most important issue on voters minds in 1987.
Today it ranks 10th.
But this time in our region defence issues are crucial to the economic battle.
The peace dividend has contributed to thousands of job cuts at defence contractors like Dowty group and Smiths industries.
Air bases soon to close include RAF Abingdon.
RAF Kemble and RAF Hullavington.
And the Gloster regiment is to disappear in the infantry cut backs confirmed by the government this year.
The regiment has more battle honours than any other in Europe; it employs 650 men from Gloucestershire.
Those jobs will go as part of a reduction of 18 infantry battalions.
Male speaker
This hasn't been properly thought out in terms of how best to determine the country's security in future.
Voice over
While opposition parties are happy to comfort those hit by defence cuts they're loath to make specific promises about who they might reprieve.
Male speaker
We will carry out a full defence review but we can't promise where the cuts may be reversed
Voice over
The Defence Secretary remains unapologetic; during an election visit to Swindon he claimed opposition defence policies would be an even harder bullett to bite.
Male speaker
The MOD is still the biggest defence spender; the other parties would order less and cut more than we will.
Voice over
The reduction in airforce resources poses questions not just of defence and employment, but of land use.
The maintainence engineering base at RAF Kemble near Cirencester and the former parachute packing centre at Hullavington are both closing along with RAF Abingdon whose engineering work has been switched to Wales.
Much of the land will stay under ministry of defence control; at Abingdon 500 houses are the focus of argument.
The MOD wants to keep them; the liberal democrats want them used to cut housing waiting lists.
Paddy Ashdown went to the base 8 weeks ago claiming the housing row was symptomatic of Government railroading.
Male speaker
There should have been a Government white paper to properly calculate the defence needs of the country.
The review has been treasury driven rather than defence driven.
Voice over
But it's outside the armed forces and in the factories of Gloucestershire where the defence reductions have cut most deeply; contractors like Dowty and Smiths industries have shed thousands of jobs.
Trades Unions say nothing short of direct regional aid will reverse those companies fortunes.
Male speaker
Targetted regional aid will not just help the companies it will bring training oppertunities for tradesmen and managers alike.
Voice over
Industry analysts say long term growth in technical areas could wither without the lure of profits tomorrow for spending on research today.
Male speaker
Without research and development properly funded these companies will have no products to sell 10 years down the line.
Voice over
4 weeks ago the first trident nuclear submarine rolled out from the Barrow shipyard with hardly a headline and still less protest.
The gulf war was fought with cross party agreement.
Neil Kinnock's thrown off his unilateralist past as has Paddy Ashdown.
Never since the wartime cabinet saw Churchill and Atlee working in concert have the main political parties seemed so close on defence.
It was soldiers returning from the battlefields who're credited with making that election a labour landslide.
The military influence on the result in 1992 may be less straight forward.
Now football, and Oxford United sufffered a setback in their fight against relegation last night.
They lost (2-1) two — one at Millwall.
Tim Russon reports.
Voice over
One of the all time greats of rock and roll is in the region tonight on the last date of a UK tour.
Neil Sedaka, writer of Breaking Up is Hard to Do and Laughter In The Rain had played the Albert Hall last night, but showed just as much enthusiasm for the provincial stage.Mike Rowbottom reports 
OXFORD
NEIL SEDAKA
American fighter plane explodes and crashes in car park
An F1-11 fighter plane has exploded and crashed into a factory car park in Oxfordshire.
The crew ejected safely and no-one was injured on the ground.
FTSE down 3
The hundred shares index closed down (3.2 at 2405.4) three point two at twenty-four, o, five point four.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy three and down at two marks, eighty five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
US fighter crash: Crew eject as plane comes down in a car park.
Jailed for life.
Danny Gardiner guilty of Chalky White murder.
And why did it happen?
Woman dies after police raid on her home.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The aircraft, worth millions of pounds, was on a routine training mission when it came down six miles from its base at RAF Upper Heyford.Eyewitnesses have described seeing the plane trailing smoke and flames just before it crashed.
Nick Clark reports.
FINMERE/Oxfordshire
JOE PALLETT/Eyewitness
Ch Insp JOHN REEVE/Thames Valley Police
Capt DAVID FRUCK/US Airforce
DAVID MURRAY/Eyewitness
Voice over
RUNS=1:00est 
Drug dealer Danny Gardiner has been jailed for life for the murder of police informer Chalkie White.
White was stabbed and dumped in a lake because he had been due to give evidence against Gardiner in a robbery trial.
Tim Hurst reports.
Voice over
MARY TURNER/White's Mother
Det Supt MALCOLM HART/Gloucestershire CID
A police inquiry has begun after a pensioner died of a heart attack following a police raid on her house.
The seventy seven year old collapsed after five police officers clambered in through the window to arrest her grandson.
Her familly say they're disgusted by the way the police acted.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
KEITH BROOKS/Grandson
Voice over
Police officers called at seventy seven year old Emilly Thomas's home because they had an arrest warrant for her grandson James Bellamy, who was indide.
They asked Mrs thomas to let them in, but she held a note up to the window asking them to fetch her daughter, Mr Bellamy's mother, who lives around the corner.
Instead officers climbed in through an open window and arrested Mr Bellamy.
Mrs thomas, a stroke victim who walked with the aid of a zimmer frame, collapsed and died just after.
Her family attended her funeral today.
He says that he believes the police action contributed to his gran's death: the whole family are devastated.
In a statement, gloucestershire police said: We can confirm that the family have expressed some concern over police activity, the matter has been refered to the independant police complaints authority which will supervise inquiries concerning the death.
He says that whatever needs to be done should be done to stop anything similar happening.
Meanwhile Mrs thomas's other grandson James Bellamy is now on the run after escaping from police custody.
NORTHAMPTON
PADDY PLAICE/Husband
Det Insp TOM HENRY/Northamptonshire Police
A length of thick blue nylon rope like this had been tied at a height of about 4 ft across the main Cattle Market Road in Northampton.
On one side it was fixed to a plastic drainpipe outside the Stars and Stripes pub.
On the other side to a road sign.
28 year old Gill Plaice rode straight into it on her 750cc motorbike.
It caught her straight across the neck and she probably owes her life to the fact that the drainpipe snapped.
She was rushed to Northampton General Hospital where she underwent several hours of surgery, including a tracheotomy operation.
Her husband says she has a big mark across her throat from the rope.
Its crushed her windpipe, and the doctors have put a pipe in so she can breathe.
She can't talk at the moment.
They don't know whether the injuries will heal themselves or whether they'll have to operate again.
He says he thinks the people responsible are mindless morons and he'd like to get his hands on them.
Detectives say someone on the main road most have seen the rope being tied in place at about 8.30 p.m. last night.
They've described the incident as mindless stupidity.
Det Insp Tom Henry says it was a particularly nasty incident and a stupid act for anyone to do.
Obviously it has had serious consequences in this case.
Tonight Mrs Plaice's condition is described as serious, but comfortable in Northampton General Hospital.
IN part two: The defence of the Realm.Is it now just a battle for jobs?
And, still turning them on.
The Timeless Sedaka at his very best.
Detectives hunting the killer of a prostitute have set up a telephone hot-line for women who work in a city's red light area.
They believe the women could help them find the person who murdered Carol Clark: her partly-clothed body was found in a canal five days ago.
IAN MACLAREN/Reporting
Det Insp WAYNE MURDOCK/Gloucestershire Police
Det Chief Supt COLIN EYNON/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Carol Clark worked as a prostitute in the red light area of Bristol.
Detectives are trying to establish why her body was found dumped, 20 miles away in the Gloucester to Sharpness canal at Sharpness docks.
They believe vital information could come from other prostitutes who, like Carol, worked in Bristol's red light area.
Because of the sensitive nature of the police inquiries, a direct line has been set up for women to contact Gloucestershire detectives, based in Bristol.
The number is 0272 455732.
Meanwhile, in Sharpness, police are trying to contact people who were on board the Severn Explorer on Sunday.
In particular, detectives are anxious to hear from a woman who was seen carrying two bags from a caravanette on board the Severn Explorer.
The Home Secretary has officially opened a new American-style prison.
It looks like a college, and might even be mistaken for a supermarket.
Life there is more comfortable and humane than the old-style prisons, and it's being seen as a model for the future.
ERIKA BARNES/Milton Keynes
MIKE/Prisoner
KENNETH CLARKE MP/Home Secretary
Judge STEPHEN TUMIM/Chief Inspector of Prisons
Voice over
It could be a technical college.
It could be a community sports centre.
It looks like the local supermarket, but it's actually Britain's newest prison.
Woodhill at Milton Keynes.
New look; new regime; new generation.
It's an American campus-style prison; bright and comfortable.
Far removed from the dark and cramped cells and corridors of Victorian institutions.
It provides a positive experience for prisoners who're serving their time.
And they choose for themselves just how they fill that time.
Male speaker
It's not a holiday camp.
They treat you better.
Female speaker
Do you think it'll make you a better person?
Male speaker
I don't think any prison will make me better, but it might make me not come back.
Voice over
The theory is that the prisoners are in harmony with their surroundings and custodians, so they'll become better citizens on their release.
The concern is that it's a soft option for criminals.
Not true says the Home Secretary.
Male speaker
The bulk of the prison contains cells and there's a large amount of wire.
There are some inmates who are unruly elsewhere.
Voice over
The Home Secretary says Woodhill is the way forward.
Although, for the man who checks up on the standard of Britain's prisons, there's still some way to go.
Male speaker
It's going in the right direction.
Voice over
The new style regime gives prisoners a kind of freedom behind the bars.
A freedom to take responsibility for their lives, even though society still holds the key to their final freedom.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News…
Counting down to Grand National weekend.
Aids setback…the drug which scientists say doesn't work.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
Dr TIM PETO/Concorde Project
Dr ANNE EDWARDS/Consultant Physician
PETER/Aids Sufferer
Voice over
AZT which is sold under the trade name of Retrovir was once thought to offer real hope to people carrying the HIV virus.
Research in America suggested that it could delay the onset of full-blown AIDS.
But a more comprehensive study by doctors from Oxford has produced no evidence to support this.
The Concorde project followed more than 1,700 HIV infected people.
Half of them were given AZT and the rest got placebos or dummy capsules.
After four years around of quarter of them had developed AIDS and ten per cent had died.
The other seventy five per cent remained in good health.
Those who'd been treated with AZT fared no better than for those who hadn't.
Male speaker
Thousands of people took AZT in the hope that it would make them feel better and live longer.
Our findings are disappointing.
The reason the Americans got it wrong was they were putting more faith into blood tests to see if the drug worked and it turns out that those blood tests cannot tell you whether it works or not.
Voice over
AZT does seem to benefit people with full-blown AIDS.
But it's an expensive drug and it has unpleasant side effects.
The latest findings may not make much difference to clinical practice in this country.
Many hospitals including those at Oxford, where some of the research took place, do not normally use it with patients who display no symptoms.
Female speaker
There have been some centres who felt that the American data has justified using it at an early stage.
But most of us have been waiting for the results of the Concorde trial.’
Voice over
But the drug does at least offer some respite in the later stages of the disease.
Male speaker
Until AZT was produced being diagnosed as HIV was a death sentence.
AZT does give you a chance for a few more years.
Voice over
Last year in the Oxford health area there were 50 new cases of HIV — a modest rise which brings the total to 370.
Significantly is that almost all the new cases are confined to people in the high risk groups or those who've knowingly had sexual contact with them.
The virus has yet to make much headway in the wider community.
A church service has been held in memory of a man who was stabbed to death in his back garden.
Friends and family gathered to hear tributes to Richard Miles.
Police are baffled by the killing and are appealing for fresh information.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Eastington
Rev NOEL BAKER
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Friends and family crammed into the church of Saint Michael and All Angels in Eastington to pay tribute to Richard Miles.
Richard was stabbed to death in the back garden of his home in Newtown 4 weeks ago.
Police officers investigating the murder were among today's congregation.
Richard worked as a panel beater.
His workmates brought some of his tools to display during the service.
The rector offered his deepest sympathy to Richard's parents.
They prayed for help for the Gloucestershire Police force in finding Richard's killer.
Richard will not be buried until the mystery of his death has been unravelled.
Today's congregation hope that day will come soon.
Train drivers on one of the region's key commuter lines have ignored the all-out national strike to get passengers into London.
It was one of just two services operating throughout the country.
Elsewhere thousands of commuters avoided traffic chaos by staying at home.
KIM BARNES/Reporting
PHILIP WHITE/125 Club
DIANA LEIGH/British Rail
Voice over
This was a rare sight today.
The Chiltern line kept moving, despite a national 24 hour strike which brought the rest of the rail network to a halt.
It meant passengers from Bicester and Aylesbury could get into London.
Elsewhere rail passengers either found other means of transport, or stayed at home.
Didcot and Swindon stations, normally packed, were deserted.
There were mixed reactions to the strike.
Bus managers were expecting to be rushed off their feet.
Extra vehicles were brought onto the Oxford to London route, but they weren't necessary.
Things were quieter than usual and travelling through London was a breeze.
But the region's commuters may not be guaranteed such a smooth ride with the rail workers considering further, tougher action in the battle over job losses.
The Grand National is off at three fifty…that'll be half-time at the County Ground and the Manor…tomorrow we've got Swindon against Peterborough and Oxford versus Brentford 
Voice over
If the match at the County Ground is anywhere near as fast and lose as the game at London Road, then the Swindon fans are in for a thriller.
Peterborough 3 Town 3 was the final score.
United went one up.
Swindon pulled back United went 2-1 up and again Town pulled.
Then they went into the lead, only for Peterborough to come back with a late equaliser.
Glenn Hoddle and his men have been taking a break in Spain this week, so let; s hope their ready and willing to kill the Posh off tomorrow.
Town should be unchanged, but top scorer, Craig Maskell might get a look in.
He's fit again and was back on scoring form in the reserves this week.
Oxford will have a tussle on their hands at the Manor.
Brentford have been a bogey team for both our sides this season.
United lost 1-0 down there in November.
Brian Horton has named a squad of 15.
Youngster, Mark Druce is been in cracking form in the reserves could get a chance.
Hereford are playing tonight.
All change for them at Crewe.
At Edgar Street, United lost out 1-0 earlier in the season.
Hereford should be unchanged, but sure of a place is new striker, Darren Rowbotham an instant hit last week and he's the man that gives us our goal of the week to finish off.
The future or rather fate of Gloucester rugby club could be decided at Bristol tomorrow…there are two league games to go and the cherry and whites need to win one of them to escape relegation 
IAN SMITH/Gloucester Captain
Voice over
Now is the time for the Cherry and Whites to pull together and push away from the bottom of the first division.
They could have done with an easier game than Bristol but they beat them 38-11 back in October, so it can be done.
Ian Smith, the Gloucester Captain says that funnily enough the team have been playing better away from home, but it's a big game.
The pressure's on them and they have to win.
the Gloucester team to face Bristol is being kept secret but there's nothing hush hush about our next guest he's the man who'll be riding motor bikes for the Oxford Products Team in the British Championship this season…
ROBERT DUNLOP
Voice over
Irishman Robert Dunlop…
TT winner…
British 125 champion in 91…runner up in the supercup last season is the man who'll be riding the ducati for the Oxford Products team…
His first race is at Brands Hatch on Easter weekend and then its off to Knockhill for round one of the British Championship…
Robert Dunlop says its a good team and on Easter friday he'll be up against the best in the world…he's a positive man and hopes to be British champion this year
A Monastery has won a tourist award for providing some of the best accomodation for holiday makers.
The monks have turned part of their Abbey into a guest house, and all their visitors agree that the brothers are very good hosts.
CLARE LAFFERTY Hereford
Father ADEN Guest Master
Father JOHN Procurator
Father MARK Prior
Voice over
Arriving for a quiet weekend at a guest house with a difference.
Because here, your hosts are all monks.
The monastery at Belmont Abbey near Hereford has opened up a guest wing.
And they've just won a tourist award for providing some of the best accomodation in the area.
All the monks have different duties.
While Father Aden tidies the rooms, Brother Bernard slips into his role as tourist guide, showing off some off the treasures of the Abbey.
And Father John is in the kitchens making sure that today's lunch menu is up to scratch.
It's a far cry from the kind of work he thought he'd be doing when he joined the order.
The monks are now advertising at the British Travel Trade Fayre.
A monk run guest house may seem strange to an outsider, but the brothers say that traditonally, they've always been hospitable.
Many of the guests here have a religious interest, but they say that's not the main attraction.
Male speaker
I think the whole place has a vry calming influence.
Female speaker
It's five star treatment.
Voice over
That hospitality even stretchs to helping the guests celebrate special dates.
With that kind of service, the monks hope that more and more holiday makers will wish they were here.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Marines to join fisheries protection
FTSE down 8
The hundred shares index closed down eight point five at two eight six nine point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty one and down at two marks, forty three.
Welcome back.
In a few minutes, we'll be joining the monks who've turned part of their abbey into a guest house.
But first with news of the weekend's big sporting event, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
BOBBY BEASLEY/Former Jockey
JOHN UPSON/Trainer
RICHARD LEE/Trainer
CAROL LEE
JUDY DAVIES/Jockey
JOHN EDWARDS/Trainer
TIM JARVIS/Jockey
Voice over
Between £60 and £70 million will be won and lost on the Grand National; a fortune riding on 40 horses.
Those that follow the form, will be calculating the affects of the weights and weather.
Most though, will be looking to see what their favourite jockey's riding.
Lucky numbers, nice colours, family names.
They'll all be coming into the equation.
The Grand National as always, has been the horse race of the year.
Film of 196l…
National…
Why are we here in 61?
To see a horse called Nicolaus Silver the only grey to win this century.
It was trained by the Rimells in South Worcestershire and ridden by a young lad called Bobby Beasley.
You see, when you win the National, you write your name into history.
Here's not a day when folk forget and at the Baiting House pub just north of Bromyard, there's not a pint pulled without passers by talking of Nicolaus Silver with his jockey; now the Landlord.
Bobby Beasley jokes that down at the start they kicked the horse that was second and that might have helped them win.
And yet Bobby Beasley and Nicolaus Silver were so nearly never part of the National story.
In a plot right out of a Dick Francis book, they were nearly nobbled by a doping gang.
Bobby Beasley says that there were two grey horses in the yard and two days before the race, they switched the horses and the other one was doped.
So will follow the galloping grey into the land of legend this weekend.
The Central South favourite has to be this chap, Zeta's Lad.
Who says so?
This chap, his trainer, John Upson.
John Upson says he thinks his horse will win.
On form, everything is just right.
You know the old saying about never look a gift horse in the mouth, well don't turn down a good tip.
You see John Upson is no romancer.
He gives it to you straight.
He built a fortune in the construction industry and then moved to Highfields Stables in the village of Adstone just north of Banbury and took up training.
John Upson says that it's like being Managing Director of a good team.
No one man can train all the winnners.
Zeta's Lad is owned by his wife, Diane.
The Upsons have sent out over 150 winners from their home and are not overawed by the big race.
John Upson says he didn't use to care too much for the National, because it was cruel to horses, but now it is safer and there's a lot of magic and mystique attached to it.
Another local family off to Aintree for the big day are the Lees from Byton in Herefordshire.
Their horse is Travel Over.
Mum, that's Carol, has been riding him out this week, while Dad, that's Richard, the trainer and son, Tom have been masterminding and monitoring the build up.
A long morning walk through the woods is their secret.
Richard Lee says they often take them to the woods because they are working without knowing it.
Going up and down tracks is good for them and makes them very relaxed and happy.
Carol Lee says she's looking forward to having a horse in the Grand National.
It is their first one, but no jockey could have a better ride.
Carol won't be riding in the big race.
Marcus Armytage who won on Mr Frisk is their jockey, but one woman, the only woman who will be in thick of it, is Judy Davies.
She's riding her Dad's horse, Formula One, who lives at the Caradoc Court stables of John Edwards near Ross on Wye.
Judy Davies says she's not nervous and trying to keep calm.
Dave as the horse is known gets excited although you wouldn't know it to look at him now.
She's says the horse is like a big brother and she's going with a chance.
John Edwards says the horse is a good jumper so he'll tell Judy to hang on and sit still and let the horse do the hard work.
The Edwards yard could have 3 other horses going.
Trusty Friend, Direct and False Economy are all down to run…
There's only one horse from Oxfordshire and here again, it is another family affair.
The Jarvis' from Frimley Stables at Aston Upthorpe have been getting ready for their big day.
Son, Tim's the jockey.
Sister, Sarah, is the stable lass and dad, Alan is the trainer.
The horse is Joyful Noise.
Tim Jarvis says it's always been his ambition to ride in the National and now he wants to go one step further.
So what do you fancy?
A favourite or a long shot?
Before you plunge in that big pin and gamble away your pounds and pennies, here's a few more from these parts to follow.
Peter Scudamore is riding the horse that lives next door to him in Naunton.
The Pitman team's big hope is Cheltenham owned Garrison Savannah.
Richard Dunwoody's on this one.
Last year's winner from Lambourn goes again.
Here are two more from the downs with an outside chance and one from Wendover in Buckinghamshire.
Tarogan's is the Swindon hope and speedmaster brings up the Lambourn lot.
The betting.
Our Zeta's Lad is there.
They've all been listening to the trainer.
Outsiders, long shots, dark horses.
We've shown you all 3.
Hope you find the winner.
we've one winner already…and they'll be on their way to Aintree tomorrow compliments of the Central South Grand National Competition 
Voice over
The cards came pouring in again here are the main answers we were looking for, trainers jockeys and horses.
Quite a few of you got a lot more and the winner, congratulations go to Margaret Howlett from Little Milton.
Have a nice day.
(1)
rugby union offers us a cracking double bill this weekend…in the Pilkington Cup semi-final Gloucester face Bath…in the Provincial Cup Final at twickenham Bicester are up against Bradford 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
SIMON GRATER/Bicester Captain
Voice over
For Gloucester, the Pilkington Cup offers the last chance of glory this season.
Standing in their way are old rivals Bath.
They're Gloucester's bogey team.
In the Pilkington final two years ago, they ran riot over the Cherry and Whites.
Tomorrow's game at Kingsholm…in front of thirteen thousand fans…offers a chance for revenge.
Male speaker
We've got 15 players who must perform at their best if we're to win.
That's the only way to beat Bath.
I'm confident we can win.
Voice over
Oxfordshire side Bicester are already on their way to Twickenham for the second time in two years.
Last season they lost the Provincial Insurance Cup to Bradford Salem.
Tomorrow they return to rugby headquarters for a re-run of last year's final.
Their aim is simple.
Male speaker
Victory.
We want to beat Bradford.
We must bring that cup back to Oxfordshire.
Voice over
back seat for soccer this weekend but still an awful lot to play for what with Oxford fighting relegation and Swindon chasing promotion 
Voice over
right we've got the finishing post in sight now…here's the rest of the sporting weekend's runners and riders 
Voice over
It's the Brazilian Grand Prix on Sunday.
Can Nigel Mansell in the Williams car from Didcot make it three victories in a row?
Cars of a different vintage will be among the attractions at Prescott Hill near Cheltenham this weekend as the speed hill-climbing season gets into gear.
On Sunday the Iffley Road Rugby ground plays host to this year's Oxfordshire sevens.
Schoolgirls from Burford and Wood Green in Witney will be in the swim tomorrow for the finals of the National Synchronised Swimming competition.
And finally good luck to Woodstock-based football manager Jim Smith the on Sunday.
His Portsmouth side take on Liverpool in the FA Cup semi-finals.
Jason Donovan wins
The entertainer, Jason Donovan, has won two hundred thousand pounds in damages against a magazine who alleged he was homosexual.
FTSE down 22
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-two point seven at twenty-three, eighty-two point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy-four and down at two marks, eighty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Well, last night's rally was by no means the first of the campaign to hear promises made on law and order.
Rising crime has become a key election issue.
The Conservatives point to the cash provided this year for an extra thousand police officers as evidence of their commitment to tackling the problem.
Labour say they would increase policing levels still further, and the Liberal Democrats are calling for new crime prevention programmes.
BLACKBIRD LEYS/Oxford
PC KEITH RAW/Thames Valley Police
MABEL DAVIS/Burglary Victim
CHARLES POLLARD/Chief Constable/Thames Valley
ADA SAMPSON/Prison Reform Trust
PETER PATRICK/Chief Probation Officer/Oxfordshire
PC KEITH RAW/Thames Valley Police
PETER PATRICK/Chief Probation Officer
Voice over
It became notorious last summer.
The Blackbird Leys estate in Oxford; a centre for so called hotting when youths drove high performance stolen cars in front of an audience.
On patrol, Constable Keith Raw describes it as a difficult estate to police.
Two Police houses have been empty for five years after officers moved out because of attacks.
Male speaker
The estate was created thirty years ago and I don't think they gave crime prevention a thought.
With the alleyways and dead ends its a burglars paradise.
Voice over
Car crime is the fastest growing crime.
In Thames Valley last year, 22,000 cars were stolen, in Gloucestershire nearly 4,000 were taken.
In both areas a rise of 36%.
Harold and Mabel Davis were among 5,000 homes burgled in Gloucestershire last year.
They turned it into a fortress after the third time when most of their son's possessions were taken.
He died n December.
Female speaker
You don't want to come back into the house after somebody has been there.
You don't know when they are going to strike again.
All three main political parties list a reuction in crime as a priority in their manifestos.
Voice over
The Conservatives want better community policing.
Labour want local councils work more closely with police.
The Liberal Democrats want commnity crime prevention programmes and more neighbourhood watch schemes.
But for the people dealing daily with increasing crime the priority is more police.
Male speaker
The number of police officrs in the Thames Valley in relation to the population is still less than it was twenty years ago, yet crime has gone up six times.
The public need more police officers to do the job.
Voice over
Bullingdon Prison is one of several new buildings designed to replace the Victorian institutions such as Oxford, but with so many people in jail, Oxford and many like it have to remain open.
The neccriminal justice act in November introduces a new sentencing frame work which should reduce the numbers, but others would like to see the next Goverment go further.
Male speaker
We would like to se the political parties commiting themselves to an overhaul of the sentencing process to make it more rational and civilised.
Voice over
According to the Probation service, too many women and people from ethnic minorities are in prison in proportion to the numbers convicted; something they'd like to se the next Government tackle.
Male speaker
There are clear examples of racism and discrimination within the criminal justice system at all levels that must be addressed.
Voice over
With the Criminal Justice Act bringing in major changes to the entire justice system, many of the agencies want time taallow it to work.
So should crime be a priority this election.
Male speaker
Crime is a big issue not just an issue of sentencing or the courts, but something that must be looked at away from politcs.
Politicians pay lip service to crime.
Male speaker
There is an urgent need for a major debate about crime.
But it is unlikely to happen at the hustings or in the run up to the election.
Voice over
In Blackbird Leys, local politicians are tackling crime by introducing speed bumps to discourage the’ hotters,’putting security phones on entrances to flats.
Nationally, for the politicians on the hustings won't be so simple.
In part two: Going Dotty about Auntie…the horse that's a local favourite to win the national.
And going for the big one…the Dark Blues in their toughest training yet.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
JOHN BUCKINGHAM
JOHN WEBBER
HENRIETTA KNIGHT
ROBERT BELLAMY
Voice over
tell you what finding the winner of the boat race is a lot easier…
Oxford are six to four on favourites…
Cambridge eleven to ten…our preview comes from Nick Clark 
DAN TOPOLSKI/Former Coach
CALMAN MACLENNAN/Crew
STEVE ROYLE/Coaching Director
Voice over
Sifting through the wreckage…fighter jet crash inquiry begins
Killed in crossfire…the British soldier who died fighting for the Croatians.
And we'll cut crime…
Labour's promise to estate plagued by joyriding.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The jet had been on a routine training mission when it came down, destroying thirteen parked cars.
Today, as investigators sifted through the wreckage it was business as usual for the factory's staff.
Gargy Patel reports 
BARTON HARTSHORN/Buckinghamshire
KIM WESTCOTT/Chemical Manager
Col GREG BAILEY/Vice-Commander
Voice over
The site of the Dalgety agricultural firm is still covered with aircraft wreckage and burnt out cars.
Despite this, staff arrived for work as usual this morning.
The EF1-11 radar jamming plane had taken off from the Upper Heyford airbase.
Minutes later eyewitnesses saw it spiral out of the sky and crash just thirty yards from the firm's buildings.
A man who was in the car park at the time said he was forced to dive for cover.
The two crew members, Captain Jeff Coombe and Captain David Genevish managed to eject safely.
They're now recovering with their families.
The only victim was a dog in one of the cars.
Accident investigators were interviewing the crew today.
So far there are no clues as to what caused the crash.
The base decided to continue with routine flying missions.
The EF1-11A has a good safety record.
In it's 11 year history, this is the first to crash in peacetime.
Defence experts say the £50 million plane is a damaging loss to the Americans.
Local people have again expressed fears about safety from jets flying in and out of the base.
A British soldier who joined the rebel Croatian army in Yugoslavia has been shot dead.
Grant Mann, from Northamptonshire, was killed just days before his thirty first birthday.
But his mother says he loved excitement and wouldn't have wanted to die any other way.
Gareth Furby reports.
TOWCESTER/Northamptonshire
JOAN MANN/Mother
Voice over
Grant Mann left the Parachute Regiment in 1989.
But his family says he never adjusted back to civilian life.
Just after New Year he said he was going camping in France.
A month later he phoned home to say he had joined the Croatian Army in Yugoslavia.
And just last week there was another phone call, this time from his Commanding Officer, with the worst possible news.
She says he was killed in crossfire.
He was hit in the chest and died instantly along with about 28 others.
He only sent one letter.
But phoned home several times, to say he was happy.
She says he was doing what he wanted to do.
It was typical of him.
He was a soldier and he wouldn't have wanted to die any other way.
Grant Mann would have been 31 last Friday.
His family sent him birthday cards, but he never received them, he was already dead.
His body is now being brought back to Britain.
A man accused of murdering a police informer has been cleared.
Simon James from Minchinhampton near Stroud in Gloucestershire was jointly accused of killing
Alan Chalky White whose body was recovered from a lake in Cirencester in (19-89) nineteen-eighty-nine.
Yesterday the jury at Winchester Crown Court found Danny Gardiner from Stonehouse, near Stroud, guilty of the murder.
Labour has pledged to cut crime on an estate notorious for joyriding.
Shadow Home Secretary Roy Hattersley told voters at a mass rally on Oxford's Blackbird Leys estate that the area needed more policing and more jobs.
BLACKBIRD LEYS/Oxford
ROY HATTERSLEY/Shadow Home Secretary
GORDON BROWN/Industry Spokesman
Voice over
Hundreds of supporters gathered at the Blackbird Leys Leisure Centre to hear Deputy Leader, Roy Hattersley and Industry Spokesman, Gordon Brown.
The estate has been notorious for joyriding following last year's troubles.
And Roy Hattersley said that a Labour Government would cut crime on the estate.
He says they can get rid of the conditions that cause crime and that must more jobs, more hope and less despair.
Gordon Brown also promised Labour would be good news for big employers…like the nearby Rover plant in Cowley.
He says Labour's commitment to manufacturing industry is the best hope for the future.
Oxford East is Labour's only seat in the entire Central South region.
And it's winning margin in the last election was only 1,300 votes.
Labour hopes the rally has boosted support.
Before we go, just time to tell you about a new two part series on Central News starting tomorrow night.
This week Rover is officially launching its new executive car which will be made at Cowley.
It aims to compete with the likes of BMW and Audi as the company moves upmarket.
Over the next two nights Mike Rowbottom looks at the story of the famous car plant…which after years of uncertainty is enjoying a new lease of life.
Voice over
The Rover car company in 1993 is a completely different outfit to the massive British Leyland corporation which dominated British industry 15 years ago.
This week a revitalised, privatised, energised Rover launches its new model range; the Rover 600 series, made at Cowley.
Tomorrow we begin a series looking at the history of the Cowley works from the time of their Creator William Morris, through the Leyland years under Sir Michael Edwardes, up to the present day.
New models and new ideas have turned the company around and saved Cowley from closure.
Turning the Corner Starts tomorrow on Central News South.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
while confusion reigned at Aintree…they were celebrating at the County Ground as Swindon won again and complaining at the Manor as Oxford lost again…here's the action 
Voice over
It was a one horse race at the County Ground…
Swindon were galloping home alone against peterbro…the going was good…
Town made all the running…but they kept on falling at the final hurdle in front of goal…
they looked odds on to score everytime they touched the ball…but United somehow managed to hold out
the only goal…the winner came midway thro the second half…
Glenn Hoddle…the tru thoroughbred made something out of nothing…
Bodin raced in to smash it home…and it was time to party…
Swindon were already on their way to the winners enclosure…when David Mitchell almost got a second…they won by the length of the pitch…
and its still looking good for the promotion play-offs…only Tranmere have a realistic chance of catching the top six teams…
at the bottom though…press the alarm bells…reach for the panic button…
Oxford are in trouble again…
United's problems started in the first half when Brentford went ahead with a freak a fluke goal from Gary Blissett…that knocked the stuffing out of them…
Brentford had a player sent off but no excuse for the second goal…the fans are angry…they've every right to be when you see a team give away goals like this…
Bennett the scorer…
Brentford the winners 2-0
STING
like lightning…that's how hereford struck at Crewe…a second goal for new boy Darren Rowbotham…watch closely we'll show it again…
United look free from any relegation worries now…this was a good point away from home…they held until late in the second half when Ward hit the equaliser…
Crewe 1 Hereford 1
The very best news of the weekend was that Gloucester have saved themselves from relegation…it'll be first division rugby at Kingsholm again next season thanks to a stirring 22 — 9 win at Bristol 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
Voice over
This was do or die for Gloucester.
Their first division place, their future was riding on the game and sure enough the Cherry and Whites rose to the challenge.
They were in control from start to finish, with Don Caskie scoring the first try midway through the first half.
Roared on by a massive contingent of supporters, Gloucester then went for the kill.
There was no way they were going to let this game go.
Fly-half, Paul Beech was just one of the heroes.
He set things up for Tim Smith to score the second try and then landed a absolute beaut of a conversion.
Bristol were almost finished, but to make sure the Gloucester machine churned on.
It was in the bag by half-time, when Bob Phillips touched down for try number 3. 22-9 the final score and the final verdict of coach Keith Richardson.
Keith Richardson says it was a brilliant performance and they were helped by the tremendous support from the Gloucester fans.
Talking about his future, Keith says that he has turned down an approach from Rugby and it's up to Gloucester now whether they keep him on.
A teenager who's aiming to become the next Paul Daniels has joined the world's most exclusive group of magicians.
At eighteen, she's the youngest female member in the history of the Magic Circle.
ROBIN POWELL Reporting
ANNA KAZAN Magician
SWINDON
GLORIA BROOKS Anna's Mother
Voice over
Lend Anna Kazan a fiver and you'll be lucky to see it again.
Not that she'll have spent it.
More likely used it to saw a hole through a pound coin.
Optical illusions are her stock in trade.
She's now so good at them, that the Magic Circle's just made her its youngest member.
Anna left school two years ago.
While others had comparatively modest ambitions, her heart was set on becoming a star.
Anna's mum still can't believe her success.
It all started, she recalls, when Anna answered an ad at the Job Centre for a magician's assistant.
Anna's achievement is all the more remarkable for the fact that the Magic Circle's only recently admitted women.
She objects to being called a magicienne, but insists she hasn't encountered any serious discrimination.
Later this month, Anna's taking her cabaret act to Cyprus to entertain the Army and the Magic Circle's lined up a number of shows in London for when she returns.
Her ultimate aim is television stardom.
Until then, whatever you do, don't lend her your wallet.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Grand National inquiry announced
The Jockey Club has announced it's to hold a full-scale inquiry into exactly what went wrong at last Saturday's Grand National in an effort to prevent it happening again.
IRA suspect to appear in court
FTSE down 31
The hundred shares index closed down thirty one point one at two eight three eight point eight .
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty two and down at two marks, forty two.
Cave rescue teams have been taking part in a hazardous exercise to gain experience of an emergency underground.
Their task was to rescue a seriously injured woman who'd fallen several hundred feet in difficult weather conditions.
IAN MACLAREN/Mitcheldean
PAUL TAYLOR/Organiser
Voice over
They emerged from the entrance of a former iron mine in the Forest of Dean, exhausted.
The plan had been to locate and rescue a seriously injured woman.
Atrocious weather, made conditions almost unbearable overnight.
So bad, the woman had to abandon her role as a make-believe victim and return to the top.
Going underground is a tricky business at the best of times.
150 cavers from all over the country took part in the exercise.
They were assisted by other emergency teams who might be called upon in the case of a real emergency.
Most of them say they've learned from the experience.
Even without their victim, the task was difficult enough.
Communication systems were also put to the test; up sound.
Rescuers were kept in touch through radio links.
Telephone lines were also fed down the mine.
Bodies caked in mud, the rescuers gather for a debriefing session; up sound.
Despite the problems, the organisers say they're confident they've gathered valuable information about how to plan for potential emergencies.
The army has been giving would-be soldiers the chance to get some hands on experience of military equipment.
It's all part of a recruiting campaign by the Glorious Glosters.
The regiment is stressing that despite its imminent merger with another regiment it's still very much in business.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Innsworth
Sgt Mjr STEVEN CLARKE/Gloucestershire Regiment
Voice over
It was a chance to find out a little of what life in the army is all about.
Cadets, scouts and school leavers gathered at RAF Innsworth in Gloucestershire to try their hand at being soldiers.
The day was organised by the Gloucestershire Regiment as part of a recruitment drive.
One of the most popular activities was the rifle range, where would-be soldiers got their first opportunity to fire real guns.
From real bullets to paintballs.
And a different kind of target practice.
For many, the real test was the assault course.
To make things as realistic as possible, the Sergeant Major made sure he was in good voice.
Male speaker
Days like this are great.
It's good experience and it keeps you fit.
Voice over
So while some ended the day in search of a different career.
Others were convinced that they'd be well suited to life in combat uniform.
(ANNE)
Still to come on Central News…
Swindon Town's promotion push gets another boost…while Oxford head for more trouble.
Welcome back: In a few minutes we'll be meeting the teenager who's joined the elite in the world of magic.
But first, with news of the weekend's dramatic sporting events, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BBC Sport
RICHARD LEE/Trainer
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Racecourse Director
MALCOLM JONES/District Manager
Rev PETER WYLD/Retired Vicar
Voice over
A shame, a shambles, a fiasco and a farce; that's the damming verdict on this year's Grand National and the arguments about what went wrong and why will be running for longer than the race.
One man who's suffered more than most, is Herefordshire trainer, Richard Lee.
His horse, Travel Over, got caught up in the tape at the second false start and came back from Aintree lame.
As the inquest got underway at the jockey club, the home of National Hunt racing, Cheltenham was reviewing its own starting gate which is similar to the one at Aintree.
Their verdict.
The biggest losers were the bookies.
This William Hills shop in Cheltenham is having to pay back over £20,000 in stake money.
The unluckiest punter has to the Reverend Peter Wyld from Oxford.
He was counting his blessings having backed the first 3 horses that actually finished the race.
It was his first bet, but the Lord works in mysterious ways all right and his winnings of £186 were lost when the National was declared void.
Heavens above!
Hunt saboteurs tragedy…teenager's parents say noone's to blame.
combat.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GRAEME BOWD/Milton Keynes
DAVID FOX/Hunt Saboteurs
Hunt Promotional Video
BRIAN TOON/Master of Foxhounds' Association
Voice over
The parents of Tom Warby accept that his death was a tragic accident.
And they refuse to critiscise the driver of the horsebox which ran him down.
But they do blame the Hunt Saboteurs who organised the demonstration in Cambridgeshire and sent a bus to Milton Keynes to pick up young supporters.
Tom was one of several demonstrators who tried to block round a horsebox at the end of the meeting.
As it sped down away he fell under the wheels.
His father Mr Keith Worby said tonight: The people I blame are the ones who get young people to go along to make up numbers.
He had no strong views on fox hunting, he just went for a cheap day out.
We tried to persuade Tom not to go and I told him to stay well away from the horses.
But we never thought this would happen.
The Saboteurs say the demonstration was peaceful.
They believe Tom was old enough to decide whether to support it.
Male speaker
It's extremely regretable.
The hunt take out much younger people, pony clubbers of six or seven years old.
It is always a possible that something like this will happen.
Voice over
The hunting lobby has been trying to improve its public image with a campaign to put the case for its controversial sport.
And tonight its leading figures said that while Tom's death was regretted, huntsmen had to protect themnselves from the saboteurs.
Male speaker
Saboteurs are people who commit wilful acts of damage.
They were trespassing where they shouldn't have been.
I am afraid the blame lies with the saboteurs.
Voice over
Police have been mounting a guard at the hunt's kennels in case Tom's death provokes further demonstrations.
The driver of the horsebox has been questioned and released on police bail.
The father of a murdered prostitute has made a public appeal to help catch her killer.
The partially clothed body of Carol Clark was found more than a week ago.
Her father says the family only found out she was a callgirl after her murder.
KEN GOODWIN/Dursley
PETER CLARK/Father
Det Chief Sup COLIN EYNON/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
The father of murdered prostitute Carol Clark, whose body was found in Sharpness docks.
Peter Clark is appealing for his daughter's clients, friends and associates to come forward if they have even the smallest amount of information.
He says that clients must overcome their reluctance and come foreward.
Any information could help.
Mr Clark says that his family had no idea that Carol was working in the red light area of Bristol as a prostitute.
They only found out after she'd been murdered.
He says it came as a great shock, although when she was a drug addict they had wondered how she managed to pay for heroin.
Police are now analysing the results of a 72 hour road check in which 500 motorists in the Sharpness area were stopped and questioned.
It was the biggest operation of its kind ever undertaken in the county.
Today police released a photograph of Carol wearing the same jacket she had on the night she dissapeared.
The coat, along with other items of clothing still hasn't been found.
He says that the public watch out for the jacket, plus her mini shirt and blouse.
Peter Clark has been left devastated by Carol's death.
He says his only hope now is that the murderer is caught, before someone else's daughter meets a similar fate.
A town is in mourning after two people, one of them a nine year old boy, died in separate holiday accidents in the United States.
The boy fell thirty feet from a ski lift in a Californian resort.
The man drowned after falling from a white water raft on a river also in California.
Library Pictures/ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
Library Pictures
CARTERTON/Oxfordshire
DEE BULLEY/Carterton Mayor
Voice over
9 year old Michael Roper and his 14 year old step brother, Philip Giles were on a family skiing holiday at Lake Tahoe in California when the tragedy happened.
They fell 30ft from a ski lift onto rocks and snow below.
Michael was killed instantly.
Philip suffered serious back injuries.
It appears their chair had ploughed into the back of another.
In another separate accident near Modesto in the same American state, 33 year old Stephen Murray fell from a raft.
He'd taking part in white water rafting like this, in a supervised trip with his wife and friends.
The raft capsized and Stephen drowned.
Coincidently both families came from Carterton in Oxfordshire.
The town is in mourning after hearing about the two accidents at the weekend.
Female speaker
The authorities in California are conducting investigations into the skiing and rafting accidents which are believed to be the first of their kind in the state.
Welcome back: Multiple Sclerosis sufferers have found a treatment which they say eases their symptoms.
Wesley Smith
But they claim doctors aren't paying enough attention to the use of oxygen at high pressure.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Didcot
ANN KERR/MS Sufferer
BERYL SLATER/MS Sufferer
ALEX WAYE/ARMS Secretary
Dr DAVID PERRINS/ARMS Adviser
ROBIN COOPER/Biochemist
CHRIS DAVIS/Consultant Neurologist
Voice over
No-one can prove it works and no one can prove it can't.
But every week, thousands of Multiple Sclerosis sufferers across the country take comfort from spending an hour in a divers' de-compression chamber.
There they breathe in pure oxygen at high pressure.
It's called hyperbaric therapy and most users believe it relieves their symptoms and can even stop the illness, although it won't cure it.
That's a message the members of the Didcot branch of the Multiple Sclerosis group ARMS want to get over.
Female speaker
I find it easier to move my legs after being in here.
It's not a cure, it just makes things easier.
Female speaker
I find bladder control and general movement a lot easier as a result of this.
Male speaker
It works very effectively for me.
Voice over
Multiple Sclerosis is a nervous condition brought about by the destruction of blood vessels in the brain.
These form scars, or scleroses, which are surrounded by water and affect the action of the brain.
That, in turn, is compounded by a breakdown of the spinal cord.
The result is a progressive decline in physical abilities.
But the converted believe High Pressure oxygen stops the process.
Male speaker
The treatment can halt the deteriorating effect of the illness.
The oxygen gets to the waterlogged areas of the brain effected by the sclerosis and disperses them.
Voice over
Robin Cooper, a biochemist and MS sufferer, believes the medical profession don't pay enough attention to the method.
Male speaker
They should look again at the literature, and they should listen to their patients.
Voice over
But the current medical view is that high pressure oxygen is unproved and there are more worthwhile studies to pursue.
Male speaker
Nothing seems to have been proved satisfactorily.
There are other areas of research which are more likely to be fruitful than hyperbaric oxygen therapy.
Voice over
As for the Multiple sclerosis sufferers at Didcot; they believe there's enough evidence to give credibility to their treatment, so they're keeping up the pressure both inside and outside the chamber.
Inspector Morse brought an an international focus to the city of Oxford…it's thought that up to(750) seven hundred and fifty million people world-wide have watched his investigations.
The Central TV series has ended now, but a new tourist video aims to give visitors to Morse's Oxford some clues to his old haunts.
Kim Barnes reports.
INSPECTOR MORSE/Zenith for Central
INSPECTOR MORSE'S OXFORD/Results Video
COLIN DEXTER/Author
INSPECTOR MORSE'S OXFORD/Results Video
MICHAEL WILLIAMS/Video Producer
Voice over
Is Inspector Morse's Oxford any different from the city its residents know?
Certainly the taciturn detective has to deal with many more murders than the average Thames Valley policeman.
He asks him to take the London Road.
Lewis explains he's busy that night.
Morse says he know's it's inconvenient, but as it's a violent death, he wants the personal approach.
That was the film of the book.
Now there's the video of the film of the book launched by Morse's creator, Colin Dexter, who wants to show us the Oxford the inspector Morse knows and loves.
He says Morse is town and gown.
The video tries to show different sides of Oxford, Jericho and Cowley and North Oxford and pubs and alleyways.
Our guide to the spirit of Morse is radio presenter, Brian Redhead.
But producers insist it's more than just a tourist video with a gimmick.
He says it's for tourists and people who've read the novels who want to refresh their thoughts.
But does Oxford need any more visitors — particularly those seduced by the dreaming spires of the detective with no first name?
She says anyone who's watched Morse would feel a sense of anti-climax.
Oxford is dirtier!
He says there are lots of tourists and it's a shame they just come for that.
He says there should be more education about other trails.
She asks if they have Inspector Morse in the States!
Colin Dexter says he's very pro-tourist.
And should visitors need more encouragement, take it from the grumpy one.
He says there are worse places than Oxford.
Britain is in the grip of a nationwide shortage…of sheep shearers.
Things are so bad that a special course has been set up to train young hopefuls, and maybe reverse the trend.
KEN GOODWIN/Kemerton
BOB BLANDEN/Shearing Instructor
MICHAEL BUSH/Shearer
LORNA BAIN/Agricultural Training Board
Voice over
They're hot, smelly and bad tempered.
And so are the sheep.
Shearers are highly skilled and often highly paid.
But the trouble is, there aren't enough of them.
This course, organised by the Agricultural training board, is helping to train those who want to learn how to shear sheep.
He says that you must start on the triangle and continue in long strokes.
Farmers son Paul has never sheared a sheep before.
Now he's about to have a go.
He says it's a lot harder than you'd think.
He says that if you hold the sheep properly, it won't struggle.
Experienced shearers like Michael are in so much demand they can find employment right across the globe.
He says he's worked in Australia, New Zealand, South Africa.
It's a rough life, but you get to see the world.
The two day sheep shearing course trains and average of 6 pupils a session.
She says that the instructors are well qualified.
So, if you don't mind hard work and you think you can get along with sheep, this may be the job for you.
And unlike hairdressers, you only have to learn one style — short back and sides.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
The Government has admitted that when nuclear weapons are transported by road an accident could lead to a leak of radiation.
New guidelines on the dangers of moving nuclear weapons by road have just been published but anti-nuclear campaigners believe the danger is greater than has been officially admitted.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
FREE FOR ALL/Channel 4
JOHN SAMSON/Series Editor
JOHN KELLY/Emergency Planning Officer
NUALA YOUNG/Oxfordshire CND
Britain's nuclear weapons are made and serviced by the Royal Ordnance factory at Burghfield in Berkshire.
They're moved to from the base in heavily guarded convoys — ordinary motorists unaware that they're just feet from a nuclear bomb.
These convoys use many major routes in the Central South area on their way to the Faslane nuclear submarine base in Scotland.
The transporters are designed to withstand accidents and until recently the Govenrment ruled out any possibility of a radioactive leak.
But tonight a Channel 4 documentary reveals that this is no longer the case.
Programme makers discovered that guidelines have been isued to local authorities on what do in the event of a nuclear accident.
They say that the risk is small, but cannot be ruled out.
This emergency centre in Oxford was set up to coordinate the response to just such an incident.
The guidelines sent to the the county council reveal that up to 400 ministry of defence officials are on standby to take over.
A leak of plutonium could mean evacuating a large area.
And anti nuclear campaigners believe the chances of such an accident are not as remote as the Government claims.
Female speaker
The report admits the an explosion could produce an aerosol spray of plutonium.
A tiny bit inhaled by someone would be lethal.
Voice over
The makers of tonight's televion programme say they were constantly intimidated by police and the military as they filmed a convoy.
At one stage guns were trained upon them.
The Ministry of Defence has made no comment on the report.
The Princess Royal has attacked the belief that life in the countryside is idyllic.
She says rural areas have been hard hit by the recession.
She was speaking at a conference looking at problems facing the countryside.
RICHARD BARNETT/Cirencester
SOUDLEY/Gloucestershire
August 1990
MALCOLM BEVAN/Parish Councillor
Voice over
Princess Anne, one of Gloucestershire's best known country dwellers, was the main speaker at a conference in Cirencester organized by the National Farmers Union and the Womens Institutes.
The theme was’ Caring in the Countryside.’
And the Princess Royal stressed that many city dwellers have the wrong idea about rural life.
Female speaker
The idea that everyone in the country is wealthy has always been a myth.
Voice over
The village of Soudley in the Forest of Dean is typical of communities facing a rural recession.
It's many years since the last train ran from here to Gloucester.
But it's only just over two and a half years since the village Post Office and shop put up the shutters for the last time.
In 1991, the village pub was threatened with closure when the brewery put it up for sale.
The brewery says it's now found a buyer and the White Horse will stay in business.
But falling pupil numbers at Soudley Primary School could lead to it being shut down within the next few years.
There are other problems too.
Malcolm Bevan was born and bred in Soudley.
Male speaker
There has been a loss of community spirit.
Voice over
Meanwhile the elderly have to rely on their families for support.
As for the young people who could breathe new life into village communities like Soudley, they can't wait to get out.
The message from the conference and the villagers is clear.
The idea of an idyllic countryside is a myth, especially in a recession.
Meanwhile farmers who run tourist attractions have got together to bring more visitors to the area.
The group includes rare breed centres, a fish farm and even a vineyard.
KEN GOODWIN/Guiting Power
COLIN POTTS/Tourism Officer
JOE HENSON/Cotswold Farm Park
Voice over
Everyone loves lambs and for the Cotswold Farm Park they're a big attraction at this time of year.
The Farm Park specializes in showing the public rare breeds of farm animals.
Today though, it's playing host to the newly formed Cotswold and Gloucestershire Farm Attractions Group.
The idea is that the various farm based tourist attractions get together to help bring in the visitors.
He says the countryside brings in tourists and the attractions teach them more about the countryside.
He says that he thinks they can all work together to promote each others farm attractions.
Earl Howe, the Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture officially launched the group, which has 15 members, including a fish farm, a countryside museum and a waterfowl collection.
He says that he hopes joining the group will benefit his waterfowl collection.
She says that a farming museum is an obvious addition to the group.
She says that the group promotes British produce and you can't get more British than her wine!
Members of the farm attractions group hope their initiative will pay off in the form of more visitors.
But some it seems, need no convincing.
(ANNE)
Still to come on Central News…as Rover prepares to launch a new luxury car…
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
Ch Insp DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
Insp DAVID HOBBS/RSPCA
MICHAEL/Max's New Owner
Voice over
This is Max the Rottweiller.
Enjoying a new life and a new home.
This was Max the Rottweiller.
When he barely had a life in his old home.
Male speaker
I found him with a kitten.
He was emaciated and half his weight.
He was walking in a sea of urine and faeces.
Voice over
His owners were fined £30 each and banned from keeping animals for four years.
This is Merlin the Great Dane.
And like a magician he's conjured up the spirit to keep going after horrific abuse.
Male speaker
He was in an appaling condition.
He couldn't stand.
Voice over
His owners were fined £250.
And banned from keeping dogs for 5 years.
A sentence to fit the crime.
Not so in the case of Jim; a young collie cross, tortured and shot in the head 12 times with an airgun.
The magistrates considered a jail sentence.
But gave him a £150 fine and a 2-year ban.
Male speaker
He should have been banned for life.
He took a life violently.
He should never have another dog.
Voice over
1,500 complaints were made to RSPCA officer in Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire last year.
50 owners were convicted for harming their animals.
A catalogue of cruelty, but also inconsistancies.
When he was 3 months old, Nutcracker was left starving with an undersized head collar.
Today you can still feel the deep indentation.
His owners were fined £300.
But no banning order was made.
The RSPCA want Magistrates to toughen up and ban cruel owners for a minimum of 5 years, if not more, to prevent them from harming animals like the unfortunate Max again.
Male speaker
When we first had him, he was very shy and scared.
He took 6 months to regain his confidence that we weren't going to hit him.
Male speaker
It's discouraging at times.
But when you see animals like Max become a teddy bear, it seems worthwhile.
Voice over
Friends have been paying tribute to the man who drowned on an adventure holiday in California.
Stephen Murray had saved up for months to take his wife on the trip.
Meanwhile the mother of a nine-year-old boy who was from the same town and died in a ski-ing accident, is being cared for by a church group.
KATE GARRAWAY/Reporting
Library Pictures
LIZ SMITH/Neighbour
LAKE TAHOE/California
KEVIN ROSE/Carterton Football Club
Voice over
It was supposed to be the holiday of a life-time for Steve and Karen Murray, a last trip away before the birth of their first child.
But it ended in tragedy.
The couple were on a white water rafting expedition, like this one, when Steve was thrown into the fast-moving river and drowned.
It happened in a remote region of California, between Sacremento and Yosemite National Park.
Friends say they had been looking forward to the holiday for months.
Neighbours in Carterton in Oxfordshire say the whole estate where the couple lived, is in shock.
In another accident, also in California, Micheal Roper, who was 9, died when he fell 40ft from a chair-lift at a ski resort in Lake Tahoe.
His step-brother, Phillip Giles, who's 14, suffered serious back and kidney injuries.
Both Phillip Giles and Steve Murray played at Carterton Town Football Club.
Micheal Roper's body will be flown back later this week for a funeral which is expected to take place on Saturday.
Steve Murray is also expected to be buried this weekend.
Schoolchildren from all over the country are donating their personal possessions to help the victims of the Yugoslavian civil war.
They're being sent to a village house which has become the centre of a sophisticated operation ferrying out thousands of parcels to Dubrovnik.Mike Rowbottom reports.
STADHAMPTON/Oxfordshire
BEN RAWLINSON/Parcel Packer
EMMA COX
SAMANTHA LEES/Parcel Packer
SHEILA KITSINGER/Lentils For Dubrovnik
Voice over
It's the thought that counts…and when it comes to aid for the beleaguered people of Dubrovnik plenty of thoughts count for a lot.
Primary School children from the Oxfordshire village of Standlake have been putting together individual boxes for the thousands of homeless children.
They're being driven by Yugoslav drivers today.
(The children describe what's in their boxes including clothes, sweets, toys and toiletries)
Dubrovnik has been suffering for months in the Yugoslavian civil war.
Some twenty two thousand have been made homeless, and they still face constant danger.
Voice over
The idea started in Standlake and has spread throughout the country.
It began as a homebased outfit called Lentils For Dubrovnik, but ten lorryloads later it's become a highly sophisticated collection and distribution network…and it's threatening to engulf the organisation.
Female speaker
we have about three thousand boxes here at the moment.
Sometimes I have to open a bopx and remove a pair of smelly socks donated by a child
Each of the boxes has a specific target, packed by children for children, or women for women.
That way it's though they'll get close to what they need
The latest film by Steven Spielberg’ Hook’is to receive its premiere in London tonight.
But tomorrow it comes to the region for its second national showing.
The film, which is based on the story of Peter Pan, will raise money for a children's hospital ward.
Most of it will be spent providing hospital accommodation for parents who want to stay with their sick children.
Courtesy of COLUMBIA TRISTAR
MADELEINE MURRAY/Mother
ELIZABETH WHITWICK/Organiser
ISABEL HEMMINGS/Childrens' Ward Manager
Voice over
Peter Pan, the boy from Never-never Land and his arch enemy Captain Hook are engaging in combat in Oxford tomorrow night.
They're the stars of Steven Spielberg's new film which will receive a charity screening tomorrow night to raise money to keep families of sick children together in hospital.
One of the families to benefit will be the Murrays.
Heather Murray was born 7 weeks ago with a heart condition and has spent most of her young life in hospital.
Her parents Madeleine and Michael live too far away; in Amersham, to travel back and forth to the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford where their daughter is being treated.
But there are only limited facilites for them stay in the children's ward to be near their daughter.
They also have another daughter to care for at home and so the family is inevitably split up.
Female speaker
If you know thre's somewhere you can stay, that you can be together as a family, it's the most important thing.
If you're separated, that's just more stress.
It's bad enough having a seriously ill child without all having to be split up.
Voice over
But the hospital has enlisted the help of Peter Pan, in the shape of’ Hook’Steven Speilberg's latest blockbuster.
In the film, the little boy who never grew up is now a 40 year old played by Robin Williams and his children are threatened by Hook, played by Dustin Hoffman.
Huge media interest surrounded the making of the film, the second most expensive ever made.
The national premiere of’ Hook’is before the Princess of Wales in London tonight.
The film's second national premiere will be in Oxford tomorrow night, in aid of the John Radcliffe Hospital's childrens' ward.
Female speaker
J.M.Barrie left the rights to’ Peter Pan’to Great Ormond's Street Hospital in London.
We also have superb childrens' facilties in Oxford and the connection — Peter Pan — Great Ormond Street — Hook — we can use that to improve our facilities.
Voice over
Money raised from the premiere will go the hospital's childrens' ward.
Most of it of it will be spent on rooms for parents of children being treated.
At the moment facilities for parents to stay in the hospital are makeshift.
Now the hospital has set aside two rooms.
The money from the premiere will pay for furniture and equip a kitchen.
Female speaker
We encourage parents to stay in hospital when their children are sick.
We have some facilities, but they're not extensive and we often don't have enough room.
So it's important we have more rooms for parents.
Voice over
It seems fitting that a film about everlasting childhood should be raising money that will help give children a chance of life beyond childhood.
And there are still some tickets left for the charity showing of Hook at the Canon Street in Magdalen Street, Oxford, tomorrow night at eight o'clock.
Souness has life-saving surgery
FTSE up 3
The hundred shares index closed up three point three at twenty-four, oh-four point two.
The pound is down at one dollar seventy-four, and up at two marks eighty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
Charity workers say twelve thousand child refugees are marching through Sudan in an attempt to escape the Civil War.
Many of the children have no idea what's happened to the rest of their families or whether they'll ever see them again.
Now aid workers are trying to ensure the children's own health and welfare.
Jane Saggers reports.
ABRAHAM DUUT/Refugee
PETER SCOTT/World Vision
JACOB AKOL/World Vision
Stretching back as far as the eye can see; 12,000 children on the march in the Southern Sudan.
They've already been walking for several weeks, many carrying their possessions in their school bags.
Most of them have no shoes and have no idea where they are being led to in their journey several hundred miles across the semi-desert.
This boy is just one victim of the Sudanese civil war.
He says his family were attacked by Government troops.
A lot of people were killed.
His mother and father were killed, but he doesn't know what happened to his brothers.
There were a lot of children left behind and they started running into the bush.
The childen are protected on their journey by members of the rebel SPLA, the Sudan People's Liberation Army fighting the Sudanese Governments plan to impose Islamic Laws in the south.
As the Government troops move further south, so the children move even further towards the safety of the Kenyan border.
Most are malnourished, only saved from starvation by water and food provided en route by the Red Cross.
At the end of this month, the care of these children will be passed on to the Northampton based charity, World Vision.
But one of their biggest problems is the fact that they are all children.
He says in other parts of the world and in other parts of Sudan, the charity has been able to resettle refugees by providing land, tools, seeds and rudimentary housing and they can fend for themselves.
When you are talking about 12,000 children, many only young teenagers, there is a limit to what they can do for themselves and the help of the aid community is obviously vital.
Many of the young refugees left their homes and families 4 years ago.
But relief workers walking with them say their naivity, their innocence is also their strength.
He says children always have a sense of adventure.
Knowing what they have left behind they hope things will improve where they're going.
There is a naive sort of belief that they are innocent and that the rest of the world will come to their aid.
World Vision hope to provide some sort of schooling for these youngsters.
But their real hope is that one day they'll be able to take them home.
In part two: Time to act…the Greens plea to save our polluted planet from destruction.
And a fairytale ending…
Speilberg's latest film to aid children's hospital.
Welcome back.
The Green Party is campaigning on the simplest of tickets in this election…the need to save our planet.
And yet few voters appear to be heeding the dire warnings from the conservationists…the party is trailing in the polls at around two per cent.
The Greens are fielding twelve candidates in the region who say that 
STROUD/Gloucestershire
AUGUST 1989
RICHARD LAWSON/Greens' Principal Speaker
Voice over
When the Green party was formed 20 years ago, many treated it as a political joke and dismissed its members as a bunch of idealistic hippies.
But times have moved on…concern over the environment has grown and pressure from the Greens has forced the other parties to take ecological issues seriously.
However the Greens say only they can save our planet.
And they're fielding 12 candidates across our region who are carrying that message to the voters.
As part of the campaign, the Green's Principal Speaker has been in Stroud in Gloucestershire, where the Greens have six local councillors.
The party has benefitted from local environmental battles here.
The most celebrated was the saving of a row of trees threatened by a road scheme.
In the election the concerns are global:
Male speaker
The Greens aim to bring in environmental policies to protect the future of the planet.
A vote for the Greens will put pressure on the other parties to act responsibly.
Voice over
As yet, the Greens pleas for the planet don't seem to be swaying the electorate with polls showing the party has only 2% support.
So Richard Lawson is used to this response to canvassing:
Female speaker
Why vote for the Greens when they won't win?
Voice over
For some though the future is too important to be left to the front runners in the election race:
Female speaker
A Green vote isn't wasted as it says she's concerned about the future of the planet.
Voice over
The Green manifesto calls for drastic measures to eke out the earth's dwindling resources and reduce pollution.
Coal, oil and gas will be taxed more heavily and money will be put into conserving energy by using it more efficiently.
Recycling will become the rule, rather than the exception, with 60% of all waste re-used in manufacturing.
And perhaps most controversial of all, the Greens will tackle what they see as the scourge of the motor car:
Male speaker
Cars are killing us with pollution and accidents.
The Greens will restrict traffic and discourage the use of cars in towns.
Voice over
It's inevitable that the environmentalist vote will be squeezed in an election where the Tories and Labour are running neck and neck.
But Richard Lawson says the Greens can afford to bide their time:
Male speaker
It's like a small mammal watching two dinosaurs fighting.
And the Greens know the future doesn't belong to the dinosaurs.
Voice over
Fresh hope…new lead in hunt for man who attacked pensioner in her own home.
Burned out…testament to yet another night of joyriding.
And Homeless and helpless…the war victims who are looking to a local charity.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Mr JOHN FIELDHOUSE/Maxillo Facial Surgeon
HODSON/Wiltshire
Det Chief Insp LEN CURTIS/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
Battered and bruised — the brutal attack on Hilda Jones left her with such serious wounds to her face, that her left eye had to be removed.
Her surgeon was horrified by her injuries.
Male speaker
This is certainly, from an assault, one of the worst series of injuries I've seen for someone of her age.
Normally you see these kinds of injuries with victims of road accidents.
Female speaker
How difficult will it be for her to recover?
Male speaker
Inevitably at her advanced years, it's difficult for her to overcome.
But we're hopeful she'll pull through.
Voice over
Mrs Jones was attacked at her home in the village of Hodson near Swindon all for the sake of sixty pounds.
An artists impression was drawn up of a man who was asking for directions to her home earlier in the day.
Police now reveal he called at the house shortly after that.
And he was a man known to Mrs Jones's daughter Myra.
Male speaker
This man was immediately recognised as a man called Alfie or Alfred Hogan who the witness knew sixteen years ago at a bakery.
He was dressed in a beige zip up jacket.
We've got a sighting of a similar man seen in the Elmtree pub in Chiseldon.
We believe he came from the London area.
Described as a chirpy cockney who could tell a plausible story.
He was interested in dog racing and liked a pint.
Voice over
The thirty officers working on the case urgently want to trace the mystery caller.
But they warn his name, Alfie Hogan may be an alias.
He could provide the key to a vicious and dangerous attacker.
There has been another night of trouble on a estate notorious for joyriding.
A police car was stoned by onlookers as it chased a stolen car which later crashed into a lampost.
In a separate incident, another car turned onto its roof after in a joyriding incident.
The police insist they have the situation under control.
This report from Gareth Furby.
BLACKBIRD LEYS/Oxford
MARTIN PILL/Car Owner
Sgt JOHN NESBITT/Oxford Police
EDDIE DULLER/Oxford Mail Editor
Voice over
The legacy of another night's trouble on Oxford's Blackbird Lees Estate.
Joyriders crashed into a lampost after being chased by police.
Several parked cars were also damaged.
He says the state of the damage shows how fast the car was going when it crashed.
Another stolen car was found on its roof on the nearly Littlemoor Estate.
Four occupants ran away before police arrived.
After last summer's trouble's at Blackbird Leys some roads were narrowed or treated with an anti-skid surface.
But early this morning the joyriders chose a road which hadn't been altered.
Residents now want more done to keep them away.
They say it's disgusting and something needs ot be done before someone is killed.
After a quiet winter joyriding is again on the increase.
Oxford police admit it's now rare for a night to go by without at least one report.
He says things have been getting more busy but it's still not as busy as it was last year.
But that's not good enough for the editor of the Oxford Mail, who devoted today's front page to a call for urgent acfion.
He says all the signs are it could soon be as bad as last year, which would be a great pity.
But the police say they are taking action, but for operational reasons they can't reveal any details.
Trade unionists sacked from a Government spy base are to seek compensation for loss of earnings if there's a change of Government on polling day.
Four unions have started a recruitment drive for new members after an eight year ban on union membership at the base.
Tim Hurst reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
HUGH LANNING/Civil and Public Servants
ROBIN SMITH/National Union Organiser
RODNEY BICKERSTAFF/TUC President
Voice over
Robin Smith from Cheltenham was a computer scientist working for the Government, and a member of the Institution of Professionals, Managers and Specialists, at the GCHQ spy base in the town.
In 1984 the Government announced a union ban at the base, and in 1989 Robin Smith was sacked.
He and other activists say time is now running out for the union ban, which they say will end after the election, because both Labour and Liberal Democrats have pledged to re-introduce union rights.
Today, four unions started a recruitment drive within GCHQ, one worker has already signed up.
Since he was sacked, Robin Smith has become a full time employee of his union, after six months on the dole.
He says he'll fight for compensation for everyone who was sacked.
Today's announcement of the drive for union members smacked of a victory celebration, surely a little premature ahead of Thursday's vote?
Only time will tell if the ban will be lifted on Friday…ironic then that the clock should stop half way through today's announcement, and refuse to start again.
The Central South first division promotion and relegation battles continue tonight, with Oxford United playing at Leicester City.
Last night Swindon Town slipped up at Tranmere and lost three-one.
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
Voice over
The only team that can stop Swindon reaching the promotion play-offs, are Tranmere, so this was a crunch game.
It started well enough, with Dave Mitchell giving Town the lead midway through the first half.
The goal though, was against the run of play and sure enough, Rovers came back at the start of the second half with an equaliser from Kenny Irons.
15 minutes later, Tranmere were in front and Town were tumbling to defeat as Irons blasted home number 2.
There was worse to come seconds before the whistle, when Irons hit his hat trick and Swindon for once were well beaten.
Town are still in the frame at the top of the table, but it's going to be close Millwall also lost last night and Leicester play Oxford tonight.
United are making 5 changes.
They need the points to pull clear of relegation.
There's a recall for keeper, Paul Kee and David Collins gets a game in midfield with Lewis injured.
In Division 3 last night, Hereford won a point in a roller coaster of a game against Scunthorpe at Edgar Street.
They went one down, when Ian Helliwell struck from a free kick.
United came bouncing back with an equaliser at the start of the second half.
Chris Fry was in the right place at the right time.
There was more celebrating to be done minutes later, when they took the lead.
This was a reward for persistence, as the United strike force tried to find a way through.
Owen Pickard was the man with the magic touch.
With just 10 minutes to go though, United lost, or rather threw away their win, when Sam Goodacre scored a soft second goal for Scuthorpe to make it 2-all.
And then they took the lead.
Rover has officially unveiled a new luxury model which it hopes will help pull the company out of the red.
The Six Hundred series, made in collaboration with the Japanese, is being built at the Cowley plant.
Tonight, Mike Rowbottom assesses the significance of the car in Rover: Turning the Corner.
ROY EDNEY/Transport Union Convenor
ROD RAMSAY/Marketing Director
Voice over
The Rover of 1993 is sleak, efficient and with a reputation for reliability.
But it could have been very different.
Two years ago, there were huge doubts hanging over the future of Cowley.
Today, those doubts are finally dispelled with the launch of the new Rover model.
The Rover 600 is the latest, newest model to come out od Cowley and it represents more than anything else the regeneration of the works.
It's aimed at the premium upper medium section of the market.
The 600 series completes Rover's model range
Rover is now owned by British Aerospace and its current output is a complete turnaround from the cars of a decade ago.
The name Morris has disappeared completely.
Cowley nearly disappeared too.
The old Assembly plant has closed and the South Works too.
All work has been concentrated on to what used to be the body plant.
Rover was gambling on its luxury 800 series keeping what remained open.
Thousands more jobs went.
Cowley now employs 5,000 people, compared to 28,000 in the early 70s.
But that's better than none.
Male speaker
If we'd done the wrong things at the wrong time, it could have been the end of Cowley.
When they announced the closure of the North and South Works, things were very uncertain.
Voice over
Cowley has become the quality car end of Rover's production.
The new 600 now means there are 5 models being produced from the plant; a stark contrast to the fears of two years ago.
Modern production methods now mean the 600 can be produced on the same line as the 800.
The Monetgo and Maestro are the only remaining throwbacks to the previous era at Cowley.
but they don't bear its name.
The cars which do, are those which have been produced in collaboration with Honda.
The 200 and 400 made at Longbridge and the 600 and 800 at Cowley.
The 600 has been designed with a Honda engine and Rover body.
Honda is also producing its own version with a different body design and they're both aiming at the same end of the market.
Male speaker
it's the same part of the market but we're not going head to head
Voice over
Rover no longer chases the lion's share of the market.
It's found a niche.
in the luxury end, and Cowley is central to that push.
Cider makers and drinkers have been gathering to find the best farmhouse cider in Britain.
Judges said they were looking for a pleasing colour, a sharp flavour and a good fruity smell.
CLARE LAFFERTY Hereford
Dr JIM BUCKLE Cider Judge
Voice over
Just two judges had the enviable task of testing the 49 Ciders and Perrys in the competition at the Cider Museum in Hereford.
They'd all been made by small independent producers from Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Shropshire and Devon.
After much sniffing and swishing, the judges decided that the best drink was a Perry, produced by a small cider maker from Dymock in Gloucestershire.
He'll no doubt be cracking open a few bottles of his now famous brew to celebrate his achievement.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
House price recovery’ started’
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten point one at two eight two two point one 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty one and up at two marks, forty four.
In Central News tonight:
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
The Hunt Saboteurs have admitted they've been infiltrated by neo-Nazi groups.
(Wes to read next)
WESLEY SMITH
IAN MACLAREN/Reporting
Library Pictures
PAUL DAVIS/Hunt Saboteurs Association
’ GILES’/Anti-Nazi League
Voice over
Since the death of Thomas Worby, under the wheels of a horsebox, at a hunt protest in Cambridgeshire, it has been revealed that Hunt saboteurs groups have been infiltrated by neo-Nazis, apparently as a convenient cover for their activities…
Reports say Thomas was one of a number of teenagers recruited in Milton Keynes by Margaret Flynn, who had neo-Nazi links in the past.
She was married to Terry Flynn, self-styled British Fuhrer and leader of a far right group called November 9.
The Hunt saboteurs bar extreme right sympathisers from its organisation.
Margaret Flynn was expelled 3 years ago, but has continued to be active in support of the saboteurs.
A statement on her behalf said’ the stories are an example of an abuse of privilege and can only be deeply regretted.’
Hunt saboteur groups say Nazi supporters won't be tolerated in their organisation, and one known sympathiser was recently expelled…
The rise of neo-Nazi groups in France and Germany, has seen the resurgance of the Anti-Nazi League in this country.
They say scenes like this must not be allowed to happen here, and infiltrators must be rooted out…
An inquest was opened and adjourned into Thomas's death today.
A schoolboy has been recalling the last minutes of a ski-lift crash in which his step brother died.
Philip Giles fell more than thirty feet onto a hillside while on holdiay in California but doctors expect him to make a full recovery.
HARRIET RYLEY/Reporting
LAKE TAHOE/California
Voice over
Doctors at Barton Hospital in Lake Tahoe are confident Philip Giles will make a full recovery after his fall from the ski-lift.
They had thought he'd split a kidney as well as fracturing an elbow and dislocating a shoulder.
But today, latest tests show Philip's kidney is only badly bruised and the 14 year old should make a full recovery.
Philip himself is still badly shocked by the accident when he and his step-brother, 9 year old Michael, fell 30ft from a ski-lift.
Michael was killed instantly.
It appears their chair had ploughed into the back of another.
Workers at a Grand Prix racing team which is facing receivership, say they've been betrayed by their management.
Nearly one hundred thousand pounds worth of equipment has been removed from the March Formula One headquarters.
The workers say it should be sold to cover their unpaid wages.
KATE GARRAWAY/Bicester
STEPHEN BARBOUR/Commercial Lawyer
Voice over
March has been part of the Grand Prix racing scene for more than 20 years, but recent lack of sponsorship has meant staff at Bicester haven't been paid for over 5 months.
They've been told they can only get they're money back from the sale of assets, when the comnpany goes into receivership at the end of April.
But today, they say this last chance has gone.
£100,000 worth of equipment has been taken off the site.
Representatives of the company's director Henny Vollenberg saythe equipment has only been taken away to another firm for storage.
The workers fear it may be sold, but they've no legal redress.
But for some of the workers who feel their wages are slipping away the race to the receivers and court feels like one they can't win.
The most successful national hunt jockey in the sport's history has bowed out today…with a win in the last race of his career.
The Gloucestershire rider says he doesn't want to break any more bones, and wants to stop racing while he's still giving value for money.
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
PETER SCUDAMORE
Voice over
The Alpine Meadow Handicap at Ascot this afternoon.
Peter Scudamore's last race, and his 1667th winner.
It's an all-time record befitting the 8 times champion jockey who once won 221 races in a season.
Born in Herefordshire but living at Naunton in Gloucestershire Scu hit the top as stable jockey to David Nicholson before forming a devastating partnership with Martin Pipe.
At 34 he says it's enough
Male speaker
I have to consider Martin Pipe and Nigel Twiston Davies who I'm riding for.
I'm not riding as well as I was and I'm not as brave as I was and I have to face facts
Voice over
Scu's still expected to continue in racing, helping out his business partner and next door neighbour in Naunton…
Nigel Twiston Davies.
The odds are shortening all the time against him emerging as a big time trainer in his own right.
However close colleagues approve of his decision
Male speaker
I've just had two great jockeys John Francombe and Jonjo O'Neill phone me and they both agree it's time I got out and I should be pleased they tell me
Voice over
He never won a Gold Cup or Grand National, but he won everything else.
Ironically the retirement confirms Oxfordshire's Richard Dunwoody as unassailable in the race for champion jockey this year.
He's got a hard act to follow
In Central News tonight:
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Security Video/TIM HURST/Cheltenham
Det Sgt PAUL PURNELL/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
Two men, one with a sawn-off shotgun hidden in his jacket, walked into a late night takeaway food store and ordered the assistant to open the till.
The assistant was hit on the head with the shotgun so hard, that part of the stock broke off.
That's been examined by a gunsmith who says the gun was real.
The attack happened at a Kentucky Fried Chicken takeaway at Cheltenham in Gloucestershire.
The robbers got away with £180.
Detectives are horrified the men are prepared to use such violence for a comparatively small sum.
The best clue to the mens' identity is a clear trademark on the back of one jacket as the robbers leave.
Police say they'll be easily recognised by friends and neighbours and they must be caught before someone is killed.
A coroner has recorded a verdict of accidental death on a man who drowned in a rafting accident in California.
Stephen Murray died after getting trapped under rocks when he fell from a raft going through rapids.
His funeral will take place on Saturday.
HARRIET RYLEY/Reporting
Library Pictures
CHRIS CURRY/Friend
Voice over
33 year old Stephen Murray died after falling from his raft during a white-water rafting trip on holiday in California.
His wife, Karen who's 5 months pregnant, was with him, along with two friends and a trained raftsman.
The coroner, Nicholas Gardiner heard that Stephen, from Carteron in Oxfordshire was thrown into the river along with his two friends, when the raft was rocked by a plume of water.
The others climbed back on board, but Stephen, who's a competition swimmer and water-skier, was swept away.
He was found dead 26 hours later by police divers, wedged under a rock, just 600 yards away from the spot where he fell in, still wearing his life-jacket.
Stephen Murray's funeral will be held on Saturday.
14 year-old Philip Giles, also from Carterton, who survived a 30ft fall from his chairlift in which his younger brother was killed, also in California, has now been discharged from hospital.
A pilot who died when his light plane crashed in a wood had once survived another crash just a few miles away.
The official report into the accident which killed David Kay and his wife Margaret says it was caused by pilot error.
The aircraft came down during an attempt to land in bad weather.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
December 1992
Voice over
The four-seater Cessna came down in a wood near Hambledon in Buckinghamshire spreading wreckage over a wide area.
The plane was on a flight from Newcastle to Wycombe Air Park just three miles from the site of the crash.
The report says the 57-year-old pilot David Kay was attempting to land in low cloud and heavy rain.
Some years earlier he'd crashed another aircraft at nearby Chinnor but escaped without serious injury.
He was subsequently prosecuted for low flying.
Investigators says that on this occasion he was also flying too low.
The airfield has no radar or navigation beacon and the pilot was having difficulty finding the runway.
But the report says he should not have tried to land there in such bad conditions.
Travel agents say they've sold out of foreign holidays as thousands head for the sun over the Easter Bank holiday.
But recession-hit traders who rely on tourism in the region say they're only guardedly optimistic about an Easter boom.
IAN MACLAREN/Reporting
CHAS SIMMONS/Abingdon Travel
DOUGLAS BAMBER/Chamber of Commerce
DES FFORDE/National Waterways Museum
Voice over
For those who can afford it…the top holiday destinations this Easter are…just about anywhere in the sun…
The Canaries and Florida are among the most heavily booked.
Travel agents say there's been a last minute rush for holidays abroad…with the weather here looking distinctly dismal…
At home, historic cities are always popular tourist destinations.
In Oxford, the chamber of commerce is hopeful, the lean years as a result of the Gulf War and the recession could be over.
In Gloucester they hope one of the big attractions this weekend will be pleasure boat trips.
Hundreds of jobs in Gloucester Docks rely on tourism…
Ross on Wye has been particularly badly hit by job losses during the recession.
Local initiative schemes have been set up and traders believe business confidence is on the up…
vox
But as the airports prepare to jet the lucky ones to foreign climes…the good old British weather is likely to dictate how we spend Easter at home.
The tale of an unlikely Viking hero called Erik has been adapted from screen to stage.
The film version was written by Terry Jones and starred half the Monty Python team.
Now Erik and his crew are back — with a former presenter of Blue Peter at the helm.
ROBIN POWELL Swindon
PETER DUNCAN Director
JAY WORTHY Erik
Voice over
Sailing off the edge of the world.
The idea might seem silly nowadays, but it scared the life out of even the most blood-thirsty Viking warrior.
You'd have thought that re-creating it on stage would have the same effect on a modern-day director.
But that's precisely the achievement of former children's television presenter Peter Duncan in a brand new stage version of Erik the Viking starting its UK tour at the Wyvern Theatre in Swindon.
The real Erik died more than 1,000 years ago, but he was recently resurrected on the big screen by Terry Jones.
He and his crew are searching for the Land Where the Sun Goes at Night.
But they're more likely to bump into the Great Dragon of the North Sea, or Half Tan the Black, alias John Cleese.
Enter Erik — admittedly not your archetypal hero.
The Wyvern production has drawn heavily on local talent.
It's given these youngsters from Thamesdown Drama Studios their first taste of professional theatre.
Male speaker
I've never worked with professional actors before.
Female speaker
They're not serious all the time.
They're fun to work with.
Female speaker
It'll be a great show.
There are some impressive special effects and it's a great story.
Voice over
Erik the Viking's in Swindon until Saturday.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
UN convoy reaches refugees
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down point three at two eight two one point eight 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty two and up at two marks, forty five.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good Easter holiday.
A couple are planning to drive their vintage Rolls Royce through the Alps to help children caught up in the war in Croatia.
The seventeen hundred mile journey across Europe will raise money to repair a badly damaged hospital.
RICHARD BARNETT/Hay on Wye
STEPHEN SOUTHALL/Driver
PHILIPPA SOUTHALL/Navigator
OSIJEK/Croatia
Voice over
For Steven Southall, who's 77, his wife Philippa, who's 69 and their 1920 Rolls Royce called Wendy, it's the challenge of a lifetime.
In June, they'll be setting off from Herefordshire to Austria to take part in a re-run of the 1913 Alpine Rally.
The original event was won by a Silver Ghost, and the Southall's Rolls Royce open tourer will be one of 50 similar cars taking part.
Ahead lie 1700 miles of treacherous mountain roads and 21 passes.
Starting off in Vienna, the cars will travel through Italy, Switzerland, Croatia and Slovenia before returning to Austria a fortnight later.
Male speaker
It should be quite a challenge, although many of the roads are tarred.
Voice over
They don't expect to be shot at in Croatia and Slovenia.
Female speaker
She's confident they'll succeed.
Voice over
The money raised by the event will help to rebuild the Children's Hospital in Osijek, which has been badly damaged by shellfire.
And it will provide medical equipment to care for the 120 children there.
Wendy the Rolls has a happy cruising speed of around 50 and at her age, she might be expected to take life easy.
But how about the driver and navigator?
Female speaker
It wouldn't do the car any good to be laid up.
Voice over
The same goes for her and her husband.
A training run in the foothills of the Black Mountains of Wales went without a hitch, so Stephen, Philippa and Wendy the Rolls should take the Alpine Rally in their stride.
(ANNE)
Still to come on Central News:
The manmade homes to bring back the otter…
Welcome back: Attempts to encourage otters to return to the River Thames are being aided by a man-made home which has been designed specially for them.
Nature conservationists have put together an otter's holt made from logs.
(Wes to read next)
Many otters died after toxic chemicals were spilled into the river but its hoped the new otter homes will encourage hundreds to return.
SIMON GARRETT/Minster Lovell
TIM SYKES/BBONT Nature Trust
DAPHNE NEVILLE/Bee's Owner
Voice over
Bee is a tame Asian otter.
Even though her relatives never lived on the Thames, she's been brought along to check out a new artificial holt, built by volunteers from the conservation group, BBONT.
Otters' became extinct on the Thames about 20 years ago.
Artificial holts could help tempt them back, much like a garden bird box.
It's a single-storey timber-built residence with separate living quarters and within easy reach of the river.
The site was carefully chosen in good otter country.
The deadly chemicals which first drove the animals away have now been banned and it's hoped they could be back here by the end of the century.
After a good sniff round, the moment of truth and approval.
The experts say a good manmade holt can be better appreciated than a natural one
Football…and first division Oxford are deep in relegation trouble after losing two one at Leicester last night…
In a disappointing run United have only won one of their last ten matches.
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
Voice over
United chopped and changed their team to face Leicester, but they still ended up on the wrong end of a 2-1 scoreline.
City who are chasing promotion, took the lead with a penalty.
No arguments, no complaints from Oxford.
It was a clear foul by Mike Ford.
And there was nothing Paul Kee could do to stop the kick.
He went one way, the penalty from Steve Thompson went the other.
United didn't lie down and die.
They gave as good as they got.
They're still fighting, which is a good sign and come back with an equaliser just before half-time.
Another couple of feet and Joey Beauchamp would have had a penalty, but the free kick gave them a goal with Mike Ford supplying the header.
It was just what United needed and it rattled Leicester who in recent weeks have been the most successful team in the table.
The goal looked good enough to give United the draw as well, but with just a minute to go they cracked.
Steve Walsh hit the winner.
A real blow this was, as United need every point they can get and now the fight for survival is really on.
Look at the bottom of the table and you can see how tough it is going to be.
They've had a game in hand and that could be priceless.
The fate of both Oxford and Swindon could turn over Easter.
Here are the fixtures.
Both at home on Saturday and both could or should win.
On Monday, they're both away and the matches are much tougher.
Good Evening.
WESLEY SMITH
Police are warning that two armed robbers who hit a man over the head with a sawn off shotgun, could kill if they're not caught soon.
The shop assistant was hit so hard that part of the shotgun broke off.
Detectives say they're horrified at the level of violence for such a small sum of money.
Security Video/TIM HURST/Cheltenham
Det Sgt PAUL PURNELL/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
Two men, one with a sawn-off shotgun hidden in his jacket, walked into a late night takeaway food store and ordered the assistant to open the till.
The assistant was hit on the head with the shotgun so hard, that part of the stock broke off.
That's been examined by a gunsmith who says the gun was real.
The attack happened at a Kentucky Fried Chicken takeaway at Cheltenham in Gloucestershire.
The robbers got away with £180.
Detectives are horrified the men are prepared to use such violence for a comparatively small sum.
The best clue to the mens' identity is a clear trademark on the back of one jacket as the robbers leave.
Police say they'll be easily recognised by friends and neighbours and they must be caught before someone is killed.
A coroner has recorded a verdict of accidental death on a man who drowned in a rafting accident in California.
Stephen Murray died after getting trapped under rocks, when he fell from a raft going through rapids.
HARRIET RYLEY/Reporting
Library Pictures
CHRIS CURRY/Friend
DAVID JENKINS/Father-in-law
Voice over
33 year old Stephen Murray died after falling from his raft during a white-water rafting trip on holiday in California.
His wife, Karen who's 5 months pregnant, was with him, along with two friends and a trained raftsman.
The coroner, Nicholas Gardiner heard that Stephen, from Carteron in Oxfordshire was thrown into the river along with his two friends, when the raft was rocked by a plume of water.
Chris Curry, one of the two friends who fell in, describes what happened:
Stephen was found dead 26 hours later by police divers, wedged under a rock, just 600 yards away from the spot where he fell in, still wearing his life-jacket.
Karen's father who identified his son-in-law's body, described how his daughter is coping:
Stephen's funeral will be held on Saturday.
A pilot who died when his light plane crashed in a wood, had once survived another crash just a few miles away.
The official report into the accident says it was caused by pilot error.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
December 1992
Voice over
The four-seater Cessna came down in a wood near Hambledon in Buckinghamshire spreading wreckage over a wide area.
The plane was on a flight from Newcastle to Wycombe Air Park just three miles from the site of the crash.
The report says the 57-year-old pilot David Kay was attempting to land in low cloud and heavy rain.
Some years earlier he'd crashed another aircraft at nearby Chinnor but escaped without serious injury.
He was subsequently prosecuted for low flying.
Investigators says that on this occasion he was also flying too low.
The airfield has no radar or navigation beacon and the pilot was having difficulty finding the runway.
But the report says he should not have tried to land there in such bad conditions.
Video pictures have been released of a man who tried to snatch a baby girl from her pushchair.
Security Video
The man the police want to question was walking through the Greyfriars bus station in Northampton, when he was caught on a security video shortly before the attempted abduction.
He ran off when he was tackled by a passer-by.
Attempts to encourage otters to come back to the River Thames are being aided by the building of a man-made home for them.
Conservationists have put together an otter's holt, and one of the creatures has given the residence her own’ paw-print’of approval 
SIMON GARRETT/Minster Lovell
TIM SYKES/BBONT Nature Trust
Voice over
Bee is a tame asian otter.
Even though her relatives never lived on the Thames…she's been brought along to check out a new artificial holt…built by volunteers from the conservation group…
BBONT.
Otters' became extinct on the Thames about twenty years ago.
Artificial holts could help tempt them back, much like a garden bird box
Male speaker
To an otter it's like any other hole in the ground, it's cover.
It's just a pile of sticks to the passer-by so it's hidden from the world outside
Voice over
After a good sniff round, the moment of truth…and approval.
The experts say a good manmade holt can be better appreciated than a natural one
There's only one problem with building a perfect home for an otter…getting her out again
In Central News tonight:
Five dead in bank holiday crash.
Driver error, or mechanical fault?
Run down by her own car…the nurse who tried to stop a thief.
And safety first.
Warning to boat owners after river explosion.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The crash happened as motorists streamed home along one of the region's busiest routes.
The woman driver of one car appeared to lose control while overtaking.
But her family say they're not convinced that she was to blame.
Police say mechanical failure has not yet been ruled out.
GRAEME BOWD/Crowmarsh Gifford
Ambulance Service Video
STEVEN WEBB/Driver's Nephew
ANDREW HOWARD/Automobile Association
The crash on the A423 in Oxfordshire came as drivers headed for home after the weekend break.
Police believe the two cars collided at a closing speed approaching a hundred miles an hour.
So great was the devestation that rescue workers were not at first sure how many vehicles were involved.
Three women in a red Metro were killed instantly, along with a fourth who was a passenger in a Honda.
A man and a woman were cut free from the Honda, but the woman has since died.
In the Metro were Sylvia Webb from Abingdon and her sister Valerie, on the the right who was driving.
Also killed was their friend Alice Morford.
According to police their car pulled out to overtake a caravan.
The manoeuvre was almost complete when the car started weaving across the road.
Then it struck the Honda.
The driver's nephew, whose mother was also killed, said his aunt was not someone who took risks.
Male speaker
We are just hoping they will find there was something wrong with the car.
Our aunt was a good driver.
She had been on a refresher course.
The car was only a year old.
Voice over
The dangers of overtaking on high speed single carriageways are well known.
This is one of the most critical manouevres in day to day driving.
The A423 is one of the busiest roads in the region and there've been many accidents.
To ease congestion last year saw the completion olf a new duel carriageway linking the M4 and the M40.
This gives drivers an alternative route between Maidenhead and Oxford.
The stretch of road where the crash took place was itself finished only two years ago.
It forms a bypass around Crowmarsh Gifford and had previously had a good safety record.
The original proposal was to make this a duel carriageway, but the plan was shelved to save money.
The AA say bank holiday driving can bring special dangers.
Tonight the driver of the Honda Brian Wilmot is criticaly ill in hospital.
The passnegers, who both died have been named as Sylkvia Wilmot and Marjorie Poynton.
Both cars cars are now being examined by crash experts.
Voice over
A nurse has been knocked down and seriously injured by her own car after she tried to stop a man stealing it.
The thief drove the vehicle straight at her.
She's now in a stable condition in hospital after surgery for a shattered pelvis and a broken leg.
KATE GARRAWAY/Oxford
MARTIN KEENE/Fiance
Chief Insp PETER CLARKE/Thames Valley Police
STEPHEN LONGTHORP/Home Owner
Voice over
Lynn Deeley was working at St Andrew's Home in Headington when she spotted a man tampering with her Metro in the staff car park.
She challenged the thief, but he deliberately ran her down; breaking her leg in 4 places and shattering her pelvis.
Miss Deeley was planning to marry.
Her fiance is disgusted by the attack.
Male speaker
I want him caught and brought to justice.
Voice over
Oxford police also want the thief caught.
They've described the attack as brutal.
Male speaker
It's a despicable attack.
Voice over
Lynn is a popular nurse a St Andrews.
Staff and residents have been praising her bravery in trying to stop the thief.
Male speaker
She's very caring and popular all the residents are concerned.
Voice over
Police are now appealing for witnesses to the attack.
This is the fourth car to be stolen from the site since October.
They want to make sure it's the last.
The Chief Constable of Gloucestershire has announced that he's leaving his job to take up a new post with the intelligence service in London.
Albert Pacey will be leaving the county at a time when there are two unsolved murders, the crime rate is soaring and there's a staffing crisis.
But he denies that he's deserting a sinking ship.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
ALBERT PACEY/Chief Constable
Voice over
ALBERT
Albert Pacey made his announcement at the headquarters in Cheltenham where he's been based for nearly six years.
He's leaving his post as Chief Constable of Gloucestershire to become Director General of the National Criminal Intelligence Service in London.
At fifty five Mr Pacey has had a full and distinguished career in the police force.
He's been Assistant Chief Constable of Humberside and was the Deputy Chief Constable of Lancashire before coming to Gloucestershire in ninteen eighty seven.
He leaves the county at an unsettled time.
There are two unsolved murders; crime rates are rising more rapidly here than anywhere else in the country; and there's an on-going battle for a bigger budget and more staff.
But despite this, Mr Pacey denies he's chosen a bad time to go.
Mr Pacey will take up his new post in London after the Summer.
It's not yet known who will take up his position in Gloucestershire.
But whoever it is, there's no doubt they'll have quite a job on their hands.
Weekend sailors are being warned to check their craft thoroughly after a boat was destroyed by fire.
The couple on board were lucky to escape alive, and with the season just getting under way, waterways officials say boat owners must make sure they're shipshape.
Amateur Video/KIM BARNES/Radcot
JOHN REDMOND/National Rivers Authority
Voice over
People out enjoying the first weekend of the season on the Thames, watched helplessly, as the Yorkshire Belle exploded in flames at Radcot Bridge.
It's thought the fuel system's to blame.
Owner, Peter Bird battled against the blaze after pushing his wife, Barbara into the water.
Both are now recovering from first degree burns.
They'd only had the boat 18 months.
Waterways officials say the blaze shows that boats must be checked after the winter.
The NRA today began its investigation into the cause of the fire.
They'll examine the boat and talk to the owner.
They're already planning for a new MOT-type inspection for small boats.
With the Thames in fullspate after recent rain, they say the message is safety first.
Another warning…this time to parents about the dangers of youngsters touching farm animals.
Four children who stroked Easter lambs picked up cryptosporidium…the same bug that contaminated some water supplies in the area four years ago.
Library Pictures/ERIKA BARNES/Swindon
STEWART BELL/Farmer
Dr JOHN PARSONS/Director of Public Health
Voice over
The lambs are cute enough to cuddle.
And farm Open Days like these are encouraged, to allow young visitors to learn more about life beyond the classroom.
But there are other lessons to be learned.
4 children from Swindon picked up lambs here at Southleaze farm and picked up a dangerous parasite, cryptosporidium.
They suffered severed sickness and diarrhoea.
It's hit the farm before and since an outbreak 3 years ago, the farmer has worked hard to try to ensure there wouldn't be a repeat.
Male speaker
Then we put up wash basins and signs.
It's surprising.
Voice over
It's the same bug that contaminated water supplies in the Swindon and Oxford areas 4 years ago.
Then, hundreds of children reportedly fell ill.
It's believed the source of the outbreak came from grazing cattle and sheep.
The latest case highlights the need for scrupulous hygiene on all farm visits.
Male speaker
All farms are at risk.
It's a hazard of farm life.
It's not a reason to stop farm visits.
But when they do they have to be sensible and wash their hands.
Voice over
Farmer Stewart Bell had already taken steps to prevent children from becoming infected.
In future, he'll go even further, by giving hygiene talks to his young visitors.
He's reluctant to stop them handling the lambs altogether.
He says it would turn his outdoor classroom into a museum.
And for the young students, it might just take the fun out of learning.
(ANNE)
Still to come on Central News:
Six of the best from Swindon.
A ten goal thriller keeps the play-offs dream alive.
Plus, a cracking finish as the Grand National lays another egg.
And the taxi driver with a new way of drawing the punters.
and finally tonight we've news of the Gloucestershire village that has managed to succeed where the world of sport has failed miserably and that's to re-run the 1993 Grand National…
Which horse was it you backed let's see how it faired as we cross to Stanton for the big race 
Voice over
There were crowds, a canal turn, a man with a red flag and a starter with a bowler — just like Aintree.
And what of the runners and riders; all hard boiled eggs painted in the colours of the jockeys which rode, or rather, should have ridden in the National.
The course was all down hill.
The going on tarmac, decidedly firm to rock hard.
They lined up behind the elastic.
Over to you, Mr Starter.
Would you believe it — a false start and the man with the red flag is there to make sure all the eggs go back to the line.
Under starters orders for the second time and they're off.
Zeta's Lad set the pace.
Captain Dibble rolled on behind.
There was a real scramble behind them.
Fallers; some hopes, not to mention shells, were crushed.
Won; t Be Gone Long crashed out.
And as they came to the final furlongs it was Roc de Prince, Laura's Beau, Sure Metal going for the line and then on the outside, up came New Mill House.
A real gallop to the finish.
Eggsciting or what!
After a photo or a snapshot with the instematic, the official result of the 1993 Egg Grand National was a win for New Mill House, 2nd, Roc de Prince and 3rd Laura's Beau.
The balance of nature is being restored in a village where hedgehogs and frogs have died out.
And it's all down to a Wildlife Rescue Group.
IAN MACLAREN/Bushley
TIM GOULD/Vale Wildlife Rescue
MARK BERRY/Group Founder
SIMON COMBES/Group Chairman
Voice over
A survey by the Wildlife and Vonservation group in the Gloucestershire village of Bushley, revealed that the population of hedgehogs and frogs had been wiped out, following heavy floods this winter.
They called in the Vale Wildlife Rescue Group who supplied 6 hedgehogs which had survived a variety of other mishaps.
Male speaker
This one had an argument with a lawnmower.
Voice over
Hedgehogs, surprisingly, have an important role in village life…
Male speaker
We have snails ans slugs on the increase.
The hedgehogs restore the balance.
Voice over
Apart from improving villagers' gardens, the Conservation Group has a unifying effect.
Male speaker
Once they see what's going on, they want to join in.
Voice over
Also replenished, the village pond, which had lost its frog population.
Part of Bushley's determined attempt to restore the eco-balance to a small corner of Gloucestershire.
A taxi driver with a passion for art has found an original way of keeping his passengers amused.
He's turned his cab into a mobile picture gallery, and has even been known to dash off the odd sketch of the people he drives around.
ROBIN POWELL Swindon
PETER MILLER Taxi Driver
Voice over
Swindon cabbie, Peter Miller never wastes a moment between pick-ups.
While waiting for passengers, it's out with his sketchpad and on with his favourite pastime — painting.
Peter renewed his interest in art two years when his son studied the subject at college.
He specialises in portraits and caricatures, which helps to explain why his cab's now decorated in an array of film and sports stars.
It helps if you play for Swindon Town, or just happen to be a Formula One motor racing champion, but could we persuade Peter to add a Television Presenter to his collection?
In the event, Wesley Smith's portrait WON'T be hanging next to Sean Connery's in an exhibition of Peter's work now showing at the Link Centre.
It's not, he admits, one of his best.
But for a picture scribbled in a 10-minute break between jobs at Swindon Station — not bad at all.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Hong Kong talks resume
China has agreed to resume talks with Britain over the future of Hong Kong.
Man in court over Hani death
A man's appeared in court accused of shooting dead the black South African leader, Chris Hani.
UN evacuates 800 refugees
A United Nations relief convoy has evacuated eight hundred refugees from the besieged Moslem town of Srebrenica.
Teachers threaten to strike
The National Union of Teachers has voted for possible nationwide strikes in protest at the planned introduction of performance-related pay.
Inquiry into sisters' death
The Police are waiting to interview a teenage car driver following the death of two sisters who were crushed against a wall in Middlesbrough.
FTSE up 25
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-five points at twenty-eight, forty-six point eight.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-six and up at two marks, forty-six.
Welcome back: Still to come on Central News, the taxi driver who freely admits that he provides a very sketchy service.
But first, with all the holiday sport, here's Tim..
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Swindon Town must have felt like humpty dumpty in the first half…they had a bad fall against Birmingham City…took a real tumble…
Dean Peer gave the Blues the lead…
John Frain made it two and it was going to take more than all the kings horses and men to put Town back together again…
Shaun Taylor knocked one in just before half-time…but within five minutes of the second half Swindon were in pieces…two more goals from Birmingham and surely that was it…remember the famous line from the world cup…they think it's all over…
Birmingham did as Paul Moulden…and Andy Saville made it four…one…
Then came the comeback…more a miracle as Town cracked…five goals in thirty minutes…top scorer Craig Maskell set the ball rolling…his first of the year…his twentieth of the season…
Dave Mitchell was next man in a real flyer this one and at 4-3…there was everything to play for…
Mitchell was back with the equaliser…they were walking round the Birmingham defence now…
With 12 minutes to go…
Maskell headed number five…
Birmingham fans couldn't believe it…the Swindon fans must have been rubbing their eyes too…ion the last minute Mitchell raced away for his hat-trick…they think it's all over it was then…6-4…to Swindon…what a scorcher…
Town's first Easter delight came on saturday against Luton at the County Ground…they were given a tough time in this one…a draw would have been a good result…a fair one too…but thanks to Paul Bodin the full-back with a golden boot they went and snatched a win…
it was a great winner…his sixth of the season…and it just about booked Swindon a place in the promotion-play offs…with only four games to go it's asking too much to make the top two but only a disaster can keep them out of the play-offs…
down at the bottom…there's no room to breath…no room for mistakes…
United's game at Newcastle was rained off yesterday but they did the business against Bristol City on saturday
this was a game that Oxford just couldn't afford to lose…they played it right…kept the defence tight…looked for the break…the opening up front…the hero was a local lad Mark Druce who celebrated his home debut with his first goal…he used his head in more ways than one…
United made sure of the win midway through the second half…a gold star for David Collins having set up the first he made the second too…
Bristol City looked for the offside…
Joey Beauchamp cracked it in…and Oxford were home and dry at 2-0…
It was also a Good easter for Hereford…played two won one and drawn one…they only let in one goal…here it comes…scored by Shrewsbury
Griffiths after just two minutes of the game at the Gay Meadow…
United equalised three minutes later…
Owen Pickard got the goal…one-one the final score…the only black spot was the sending off of Richard Jones…
Last night United beat Carlisle at Edgar Street…
Max Nicholson started and finished the move which brought the only goal of the game midway through the first half…
The win means there are seven points between United and the bottom of the table and that should be enough to ensure another season of league football for Greg Downs and his men
The easter treat for the rugby folk of Gloucester was to see their team taking on and beating the Italian side Benneton Treviso…who boasted 14 internationals and some of the best players in the world 
Voice over
With the Rugby World Sevens being played this weekend, the game at Kingsholm was a taster; a curtain raiser for good things to come and Gloucester rose to the occasion with a stirring display.
Scrum half, Julian Davis scored the first try.
Forget the shape of the ball.
Treviso showed all the skills and style you'd expect from an Italian side, but their two stars, All Blacks winger, John Kirwan and Australian captain, Micheal Lynagh had a quiet game.
Just as well for the Cherry and Whites.
A team with 14 internationals though is some force and sure enough, they were back in the game with a try from Perziano.
The conversion, down to Lynagh who's scored more points than anyone else in International Rugby.
A couple more for the collection at Kingsholm.
Treviso, who finished as runners-up in the Italian league, flourished in the first half and took the lead with a second try.
This one was scored by Rossi.
Lynagh believe it or not, missed the conversion.
In the second half, the Cherry and Whites rolled their sleeves up and got stuck in.
They gradually pulled themselves back into the game.
The turning point was this try from Bobby Fowke.
Lynagh got his kicking boot working again to keep the Italian challenge going, but the best came last and it was down to Gloucester.
In the final minute, one last attack brought a great score for Simon Morris.
It knocked the pasta out of Treviso.
Final score, 25-15 to the Cherry and Whites.
A village which started looking into its own history has discovered that it used to be somewhere else.
In fact, it used to be in TEN other places.
The research has also revealed a ghostly army which marches through the village, and a strange old system of farming…based on thirteen wooden balls in a sack 
Amateur Film/SIMON GARRETT/Yarnton
DENNIS CARTER/Meadsman
PAT SHURMER/Senior Meadsman
CLARE MILES/Designer
JOAN ROWE/Village Archivist
TONY DEL-NEVO/Committee Chairman
Voice over
Drawing the lot balls in Yarnton.
For centuries meadowland with common hay rights was portioned out.
Each strip was staked by its winner who cut his mark in the ground.
The ceremony was conducted by officials called Meadsmen.
Today the lot drawing is gone, but the meadsmen still preserve the land
Male speaker
The top end of the meadow everybody wanted to rush for that, what they used to call the Wherton bank, that was the best grass, they liked that strip.
I used to walk a tread, a mark from the top to the bottom of the field.
The horse would walk up that and that was how they marked the boundaries.
But if you crossed to the wrong post there was a devil of an arguament because someone ended up with only half a strip
Male speaker
It hasn't been ploughed or sprayed or anything artificial put on it at all and it's the old natural grasses.
They're mowed in summer and grazed afterwards and wild flowers including orchids come up and it is unique
Voice over
The lot balls are just one exhibit of the Yarnton Village History Project.
Much of what's on show could be from any English village.
Committee members have striven to ensure, like the village itself, the new is on display alongside the old
Female speaker
We were very glad to arrange for five photographers to make a survey of the village; its people and occupations — unusual sights and environment
Voice over
Gravel extraction has helped reveal the mysteries of Yarnton's past.
Archeologists have discovered a creeping village.
For some unknown reason it has moved eleven times.
Yarnton is a place of legends.
A love struck farmer's daughter was told she could not see her sweetheart.
Her parents shut her in an upstairs room.
She left her mark on the glass
Female speaker
She threw herself out and was killed, and is supposed to haunt the little lan which runs alongside.
My cousin who lived up there said she used to hear her going down shouting’ mother, mother.’
Female speaker
King Charles 1st's armies marched into Yarnton across the river and into Froggledown lane.
The ghosts of his men are supposed to come back and people have heard the rattle of the harness and the jingle of the wheels rattling along
Voice over
For the people who've produced the village archive it's the end of two year's hard work.
The displays will be preserved for the future.
The place and the people have been changed by the project
Male speaker
I've learnt there are a lot of caring people in this village, they're keen to help in giving information.
It's amazing how we've united the village and I feel good to be a part of this village 
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Rifkind rejects Thatcher plan
Voice over
The Defence Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, has rejected Lady Thatcher's idea of lifting the United Nations arms embargo on Bosnia saying it would prolong the conflict.
USA may back change
However, the USA has said it may back the lifting of the UN embargo if the Serbs don't sign a peace agreement soon.
Moslem victims treated
Meanwhile, injured children evacuated from the Moslem town of Srebrenica are being treated in hospitals in neighbouring Tuzla.
Fresh talks to avert rail strike
Fresh talks are underway between the rail unions and BR, in an effort to avert Friday's second one-day national strike.
FTSE down 4
The hundred shares index closed down four point seven at twenty-eight, forty-two point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-five but up at two marks, forty-seven.
(ad lib)
By the turn of the century…if we take the advice of experts…we should all be a lot healthier.
But doctors say we'll never be a healthy nation until we start to deal with the problems of teenagers.
Young people have a much higher rate of suicide, smoking, and accidental death.
As Gargy Patel reports, we need to act now to prevent the figures getting worse.
TEENAGE HEALTH FREAK/Channel Four
OXFORD
Dr ANN McPHERSON/GP
RICHARD/Homeless Teenager
Dr KEITH HAWTON/Consultant Psychiatrist
ALEX LANGDON/Actor
Dr AIDAN MACFARLANE/Oxford Health Authority
Voice over
Being a teenager isn't always fun, as life in the Channel Four series’ Teenage Health Freak’shows.
Arguments at home, worries about parents, pressure from friends, worrying about exams, money, sex; in the end it can all be damaging to your health.
The Government has issued targets to improve the health of the nation.
But the experts say that has to start with the teenage nation.
Such as cutting the pregnancy rate in under 16s by half, reducing the accident rate by a third, encouraging healthier eating and more exercise.
In the last few years, more and more teenagers have ended up living dangerously on the streets.
Richard became homeless and an alcoholic after leaving home because of constant rows.
With help, Richard is now recovering his health and his confidence.
But many teenagers lose all hope.
Suicide is a growing problem with young people highlighted by cases like Oxford University student Tracy Cole.
Giving teenagers a voice is a good way for them to recognise problems early on.
Even those who act the part, have their own problems.
Doctors say too many teenagers adopt an unhealthy lifestyle and it stays with them.
Smoking rates in schoolchildren need to be drastically reduced and the recession has its effects.
But without firm Government action, the health professionals can do little.
The campaign to achieve a healthy teeange nation calls on more guidance for teachers and parents to recognise the trouble signs and listen to what the teenagers say.
Growing up and learning to be independent can then be happier and healthier.
(ANNE)
Still to come on Central News:
Trouble in Paradise
Jilly Cooper's new novel that has scandalised a village.
And the way we were.
The farming system based on thirteen wooden balls.
Wesley Smith
Welcome back:The novelist Jilly Cooper has been causing a stir with her raunchy new novel.
The book is set in a fictitious village called Paradise, and is full of sexy rural romping and illicit goings-on.
But just a few miles away from where Jilly Cooper lives is a REAL hamlet called Paradise, and villagers there are worried that readers might think the book is based on them.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Paradise
JILLY COOPER/Novelist
Voice over
The tiny hamlet of Paradise in Gloucestershire; sleepy, serene and according to locals, a world apart from the village of the same name portrayed in Jilly Cooper's latest novel.
In the book’ The Man That Made Husbands Jealous,’the fictitious Paradise is a hotbed of illicit sex and raunchy romps.
Villagers here are concerned that people who read the book might confuse fact with fiction.
Jilly Cooper apologises for the mix up.
She says she had no idea that there was a REAL Paradise in Gloucestershire, even though she only lives a few miles away.
So ARE there any passionate toyboys or immoral goings on in Gloucestershire's own Paradise.
Female speaker
We're very sedate here.
It's all just a myth.
Male speaker
I'm sorry, I must have missed out on that.
Male speaker
I don't live here, but if that is going on, I'll move here.
Voice over
So the paradise that was once lost in the Cotswolds has been found by the spotlight.
Villagers hope their fame won't attract too much attention.
They say the thought of having coach loads of inquistive tourists driving through the hamlet would turn their Paradise into a living Hell.
A company is beating the recession in Britain by exporting adventure playgrounds to Spain.
It's already secured two million pounds worth of business, and hopes to create fifteen new jobs.
RICHARD BARNETT/Hereford
ANDY BARKER/Designer
PETE BRADLEY/P and R Metalcraft
Voice over
A warehouse on the Rotherwas Industrial Estate in Hereford has been transformed into an adventure playground.
But not for long.
Next week, all the equipment will be shipped to a town near Barcelona.
Britain still leads the world in playground design and the Bouncing Ball company in Hereford has found a ready export market in Spain.
This first indoor adventure playground contract is worth £80,000.
And the firm has orders for 20 more over the next two years.
That adds up to more than £2 million worth of business for Andy Barker, who set up the company only a year ago.
Male speaker
It's a very competitive business.
But we are 3 years ahead of everyone else in playground design.
Voice over
The playground has been built by another Hereford firm, who say it's been quite a challenge.
Male speaker
It was hard to construct, but it's good to have a challenge.
Leisure is one of the few industries that is growing.
Voice over
If the Spanish youngsters enjoy the adventure playground as much as their English counterparts, there should be no problem.
It all goes to show that for one company at least, beating the recession is childsplay.
A coroner has recorded an accident verdict on a nine year old boy who was killed when two chair-lifts collided at a Californian ski resort.
Michael Roper and his step-brother were thrown thirty feet from the lift onto the snow below.
Michael's step-father said he first thought there had been an earthquake.
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
5 April 1993/LESTER GILES/Step-father
CATHY PAVICH/Sierra Ski Ranch
Voice over
This was the first ever accident on a ski-lift at the Sierra Ranch resort in California.
Two weeks on, the authorities still don't know why it happened.
9 year old Michael Roper was on holiday with his family from Carterton in Oxfordshire.
He and his step-brother Philip Giles got separated from their parents on a ski-lift they were taking up the mountain side.
As the lift approached the top, the chair in front of the boys stopped — jammed in the wheels of a pylon.
Their chair ploughed into the back.
The coroner said Michael's head hit the chair and he died instantly from a fractured skull.
The lift was stopped immediately.
But the parents were stranded on the lift on chairs just behind the accident scene for half an hour before they were rescued.
The authorities in California are still investigating what went wrong.
The so called Sling-shot lift was closed down after the accident.
Two other similar lifts at the resort are still in use.
Skiers there said there was always a chance something would go wrong.
The Oxford coroner recorded a verdict of accidental death on Michael Roper.
14 year old Philip is said to have made a’ terrific’recovery after falling from the same chair lift, but he keeps asking why it happened.
Hundreds of mourners have attended the funeral of a student teacher who died after being stabbed.
Murray Pugh was described by his best friend as universally popular, both with fellow students and with the children he taught.A man has already been charged with his murder.
KEN GOODWIN/Bath
Voice of Rev GRAHAM POLLITT/College Vicar
NICK LEE/Friend
Voice over
Members of Murray Pugh's rugby team carried his coffin into the service at Haycombe crematorium in Bath.
Murray's family home had been in Bath, before he'd started his 4-year degree course at Cheltenham college of higher education.
As well as his family, dozens of students were there to hear the college's vicar pay tribute to their friend.
He says that Murray always tried to help others, and it was doing just that which led to the tragedy.
There were so many mourners at the funeral that some had to stand at the back and listen to the service relayed by loudspeakers.
Afterwards, Murray's best friend said that the student had been popular with everyone.
He says that Murray was a friend to everyone.
He feels he has lost part of himself, losing Murray.
It was 5 weeks ago that Murray died after a he received single knife wound to the chest during an incident in Cheltenham town centre.
At the same time today as his funeral was taking place a man charged with his murder was making another appearance in court.
22 year old Paul Wheway was remanded in custody for a further 4 weeks.
A woman has been killed by an avalanche while skiing in the French Alps.
Olivia Marchington, who was twenty-two and from Didmarton in Gloucestershire, was an accomplished skier.
She died while with two friends at the French resort of Meribel, where she worked as a chalet maid.
Her two friends, both from Sweden, escaped injury.
A drum of dangerous chemicals has been stolen from a factory store.
BERINSFIELD/Oxfordshire
The drum, containing twenty gallons of hydrochloric acid and nitric acid, was taken from a locked cage at a factory on the Tower Road Trading estate at Berinsfield in Oxfordshire.
Police are warning that the chemicals are highly toxic and anyone who comes into contact with them should seek urgent medical attention.
A company which makes diesel engines has won a seven million pound contract to supply the United States Military.
DURSLEY/Gloucestershire
The Lister-Petter company, which is based at Dursley in Gloucestershire, beat off stiff competition to clinch the two year deal to make eight thousand engines.
In Central News tonight
The jealousy that almost ended in death.
Magistrate accused of trying to kill his wife.
Whose body?
Remains unearthed after twenty year hunt for missing woman.
And a tragic accident.
Inquest verdict on boy killed by ski-lift.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Cranog Jones is said to have run a pipe from the garage through a specially- drilled hole in their bedroom wall.
But the plan failed when Mrs Jones awoke just in time to save her life.
GRAEME BOWD/Winchester Crown Court
BROCKHAMPTON/Gloucestershire
Prosecution counsel Mr CHristopher Clarke QC said the plan would have succeeded but for an important factor which Jones had overlooked.
The noise of the car engine was carried up the the pipe and Mrs Jones was woken in the early hours of the morning.
She found her husband at the foot of the bed cropuching over a wooden box into which the pipe had been inserted.
He was about to place the box over her head.
Mr Clarke said it was a clever evil and devious scheme and it would have been the perfect murder.
After her death Jones planned to place the body in the car with the engine running and push the pipe through the window to make it look like suicide.
Mrs Jones told the jury she was terrified.
She found the phone line had been cut but she managed to raise the alarm from a nearby callbox.
By the time police arrived most of the evidence had been cleared away.
But later detectives found secxtions of tubing on a council tip.
When questionned Jones admitted that hye had gassed the family cat.
But he said iot was an accident.
The animal had been in the garage while he was working on the car with the engine running.
Since his arrest in 1991 the couple have divorced.
With Mr Jones at court was his second wife Dianne.
The trial is expected to last for two weeks.
Police searching for the remains of a woman who went missing twenty years ago have recovered a body.
It was found in a garden where they've been digging for the past six weeks.
But the body hasn't yet been identified as that of Joan Main, who disappeared in (1973) nineteen-seventy-three.
Her husband David has already been charged with murder.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
PETER SANDALL/Wiltshire Police
JUDY HAWKES/Neighbour
Voice over
2 decades after she disappeared, the police are awaiting confirmation from forensic scientists that the search for Joan Main is finally over.
Yesterday afternoon, they discovered a body buried at the back of a house in Swindon's Old Town.
According to a neighbour, it was found in a barrel, several feet underground.
The breakthrough came 6 weeks after the police dismantled the garage and started ripping up the garden at what used to be the home of Joan's husband, David Main.
Joan Main was 35 when she went missing from her home at Haydon Wick in January 1973 and hasn't been seen since.
The police are as confident as they can be that the body they've found is hers.
Detectives are expected to interview David Main about the discovery.
Main, a 60-year-old plumber from Broadwell near Lechlade, was charged with Joan's murder at the beginning of March.
Meanwhile, residents in Goddard Avenue are glad that the excavation is complete and grateful to the police for keeping disruption to a minimum.
A post mortem on the body found yesterday has already been carried out, but it may be some time before it's formally identified.
A group of actors has set up a company which asks for more from its audience than just applause.
The Tilt Theatre encourages the people who come to see its evening shows to give their reaction in discussions immediately after each performance.
By day they give workshops in schools trying to de-mystify classic works for schoolchildren.
HARRIET RYLEY/Five Acres
FELICITY ROSS/Viola
JUDITH PAGE/Olivia
Voice over
Working out just who's who in Shakespeare's’ Twelfth Night’is complicated enough — especially if you're 12 and this is your first encounter with Shakespeare.
These Year 8 pupils from Lakers School in the Forest of Dean will be studying the play next year.
But instead of ploughing through the text, their introduction to the play comes from Tilt — a new Gloucester-based company.
They encourage the children to imagine what it's like to be a character in the play — one of two twins who are separated in a shipwreck and thrown up on a beach on a strange island.
She says she enjoyed imagining being on an island.
He says the play is complicated but it's fun.
He says it's different to what they're used to, but he's enjoyed it.
After the workshop — the full performance — given the Tilt treatment.
She says they worked closely with the Hindu community in Cheltenham who introduced them to a teacher from Birmingham who taught them.
They want to use dance as a way in.
The costumes are from a mixture of eastern backgrounds.
She says they bought them all from Birmingham — many are for weddings and rituals.
The company has been touring the play around Gloucestershire encouraging their evening audiences to give their reaction right after each performance.
By day, they're working with the audiences of tomorrow, hoping to lift the text off the page and straight into the imagination.
A couple whose cottage garden is so spectacular that it's visited by two thousand people a year are about to move house.
And they're taking the garden with them.
They've already begun the arduous task of carrying their plants half a mile across town to their new home.
RICHARD BARNETT Cirencester
July 1992
Rev JOHN BECK Gardener
SUSAN BECK Gardener
Voice over
For the Reverend John Beck and his wife Susan, it's the horticultural challenge of a lifetime.
They're setting off across Cirencester on a daily journey, carrying a little bit of their garden with them.
The couple have no car, so the trip across town has to be made by bicycle or on foot.
They're transplanting their cottage garden a handful of plants at a time from their present home to the new house they'll be moving to in November.
And what a garden it is; overflowing with such an abundance of plants, it attracts 2,000 visitors a year under the National Gardens Scheme.
Quite a contrast to the garden they're taking over.
But the Becks have already started turning lawned areas into borders ready to take the hundreds of plants they're transferring.
Male speaker
He's moving the garden bit by bit, 6 plants at a time.
Female speaker
It's quite a challenge and it's hard work.
But she's looking forward to creating a new garden.
Voice over
The Becks have been digging up and potting plants for months now.
Their garden at Cecily Hill boasts around 550 varieties of perennial.
So it will be some time before they've sorted out all the flowers and shrubs destined for a new home.
They can't dig too many up though.
The garden will re-open to the public from June to August, so it must still look its best.
As for the new garden, the Becks hope that will be ready for public viewing by the Summer of 1994.
Meanwhile the horticultural trips across Cirencester go on.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Smith presses PM on Bosnia
In the Commons, the Labour Leader, John Smith, has called on the Prime Minister to do more to stop the killings in Bosnia.
New English teaching proposals
The National Curriculum Council has put forward new proposals for the teaching of English in schools with an emphasis on grammar.
Funeral for crash sisters
Two thousand mourners have attended the funeral of two young sisters from Middlesbrough who were knocked down by a car which went out of control.
FTSE down 2
The hundred shares index closed down two point four at twenty-eight, thirty-nine point seven.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-five and up at two marks, forty-eight.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
In Central News tonight
The double life of a murder victim.
Fiancee…and prostitute.
Lest we forget.
Peace demo arrest on Libyan bombing anniversary.
And who's cashing in?
Compact disc prices under the spotlight.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Police discovered Carol Clark's other life last week, but have only just revealed details.
She also left a diary with names of clients, and police say if they don't come forward voluntarily, they'll be visited at home.
Library Pictures/TIM HURST/Reporting
SHARPNESS/Gloucestershire
Det Chief Supt COLIN EYNON/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
Carol Clark met the psychologist 6 years ago.
She'd been living with him in Bristol and they planned to marry.
She was wearing his engagement ring when her body was found in a canal at Sharpness Docks in Gloucestershire almost 3 weeks ago.
Carol Clark's double life, she was also known as Kate or Charlotte, has complicated the police hunt for her killer.
The dead woman lived at weekends in a flat in Bristol's red light district and there police have found papers, including a diary, which names many of her clients.
Carol Clark had been missing for almost 40 hours before her body was found at Sharpness.
There was no sign of her clothing, a mini-skirt and brown jacket.
A woman with a blond plait was seen getting out of a car with a man near the canal upstream of Sharpness.
The police want to talk to that couple, as well as other groups; 5 youths seen in the docks, 3 people near a small white car, and 1 man with a dark hatchback car.
Seven years after the Americans bombed Libya, a veteran peace campaigner has been arrested while protesting at the airbase used for the raid.
Ann Scott was taken away by Ministry of Defence police after cutting a perimiter fence.
But she says she's confident the case will never come to court.
April 1986/GARETH FURBY/Reporting
UPPER HEYFORD/Oxfordshire
ANNE SCOTT/Peace Campaigner
Library Pictures
MARGARET DOWNS/Peace Campaigner
NIGEL ANSTEE-ALGAR/Peace Campaigner
Voice over
Exactly seven years ago American fighter bombers left Upper Heyford in Oxfordshire, on their mission to bomb Libya.
Today to mark that anniversary a veteran peace campaigner cut through the base fence.
Ann Scott, a grandmother who's done this at least seventy times before, was quickly arrested.
But earlier she explained why she wanted to break the law yet again.
She says its for her grandchildren.
Ann Scott will now be prosecuted.
But she's confident the case will eventually be dropped.
It follows a campaign by a civil rights activist called John Bugg.
He walked onto the runway but was cleared of tresspass after pointing out that the public right of way as marked on maps actually crosses part of the base.
John Bugg died in January and peace campaigners have now named the path in his memory.
She says its a fitting tribute.
But this may prove to be one of the final fence cutting protests at Upper Heyford.
The base is winding down as part of the defence cuts.
By Christmas all the bombers are due to have left.
And that could mean the end for the peace camp which dates back eleven years.
He says they've been a thorn in the side of the auhtorities.
Tonight the Ministry of Defence confirmed Anne Scott had been charged with criminal damage.
She was released on bail…and will appear before Bicester magistrates next month.
Jaguar is facing a High Court battle over cancelled orders for its new supercar.
When the X-J two twenty was launched there was no lack of buyers, even though it costs more than four hundred thousand pounds.
But now many of those who paid deposits say they no longer want the car.
The company has told them to pay up or else.
GRAEME BOWD/Bloxham
PAUL CLEMENTS/Buyers' Solicitor
NICK FRY/Managing Director
XJ220 is as frightening as its price tag.
The car which is built at Bloxham in Oxfordshire has a top speed of 217 mph.
But many of those who placed orders back in 1989 had no intention of actually driving one.
They were speculators, who hoped to sell it for even more than the showroom price even though it meant tying up a £50,000 deposit for four years.
Since then the luxury car market has collapsed and the speculators want out.
Around 20 have refused to pay the next instalment.
Jaguar says it will sue them for breach of contract.
But solicitors for the reluctant buyers say the car was not built to the original specification.
They also claim that by bringing out a similar model, the XJR15 Jaguar failed to keep its supercar exclusive.
Male speaker
When customers contracted to have the XJ220 built they they thought they were getting an exclusive car.
With the other model that does not apply anymore.
Voice over
In the late eighties speculators made hundreds of thousands of pounds by trading in luxury models.
But recent auction prices have been disappointing.
in a recent sale Rod Stewart's Lamborghini went for a mere sixty one thousand pounds, less than half what he paid for it.
To take account of this trend The new Aston Martin DB7, to be built in Newport Pagnall, will cost only £80,000, havce the price of the companies current models.
The deposit is ten thousand pounds and the company says this will not be repaid if orders are cancelled.
Male speaker
The cars are very personalised.
If an order was cancelled we would have difficulty finding another buyer.
So it seems fair not to return the deposit.
Voice over
Jaguar has already served a writ on one customer who withdrew his order.
If it goes to court it could be an important test case.
Voice over
Britain's biggest manufacturer of compact discs has denied accusations that music lovers are being ripped off over the cost.
Most C-Ds retail at around thirteen pounds, although they cost as little as fifty pence to make.
A House of Commons Committee is investigating pricing policy.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
TERRY WILLIAMS/EMI Compact Disc
ED BICKNELL/Dire Straits Manager
SCOTT MILLS/GWR FM
Voice over
More than a hundred thousand compact discs roll off the production line at EMI in Swindon every day.
Most will fetch between 11 and 15 pounds in the shops, despite costing rather less than that to make.
The CD used to be considered a luxury item, but last year its share of the music market broke the 50 per cent barrier for the first time.
CD players have come down in price, but the discs themselves are still about thirty per cent dearer than in America.
Today a Commons Select Committee began investigating claims that they're overpriecd.
Among those giving evidence, Ed Bucknell, the manager of Dire Straits.
So who's making the profit, if a typical CD retailing at 12.99 can be made for a mere 50 pence?
An estimated 55 pence is spent on packaging.
The artist receives 88 pence, the producer and publisher another 88 between them.
With V-A-T at 2 pounds 27, that leaves 3.25 for the shop, with the lion's share — 4 pounds 66 — going to the record company.
The CD industry might provide 230 jobs in Swindon, but judging by the response to a poll on local radio, most people would like to see prices lowered.
The record companies' mouthpiece, the BPI, told us: CDs cost less in the UK than many European countries.
They are cheaper in the US, but so are most goods.
Prices are unlikely to be reduced dramatically.
At least music lovers have made it known they're no longer willing to part with money for nothing.
(ANNE)
Still to come on Central News:
The computer wizards byte back.
The game boys who took on the big boys, and won,
Plus, you CAN take it with you…the moving story of a man and his garden 
Wesley Smith
Welcome back: A two-man computer company has won two million pounds in damages from games giant Nintendo who tried to stop them marketing a revolutionary new invention.
The court decision means the pair, who are only in their twenties, could make a substantial fortune from the device, which enables the user to modify a computer game and get more use from it.
SIMON GARRETT/Southam
NINTENDO COMMERCIAL
DAVID DARLING/Game Genie Designer
1986
Voice over
When owners of expensive computer games have conquered all the complexities of their latest purchase the only thing to do has been to buy another, harder game.
But the Darling Brothers from Southam changed all that.
Their Game Genie gadget allows players to change the rules, speed up or slow down the action.
American game giants, Nintendo cried foul and took them to court in an attempt to ban Game Genie sales in America.
They lost.
The Darlings stand to recoup £2 million in damages.
Male speaker
Ever since the beginning they tried to stop it getting onto the market.
To begin with they succeeded.
They kept it off the market for a year.
They got an injunction before the court case.
But we won the court case and now its selling really well.
I think it's grossed $100 million dollars in the States.
Voice over
The Darling brothers went into the computer business while still teenagers.
It's not childsplay though.
The British market alone is worth £750 million a year.
The Darlings turnover in the coming financial is expected to top £10 million.
While they're delighted with their legal success, they have it in perspective.
Male speaker
Well this is kind of like a sideline for us, the Game Genie Video Enhancer in not the normal kind of thing we do.
Normally we do video games.
Voice over
Celebrations over the court victory may be premature.
Like any big corporation, Nintendo won't give up easily.
A spokesman said while they accept they've lost the copyright battle, they still intend to go to court again in an attempt to get the damages reduced.
For the Darlings, it's all part of the game.
Campaigners say they'll continue to fight to save a hospital threatened with closure.
The Regional Health Authority voted this afternoon to shut down the specialist chest and orthopaedic hospital.
But protestors say they won't give in.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Bristol
STANDISH/Gloucestershire
GORDON HOPWOOD/Save Our Standish
RENNIE FRITCHIE/Regional Health Authority
Voice over
Campaigners travelled to Bristol to appeal to the South West Regional Health Authority to keep Standish hospital open.
Specialising in chest and orthopaedic the hospital has been threatened with closure for more than two years now.
This afternoon it came a step closer when the Health Authority voted to shut it down and transfer facilities to the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital.
Campaigners were disappointed but not surprised.
The Health Authority says it made the only logical decision.
But patients at the hospital were saddened by the news.
Male speaker
I've been to the Royal and I know where I'd sooner be.
Male speaker
I'd sooner be in this hospital.
Voice over
A final decision will now be made by the Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley.
Campaigners say they'll continue to fight for Standish, but at the hospital tonight there was an overwhelming feeling that it's already too late.
People living in remote areas are being urged to make a note of the map references of their homes — because it could save their lives.
The emergency services say it could cut vital minutes from the time it takes to respond to a call.
KEN GOODWIN/Worcester
GEORGE WHEELER/Farmer
Voice over
George Wheeler lives on a remote farm in Worcestershire.
He lost both his legs in a farming accident and had to watch the minutes tick away while the emergency services looked for his farm.
Although they only took 20 minutes to arrive, if George could have given a map reference, as well as his address, they could have got there that much sooner.
He says that if the ambulancemen had a map reference they might have found him sooner.
Anywhere in the country can be given a map reference.
The network of squares which cover ordnance survey maps can be used to pinpoint a spot to within 100 metres, giving it a 6-figure number.
West Mercia police, who are pioneering the gridline scheme, want people in rural areas to learn their map references.
The scheme's pioneers hope that by making sure you know where you are on the map you could save vital minutes if you ever have to call on the emergency services for help.
The re-opening of a nineteenth century cabbies' shelter has upset some taxi-drivers.
The old hut's been converted into a flower-shop, but the cabbies say they wanted to keep it for themselves.
KATE GARRAWAY/Oxford
SANDY GRIFFITHS/Leaseholder
PHIL SKERN/Taxi-driver
Voice over
It may look like an old garden shed, but according to the owners this is a historic building.
No you're not being taken for a ride, this is a 19th century cabbies shelter.
For years, neglected in the centre of Oxford, it's been a rest-spot for the weary taxi-driver for over a century and now's lovingly restored and converted into a shop.
Female speaker
It's part of our history.
They don't make shelters for cabbies like this any more.
Voice over
In the days before radio the shelter was a link with other drivers and todays cabbies say it should have been kept for them.
But the Council's annual rent of £8,000 was more than they could afford.
He says we tried to persuade the Council to let us have it, but they said it had to be leased so now we have no where to go.
The Council denies their rent's too high and even though the new owners have made the hut a cabbies' shelter in name only at least Oxford's most unusual historic building is once again back in use.
(WES AD LIBS BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, a look ahead to a motoring marathon.
Voice over
Welcome back.
Later on, the radio soap opera that's coming to the stage.
(WES) But first with news of a motoring marathon and all the weekend's sport we join Tim Russon in London.
NICK BRITTAN/Rally Organiser
BRUCE STAPLETON
DOUG MORRIS
FRANCIS TUTHILL
TONY WILSON
PAM DURHAM
HOWARD PATTERSON
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
GARETH FURBY/Didcot Magistrates Court
NICK HANCE/Atomic Energy Authority
JEAN SAUNDERS/Friends of the Earth
Voice over
The leak happened in the Pluto reactor building at Harwell in Oxfordshire.
The reactor itself was shut down in nineteen ninety, but gas bottles like this had been left inside a secure unit called a glove box, and they weren't labelled.
In April last year a worker was told to take bottles to a handling bay for disposal.
The court heard the worker thought all the gas bottles were empty.
But as he cut into one using a power saw, an alarm sounded, and he realised there'd been a leak of radioactive tritium gas.
Today Didcot magistrates fined the Atomic Energy Authority eight thousand pounds for breaking safety laws.
But Harwell insists it was only a minor leak and the public wasn't in danger.
He says it was only one twentieth of background radiation in Oxfordshire.
But environmentalists still aren't convinced.
She says radioactivity is the most dangerous thing on earth.
The Atomic Energy Authority has now introduced new procedures at Harwell and say it's confident there won't been another similar leak.
A search has been launched after a couples mysterious disappearance.
Barbara Allsopp and her husband Alan haven't been seen for three days.
Police with tracker dogs have been out searching fields and river banks.
KEN GOODWIN/Newnham-on-Severn
Insp TONY DAVIS/Gloucestershire Police
TONY FIRTH/Severn Rescue
Voice over
Barbara Allsopp, a well known member of the community at Newhnam on Severn and her husband Alan, both now the centre of a mystery that's baffling police and friends of the couple.
Neither have been seen since Tuesday.
Newspapers and milk lay untouched on the doorstep of their cottage.
Mrs Allsopp failed to attend a meeting last night of the Parish Council, of which she's chairman.
He says that they are very concerned.
The Severn Auxilliary Rescue Association has been helping the police search the River Severn and surrounding areas.
He says that they have little information to go on, so the search has to be very wide.
Mr Allsopp was known to suffer from senile dementia and was often seen walking in the area.
It could be that the couple simply decided to go away for a few days, but those who know Mrs Allsopp say it's unlikely she would have left without telling anyone.
One glimmer of hope though, tonight police say that someone who knows the couple claims to have seen them at a garden centre in herefordshire.
If that's true, the mysterious dissapearance of Barbara and Alan Allsopp could have a happy ending.
People whose lives have been devastated by crime are backing a fund-raising appeal to help others who've suffered as they have.
Victim Support helps thousands of people every year, but the service is running desperately short of money.
Kim Barnes reports.
JANET PARSONS
MAMIE GRAHAM/Victim Support
PAUL ROSS/TV Presenter
JOHN HAYWARD
Voice over
Janet Parsons knows what it is to find yourself a victim of crime.
Her husband, Leslie was killed at the wheel of his lorry by two joyriders racing each other.
She had vital help from her counsellor at Victim Support.
Janet's counsellor Mamie Graham is on the end of a phone 24 hours a day for those who find themselves at the sharp end of crime.
Now Victim Support needs individuals and businesses to help fund their work in north Oxfordshire.
The appeal was launched by Paul Ross, presenter of TV's Crime Monthly.
He gets to hear of the benefits to victims.
4,000 people have already been helped by Victim Support in the Banbury area, including John and Rose Hayward.
They were nearly killed when they were held up and shot in Florida.
Thousands of commuters once again decided to stay at home rather than try to beat the rail strike.
Buses placed on standby for the journey to London weren't needed, and the roads were less congested than usual.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
HANS RAJ/Driver
STUART BARTON/AA Roadwatch
Voice over
It was repeat of the strike two weeks ago, except not even the Chiltern Line from Bicester and Aylesbury into London was running.
There were empty stations all over the region.
But that did not translate into congested roads and pressure on commuter buses.
Extra Provision was made, but not needed.
Male speaker
I'm very surprised by the traffic.
It's just like a Sunday.
I missed the strike two weeks ago and I wasn't expecting this.
Voice over
The major routes throughout the London commuter belt were clear.
The M1 through Buckinghamshire, The M4 and M40 were all easier going than a normal weekday.
Some people were forced to travel by bus because they had to be at work.
But not many.
Female speaker
It wasn't vital to come but I thought I ought to.
Male speaker
I don't enjoy the coach.
It takes twice as long and is a lot more bumpy.
Voice over
Otherwise people just stayed at home and ignored Government encouragement to come into the office.
Some took holidays, others extended their Easter break.
But the AA thinks commuters might not get away with it a third time.
Male speaker
A further strike could be a different situation because it will be a normal weekday and drivers might get a false sense of security.
Voice over
But for today commuter chaos has again failed to materialise.
Former Beirut hostage John McCarthy has paid tribute to the staff of RAF Lyneham who gave him help and support after his release.
He says he's now firm friends with the doctors who prepared him for freedom.
Today, huge crowds gathered to watch John and girlfriend Jill Morrell launch their new book in Oxford.
KIM BARNES Oxford
August 1991
JOHN McCARTHY Former Hostage
JILL MORRELL
Voice over
They welcomed John McCarthy and Jill Morrell like heroes and to many that's what they've become.
Hundreds gathered to buy the book and catch a glimpse of the real thing.
After 5 years in captivity, John McCarthy flew back into this region, his first step onto British soil taken at RAF Lyneham.
He spent a week there and is grateful for the help he was given.
Jill had acheived intenational recognition for her campaign for John's release, but she watched his flight into Lyneham on TV like the rest of us.
In the book, John pays tribute to the help he had from RAF Lyneham psychiatrist, Gordon Turnbull.
The two remain good friends.
Both say simply writing the book has helped them come to terms with the experience and it's a story that's still gripping many people.
Keen Oxford readers queued for hours.
The crowds are the biggest the bookshop has seen and the book is selling faster than any the publisher has known.
Was all the attention overwhelming?
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Violence at Chris Hani funeral
FTSE up 5
The hundred shares index closed up five point six at two eight three zero 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty three and up at two marks, forty six.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back to Central News.
Still to come…can the new craze for step aerobics actually damage your health?
First though, with things getting a little hot in the manager's seat at Oxford United, here's Erika with the sport.
ERIKA BARNES
Yes,’ Horton Out’was the cry at the Manor on Saturday as Oxford United slumped to another depressing one-nil defeat against Charlton.
’ Not likely’says the boss…they can still avoid the drop.
Meanwhile Swindon drew in what could be a dress rehersal for the Division one play offs.
Hereford drew too…and in rugby Gloucester claimed the scalp of would be champions Bath.
But first…to the Manor.
BRIAN HORTON/Oxford Utd Manager
Voice over
Manager Brian Horton called it a criminal performance.
Just look at the evidence.
Charlton's Alex Dyer managed to round the defence and score, with 5 United players between him and the goal.
The referee hobbled off with a pulled muscle.
He'd probably seen enough anyway.
In their defence, Oxford did pick things up in the second half, Druce did all the running, Walker placed the header, but Salmon wasn't going to let the match slip through his fingers.
But perhaps this best sums up the case for the prosecution.
In mitigation, Oxford lack confidence and are frightened about the drop.
But the jury; the fans announced the sentence at the end.
They think the boss should go.
Male speaker
Course I'm not going to go.
I'm not walking out.
When I was a player, I was a fighter.
We've got 5 games to go.
Course I'm not going.
Voice over
But it's getting too close for comfort.
Oxford are now 4th off the bottom.
Just one goal in their favour is keeping them from relegation.
Male speaker
This time last year, we were in a worse position.
Of course we can get out of it.
Female speaker
Have you been practising your celebratary dance?
Male speaker
I'll save it 'til we're safe.
But I don't want to leave it to the last game of the season.
Voice over
It was extra train on Sunday and today, to prepare for tomorrow's vital game against Peterborough.
One all the score last time round.
Joey Beauchamp, claimed the point for Oxford.
When Swindon and Leicester meet, they often see red.
At the County Ground, it was Julian Joachim who was sent off, for taking a swip at Colin Caulderwood.
It was a dress rehearsal for next months's play offs.
Swindon had all the attack.
Leicester were exhausting all their luck in defence.
But it was Leicester who took the lead in the first half, when Walsh headed home Philpotts cross.
But it was Swindon who had all the chances.
They only managed to convert one of them, when Shaun Taylor found the time and space in a crowded penalty area to knock home the equaliser.
So there's no change at the top of Division One, with both Swindon and Leicester poised for a possible play off re-match.
Meanwhile at Carlisle, Hereford hung on for a nil-nil draw, thanks in part to keeper, Alan Judge, who returned to the pitch with stitches, after being kicked in the head in the first half.
England full back Jonathon Webb said his farewells to rugby union at the weekend, as his side Bath went down to Gloucester 16-17.
It was fitting that Webb scored two outstanding tries, but Gloucester made sure it wasn't the happiest of endings.
Voice over
Jonathon Webb's something of a hero in Bath.
They'll miss him, like they missed many of their first team players who're saving themselves for a vital league game next week.
Nevertheless it was Webb and Bath who made their mark first, with a neat series of passes over on the right.
This is no action replay.
It's the next try.
Same move; same scorer, 4 minutes later.
But Gloucester learnt their lesson and threw their weight behind the task.
With a bit of pushing and shoving they finally helped Simon Morris over for their first try.
In the second half; whilst the forwards tangled with each other here on the left, they missed Gloucester's Peter Glanville drive over for another score.
It ended 16-17 in Gloucester's favour; some comfort for Coach, Keith Richardson after a tricky season.
Male speaker
The win was a good one, in a season when confidence hasn't been high.
Games against second strings aren't easy.
Gloucester had a few players out as well.
Bath looked as if they were going to win, but Gloucester's defence held out well.
Voice over
But the day was Jonathon Webb's.
This penalty took his tally for Bath up to 259 points in 49 matches.
Fitness fanatics have been warned that they could seriously injure themselves if they join in the latest health craze without proper preparation.
Thousands of people have been practicing step aerobics, but over-enthusiasm could leave them flat on their backs.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
ANDREW ROWE/Chiropracter
MARGARET CROSS/Patient
CAROLAN BROWN/Princess Diana's Fitness Trainer
Voice over
Step Aerobics is the latest fitness craze to sweep the country.
It's reckoned to be the best method yet devised of keeping the body in good condition.
Over 150 enthusiasts turned out at Oxford over the weekend to put their best foot forward with Princess Diana's personal trainer Carolan Brown.
But it can be dangerous if you don't know what you're doing.
Serious back injuries can result, keeping chiropracters like Andrew Rowe, busy.
Male speaker
The trouble comes when people get too enthusiastic and don't warm up or train enough.
Voice over
His practice in Abingdon is constantly dealing with exercise-induced injuries.
One of his patients, Margaret Cross, says she frequently aggravates her back when she exercises.
Female speaker
I feel pain in my back and legs after I've been doing aerobics.
Voice over
One complaint against step aerobics has been the number of unqualified people taking the classes.
Female speaker
You can't really teach step without propertraining.
It's very difficult and there are training courses all over the country.
Female speaker
You have to be careful of backs and knees, but a good instructor will check your overall fitness.
Female speaker
As long as you teach them the basics, they should be all right.
Voice over
The message is that enthusiasts should be careful, no matter what exercise they take.
Thieves have stolen toys from the graves of four young people killed by a car which went out of control and crashed into them.
The toys were put there by their parents, who visit the cemetery every day.
They say the thefts are only prolonging their grief.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
13 September 1991
SUSAN LILLEY/Victim's Mother
ANDY BARNES/Victim's Father
Insp RICHARD ROWLAND/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
There've been visitors each day for the past year and a half to this quiet corner of the Whitworth Road Cemetery in Swindon.
It's the resting place of 4 of the 5 youngsters who died when a speeding car went out of control in Akers Way and hit them as they played at the side of the road.
Their parents like to leave toys by the graves, but on several occasions they've returned the next day to find them missing.
Susan Lilley lost her 7 year old son, Ian in the crash.
Andy Barnes, his 15 year old daughter, Paula.
He reckons those responsible are children who don't know any better.
The police say they're appalled by the thefts, but do point out that those who leave graveside tributes do so at their own risk.
Meanwhile, the parents of those who died won't be deterred from leaving toys by their children's graves.
The police are urging those responsible to return the toys they've stolen and allow the victims' families to pay tribute to the loved ones they lost in the way they want to.
A fire chief working in Saudi Arabia is to be publicly flogged for breaking the country's alcohol laws.
The Foreign Office says he's decided not to appeal against the sentence in the hope that he'll get home more quickly.
TIM HURST/Reporting
GEOFFREY CLIFTON-BROWN MP/Cirencester
Voice over
Damien Devine from Cirencester in Gloucestershire, heads a training programme for firemen in Saudi Arabia, where he's worked for the last 18 months.
At the weekend a Saudi court sentenced him to a 120 lashes in public for supplying alcohol, a charge he's always denied.
His wife, Anna, says she's had four letters from him since his arrest before Christmas, but she has no knowledge of any appeal.
Consulate staff in Riyadh confirm Mr Devine wants to get home as soon as possible so he won't appeal, although back in Britain, his MP is pressing the Foreign Office to intervene.
Mr Devine has already spent 4 months in prison.
It's not known when the public flogging will be carried out.
A famous sailing ship has been damaged within hours of setting sail after a complete refit.
The Soren Larsen, which starred in the TV series the Onedin Line had been in dry dock for seven months.
Carpenters who'd thought their job was done, had to set to work again.
Viewer's Video/CLARE LAFFERTY/Reporting
SHARPNESS/Gloucestershire
IAN HUTCHINSON/Soren Larson
Voice over
The Soren Larson was on her first voyage for seven months when the accident happened.
She'd been completely refitted in Gloucester docks and was on her way to Southampton via the Gloucester to Sharpness canal.
The crew tried to sail her through a narrow gap at a bridge in Purton.
But that gap was too tight.
This morning at Sharpness docks, carpenters were at work mending the damage.
It wasn't only the starboard side that needed attention.
Carpenters were confident that Soren Larson would be sea worthy by tonight.
Then she'll set off again for her destination in Southampton…trying hard to avoid any more narrow bridges.
