The video of that accident was shot by Mr Ron Varnam from Berkeley in Gloucestershire…
If you DO video anything that might interest us call our Newsdesk on 0235-554123.
If we can use it, we will of course pay for your tape.
(WES AD LIBS BACK REF)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, testing times in the life of Brian.
But Oxford United's boss says he's staying, despite the threat of relegation.
Plus, Best foot forward, but watch your step…aerobics can be a pain.
And another day, another Rainbow.The John and Jill show comes to town.
Powerboat tragedy.
Calls for a rule change after the death of a champion.
Leave them in peace.
Parents anger as children's graves are robbed.
And, a bridge too hard.
The dented pride of TV star.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
He was picked up by a rescue boat, but onlookers say THAT craft was then involved in a second accident.
John Hill's son says he's not been given the full facts about what went wrong.
KEN GOODWIN/Reporting
JOHN HILL/Just Before Race
STEVE HILL/John's Son
PAUL MOXEY/Friend
Voice over
It should have been a race a World champion like John Hill could easily take in his stride.
A legend in the power boat world, Shurdington signwriter, John has been in at the top of his sport for over 30 years.
But as the race got underway at Abu Dhabi, things started to go wrong.
A crash attracted the attention of the rescue boats, and the cameras.
But out of sight at the other end of the course, Mr Hill had also come to grief.
It's not yet clear how.
But reports say he was alive when rescuers picked him up.
Then it seems the rescue boat itself crashed, throwing Mr Hill into the water for a second time.
His son, Steve, who was there, believes it was this which killed him.
He says that he was told his father was alive after the first crash…by the time he'd had the second crash in the rescue boat he was dead.
He wants to know what happened.
One of John Hill's best friends, who's helped found the Cotwsold Motorboat racing club with him 30 years ago, says he was the sports leading lights…
He says that he was an ambassador for power boat racing, and for his country.
The family want an inquiry to find out exactly what happened.
In a statement, the sports governing body the Royal Yachting Association says:
Power boat racing has a very good safety record.
Anything that can be learned will be noted; action will be taken if needed.
An eighty five year old woman has been attacked in her bed by two men who then ransacked her house.
She's the latest of a series of elderly people singled out as easy targets for robbery.
She woke in the night to hear the men barking out instructions 
ROBBERY VICTIM
SIMON GARRETT//Newton Longville
Det Insp PETER BURROWS/Thames Valley Police
Female speaker
Don't shout out or make a fuss and we won't hurt you, we only want your money.
They put a duvet over my head and I couldn't hear anymore after that
Voice over
The woman's ordeal took place at the house where she lives alone in the village of Newton Longville just outside Milton Keynes.
She's very shaken and her arms are badly bruised from where the men held her.
Female speaker
I could hear them pulling drawers out and they said they'd go.
But as they said it I felt something being pulled round my neck.
They tied my tights round my neck
Voice over
After several minutes the men found some cash and left.
A neighbour raised the alarm after seeing the woman's dog sitting in the road outside in the early hours.
It's the fourth attack on the very old in the Milton Keynes area in just a few months.
Police have few leads or useful descriptions.
They're desperate for help from the public
Male speaker
If anybody in Milton Keynes can imagine how they'd feel if it was their parents or grandparents.
They know how we as policemen feel
Voice over
Pensioners are warned to take care, but there's a limit to how well they can protect themselves
Female speaker
I lock the doors I always do, the windows are all shut there's nothing more I can do
Voice over
A magistrate who's on trial for attempting to gas his former wife has told a court that she set him up.
Cranog Jones claims his ex-wife Margaret wanted him out of the family home.
He denies trying to kill her by piping car exhaust fumes into her bedroom.
GARETH FURBY/Winchester Crown Court
Voice over
An ice rink used by one of the country's top ice-hockey teams has been closed.
Skaters on the rink last night were given only minutes to leave before it was suddenly shut down.
The rink's owners say it simply isn't making money — the clubs that use it are trying to form a consortium to keep it open.
HARRIET RYLEY/Milton Keynes
IAN FREEMAN/First Leisure
LEE POW/Milton Keynes Kings Ice Hockey Team
RHIAIN JOHNSON/Figure Skater
JON BAHARI/Figure Skater
TONY OLIVER/Milton Keynes Kings Ice Hockey Team
Voice over
As news of the closure of the Blade Runners Ice Arena in Milton Keynes spread, protestors gathered outside the hastily planned press conference to announce its shutdown.
First Leisure, who own the rink, said it simply wasn't commercial.
That's something the hundreds of supporters of the Milton Keynes Kings Ice Hockey team will be fervently hoping too.
The team was only set up 3 years ago when the rink was built and is now ranked 13th in the country.
It was poised to get into the new expanded premier league in the sport, until news of the closure came last night.
He says the players can't wait around while negotiations go on — they've got to look for jobs elsewhere straight away.
Most ice rinks are heavily subsidised by local councils, but First Leisure's approach to Milton Keynes Borough Council drew a blank.
The council said:
Male speaker
The Borough Council has explored every avenue with First Leisure to try to increase its income by expanding the usage, which were not successful.
Voice over
It's not just ice hockey players; there are several teams of figure skaters now left without a rink to practice or compete on.
She says her life revolved around the ice rink — she had to fit her personal life in around her skating.
He says the rink is one of the biggest, cleanest, best rinks in the country.
Later, after discussions with First Leisure, a consortium of junior players parents were hopeful they might be able to save the rink.
He says they need alot of financial support, but they're hoping they'll get it from supporters and will be able to save the rink.
But for the moment, it is literally a case of meltdown at the rink, where instructions have been given to begin melting the ice.
Six hundred friends and colleagues of a student teacher stabbed to death in the street have attended a memorial service in his honour.
Many of them wept openly as his favourite music was played to the congregation.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
JOHN PUGH/Father
Rev GRAHAM POLLITT/College Chaplain
Voice over
Students and staff at the Cheltenham and Gloucester College of Higher Education, many of them fellow members of the college rugby team, wept during a performance of Elton John's Yellow Brick Road, the favourite tune of student, Murray Pugh, stabbed to death in Cheltenham just over a month ago.
He was attacked and stabbed in the chest in the town centre, after playing rugby for the college team.
A Cheltenham man has since been charged with murder and wounding a second student.
Murray Pugh's family and girlfriend listened to tributes from colleagues and the college chaplain, before his father also spoke.
Students and staff had taken a break from lectures, others had travelled from Murray's home town of Bath and the family home in Lancashire to attend the 40 minute service.
Many of them had sought counselling from the college chaplain.
A funeral service for Murray, who was 24, was held last week in Bath.
The man accused of his murder will appear in court again next month.
A motorist who went to the aid of a lorry driver whose vehicle was on fire has been killed by another vehicle which hit them from behind.
Barrie Nye from Woughton on the Green in Milton Keynes had flagged down a lorry with smoking tyres on the M-One near Hemel Hempstead in Hertfordshire.
He and the lorry driver were hit by another lorry, and killed outright 
Police are hunting three men after a hundred and forty miles an hour car chase.
SWINDON
The men, who were wearing balaclava helmets, crashed the car onto an embankment at junction fifteen of the M-Four motorway near Swindon.
Police had given chase after foiling an attempted ram raid in Marlborough.
A county council will decide tomorrow whether to appeal against the Government's decision to cap the authority.
Gloucestershire county council is being told to cut it's budget by ten million pounds and is one of only three councils in the country to be capped.
The authority claims if the budget is cut, teachers will be made redundant and social services will suffer.
Members of the 'hung' council will decide whether to lodge a formal appeal against the capping decision.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
7 AUGUST 1992/RICHARD BARNETT/Hereford
TERRY ASTON/Health and Safety Executive
MIKE DERNIE/Midlands Electricity
Voice over
Michael Grant, who was 24, died within moments of a fuel oil tank exploding under him at the Midlands Electricity power station in Plough Lane, Hereford last August.
He was installing a fuel gauge on top of the tank when it blew up.
At the resumed inquest at Hereford Town Hall, Health and Safety Executive explosions expert Andrew Cox said the oil tank Michael Grant worked on had been full of highly inflammable oil vapour.
The fuel was meant to be heated up to forty degrees centigrade.
But the temperature sensor in the tank wasn't working, and the fuel could have reached 180 degrees…turning it into explosive gas which only needed one spark to ignite it.
He said there was evidence of recent welding on top of the tank.
Fellow workers told the inquest Michael Grant had taken a welding kit onto the tank when he started work on it.
One witness described seeing a plume of moke and a ball of fire and then seeing a body on the road.
Following the inquest, the Health and Safety Executive revealed it would be prosecuting Midlands Electricity over Michael Grant's death:
Male speaker
This is very serious.
Midlands Electricity will be prosecuted for failing to ensure safety of its workers and others.
Male speaker
Midlands Electricity has ensured the site in Hereford is now safe.
Voice over
The Coroner said: This is something which ought never to have happened.
A magistrate who's on trial for attempting to murder his wife by pumping car exhaust fumes into her bedroom has been explaining why he started her car at three o'clock in the morning.
Cranog Jones says he was only trying to de-tune the engine.
He's admitted twice telling lies to the police, but says his wife was trying to set him up and he didn't want detectives to believe her story.
GARETH FURBY Winchester Crown Court
Voice over
Today his closest friends told the court he was always honest.
But according to the prosecution, Cranog Jones the Cheltenham magistrate is a blatant liar.
His ex-wife Margaret claims he tried to kill her at the family home in Brockhampton.
He started up her Fiesta car at three in the morning, and says the prosecuition, had fixed a pipe taking exhaust fumes from the garage into his wife's bedroom.
But todsay Cranog Jones told the court he'd only gone into the garage to de-tune her car after they'd had an argument.
He was asked why he'd later dumped lengths of pipe at nearby Slade Quarry and then twice lied to police about it.
He said, I thought they might be used to prove Mrs Jones' case against me, so I panicked.
My wife has, over a period of time, vowed to destroy me, my job, my life, and my status as a magistrate.
Jones was also asked about the death of the family cat.
He said it was accidentally gassed when he left his car engine running.
But the prosecution lawyer, Christopher Clark QC, insisted, You deliberately killed that cat, in order to see whether the mechanism worked.
Mrs Jones claims she saw her ex-husband crouching at the foot of the bed with a makeshift gas chamber…a box fixed to a length of piping.
Today Christopher Clarke told Jones…
She woke up moments before you were going to put the box over her head.That is not so sir, was his reply.
As well as a magistrate, Cranog Jones is a training officer at Smith's Industries near Cheltenham, and today his former boss told the court he was truthful, without question.
But the prosecution says Jones is a clever, arrogant liar who had murder in his mind.
He was interrupted in the nick of time by his wife and he tried to cover up his tracks.
The case continues.
042093programe
FBI say Waco fire was unexpected
Survivors to be charged
Train driver blamed for crash
Teachers back in court
FTSE up 26
The hundred shares index closed up twenty six point one at two eight five six point one 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty four and up at two marks, forty six.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
042093programe (ANNE) Welcome back.
Now we turn our attention to the countryside, and a warning today that one of the most beautiful parts of our region is under threat…from tourists.
(WES) So many people now descend on the Wye Valley every summer that conservationists say some roads may have to be closed at peak times to restrict the number of visitors.
RICHARD BARNETT/Symonds Yat
Dr RUTH WILLIAMS/Conservationist
JOHN EVERARD/Forestry Commission
TONY GARDINER/Boatman
Voice over
The River Wye winds through 60 miles of spectacular countryside as it makes its way through Gloucestershire and Herefordshire.
It's a magnet for tourists and the sheer number of visitors is posing a threat to the area.
The Wye Valley is designated an area of outstanding natural beauty.
And a new plan has been launched to protect it.
Ruth Williams, who's conservation officer for the region says some way has to be found of reducing pressure on the most popular beauty spots like Yat Rock.
Female speaker
We may have to close some roads to traffic and make them pedestrian only.
It's the only way to cut down the traffic.
Voice over
Much of the woodland in the valley is managed by the Forestry Commission, which has helped to draw up the new plan.
Male speaker
The good thing about the forest is that you can have a lot of people around and still not have everybody in one area, you can still get a feeling of wilderness.
Voice over
Those working in the tourist industry are opposed to any proposal to limit the number of visitors.
Kingfisher Cruises run sightseeing trips along the Wye.
Male speaker
You musn't try to stop people visiting; instead you have to improve facilities for them and make moving them around easier.
Voice over
Meanwhile, the new conservation plan also tackles one of the most intractable problems; the conflict between canoeists and anglers.
Female speaker
We're trying to identify areas of the river where anglers can be left alone to fish, but also to make sure that the canoeists can still find their white water stretches, without having to paddle around the fishermen.
Voice over
The 7 local councils covering the Wye Valley have already backed the new plan.
So conservationists hope they can preserve the area's outstanding natural beauty and cater for the tourists too.
Sir Jimmy Savile says he wants to close down the world-famous Spinal Injuries Unit at Stoke Mandeville Hospital…but only because he'd like the hospital to run out of patients.
He's been presenting awards aimed at encouraging safety at work, a challenge taken up in Oxfordshire's old folks homes.
KIM BARNES/Sandford
VALERIE OBERSTAR/Manager
Sir JIMMY SAVILE
Voice over
These contented residents at Orchard House can relax knowing that staff here have just won a major safety award.
The team took up the gauntlet thrown down by the Health and Safety Executive and came up with a thorough checklist for the city's 7 homes.
It seems it's the little things that count.
At first, the checklist took 6 hours to get through.
Now it's a bit quicker.
They look at hundreds of safety points every 3 months.
And there are plenty of satisfied customers.
Oxford City Council received their award from Sir Jimmy Savile, who launched a special year of workplace safety.
He'd like to see all accidents avoided and Stoke Mandeville out of business.
Now it's hoped more people will step up safety at work, bringing peace of mind to managers and dogsbodies.
Football, and Oxford United manager Brian Horton has named a sixteen man squad for the vital relegation match against Peterboro tonight.
The match at the Manor Ground will be crucial to United's hopes of staying in Division One.
The Japanese have commissioned a British company to build a replica Elizabethan village to help its students appreciate English culture.
The village will be made of solid oak and then exported, flat-pack style, to Tokyo.
The builders are not using any nails in the construction, in an effort to build an authentic cultural centre.
SANDY BARTON/Reporting
ROGER VENABLES/Henry Venables Ltd
MARK HICKS/Border Oak
One hundred and fifty lorry loads of logs will go into the buildings…
Trees from all over the country being turned into student accomodation, an english pub and craft workshop.
The three million pound contract helping two Midlands companies:
’ It's like the icing on the cake.
It's just given us that much more sales coming out of recession to really help us.’
’ In the short term it means that we're through the recession which has been really difficult to get through
Japan and other areas of the Far East.
The Leominster based Border Oak construction company — has taken on thirty two extra staff to help complete the six months contract.
The finished period frames will be tested in Stafford before being put together in Japan…
Without a single nail…and hardy enough to withstand the Japenese weather:
’ we have design criteria which are completely different from this country.
One hundred and forty mile
And when its ready, the mini village will become a cultural centre for Japenese people learning about Britain.
And for the Midlands companies hopefully the start of more orders.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
042093programe
Police hunting the killer of the prostitute Carol Clarke want a man who phoned with information to contact them again.
The man, who said his name was Dave, told detectives about a friend who'd been looking for Carol shortly before she died.
Officers also want to trace another man who was trying to hire a taxi in the area where the body was found.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Dursley
Det Chief Supt COLIN EYNON/Gloucestershire Police
March 1993/SHARPNESS/Gloucestershire
Voice over
The officer leading the hunt for Carol Clark's killer, says a man called Dave phoned the incident office in Dursley last week.
He told officers that his friend had been looking for Carol in Bristol on the Friday before she died.
Carol's body was found in Sharpness docks 3 weeks ago.
Detectives want to speak to a man who phoned a taxi firm in Berkeley on that same morning.
Detectives also want to hear from two men; one black and one white, who were seen throwing stones at the window above the address in Bristol where Carol lived.
Meanwhile, officers are repeating their warning to Carol's clients that if they don't contact the police, the police will come to them.
A sheltered workshop for the disabled which is threatened with closure has won a temporary reprieve.
The workshop had looked certain to shut down after the local authority withdrew its funding, but now it's been given two months to persuade the private sector to come up with a rescue package.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
DAVID CARVER/Enterprise Works Manager
TONY TURNER/Enterprise Works Employee
DONALD DEWAR MP/Shadow Social Security Secretary
ESME SMITH/Wiltshire County Council
Voice over
The fate of all 56 staff at the Enterprise Works in Swindon hangs in the balance.
In February, they were told they were being laid off as part of County Council spending cuts.
Now they're being allowed to keep their jobs for 2 more months, while the Council tries to find a private company to run the workshop on its behalf.
The Works' management says it's a scandal and wants the redundancy notices withdrawn altogether.
Tony Turner is just one of those who fears for his job.
He's twice suffered strokes and is paralysed down one side of his body.
Yet at the Enterprise Works has given him a full-time job, making components for local firms.
But Tony and his colleagues have friends in high places.
Today, the Shadow Social Security Secretary paid a morale-boosting visit.
Labour has vowed to keep the Works open if it wins control of the Council at the next election.
But the ruling Conservative group says it already has the best interests of the workforce at heart.
One private concern has already expressesd an interest in running the Works on a non-profit-making basis.
If it doesn't come up with a rescue deal by the summer, these men and women could be reaching the end of their working lives.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, how tourists can spoil the countryside.
An animal shelter threatened with closure is to stay open.
It's been bought by the man who's run it for the RSPCA for the last eight years.
Staff at the centre say they're delighted that the animals, and their jobs, have been saved.
KEN GOODWIN Whitminster
CLIVE SADLER Kennel Manager
LOUISE CAHILL Kennel Maid
Voice over
Celebrations at the Whitminster Animal Shelter, after news that it's been saved from closure.
It was under threat because it's owners, the RSPCA, announced that the property was to be sold.
The kennels went on the market for £80,000 and it's thought a builder was interested in developing the site.
As bidding pushed the price up, kennel manager, Clive Saddler put in a final offer of £105,000, which was accepted.
He says they hope to be able to carry on as before, the kennels should be self-financing.
Kennel staff who thought their days were numbered are delighted.
She says that they all thought they would have to look for other jobs.
Now they're delighted.
And supporters like Lucy Power, who's taking home a stray from the kennels, are thrilled.
She says that the kennels are great.
They're also needed.
She says that all her family have taken dogs from the kennels.
He says that the kennels are needed in Gloucestershire.
So the staff get to keep their jobs and the animals get to keep their shelter.
It's smiles — and licks — all round.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Morrow blames no one for broken arm
FTSE up 13
The hundred shares index closed up thirteen point five at two eight six nine point six 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty three and up at two marks, forty six.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A company is being set-up to try to save an ice rink which was closed down two days ago.
The consortium is being headed by the manager of the ice hockey team.
He's confident he can save the arena.
But the local council says it can't afford to help him.
LIZ HANNAM/Milton Keynes
TONY OLIVER/Manager
SHAUN HENNESSY/Leisure and Arts Manager
Voice over
The Blade Runner ice rink was one of the most popular sporting venues in Milton Keynes.
Its ice hockey team is one of the best in the country.
Top matches attract around 2,500 fans.
And it's because of this popularity, that the manager believes he can save the ice rink.
Mr Oliver says he will market the rink better than in the past
He needs £300,000 to succeed.
But he can't expect any help form the Borough Council.
It's already spent its £1 million leisure budget.
Mr Hennessy says the council hasn't the money to help the rink
First Leisure, the company which owns the ice rink, had a meeting with Mr Oliver last night and says it welcomes the consortium bid.
They're also tied by a covenant which prohibits the stadium from being put to any other use.
Mr Hennessy says the council will not allow First Leisure to change the use of the stadium.
Mr Oliver says its important to keep the rink for the community, the skaters and the ice-hockey team, which is profitable.
The problem will be getting the company up and running before the best players in the Kings ice hockey team leave.
A county council has decided to appeal against the Government's decision to cap its spending.
GLOUCESTER
Gloucestershire county council has been told to cut its budget by ten million pounds and is one of only three councils in the country to be capped.
The authority claims if the budget is cut, teachers will be made redundant and social services will suffer.
Today, members of the 'hung' council voted in favour of lodging a formal appeal against the decision.
In spite of the recession it seems the world can't get enough British pigs, boots and pop videos.
The companies that produce them are amongst several in the region celebrating today's announcement of Queens Awards for exports and technology.
TIM HURST/Northampton
BEGBROKE/Oxfordshire
JOHN JEFFREY/Managing Director
BOURTON on the WATER/Gloucestershire
RICK BROWN/Managing Director
BISHOPS CLEEVE/Gloucestershire
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Voice over
Doc Martins, the boots that were once made for working, but are now sold world-wide as fashion accessories, have prompted an export award for the makers, Airwair of Northampton.
They've given the company a foot hold in Europe, America and the Far East.
Electronics design, sold even to Japan, has won a technology award for Solid State Logic of Begbroke, near Oxford.
96% of the company's output is sold overseas.
Fabric designs produced at Bourton on the Water in Gloucestershire have won a Queens Award for Warwick Fabrics, a company which started just 4 years and now sells 70% of output overseas.
The company believes even the home market has been boosted by the housing recession, with people preferring to redecorate rather than move.
Cockpit displays for fighter aircraft, proved in the Gulf War, have won a technology award for Smiths Industries of Bishops Cleeve near Cheltenham.
If pigs could fly, they might sell some to the Pig Improvement company near Abingdon in Oxfordshire.
They in turn, have won an export award for selling hardy outdoor breeds to America, Cuba and Europe — even to Denmark, where the Danish comes from.
Football now, and Oxford United fans slept just a little easier last night after Brian Horton's side earned three vital points in their fight to avoid relegation.
Oxford's two-one win at home to Peterborough lifted them into sixteenth place in the First Division.
ROBIN POWELL/Oxford
Voice over
These are nervous times down at the Manor Ground.
Oxford began the night teetering on the brink of the relegation zone and pulse rates soared as early as the second minute.
Paul Reece keeping out Bobby Barnes, with a little help from the cross-bar.
The home side were less grateful for the woodwork, when Jim Magilton beat the wall and the 'keeper with a near-perfect free-kick.
But this was a far more spirited performance than of late by Oxford.
They persevered and thoroughly deserved their lead on the half hour.
Chris Allen, one of 5 changes in the line-up, brought down by Chris Greenman.
Magilton making no mistake with the penalty.
10 minutes later, it was 2-0.
Magilton this time the provider.
Skipper, Andrew Melville the scorer.
It was a dull second half by comparison; Oxford's best chance falling to John Durnin.
Tony Philliskirk pulled one back for Peterborough, which meant an anxious last 5 minutes for the London Road faithful.
But Oxford hung on for what may well prove a crucial victory.
They're now in 16th place, 3 points clear of the bottom 3, with a game in hand.
There's just one home match remaining; the rest are all away.
One of them, ominously, at Newcastle.
No time for slip-ups, but the odds must now be on Oxford avoiding the drop.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
CECIL GREEN/President
Voice over
Stephen Tobin was convicted of blackmail at Bristol Crown Court last month.
The jury was told he'd demanded a loan of £2,000 from Brian Hillier, the former chairman of Swindon Town.
In return, he'd allegedly offered to keep quiet about illegal payments the club was making to players.
Today, Tobin was sent to jail for 18 months by Judge Peter Fanner; a sentence described by the club's current president as just deserts.
Tobin was a prisoner at Dartmoor, when he wrote to Swindon asking for a trial during the '86/'87 season.
He won a place in the reserve team and moved to a house in Park North.
He was said to be in financial difficulty when he tried to blackmail Hillier in May 1991.
Hillier, who's since served a jail sentence himself in connection with the fiddle, reported him to the police.
Two years later, the club's relieved it's all over.
The final chapter in the illegal payments saga comes as Swindon press for promotion to the Premier League.
3 years ago, when they won the play-offs, the scandal cost them their place in the top flight.
This time they're hoping for a happier ending.
A verdict's expected tomorrow in the trial of a man accused of attempting to murder his wife.
Cranog Jones denies attempting to gas his ex-wife and claims she made the story up.
The jury has been told they'll have to decide who's telling the truth.
GARETH FURBY/Winchester Crown Court
Voice over
As a Cheltenham magistrate Cranog Jones has sat in judgement of many but tonight he's waiting for a jury to delever it's verdict on him.
Today the trial judge, Ian Starforth Hill told the jurors they had to decide who is telling lies.
Margaret Jones claims her husband tried to murder her at the family home in Brockhampton, by pumping exhaust fumes from the garage into her bedroom.
But Cranog Jones says she's invented the whole story to set him up.
The Judge said there was no evidence other than Mrs Jones word to back up her central claim, that she woke up to find her husband crouched at the end of her bed with a make shift gas chamber.
A wooden box connected to a length of piping.
He added…
Judge Starforth Hill told the jurors they'd have to consider whether Mrs Jones gave the impression of a schemeing woman, could she play the part, the charde of going to the police, her neighbour and then lying on oath in court.
A man who nearly died when he was dragged along under a car for a quarter of a mile says he hopes to be leaving hospital soon.
Sonny Worthington suffered appalling injuries in the incident two months ago, but says he's confident he'll soon be up and around 
SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
SONNY WORTHINGTON
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
Voice over
Sonny Worthington celebrated his 26th birthday yesterday.
By all accounts, he's remarkably lucky to have got there.
7 weeks ago, a fight with two men and a teenage girl in his home town of Banbury, allegedly ended with him being run over and dragged under a car for a quarter of a mile.
For Sonny, those dramatic events are less than a blur.
Male speaker
I don't remember any of it.
My last memory is about a week before it happened.
Maybe it'll come back to me later and then I'll get nightmares.
But just now it's just the way I want it.
Voice over
It's known Sonny was drinking with a friend in this pub shortly before the incident.
Doctors fought to save him in the days afterward.
Now he's getting to grips with his injuries.
Male speaker
I've got a knackered left arm where the car went over it; they took a piece of bone out of the shoulder, so there'll need to be a lot of physio on it.
I've got gravel wounds in my back and my leg hurts where they took a skin graft.
Apart from that, my body seems to be in pretty reasonable working order.
Voice over
3 people have been charged in connection with causing Sonny's injuries.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GRAEME BOWD/Winchester Crown Court
BROCKHAMPTON/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Cranog Jones maintained he was innocent all through the trial.
Just a few hours before the verdict he told Central News that he believed the jury would find him not guilty.
He accused his estranged wife of being paranoid — but said he felt no ill will toward her.
KEN GOODWIN/Reporting
CRANOG JONES
BROCKHAMPTON/Gloucestershire
RECONSTRUCTION
MICK DENLY/Neighbour
Voice over
As a former magistrate Cranog Jones said he had faith that the jury would believe he was innocent.
They didn't.
Just before the verdict was announced he told Central South that he never attempted to gas his wife — and that it was all a plot by her to ruin his life.
He says that his wife was jealous of his success.
But the guilty verdict has reavealed Jones to be, in the judges words, a wicked man.
The court had heard how his wife Margaret had woken in their house at 3 a.m. to find her husband crouching over her bed with what amounted to a home made gas chamber.
He had connected a tube to the exhaust pipe of his car and bored a hole through the bedroom wall.
The tube was concealed behind a chest of drawers and connected to a box.
It was this, his wife had said, which he had intended to gas her with, using the fumes from the car's exhaust.
Jones had tried to cover his tracks by disposing of some of the apparatus on a rubbish tip.
He said this was’ just a precaution.’
He says that he had considered many courses of action, this was one which he took on the spur of the moment.
Denying his guilt to the last, he said he didn't bear his wife any ill will.
He says he's not the sort of person to bear malice against anyone.
The quite village of Brockhampton in Gloucestershire seems an unlikely setting for such a bizzare case.
Neighbour remembers the night it all happened well.
His wife had run to help Mrs Jones.
He says they offer her help when she needs it.
Tonight Cranog Jones starts a prison sentence, found guilty of attemting to murder his wife.
A verdict he maintained a jury would never return.
He says he knows he's innocent.
Two brothers have been arrested in the Irish Republic in connection with the murder of a woman in a boarding house.
Christine Campbell's body was found five months ago in a suitcase hidden in the loft.
The two have already appeared in court, and are expected to be extradited to Britain.
November 1992/CHRIS MOORE/Reporting
WATERFORD/Ireland
PETER SANDALL/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
The body of Christine Campbell was discovered last November, when Mary McCarthy, a resident at the All Travellers Guest House in Swindon, reported blood coming through the ceiling of her room.
In the loft above the room, police found the woman had sexually assaulted and strangled and her body forced into a suitcase.
Early in the inquiry, police said they wanted to trace two men from Ireland.
Yesterday, in Waterford, brothers John and Martin Stacey, aged 19 and 26, appeared before a local court.
They were arrested at separate locations in the city.
A warrant for the arrest of one had already been issued.
Male speaker
They were arrested on a warrant issued by a court in Swindon.
One is being held in prison, the other in a Youth institution in Dublin.
They appear to have spent a lot of their lives in England, although they have connections in Waterford.
Voice over
In court, the Stacey brothers gave the address of the Swindon guest house, although their family is thought to be from the Waterford area.
Two police officers from Wiltshire are now going to Ireland to arrange an application for extradition.
Male speaker
Once extradition has been granted, then officers will bring the two men back to this country and place them before the courts here.
How long that takes is entirely a matter for the legal proceedings in Ireland.It's dependent on them.
Voice over
John and Martin Stacey are expected to appear in court again tomorrow.
Wiltshire police officers will be at that hearing.
(TWO SHOT) Welcome back.
Well, at last some good news on the jobs front, with the number of people out of work falling for the second month running.
(WES) Tonight we look at one small company that's played it's part in helping to reduce the dole queues.
RICHARD BARNETT/Cheltenham
TOM BOWHILL/Managing Director
JOHN CROSBY/Panelbeater
HUGH MURRAY/Manager
Voice over
Tom Bowhill Restorations in Cheltenham is thriving, despite the recession, proving that people are still willing to pay for true craftsmanship.
Tom, a professional engineer, set up the company 5 years ago after being made redundant for the third time.
He has vivid memories of how it feels to lose your job.
Tom went on a Government training course and then started the business with a £40 a week enterprise allowance.
As demand grew for restoration of veteran and vintage cars, he took on 6 more workers, 4 of whom were unemployed.
Among them John Crosby, a tutor at the Government skill centre where Tom had trained.
John was made redundant himself when the skill centre was privatised.
Another recruit, Hugh Murray, who'd also lost his previous job.
Over the 5 years, Tom and his team have restored more than 200 classic vehicles.
Two thirds of the cars go for export, to the United States, Australia and Europe.
The rebuilds include a number of Delage cars, the French equivalent in the 20s and 30s of the Rolls Royce.
And they've just finished work on this 4.5 litre Bentley.
Tom says he hopes his success will give heart to those who've lost their jobs.
The Cheltenham firm is doing more than putting classics back on the road.
For those who've faced redundancy, it's also restoring their pride in a job well done.
Fifteen fox cubs have been handed into the care of a Wildlife Rescue Centre.
The cubs, all between three and seven weeks old, have been found orphaned or abandoned over the last few weeks.
Staff at the centre say they'll care for the animals until they're strong enough to be returned to the wild.
CLARE LAFFERTY Beckford
CAROLINE GOULD Vale Wildlife Rescue
Voice over
This is’ Nettles.’
So called because she was found crying in a patch of nettles when she was just 3 weeks old.
The other fourteen are a little older.
But they're still completely dependent on the staff at Vale Wildlife Rescue.
When they're about 3 months old, staff will start the tricky procedure of trying to reintroduce the cubs back into the wild.
The cubs will be released onto private estates where the staff can keep their eyes on them.
But for the time being, they're happy to lap up the hospitality of their rescuers.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
China and Britain in talks
FTSE up 11
The hundred shares index closed up eleven point five at two eight eight one point one 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty four and up at two marks, forty eight.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A hundred and seventy soldiers are making final preperations to leave Wiltshire for a tour of duty in former Yugoslavia.
Once there, they'll supply British troops with everything from breakfast to bathtubs.
SIMON GARRETT/Hullavington Barracks
Captain LYANNE MACLEAN
Lance Cpl STEVEN FROST
Corporal JIMMY GLOVER
Voice over
The men and women of the 9th Supply Regiment of the Royal Logistical Corps are going to Split in Croatia.
It used to be a holiday resort but this trip will be about keeping troops involved in the aid mission supplied with all they need.
Female speaker
We need to provide everything from UN cap badges, to socks or spare power units for the Warriors the Cheshires are using.
Voice over
Before they can go to supply and support the British contingent in former Yugoslavia, the regiment must themselves be properly supplied and prepared.
Female speaker
You must make sure all equipment is properly labelled.
Voice over
Although they're not going to fight, the soldiers must be able to defend themselves if it comes to that.
Male speaker
What we're actually doing is checking the firing pin isn't broken and looking down the barrel to make sure it's not blocked and is properly oiled.
It's as simple as that.
Voice over
There's some apprehension about what the soldiers will find.
Male speaker
You don't know what it'll be like, if it'll be like the scenes you see on the news every night.
Male speaker
I'm looking forward to it.
It's a chance to do what we're paid to do basically.
Voice over
The detachment will be in Croatia for 6 months.
Shopkeepers have been told they can't protect themselves against ramraiders and smash and grab attacks because they're in a conservation area.
A council has banned them from putting metal shutters on their windows, saying it would spoil the look of the town centre.
One shopkeeper is leaving a window boarded up in protest:
RICHARD BARNETT/Stroud
DENNIS MASON/Town Councillor
NAILSWORTH
JOYCE GUILD/Shopkeeper
Voice over
A clothes shop is the latest victim of the ram raiders in Stroud.
Early this morning, 3 masked men smashed their car through the window of Fosters Menswear and made off with £3,000 worth of jeans.
They left behind them broken glass, tyremarks on the road and another exasperated shop owner.
At Dixons electrical store nearby, there have been four smash and grab raids this year.
But Stroud District Council says the shopkeepers can't put metal sutters over their windows at night because it would spoil a conservation area.
The ruling has been attacked by local shopkeepers and by a member of the town council.
Male speaker
Shutters should be put up as soon as possible to discourage ram raiders, otherwise traders will leave the town.
Voice over
At Nailsworth near Stroud, ramraiders crashed a car into the window of a newsagents and stole four hundred pounds worth of cigarettes.
Shopkeeper, Joyce Guild wants to put a more secure aluminium framed window in.
But Stroud District Council says no, she must restore the original wooden window frame because it's a conservation area.
In protest, she's leaving up the wooden boards across the window.
Female speaker
The council is being dogmatic.
It's important to preserve the old, but we live in the real world.
Voice over
Stroud District Council says it's aware of the shopkeepers' problems, but it must consider the conservation aspect.
It's hoping to meet the shopkeepers and reach a compromise.
Meanwhile, the traders fear the ramraids and smash and grab attacks will go on.
A bill which would allow prosecutors to appeal if defendants are given bail looks set to become law within weeks.
Three years ago Anna McGurk was murdered by a man who'd been bailed on a rape charge.
The MP behind the bill says if it had been law then, her life would have been saved.
LIZ HANNAM/Reporting
KAY POTTS/Anna's Mother
MICHAEL STEPHEN MP/Bill Sponsor
Voice over
When Andrew Hagans was facing a rape charge 3 years ago, magistrates granted him bail, despite police objections.
Within 2 weeks he had raped and murdered Anna McGurk as she walked home from work at Gloucester City Council.
Hagans was staying at a bail hostel at the time where the only restriction was that he had to be in beween 11 a.m. in the evening and 7 a.m. in the morning.
Anna was murdered at 5.30 p.m.
Since then, her parents have been campaigning for a change in the law.
Their campaign was taken up in the Commons by backbencher Michael Stephen.
A committee of MPs has unanimously agreed to back his bill to give the prosecution the right of appeal against bail.
It is expected to become law as early as the Summer.
If it does, it'll be the first back bench measure for 8 years to reach the statute book.
Mr Stephen's believes its smooth passage is due in part to the outrage surrounding Anna McGurk's death.
The law has come too late for Anna McGurk, all her parents can now hope is that by the passing of this bill, some good will finally have come from her death.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come, how small firms can play a big part in cutting dole queues.
Motorway jacknife.
One dead, another serious as lorry hits workmen.
Your plan was ingenious.
Nine years for the magistrate who tried to kill his wife.
And sentenced to death.The Islamic terrorists who murdered a nurse.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
The men were working on the hard shoulder installing cables for emergency telephones when the lorry jacknifed.
Wesley Smith
WESLEY SMITH
It's not known why the thirty eight ton tanker went out of control.
The eastbound carriageway of the M-Fifty motorway was closed for five hours following the accident.
RICHARD BARNETT/Ross on Wye
Chief Insp PHILIP PURSLOW/West Mercia Police
Voice over
One worker was driving a digger and the other was standing nearby when the 38-ton tanker jack-knifed on the eastbound carriageway of the M50 motorway, 3 miles from Ross on Wye.
The cab of the vehicle slewed off the motorway onto the hard shoulder.
It hit the digger and the man who died was pinned under the front wheels.
The other worker was taken by air ambulance to Hereford General Hospital, where he's in intensive care.
Police say the dead man was in his twenties.
Both workers were employed by a London firm.
The tanker driver was treated for shock at the scene, but was uninjured.
Police have no idea why the lorry went out of control.
Male speaker
The area was coned off.
It is not known why the tanker left the road.
Voice over
It was more than 2 hours before accident investigators allowed the digger to be lifted out, so the body could be removed.
And a 7-mile stretch of the eastbound carriageway of the M50 from Ross to Newent was closed for 5 hours until the wreckage was towed away.
The road has now reopened.
Two brothers have appeared in an Irish court in connection with the Swindon body in the loft murder.
One of the men has already come back to Britain voluntarily, the older one is fighting extradition 
WATERFORD/Ireland
SIMON GARRETT/Swindon
DIANE GAMMAGE
JIM O'SULLIVAN
Voice over
Appearing at the district court in Waterford, 26 year old John Stacey and his 19 year old brother Martin.
John Stacey's appealing to the Irish High court against extradition.
The younger man agreed to fly back to Swindon with Wiltshire detectives.
Both will be quesitoned about the death of Christine Campbell.
Her body was found in a suitcase in a loft of the Traveller's Quest Guest House in Swindon 5 months ago.
The brothers allegedly stayed there.
Christine Campbell drank at the town's British Legion club.
John Stacey worked behind the bar there
Female speaker
He seemed rather nice, pleasant — customers liked him
Male speaker
Polite, seemed all right to me.
He was smart and he went down well with the customers…he was a good barman
Voice over
Regulars at the club say Mrs Campbell was a frequent visitor.
She often came in with her mother and sister.
Even five months after her death there's still shock about what happened to her
Male speaker
She was always in here.
She was nice.
I used to talk to her and when I found out she was murdered it was a shock, because you expected to see her in here
Voice over
John Stacey has a total of fifteen days to pproceed with his apppeal against extradition to Britain.
While he's remanded in custody in Ireland his brother will be held by detectives in Swindon
The magistrate who tried to kill his wife with a home-made gas chamber has been jailed for nine years.
The judge told Cranog Jones that his plan had been ingenious, but warned him that as a magistrate, he would have a hard time in prison.
GRAEME BOWD/Winchester Crown Court
Voice over
Cranog Jones showed no emotion as the judge passed sentence.
9 years in jail for a failed attempt to gas his wife at their home in Gloucestershire.
Margaret Jones was not in court today.
His second wife, Diane, looked relieved.
His 18 year old son, Cranog jnr, was lead away in tears.
Defence counsel, Michael Parroy, said because Jones was a magistrate, he would face a tough time in jail.
He would be a rule 43 prisoner separated from other inmates for his own safety.
Judge Ian Starforth Hill told Jones it was an ingenious and well thought out plot.
He said he had taken into account that the intended victim had suffered no long term phsyical injuries.
But he said:’ You endeavoured to go a long way to cover your tracks by disposing of the apparatus.
You did it because of your love for another lady.
Had you succeeded in your plan, all would have been plain sailing.’
Jones made a hole in the wall of his home at Brockhampton, so he could pipe fumes from a car exhaust into his wife's bedroom.
She awoke as he was about to place a wooden hood over her head.
He wanted to live in the house with his girlfriend.
The couple have since married.
Seven Egyptian terrorists have been sentenced to death for their part in the murder of a British nurse.
Sharon Hill died when the bus she was travelling in was ambushed by Islamic fundamentalists.
Sharon's mother has praised the Egyptians for their tough stance against terrorism, but is critising the British authorities for their lack of action.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
OCTOBER 1992
SHEILA HILL/Sharon's Mother
Voice over
The Islamic fundamentalists sentenced to death for their part in the killing of Gloucester nurse, Sharon Hill, who died in Egypt, after the bus she and a party of British tourists were travelling in, was ambushed.
Sharon's mother says she used to be against the death sentence, but not now.
She says that when such a tragedy occurs, you change your mind abut the death sentence.
Mr and Mrs Hill were invited to Egypt to meet some of the country's officials and see the area where the attack happened.
She says that they gave them every assistance possible.
But Mrs Hill is less complimentary about British officials.
She says the Foreign Office gave them little information.
A Foreign Office spokesman said: We always do as much as we can in such circumstances.
We passed on to the family all the information we had.
Rover cars is moving two hundred and fifty jobs from one factory to another.
OXFORD
The jobs will be transfererd from the body pressing plant at Cowley in Oxford to the main body plant in Swindon.
The work includes making panels for the Rover eight hundred series.
Cowley workers will be offered jobs in Swindon.
SWINDON
Pensioners had to be evacuated from a block of flats after an explosion at a paint store.
HEREFORD
Police are treating the fire at the Wyeland Caravan site on Belmont Island in Hereford as suspicious.
A two storey building and some caravans were severely damaged.
A new machine which will save the lives of hundreds of babies around the world is now available.
The latest in hi-tech foetal monitoring will, say the experts take all the guess work out of treating unborn children who are struggling to survive 
SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
DEBBIE DELANEY/Mother-to-be
CHRIS REDMAN/Professor of Obstetrics
LORNA BURGESS
Voice over
It's the sound of an unborn baby's heartbeat.
But the machine isn't just listening, it's evaluating the child's condition.
If there is a problem requiring treatment, the machine will say so.
Debbie Delaney's pregnancy has had its problems.
But at 37 weeks, she knows everything's all right.
Female speaker
If you feel your baby's been quiet during the day, you can ask a nurse to put you on the machine and it'll reassure you the baby's still there kicking away.
Voice over
The machine's been pioneered by Oxford instruments who are based in Abingdon.
They were approached by a senior obstetrician at the John Radcliffe Maternity hospital.
Existing equipment gave unclear results and even top specialists frequently interpreted the available information differently.
Male speaker
It has two advantages.
It makes even more precise the ability to spot a sick baby.
It allows relatively inexpert people to communicate the gravity of the problem to others so teamwork can be handled sensibly.
Voice over
Jacob Burgess is 5 days old.
His mother is one of the first to benefit from the use of the new monitor.
Female speaker
I was worried because I looked small, but it put me at ease knowing everything was all right inside.
I could hear his heart and the blood flow.
He's fine now, wonderful.
Male speaker
Subjectivity in this field is bad.
If you can reduce the pattern to a measurement, then people anywhere in the world will come up with the same result.
Opinions might considerably have differed between those places.
Voice over
The monitor is portable.
In the near future, pregnant women could have their children examined at home, with the certainty of an accurate and unequivocal result.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the long and winding road.
London to Sydney…the first of our marathon specials
Wesley Smith
Plus, living proof that you CAN get quicker than a Kwik-Fit fitter.
Welcome back: Coming up later, an emotional end of an era for an American airbase as one of its squadrons officially winds down.
Wesley Smith
But first, off on a foreign adventure, here's Tim Russon with tonight's sport.
TIM RUSSON
NICK BRITTAN/Race Organiser
ROGER CLARK/Driver
PETER
ROGER EALAND/Driver
PETER WOODWOOD/Driver
DOUG MORRIS/Driver
FRANCIS TUTHILL/Navigator
HOWARD PATTERSON/Driver
MARTYN GRIFFITHS/Driver
Voice over
The American airbase that was used to bomb Libya reached the end of an era today when it officially lost one of its three squadrons.
The seventy-ninth Fighter Squadron sent the first F-one-eleven jets into combat in the Gulf.
But it's now been disbanded as U.S. forces withdraw from Europe.
HARRIET RYLEY/ RAF Upper Heyford
Lt Col MARK HYATT/79th Squadron
Voice over
The final moments in the life of 79th Fighter Squadron — with the last ribbon added to the squadron's battle streamer — symbolising all the battles it's fought in during its 75 years service.
Formed in 1918 in Waco, Texas, the squadron had several American homes before it came over to England as part of NATO — moving to Upper Heyford in 1970.
It was the first to use F1-11s, flying combat missions into Iraq from a base in Turkey during Operation Desert Storm in the Gulf War in 1991.
This was the first of the famous’ tiger squadrons’— an association of airforce squadrons throughoput NATO powers — the newest recruit is a base in the new Czech republic — formerly regarded as the enemy.
For some of the n115 members of the squadron, the closeure means being made redundandt — others will move to airforce jobs eslewhere in Britain of America.
The squadron's F1-11's are going to New Mexico and Arizona.
All 3three squadrons at Upper Heyford will go by December, when it becomes a standby base.
Now, we've all heard of the tyre company that boasts that it's fitters are fastest.
But a competition has taken place that proved them wrong.Teams from all over the country battled against the clock to change tyres at Silverstone race circuit.
Sadly though, our local teams were a bit of a let down.
GARETH FURBY Silverstone
IAN TATE Tyre Fitter
NICK GAVINS Competitor
TIM PAUL Competitor
STEVE SMITH Losing Finalist
MARK MORGAN Losing Finalist
Voice over
You can't get faster than these tyre fitters.
Only eight out of more than two hundred teams made it to today' final at Silverstone
The challenge…change all four tyres in a simulated pit stop.
And just one fumble could separate the winners from the losers.
He says you have to keep a tight hold on the nuts.
Representing the East Midlands, Tim Paul and Nick Gavins, from Lincolnshire.
But their practice time was disappointing at 77 seconds.
He says he fell and hurt his finger.
He says they'll do better next time.
But it wasn't to be.
The Lincolnshire fitters quickly crashed out with an even worse time.
And there was a further twenty second time penalty for leaving a jack out of place.
But the team from the West Midlands was doing better.
Mark Morgan and Steve Smith from Wolverhampton have won before.
This year they lost the final.
And then reveal it was all too much for there.
They were retiring for good.
He says it affects his nerves.
He says he can't take it.
There's no room for nerves in this game.
And the trophy was taken, in a winning time of sixty four seconds, by a team from Winchester.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
High Street sales up
FTSE down 37
The hundred shares index closed down thirty seven point seven at two eight four three point eight 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty seven and up at two marks, forty nine.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
Police hunting the killer of a prostitute have found five diaries and address books containing names of her clients.
Detectives say that the names include professional men such as doctors, and warn they'll visit each person named if the men don't come forward voluntarily.
Carol Clark's body was found dumped at Sharpness Docks in Gloucestershire and her diaries have been found at flats in Bristol and Bath.
A man has been remanded on bail charged with possessing drugs after a police raid on a travellers' camp.
EWELME/Oxfordshire
Detectives seized drugs with a street value of (£300,000) three hundred thousand pounds in a raid at Ewelme near Benson.
A twenty-six year old man from Reading appeared before Oxford magistrates this afternoon.
OXFAM is calling on Western governments to write off billions of dollars of foreign debt to help countries rebuild after war and faminine.
It marks the start of the aid organisation's new Campaign for Africa.
KAREN THOMPSON/Reporting
KEVIN WATKINS/Oxfam
SUSIE SMITH/Oxfam
Voice over
The appeal for aid to Somalia brought a big response from the West.
But while the famine there has held centre stage, Oxfam say many other African nations are in desperate need of help.
Ethiopia, now at peace, is trying to rebuild from the ravages of war.
But the country is left with huge international debt.
Oxfam wants western Governments to wave repayment.
Today it launched a new campaign.
On the ground workers from the Oxford based relief organisation have set up camps as staging posts for refugees returning from Sudan.
Oxfam says another country in special need of aid is Mozambique.
It's fragile peace
A farmer is trying to bring jobs back to the countryside by turning his Victorian cattle sheds into offices.
By spending three million pounds diversifying in this way he hopes not only to create new employment, but also to save buildings that would otherwise have fallen into disrepair.
RICHARD BARNETT/Maismore
JEREMY CHAMBERLAYNE/Farmer
LORD PLUMB/MEP
ANN HAMMOND/Automotive Leasing
Voice over
Maisemore Court was built in 1860 as a model Victorian Farm, with two large courtyards housing cattle.
The classical design was a far cry from today's functional agricultural buildings.
And for more than a century they were home to livestock.
But only a handful of rare breed Gloucester cattle now remain at Maisemore Court.
And the courtyards fell into disrepair.
But now farmer Jeremy Chamberlayne has spent three quarters of a million pounds turning the cattle yards into offices:
Male speaker
Many people are glad to get out of the towns with all the problems of vandalism.
It is more secure for women too.
Voice over
The former cattle sheds have become The Steadings Business centre.
They were opened by MEP and former Farmers Union President Lord Plumb:
Male speaker
It's important to bring back a sense of community and life into the countryside.
Voice over
A company leasing cars to health authorities and councils has already moved into one of the units:
Female speaker
It's an ideal place to work…much quieter than in town.
Voice over
The office block still retains one direct link with the farm next door.
Straw that would once have been used to bed the cattle down is now put into a boiler as fuel to heat the offices.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News.
The team that bounced back.
How aerobics helped Oxford United recapture their rhythm.
Plus, a tail of success.
The radio station that's brushed off the competition.
In Central News tonight: Banned from school…headmaster says computer games cause aggression.
Lucky to be alive.
Five rescued as cabin cruiser capsizes.
And don't make them pay.
Oxfam's plea on foreign debt to help the starving.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Parents have supported the ban, even though manufacturers insist there's no proven link with child aggression.
But the headmaster says that since the ban, playground behaviour has improved.
TIM HURST/Ashton under Hill
CLIVE BOURNE/Headmaster
SANDRA CUSSELL/Game Retailer
Voice over
Traditional playground games are back in fashion at Bredon Hill Middle School near Evesham in Worcestershire after the headmaster banned handheld computer games like Super Mario and Sonic the Hedgehog.
Teachers at the school were worried that the elements of combat and destruction in some games was being reflected in more aggressive playground behaviour.
Manufacturers and retailers of the handheld games disagree.
Nintendo, one of the world leaders says’ There's no conclusive evidence that proves video games directly breed violent or aggressive behaviour.
Recent US studies show that video game playing enhances a child's imagination.’
Parents at Bredon Hill school are pleased it's game over for computer combat, they're backing the headmaster all the way.
Two brothers have appeared in court charged in connection with the murder of a woman whose body was found in a suitcase hidden in a loft.
The two men were arrested in the Irish Republic.
One is accused of murder, the other of concealing the body.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
November 1992
Voice over
26-year-old George John Stacey, who's of no fixed address, returned to Britain at the weekend after waiving his right to appeal against extradition.
His 19-year-old brother, Martin Glen Stacey, a builder from Waterford, travelled with detectives on Friday.
The elder brother's accused of murdering Christine Campbell, whose remains were found in a suitcase in the attic of the All Travellers Quest guest house in Swindon five months ago.
It's alleged that the body was hidden there by the younger brother.
The two brothers appeared, separately, before Swindon Magistrates this afternoon.
George Stacey is charged with murdering Christine Campbell on the 19 of November, Martin Stacey with concealing her body on the same date.
Both are also accused of obtaining property by deception.
They were remanded in custody until a week on Wednesday.
There was praise in court for the professionalism of the police officers handling the case.
The defence solicitor passed on the appreciation of the Stacey brothers for the way the police had treated them.
Two people have gone on trial after a raid on a laboratory which carried out experiments on pigs.
The defendants, said in court to be members of the Animal Liberation Front, also face charges in connection with three arson attacks.
July 1991/KIM BARNES/Reporting
OXFORD
Library Pictures
Voice over
Video pictures of the raid on the Cancer Research Institute at Oxford's Churchill hospital were released to the Press by the Animal Liberation Front in July 1991.
Richard Duriez from oxford is charged with conspiracy to commit criminal damage following that raid.
He also faces two other conspiracy charges with Annette Tibbles from Northampton.
PTC
Outlining the prosecution case, John Burgess said police had found evidence at the home of Richard Duriez following the incidents…documents to connect him with the Churchill, a copy of the ALF video and press release.
He said the prosecution couldn't say whether Duriez was one of the people who went into the Churchill…but he said he's not charged with going in he's charged with conspiracy.
The prosecution also say police found fragments of glass and residue of petrol in clothing belonging to Richard Duriez and Annette Tibbles.
The prosecution alleges this links them with the 3 lorry attacks.
Both deny the charges, and the case continues tomorrow.
Five people have been saved from drowning after their cabin cruiser capsized.
The boat was mooring up on the River Severn when it rolled over, trapping two of them underwater.
The policeman and passer-by who pulled them out say anyone else would have done the same.
JESSICA FOWLE/Holt Fleet
DAVID PRICE/Rescuer
PC DAVID BAINS/West Mercia Police
Voice over
It so nearly ended in tragedy.
As the cabin cruiser The Aznewts approached the bank of the River Severn at Holt Fleet in Worcester it suddenly rolled over throwing three of the crew overboard.
Two women were trapped in the cabin, with only inches of air space, as the boat filled with icy water.
It was only the actions of passer-by David Price and PC Len Bains that saved them.
Male speaker
We pulled the women out.
They were saying’ we're drowning, the water is rising.’
Voice over
Now both men are being teased by friends and colleagues about their new status as heros but PC Bains insists the credit lies with David Price.
Male speaker
I'm not a hero.
It's Mister Price who's the hero.
Voice over
All five people rescued have now been released from hospital.
Meanwhile emergency services are warning that this was a very lucky escape and that boat users should always be prepared for the worst.
Welcome back: Still to come, the local radio station that's scooped the top prize in today's presitgious Sony Awards.
But first, with all the weekend sport, here's Erika 
ERIKA BARNES
Our Central South soccer sides made three wishes on Saturday.
The first that Swindon should make the play offs…the second that Oxford avoid relegation…and the third that Hereford make sure of league football next season.
Their wishes came true…
JOHN DURNIN/Oxford United
MICKEY LEWIS/Oxford United
GLENN HODDLE/Swindon Town Manager
Voice over
These are the finely tuned footballers who beat Barnsley on Saturday!
It's the deft footwork…and their superior fitness that did it!…and of course the determination to avoid the drop.
They celebrated their one-nil win with a aerobics session at the new bodyfit studio in Witney.
Male speaker
We all do things together and it lifted us for the game on Saturday.
Voice over
This is how they did it.
Seven minutes into the game at Barnsley.
Chris Allen's free kick…a nudge back from Paul Wanless…and second time lucky for Captain Andy Melville.
Three points…thank you very much.
And this is where it leaves them…
Saturday's three points make relegation improbable…one more point would make it impossible.
Male speaker
Mathematically we can still be caught, but the pressure is off.
We're looking forward to the game against Newcastle and hopefully we can get a point before then.
With three games to go, we might even come away with another 8 or 9 points.
Voice over
Notts County made it hard for Swindon to get a point and a play off place.
They took the lead through David Reeves in only the fifth minute.
Glenn Hoddle's Swindon regained their composure as County lost theirs.
And as Mitchell broke through he was felled by Richard Walker.
He was sent packing.
As Paul Bodin sent his penalty flying.
Only another mathematical miricle will keep them from the play offs.
For Hoddle and his men the hard work is only just beginning…
And of course a vote of thanks to FIFA for ensuring the league's Welsh internationals were able to represent club and country in the same week.
Male speaker
If you look at all the players involved, Melville scored for Oxford, Paul for us and the Derby Welsh international scored too.
That says it all.
Voice over
Hereford probably expected more from their visit to Torquay…but one point from a nil-nil draw was enough.
They're safe and sound and guarenteed of third division football next year.
The sea-air clearly suited Alan Judge who was outstanding in goal.
Meanwhile back in the gym…it's all over bar the shouting…
It's been a similar story on the rugby field.
The season turned from trauma…to triumph for Gloucester…finishing fifth in the league after a 25-5 win over Harlequins.
Voice over
Gloucester have lost more than a dozen players this season…they nearly lost more than that…a place in the first division.
But the fifteen that stayed and played on Saturday typified the courage that pulled them out of the gloom.
It was Harlequins who opened the scoring…
Mike Wedderburn taking the scenic route to the corner flag.
But Gloucester went on the rampage…as Number 8 Bobby Fowke and scrum half Marcus Hanniford lined up twin tries against the quins.
Tim Smith made the conversions and two penalties…as well as this touchdown in the last minute…claiming fifteen of Gloucester's 25 points.
For Coach, Keith Richardson it's a marvellous end to a difficult season.
Male speaker
We saw some of the best parts of Rugby Union…the fitness and handling.
The win gave Gloucester heart.
The fifth position was encouraging.
But the wins against Northampton, Bristol and Harlequins showed we could be up in 2nd or 3rd spot.
I doubt if few teams except Bath could live with us.
Voice over
The World's top three-day eventers are getting in shape for the Badminton Horse trials next month…and they chose Oxfordshire for their last-minute preparations.
The Cornbury Horse Trials at Charlbury welcomed the sport's top competitors…and also some stars of the future.
BLYTH TAIT/Event Winner
Voice over
The riders and horses love Cornbury Park.
The splendor of the country home…the challenge of the cross country.
Promising young riders who're starting their sporting careers…took it all their stride…following in the footsteps of the internationals.
Beginners and world champions alike are impressed with the course.
Male speaker
It's a fabulous course.
It's becoming one of the premier events.
Voice over
It's been a difficult run up to Badminton.
The weather's put pay to other events.
But following the success of Cornbury…they'll be back, same time, same place next year.
Young musicians have been auditioning for a music academy which plans to become a new centre of excellence for the arts.
Britain has few specialist music schools outside London, which means a lot of travelling for many talented youngsters.
Now some of them could find fame closer to home.
GRAEME BOWD/Gloucester
CAROLINE LUMSDEN/Founder
SHEILA MANDER/Drama Tutor
ANDREW MOFFAT/Aged 10
JULIE INGRAM/Aged 11
Voice over
In recent years music tuition has been in decline.
Many schools can't afford a music teacher and private lessons are expensive.
But these children could have a wonderful chance to improve their skills.
They're audioning for the new Gloucester Academy of Music and Performing Arts, or GAMPA as it will be known.
The school will eventually fill three dockside warehouses.
It's founder must raise £1m to get the project underway.
But the Saturday class for young musicians will start this autumn in temporary premises.
Female speaker
Schools do their best but their teachers have to look after the whole school.
We are offering further specialism.
Voice over
The academy will also cater for for aspiring actors and actresses.
This could be the chorus line for a new British musical.
Composer Richard Taylor has written a stage version of the film classic’ Whistle Down the Wind.’
The children will perform it at the Edinburgh Festival.
They're being trained by Sheila Mander, director of the Everyman Theatre in Cheltenham.
She says too many talented youngsters have to go to London.
But not all the youngsters want a career in the arts.
This boy wants to be a fighter pilot.
This girl wants to be an astronaut.
The auditions will continue for three months.
One of the region's independent radio stations has won a top award at the radio Oscars.
Fox FM was named local station of the year.
The judges said they were won over by the sheer fun of its output.
GARETH FURBY Oxford
TOM HUNTER Managing Director
Voice over
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Chancellor says recession is over
FTSE down 21
The hundred shares index closed down twenty one point five at two eight two two point three 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty nine and up at two marks, forty nine.
Welcome back: A blood feud has broken out between producers of one of our oldest breeds of cattle.
Wesley Smith
Traditionalists claim that foreign bulls are destroying the purity of the British Hereford.
RICHARD BARNETT/Herefordshire
PETER SYMONDS/Llandinabo Herefords
JOHN WEYMAN-JONES/Lowerhope Herefords
Major MICHAEL SYMONDS/Llandinabo Herefords
CLIVE RICHARDS/Lowerhope Herefords
LIBBY HENSON/Rare Breeds Survival Trust
Voice over
In the blue corner, Lingo the 6 year old bull.
One ton of prime British Hereford; the pride of the Llandinabo Herd.
In the red corner, Derby the 5 year old bull.
One and a half tons of prime Canadian Hereford and the pride of the Lowerhope herd.
An argument over which bulls are best; British or Canadian and American is causing quite a rumpus.
In the normally austere Hereford Breed, Journal, the owners of the Llandinabo herd claim foreign bulls are leading to the disintegration of the British Hereford by introducing alien blood.
So what's the difference between British and transatlantic stock.
Lingo is a classic old fashioned British Hereford.
Derby is a monument to the Canadian Hereford breeder's skill.
The Llandinabo herd has British bloodlines going back 200 years.
It's one of the few herds left with no Canadian or American blood.
Male speaker
Alien blood is changing the Hereford for the worse.
The breed is under threat.
Voice over
But at Lowerhope, they're proud of their Canadian bloodstock.
Male speaker
Herefords face competition from large animals like Charolais.
The breed must get bigger to compete.
Voice over
For an independent view of the controversy, we turned to Libby Henson, a geneticist with the Rare Breeds Survival Trust.
Female speaker
Breeds change over time.
But it's important to keep some stock from before the days when cattle were imported.
The Trust is collecting semen from old fashioned Hereford bulls.
Voice over
The majority of Hereford herds have already been changed by the import of foreign bulls and it would be impossible to turn the clock back.
So it seems inevitable that the old fashioned British Hereford with its smaller, shorter legged bulls will eventually become a rare breed.
The rock star Midge Ure has become the first person to give a concert at the Oxford Union.
The former lead singer with Ultravox chose the university as a warm-up date for his forthcoming tour.
He also had to answer some tricky questions from the floor of the historic debating chamber.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
MIDGE URE
KATHERINE WADE/Oxford Union President
Voice over
The Oxford Union has played host to Prime Ministers and American presidents, but none of them came here to sing.
Midge Ure was playing for nothing, just a few beers to see him through the evening.
He's about to embark on a solo tour of Britain and thought the University would be a good place to try out his new act.
As lead singer of Ultravox Midge was surrounded with the slick imagery of rock stardom.
No such extravagance here, as under the watchful eye of Asquith, he launched into some of his best known songs.
The performance was well received, but when it came to questions the students didn't forget the Union's traditions of controversy.
Someone wanted to ask him why his former band had a name like a toilet cleaner — Midge said didn't choose it.
Others asked wasn't it time he retired?
Like the many politicians who've spoken here, Midge didn't really seem to answer the question.
Across the courtyard, the bar was full.
Many students clearly didn't see him as quite their cup of tea.
But those who saw the concert had a favourable reaction.
Midge will begin his UK tour at the weekend.
Juggling, plate-spinning and uni-cycling are on offer at an evening class in circus skills.
The lessons are proving very popular, especially with business men and women who say it's the ideal way to relieve tension after a hard day in the office.
CLARE LAFFERTY Evesham
MATT GOSLING Instructor
Voice over
The Expert, the Novice and the No-Hoper.
They're all turning up at the Evesham Leisure Centre to learn circus skills.
Under the watchful eye of their very own ringmaster, Matt Gosling, would-be Cocos can learn how to juggle, spin and cope with the embarrassment of failure.
A few of the students here quite like the idea of running away with a circus.
But most just see it as a fun way of relieving stress.
Female speaker
It's very relaxing.
And very good fun.
Male speaker
I've been juggling for about 5 months and it's a good place to meet new friends.
Male speaker
If you don't like Sport, it's a good way of exercising.
Female speaker
We've got two children at the swimming club here, so we thought we'd do this while we wait for them.
Voice over
They may be a long way from performing in the Greatest Show on Earth, but getting there has certainly got them in a spin.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
IRA boasts over security
The IRA has boasted that it will beat any security measures to fight similar bombings to that in the City last weekend.
Diana speaks on eating disorders
The Princess of Wales appeared live on TV to speak about the problems facing those with eating disorders such as anorexia.
CBI optimistic on recovery
A report by the Confederation of British Industry says Britain is enjoying the biggest increase in business confidence for ten years.
Fears over BR sell-off
An all-party select committee on the future of the railways has expressed fears about fares and safety.
FTSE up 10
The hundred shares index closed up ten point two, at twenty-eight, thirty-two point five.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-eight but up at two marks, forty-nine.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Three hamlets on the fringe of a fast expanding new town are fighting to avoid being swallowed up by new development.
It's the second time in a quarter of a century that the locals have come into conflict with planning officials.
But, they say they're confident of beating off the developers once again.
KAREN THOMPSON/Calverton
PETER STOREY/County Planning Officer
PHILIPPA ECCLES/Chamber of Commerce
Voice over
This is the countryside that villagers in three hamlets just a few miles from Milton Keynes fear will be eaten up by concrete.
Some of the 160 residents of Upper, Middle and Lower Weald, which make up Calverton have lived here almost all their lives.
But their tranquil existence is threatened.
When the hamlets were first included in the development area for the new city of Milton keynes in the 1960s, people of Calverton fought it in the High Court and won.
Now they're facing a new challenge.
Buckinghamshire County Council's Draft Structure plan earmarks the area for the building of 4,000 homes to help meet the expected housing needs of Milton Keynes by the year 2011.
But villagers say it's unneccessary.
Local MP, Barry Legge has written to say he sympathises with the villagers, but insists it's a matter for the planners.
But the residents are determind to win his support.
Planners have also been criticised for not letting people know what's been going on.
Consulation on the draft structure plan has just ended with Calverton residents sending in a volume of objections.
But officials deny they've been keeping their proposals under wraps.
There's enough building land within the present Milton Keynes boundary to last until the end of the century, but the Chamber of Commerce says it's essential to plan for the future.
The 3 threatened hamlets will be stepping up their campaign in the coming months to convince the County Council that a rural haven must not be lost forever.
Meanwhile, a vicar is fighting to stop houses being built on his garden nature reserve.
The Church wants to develop the site, which hundreds of schoolchildren visit as part of their nature studies.
But vicar Derek Sawyer says it's a valuable oasis.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
Rev DEREK SAWYER/Vicar
SUSAN BALL/Teacher
Ven CHRISTOPHER WAGSTAFF/Archdeacon of Gloucester
DAVID GEORGE/Neighbour
Voice over
It's more like a small farm than a vicarage, but it's the closest some of these city schoolchildren get to ducks, swans, chickens and geese.
But if the church has its way, the garden's days are numbered.
When vicar, Derek Sawyer retires, the church wants to sell off the land for housing.
He says that it's not worth staying on if the place is going to be wrecked.
St Aldate's church is sandwiched between a main road and a housing estate.
The one acre site has become a valuable asset to local schoolchildren.
They say that the birds are brilliant.
They enjoy drawing them.
She says that it's a valuable educational tool.
It would be a shame to lose it.
The church first applied for planning permission to build houses on the site in 1988, but because the reverend Sawyer had the right to object, nothing came of it.
This week there's a Department of Environment inquiry into the plans, but the church is adamant that once the present occupier of the vicarage retires, the large garden will be sold for housing.
He says yes, the church would make money from the land, but that's not the point.
The area needs more housing.
But the church's plans are not popular with the vicarage's nearest neighbours.
He says it should stay as it is.
Those who use the gardens would like some divine intervention to save the site, though so determined is the church to build on the land, that maybe not even this would be enough.
A Victorian mental hospital is up for sale…and could fetch more than two million pounds.
In the nineteen eighties it was at the centre of controvery, for putting patients into an area condemned as a human zoo.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Peppard
1981
GARETH CRUDDACE/Chief Exec
JEAN AITKEN/Former Patient
RICHARD WATERSON/Estate Agent
Voice over
The style is French gothic, the building is 130 years old and it's up for sale.
It's also got quite a history.
It was the subject of an ITV documentary 12 years ago, featuring a playground called the Cage.
It's gone now, but at the time mentally handicapped patients were locked up in it for hours at a time.
Borocourt was a mental hospital until 3 weeks ago.
Male speaker
The closure of Borocourt is symbolic.
It was the subject of a damning documentary.
We are looking forward now.
Voice over
The cage was described as a human zoo enclosed by a 5ft wire fence Borocourt was home to 900 mentally handicapped patients from South Oxfordshire and West Berkshire.
Many of them had lived there for decades.
But now huge institutions like this are out of fashion.
The patients have been dispersed into the community, like Jean Aitken who had been at the hospital for 12 years.
Female speaker
It's much better.
They trust me with bunches of keys and let me phone my sister.
Voice over
That leaves a huge mansion with over 100 rooms, in a 180 acre park.
What becomes of it now?
Estate agents think it will be a very tasty morsel for an international company.
Male speaker
Despite its former use, it is relatively unspoiled and very original.
We've had a number of inquiries from abroad.
People looking to it for educational use, or a big company HQ.
Voice over
The building was started in 1865 for a family from the northwest.
It's a Victorian mansion in the grand manner.
It passed out of the family's hands and became a mental hospital in 1935.
The Cage disappeared a long time ago in the past, leaving whoever buys the property, a clear view across the Chilterns into the future.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News.
The battle of the big beef.
When is a Hereford NOT a Hereford?
Wesley Smith
Song of the Union.
Pop music comes to the hallowed chamber.
And success on a plate.
The circus hopefuls who are all in a spin.
In Central News tonight: Crash landing.
The parachute display that missed the target.
Let us in.
Unions demand access to Honda as Heseltine unveils new car.
And up for sale, the mental hospital that once described as a human zoo.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
An RAF inquiry is underway tonight after a parachutist plunged into the crowd during a display.
Flight Sergeant Rex Pritchard, the team coach, broke his leg in the accident.
A young boy and his teacher were slightly hurt.
WESLEY SMITH
It happened as the world-famous Falcons skydiving team were making their first display jump of the season, watched by more than two hundred schoolchildren.
The injured man appeared to lose control of his chute as he tried to land.
GRAEME BOWD/Witney
Flight Lt ALEX JONES/Team Leader
Recent Pictures
Flight Sgt REX PRITCHARD/Speaking Earlier This Year
Voice over
The twelve parachutists of the Falcons display jumped from a Hercules transport plane eight thousand feet over Witney in Oxfordshire.
Gathered around the drop zone were children from several local schools.
The first sign that the jump was not going to plan came when the parachutists seemed to have trouble forming up.
Normally their chutes stack into a neat line.
Spectators were told the wind had increased.
And as the leading jumper neared the ground he appeared to lose control.
Flight Sergeant Rex Pritchard broke his leg.
In the crowd a small boy called Edward was hit in the ear.
His teacher was also slightly hurt, but there were no other injuries.
As the team went tried to work out what had gone wrong, their aircraft flew low over the crowd, it's crew unaware of the drama below.
As he waited for the ambulance, the injured man bravely signed autographs for the children.
He seemed to be telling team mates that his parachute had not performed correctly.
He said that his parachute collased at 40ft.
We shall be investigating this incident fully.
Safety is the most important thing.
Flight Sergeant Pritcard is the team coach and has made more than three thousand jumps.
After a display earlier this year he spoke about a teammates' mistake, diving thorugh the ring of skydivers.
Male speaker
We'll be looking at the video to make sure it doesn't happen again.
We all make mistakes, that was his first mistake.
Voice over
Tonight Flight Sgt Pritchard was said to be in good spirits in hospital.
The two injured spectators were allowed home after treatment.
The only Japanese car-maker in Britain which doesn't recognise unions has been accused of denying twelve hundred workers their rights.
It's claimed that Honda is turning away job applicants who belong to a union.
The company won't back down, and its stance has won Government support.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
ALAN JEFFCOTE/AEEU
ANDREW JONES/Honda UK Manufacturing
NOBUHIKO KAWAMOTO/President
MICHAEL HESELTINE MP/Trade and Industry Secretary
Voice over
1,200 staff at the Honda car plant in Swindon produce 120 cars every day.
But unlike their counterparts at Nissan and Toyota, none enjoys the full benefits of trade union membership.
Now the country's biggest manufacturing union — the AEEU — is pressing Honda for recognition.
While the company goes from strength to strength, the union claims, its employees are losing out.
But Honda says its industrial relations are excellent.
Staff are called associates, not workers and everyone's on Christian name terms.
An irony the AEEU points out is that in Japan, employers HAVE to recognise unions by law.
Mr Kawamato's over here for the British launch of the new Swindon-built Honda Accord.
Michael Heseltine gave it a test-drive today — and expressed anger that the unions are using the launch to criticise Honda.
Staff have mixed opinions on the union issue.
Male speaker
The management has its say, but we don't have ours.
Voice over
Honda's confident of creating another eight hundred people at Swindon over the next two years.
The AEEU would advise applicants to keep quiet if they belong to a union.
A nurse from Gloucestershire has been killed in a road accident just two days after emigrating to America.
RODBOROUGH/Gloucestershire
The March formula one motor racing company has gone into voluntary liquidation.
BICESTER/Oxfordshire
March, which is based at Bicester, had been competing in Grand Prix racing for over twenty years.
Recent lack of success on the track made sponsorship hard to get and led to financial problems.
Around forty workers are still owed five months pay.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
KEN GOODWIN/Durley
Voice over
Alan Stewart, who'd been arrested by police six months ago and questioned about allegations of indecency, was on the staff of New Barns School at Toddington in Gloucestershire when it closed in the autumn.
Social workers and police began an enquiry after the vice-chairman of governors, Peter Righton, from Evesham, was accused of possessing child pornography. 12 members of staff, past and present, were interviewed by police, and six were arrested and questioned in November.
New Barn school catered for pupils with special needs up to the age of 13, mostly boys.
Stewart, who's 32, and a former care assitant at the school, is the first member of staff to appear in court.
The Crown Prosecution Service is still considering reports on 5 others.
Crime recorded in the Central South region last year rose by more than the national average.
New figures show that rural areas have seen the largest increase in offences, but that the rise is less than half that of the previous year.
That's mainly because of a curb on car crime, but there's still concern about burglaries — up in some areas by almost a third.
GRAEME BOWD/Swindon
FRANC HYDE/Burglary Victim
Det Sgt WAYNE BONNE/Wiltshire Police
Det Chief Con DIRK ALDOUS/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
Government optimism that the crime wave may at last be under control will be little consolation to Franc Hyde.
In 5 years, he's been the victim of 31 offences.
His car has been stolen or broken into 7 times, his home in Swindon has seen numerous burglaries.
Even his health club business has been raided.
Male speaker
I am very angry.
An Englishman's home is meant to be his castle.
I've turned mine into a fortress.
Voice over
Police say Mr Hyde's case is exceptional.
Male speaker
’ I've never known a case where one person has been a victim of so many crimes.’
Voice over
But although figures released by the Home Office today show some grounds for optimism, robbery and burglary, the crimes people fear most, are still on the increase.
Rural areas especially are giving concern.
In Gloucestershire break-ins were up by 30%, second only to Cheshire.
Many criminals see country homes as easy targets.
Male speaker
Rural areas are suffering at the moment.
Voice over
Overall crime showed a much smaller increase than last year.
In Northamptonshire it rose by just 2%.
The Thames Valley police area showed a rise of 6%, close to the national average.
But West Mercia and Wiltshire were higher at 7%.
In Gloucester crime was up 8%.
And the figures would have been higher still, but for a smaller rise in car offences which account for three quarters of all reported crimes.
In some counties including Northamptonshire, car thefts actually fell.
Well, one police force is hoping to cut crime by using surveillance cameras.
Thousands of pounds is being spent installing them in a city centre.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
Chief Insp COLIN HANDY/Gloucestershire Police
MARK WHEREAT/Camera Operator
Voice over
Gloucester city centre at night.
Like most cities, it has it's fair share of crime.
But now, anyone who's up to no good may find they're being watched.
Strategically placed video cameras can alert the police to any trouble.
The scheme's still in its early stages, but it's already proving popular.
He says that if anything happens like an attack, it can be seen by police.
She says that it's a positive step.
The cameras cost £175,000, paid for by Gloucester City Council.
It's hoped that more cameras will be installed, financed by local businesses.
The police have already recorded one of their officers being attacked, when he tried to arrest some youths.
They say it'll make the city centre a safer place.
He says it'll attract people back into the city because they'll feel safe.
The 8 cameras are powerful enough to perform a variety of surveillance tasks.
He says they can even zoom in on tax discs to see if they're valid.
They can track shoplifters as they walk through the city.
The police deny they're adopting big brother spying tactics, pointing out that the use of video cameras in helping to solve crimes is nothing new.
They say the only people who need fear the cameras are those doing somthing illegal.
A choir is celebrating being chosen to perform in front of two thousand people at a national rally.
It's a feat all the more remarkable because, of the thirty-strong singers, only three can actually read music, and the average age of its members is seventy-five.
LIZ HANNAM Oxford
JOAN HEAVEN Choir Mistress
MARY LINES New Horizons Choir
ERNIE HACKER New Horizons Choir
QUEENIE HENRY New Horizons Choir
JOHN HEWER New Horizons Choir
Voice over
It's the last rehearsal before the big day, when Oxford's New Horizons choir perform before 2,000 people at the Opera House in Blackpool.
They'll be entertaining a national rally for the Salvation Army's Over 60s Club.
It's a big honour for the choir, who between them have a combined age of 2,500 years.
The job of controlling them lies with Joan Heaven, the Choir Mistress.
She says you have to be brusque with them because they're getting on a bit, you know.
It's their enthusiasm that inspires me.
One of the most demanding things for this choir is the physical stamina required to perform for an hour.
It's especially felt by Mary, who at 83, is the oldest member.
She says this morning's rehearsal was excellent, but a bit exhausting.
But she was determined to finish.
He says it's good to be able to start a musical career when your working life has finished.
She says they look forward to choir practice.
He says it gives him pleasure, just sheer pleasure.
The New Horizons choir perform at the Opera House in Blackpool tomorrow.
6
Crime has risen by an average of six per cent in England and Wales with the largest rise in rural areas.
UN reports intense fighting
The United Nations has reported intense fighting around Srebrenica, the Moslem enclave it is trying to protect.
Warning to British troops
A senior British peacekeeper in Bosnia has warned that British troops will be attacked if NATO launches strategic air strikes.
Crackdown on problem children
Social workers have been given new powers to use force to control troublesome youngsters in care.
George Walker made bankrupt
The former Brent Walker leisure group chief, George Walker, has been made bankrupt in the High Court in connection with debts of more than a hundred and eighty million pounds.
FTSE down 35
The hundred shares index closed down thirty-five point four at twenty-seven, ninety-seven point three.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-seven but up at two marks, forty-nine.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A new course is teaching women how to deal with what can be a frightening situation.
The class offers tips on what women driving alone should do if their car breaks down and they become stranded.
JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
1988
PC ALAN ROBERTS/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
It's something that every woman driver dreads.
Alone, a long way from home and the car's broken down.
In this situation, many women find their minds turning to horror stories such as that of Marie Wilkes.
She was murdered by the side of the M50 in Worcestershire as she walked from her car to call for help.
So it's no surprise that a safety seminar for women was booked up within days of being announced.
Male speaker
If you're in your car and a man approaches you, don't open your window.
Voice over
This was just one of the tips given at the class at the Bellinger Garage at Grove in Oxfordshire.
Advice ranged from the practical — what to do if you get a puncture or have to jump start your car, to the more psychological — how to outwit a potential attacker or abductor.
Female speaker
It's good that it's aimed at women.
I do a lot of driving, but don't know much about cars.
Female speaker
The more we know about cars, the less nervous we'll be.
Voice over
Thames Valley Police, who organised the class, say the aim isn't to scare the women, but simply to prepare them for any eventuality.
Male speaker
Women get worried by the news on television and the radio.
We're just giving them tips to make them more relaxed.
Voice over
And whilst the advice was aimed at women, the few men who attended found there was plenty on offer for them.
Male speaker
Men don't know everything.
Voice over
A recent RAC survey shows that only 16% of women know what to do if they break down on a motorway.
There are more courses planned for the future and there's little doubt that there'll be plenty of demand from women who'd rather be safe than sorry.
(HARRIET AD LIBS BACKREF)(WES) Still to come on Central News, the fastest woman on three wheels Rose Hill has become Britain's fastest woman in a wheelchair, and says her life's never been happier.
GARETH FURBY/Milton Keynes
FRED SMITH/Mayor of Milton Keynes
ROSE HILL/Wheelchair Champion
Voice over
She only started wheelchair racing 4 years ago.
But now Rose Hill is the fastest woman in Britain.
To win the London Marathon she had to train 4 hours a day, 6 days a week.
Today, her achievement was recognised with a civic reception.
The Mayor says he's very pleased.
It's an honour to be able to present her with a plaque.
Rose lost the use of her legs in a road accident 15 years ago.
But she says happier now than she's ever been.
She says she feel better now than she did before the accident.
She used to take life for granted.
But now she can look after herself.
It's not a cheap sport.
The racing wheelchair alone cost £3,000.
But the results justify the expense.
So, now she's reached the top, is she considering retirement?
She says she's good for another 10 years, even though she's 39.
For this mother, its next stop, the Swiss marathon.
Rose Hill, already a familiar sight around Milton Keynes, may soon be recognised worldwide.
Britain's goat population is on the up…there are now more than a hundred thousand kept in this country.
But although we drink goats milk, and relish goats cheese, we're reluctant to eat goats meat.
But all that could change if a campaign to promote the meat succeeds.
RICHARD BARNETT/Longdon
JO BESWICK/Goat Keeper
MARIE COLLINGE/Goat Keeper
DINO HOUTRIS/Restaurateur
Voice over
Keeping goats has really caught on in the past 10 years, as farmers look to alternative livestock to stay in business.
At Kingcraft Stud near Upton upon Severn, they keep 120 Angora cross goats.
There's a ready sale for the mohair and fleeces.
But the farm would be much more profitable if the British weren't so reluctant to eat goat meat.
So now goat keepers are hoping to convince us that the meat is both tasty and nutritious.
Female speaker
We need to demonstrate to people that goat meat is as tasty as any other red meat.
Voice over
Marie Collinge specialises in cooking goat meat and she says it's an ideal food that keeps you healthy.
She demonstrated how to cook goat chops.
They'd already been marinaded in red wine and spices before being fried up with onions, mushrooms and ginger.
Female speaker
If you marinade the meat it makes it full of flavour and very tender.
Voice over
Other countries don't share our reluctance to eat goat meat.
At the Dionysos
Greek Cypriot restaurant in Cheltenham, owner Dino Houtris was busy charcoal grilling some kid chops.
He'd also prepared a goat casserole with spinach.
His customers were impressed.
Male speaker
The English aren't very adventurous.
But when they try goat meat they like it.
Voice over
If goat meat does catch on, we could see flocks of goats ousting sheep in the farm popularity stakes.
And kid could challenge the traditional lamb on the dinner table.
A man has gone on trial accused of strangling his girlfriend.
The court heard that Robert Mantack was an habitual gambler, and that he murdered the woman to claim a ninety thousand pound insurance policy.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Bristol
May 1992/SWINDON/Wiltshire
Voice over
Robert Mantack from Swindon arrived at Bristol Crown Court for the first day of his trial.
He's charged with murdering his girlfriend Donna Simpkins.
Ms Simpkins was found dead last May in the living room of her house in Dryden Street in Swindon.
She'd been strangled with some kind of flex or cord.
The murder weapon has never been found.
He said that on Donna Simpkin's death, mantack stood to get £90,000 from a life insurance policy that had been taken out just days before the killing.
The court heard that Mantack was a habitual gambler dealing in tens of thousands of pounds.
The Prosecution said he was a man with a fox like cunning and a devious mind who was ready to deceive and lie as and when it suited him.
Mantack is pleading not guilty to the murder.
The trial continues here tomorrow.
The family of a three year old girl who's suffering from a rare heart condition has set up a support group to help other sufferers.
Three year old Francesca Lobban is so sensitive to pain that it makes her heart stop and leaves her unconscious for up to ninety minutes.
SANDY BARTON/Reporting
TRUDIE LOBBAN/ Francesca's Mother
A company looks set to be forced out of business by a Government ban on the sale of reflective car number plates.
The plates are designed to foil police speed traps.
The makers say banning them will do nothing to improve road safety, but the police insist lives will be saved.
LIZ HANNAM/Marsh Gibbon
ALLAN WILKINS/Morris Garage
Insp DAVID WISE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Allan Wilkins has sold tens of thousands of reflective car number plates since he first started selling them last June.
They appear perfectly ordinary under normal light, but disappear under flash photography.
So they'd seem to be ideal for anyone wishing to avoid police cameras.
The Government says the plates can't avoid detection.
However, it's already outlawed using the plates on public roads and now it's to ban their sale.
Mr Wilkins, who employs two people at his garage at Marsh Gibbon in Oxfordshire, first developed the technology when working on a personal security measure for the armed forces.
The numbers are painted with a reflective substance which leaves flash pictures over exposed.
But the police say they can still prosecute because the real number plate shows up on the negative.
The number plates sell for £80 a time, compared to a normal price of under £10.
When the selling of the number plates is banned, Mr Wilkins says he'll be forced out of business.
But the Department of Transport says it's important to ban the plates because simply having them on the car, changes the driver's behaviour and the idea is that speed is always a danger on our roads and anything that contributes to safety is to be encouraged.
One of the country's smallest police forces has been chosen to co-ordinate a national clampdown on trespassing travellers.
The force says the cost to the taxpayer of illegal gatherings like the one at Castlemorton Common last summer runs into millions of pounds every year.
May 1992
ROBIN POWELL/Devizes
Det Ch Const DIRK ALDOUS/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
When 20,000 people gathered for an illegal festival at Castlemorton Common in Worcestershire last May, they brought misery to thousands living nearby.
Now 26 police forces from the midlands and the south are teaming up to counter the menace such gatherings cause to landowners and the general public.
Their most important weapon in their war on trespassers is this — a new intelligence unit at the headquarters of the Wiltshire Constabulary in Devizes.
The Wiltshire force is well qualified for the task — it regularly deals with hippy gatherings at Barbury Castle near Swindon and, more famously, at Stonehenge.
Now it'll give the rest of the country the benefit of its experience of the problem.
Mr Aldous denies the approach will be confrontational.
His aim is to stop illegal gatherings in the first place.
Last year's trouble at Castlemorton Common erupted over the late May Bank Holiday.
The first big test for Wiltshire's Intellignce Unit will be this coming Bank Holiday weekend.
Cricket now, and the new county championship season began today.
At Bristol, where Gloucestershire are playing Middlesex, Gloucestershire won the toss and chose to bat.
In their first innings, they've so far reached (209 for 6) two hundred and nine for six.
Northamptonshire are playing Warwickshire at Edgebaston.
Northants won the toss but put the home side into bat.
Warwickshire are currently (233 for 4) two hundred and thirty three for four in their first innings
And at Trent Bridge, where Worcestershire are playing Nottinghamshire, Worcestershire won the toss and are batting.
Their first innings total so far is (186 for 6) a hundred and eighty six for six.
This summer more than ten million people will go to watch the Red Arrows — widely regarded as the most spectacular aerobatic team in the world.
Before their season begins, the Arrows undergo intensive training — far away from the rain and clouds of an English spring in the skies above Cyprus.
BHARAT PATEL/Reporting
ADRIAN THURLEY/Red One
The day begins at sunrise and an army of engineers check everything from the fuselage to the fuel valve.
By 8 a.m., the pilots are ready for their first practise.
They slip easily into their routine.
They've gone through each manoeuvre hundreds of times before.
Just as well really; when they go into the diamond formation, the trade mark of the Red Arrows, their wings are only 10ft apart and they're travelling at 400 mph.
The crucial role is played by Red One; the lead pilot; the captain of the team.
He says formation flying is a doddle.
It's like driving on a motorway.
I'm the guy in the middle lane and you follow me.
You don't overtake, you just keep an eye on me and keep the same distance away.
It's easy.
The flying part may be easy, but the stress on the mind and body is enormous.
The pilots fly just 3 times a day for just over 20 minutes.
But they return to the ground shattered.
People think it's like driving a car.
But up there, we take up to 8 G-forces, which increase your body weight by 8 times.
From the ground, almost all the manoevroes look difficult and death-defying.
Sometimes they're both.
What the pilots need at those crucial moments, is an absence — not just of nerves, but of fear.
If you were frightened of it, you'd be dangerous.
It's a great job, but you don't enjoy it until you get back to the ground.
For fast jet pilots, a stint with the Red Arrows is the highlight of their careers.
Despite the demands they face, all Red Arrows will tell you it's the best job in the world.
It's real seats of the pants flying.
We love doing it.
There's not much pure flying left where you don't use computers.
It's doing what they've always done for 50 years.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Buckingham Palace allows visitors
Buckingham Palace is to be opened to the public during August and September to raise funds for the restoration of Windsor Castle.
Observer bought by Guardian
The Observer newspaper has been bought by the Guardian.
Man questioned over murder
A man is being questioned in connection with the murder of the woman from Derbyshire, Debbie Buxton.
Fire protest at Commons
A man has set fire to himself outside the Houses of Parliament in protest at the Bosnian situation.
Major consults USA on Bosnia
In the Commons, the Prime Minister has said he is still consulting with the United States over the situation in Bosnia.
Thames Water Chairman missing
Sir Roy Watts, the Chairman of Thames Water, has gone missing after being dropped off at his flat in London.
2
Two thousand, five hundred jobs are likely to be shed from the Lloyd's of London insurance market by nineteen ninety-five.
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten point five at twenty-seven, eighty-six point eight.
The pound is up slightly at one dollar, fifty-seven, and down at two marks, forty-eight.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
And there was another armed raid at a village post office at Moreton-in-Marsh, in Gloucestershire.
A man carrying a handgun ordered staff to fill a carrier bag with cash before escaping on foot.
It's not known how much money was involved.
He was aged about fifty, with greying hair.
A pub recommended by Egon Ronay is now cooking up spam and mash in its kitchen — to feed children at a village school.
The school recently opted out of county council control, and has used its new found freedom to choose the local pub to supply school dinners.
JESSICA FOWLE/Shenington
SHIRLEY HARTLETT/Headteacher
STEPHEN DIXON/Landlord
Voice over
Swordfish with white wine, veal with ginger wine and mushrooms in cream sauce with brandy.
Just some of the dishes on the menu at the Bell Inn at Shenington in Oxfordshire.
But no mention of the potato that's being busily mashed in the kitchen out the back.
That's because it's one of the delicacies reserved especially for 50 of the children at the local primary school.
The meals are cooked at the pub and taken down the road in special insulated containers.
When it came to choosing who'd provide the food, the pub won hands down.
Female speaker
It was only a few minutes before we decided on the Bell.
The food is good, it's local and it's always hot.
Voice over
Today they had spam or sausage casserole and mash followed by rice pudding and jam.
It went like hot cakes.
Female speaker
The Bell's food is always fresh and is a lot nicer.
Female speaker
The sausage casserole was absolutely lovely.
Voice over
Since the Bell started doing the meals, 11 children have switched from packed lunches, but some still aren't convinced.
Female speaker
They'd have to serve her favourite dish which is spaghetti bolognaise.
Voice over
They say: It's disgusting.
And above all it gives Stephen Dixon at the Bell a chance to cultivate his clientel.
Male speaker
They're my future customers.
Sometimes they want wine or beer with their lunches.
They'll have to wait till they're 18.
Voice over
And after lunch, it was out to the village green to work off all those second and third helpings of delicious pub grub.
(HARRIET AD LIB)(WES) Still to come on Central News, the first time author set to make millions.
(HARRIET) The author's an ex-army captain who'd never written a word before, but his first novel is set to make him millions.
KIM BARNES/Eynsham
DAVID MASON/Author
Voice over
David Mason can't complain about lady luck.
Already comfortable to say the least as an Oxfordshire landowner, he's now the toast of the publishing world and all because he had one very good idea for a thriller.
What if Saddam Hussein had been assassinated?
Publishers bit his hand off, paying a £100,000 advance before the book was written.
Deals abroad and the film rights mean Shadow Over Babylon has already raked in almost £1 million.
The key to the book is the military detail.
David shows it would have been possible to assassinate Hussein and he knows; he's a trained sniper.
A captain in the Welsh Guards, he was decorated after commanding the Sultan of Oman's army.
In his new role as a writer, how can he help the rest of us to earn £1 million?
But he might get there first.
Publishers and film-makers are already beating his door down for blockbuster number two.
The world's top women golfers have tee-ed off in the Ford golf Classic at Woburn.
In the past they say they've suffered prejudice and poor support.
But this year they're out to prove they have just as much to offer the sport as the men.
WOBURN/Bedfordshire
TERRY COATES/Chief Executive
LAURA DAVIES/Former British Open Champion
FRILFORD/Oxfordshire
TRACEY CRAIK/Frilford Heath Golf Club
Voice over
Putting the final touches on their game.
No longer wanting to be the second class citizens of the sport, the women golfers have used the Classic at Woburn to launch their new drive for equal opportunities.
Male speaker
The girls are playing high quality sport.
They are great ambassadors.
There are no punch ups.
Just true entertainment.
Voice over
The women are pushing for more sponsorship and better coverage of their sport.
They say the time is right, while they're beating the Americans at their own game.
Britain's Trish Johnson now leads the US money list.
Laura Davies still relishes the Solheim Cup win over the states.
Female speaker
We're building on the Solheim cup.
We can't help but go from strength to strength.
But without sponsorship and television, we're at their mercy.
Voice over
Oxfordshire's Tracy Craik typifies the struggle women professionals have to make a living.
In between tournaments, she has to return to Frilford Heath to give lessons.
More financial support would help improve her chances against the big names.
Female speaker
They're playing week in and week out.
Many of the girls haven't played for a while.
It makes it difficult.
Voice over
120 golfers have taken on the challenges that Woburn has to offer.
Their aim is to raise their game, but also to raise their profile amongst the sporting public.
Tracy Craik finished the day in the top forty.
This birdie on the 4th helped her complete the first round just two over.
But for some who failed to master the course, it'll be a long and lonely drive home.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
ROBIN POWELL/Bristol Crown Court
Voice over
The jury at Bristol Crown Court was told that Mantack took with him a tape he had made of a woman's voice crying for help.
When Donna failed to turn up, he left, drove to a telephone box and played the message down the line.
The voice said,’ Mum, I've got a problem.
I need your help, get here quickly.’
The prosecution said that drinkers at the Volunteer Inn at Great Somerford saw Mantack go into a phone box with a large tape recorder.
Mantack then returned to Donna's parents house, where they told him about the message.
He later found her body.
Mantack, who's from Pinehurst in Swindon denies murder.
The trial continues.
Three DIY stores are being prosecuted for trading on a Sunday.
The city council which is bringing the action says the prosecutions are being treated as test cases.
If it succeeds, other shops can expect to be brought to court.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
DEREK PERRY/Gloucester City Council
Canon HEDLEY RINGROSE/Vicar of Cirencester
Voice over
Sainsbury's Homebase was one of three stores brought before Gloucester Magistrates Court by the City Council.
The others were Great Mills, and the city's B and Q store.
All are being prosecuted for trading on a Sunday.
It follows a decsion by the European Court confirming that the Shops Act, the statute which makes Sunday trading illegal, is valid.
And Gloucester isn't alone.
Prosecutions are also being brought by councils in West Oxfordshire and Oxford.
They're supported by Keep Sunday Special campaigners.
Shoppers were surprised to hear about today's court case.
Male speaker
They'd be better off waiting to see what the law is before wasting money on taking action.
Voice over
Today's hearing in Gloucester was adjourned until June.
So the stores can remain open on a Sunday for another month at least.
A man being questioned about the murder of a prostitute has been released.
Carol Clark's body was discovered in the Sharpness canal, in Gloucestershire, just over a month ago.
She'd died from a blow to her neck.
A man who lives near Sharpness docks was arrested yesterday and questioned overnight in Gloucester before being freed.
A burglar who fell through the roof of a shop and down a ventilator shaft has been jailed for three years.
April 1992/GLOUCESTER
Twenty two year old Shaun Durham fell while trying to escape after the raid on Burtons menswear in Gloucester last year.
He was found trapped and unconscious at the bottom of the shaft.
Emergency services rescued him, but he escaped from hospital two days later.
He committed a string of further offences before being arrested again.
A farmer and his wife say they'll fight council plans to throw them off their land.
They appeared in court accused of failing to comply with a notice to quit their mobile home.
After the case was adjourned, the couple said that if they lost their home, they'd lose their livelihood too.
RICHARD BARNETT/Coleford
AWRE/Gloucestershire
PETER SMITH/Farmer
Voice over
Farmer Peter Smith and his wife Dulcie arrived at Coleford Magistrates Court in the Forest of Dean prepared to fight for their right to a home and a job.
The couple moved a mobile home onto their twenty acre smallholding at Awre after they bought the land four years ago.
They said they needed to live on site to look after the calves they rear.
But Forest of Dean District Council refused planning permission for the caravan, and then served an enforcement notice ordering the Smiths to quit.
Today's court hearing was adjourned while the couple get legal help to fight their case.
As they left the court, Peter and Dulcie Smith said they would fight to keep their home and their livelihood:
Male speaker
If they are thrown off the land they will have no home or work.
They will be finished.
Voice over
PTC
The case comes before the Magistrates again in June.
If they order the couple to quit, the Smiths say they will be homeless, and unemployed, because they'll have to sell off their animals.
A masked robber armed with a shotgun has held up a newsagent's shop.
CHELTENHAM
It happened as the manager arrived to open up at Cotswold Newsmarket on Priory Road in Cheltenham.
The raider threatened him with the gun, and a quantity of cash and cigarettes were handed over.
The man stuffed them into a white plastic bag and ran off.
He was wearing a balaclava helmet, tee shirt and grey pullover with a grey overcoat and worn white training shoes.
(1)
Perfume price war…it's causing a stink in the High Street.
Traffic misery…chaos expected when bridge is rebuilt
And a lifeline for lone women…a cut-price car phone to call help at the roadside.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
STEVEN ROUND/Marketing Controller/Superdrug
LIZ EARLE/Beauty Writer
Voice over
Luxury perfume is a multi-million pound business, and increasingly the big retailers have faced criticism for overcharging.
Now this store in Banbury is among several out to smash what its owners call the cosy club of perfume companies and their favoured retailers.
It'll soon stock upmarket perfumes, at prices around a third lower than its competitors.
And cheaper even than current duty free prices.
Chanel No 5 for example will sell at 29.95, a discount of ten pounds.
And Aramis aftershave will retail at 19.95 again a ten pound discount on the recommended price.
Superdrug says in the past the big perfume houses have refused to supply them out of’ snobbishness,’so they've now bought stocks from alternative suppliers on the continent.
He says they want to get into the market and this is the only way and it will benefit the customer.
Superdrug claims until now up to sixty per cent of the perfume price has simply been pure profit for the retailer.
Not suprisingly today customers in Banbury welcomed the prospect of lower perfume prices.
They say it is good news and they will shop where its cheaper.
Altogether twelve Superdrug stores will soon sell discount perfumes.
And the company claims competiting high street shops have already been forced to cut their prices as well.
Today Boots said’ We have no plans to change out national pricing policy but will take whatever action is necessary on a local basis to protect our business.’
One beauty expert says perfume has been overpriced for far too long.
She says the profit margins in Britain have been higher than abroad and its a good thing that prices are now falling, although it will mean some of the’ luxury’element is lost.
Tonight the Chanel Company declined to comment.
Superdrug will now refit many high street shops with a new perfume counter.
And it says low price but still high quality frangrance should be on sale in the region by the late summer.
Traffic experts are predicting jams and misery over a large part of the region because of a bridge which is suffering from structural corrosion.
One of the country's main routes to the south coast will be affected for months when part of the bridge is rebuilt.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
OXFORD
GORDON YOUNIE/Royal Automobile Club
JOHN DARBY/County Bridge Engineer
Voice over
Engineers were quick to shore up the weakened Botley Road Flyover in Oxford as soon as they found corroded support wires in the spans.
The thirty year old Bridge now has steel supports keeping it safe…but it's certain to be replaced in the centre and that could take months.
Male speaker
It will be traffic chaos.
It's difficult to know what to suggest because if traffic diverts to the other side of town then it will get clogged up there
Voice over
The A34 main road from Southampton to the midlands has become a familiar venue for contraflows and queues.
Two years ago it was resurfaced but that was before the M40 was opened.
There is now more traffic than ever on the route and any hold-ups will spill on to the surrounding routes.
The Oxford Ring Road acts as a distribution centre for the A40, A34, A420, and of course the motorway.
Engineers found the corrosion when they were checking the bridge before starting work on the support piers.
They immediately put in steel support jacks.
The Bridge has two and a half thousand steel wires running through its spans which act as support for the concrete.
Two of these have been found eaten away…but there could be hundreds more.
Male speaker
The problem could stretch right down into the centre of the steel wires.
We think there was problem with the materials when it was built There are other bridges in the county built with the same system but engineers say they're safe)
Voice over
Already heavy traffic is kept away from the centre of the bridge.
No one can say how long it will take or how much money it will cost.
But it will involve replacing the entire middle span…and that could take months.
Women and disabled drivers who feel at risk of breaking down alone have been thrown a lifeline by a motoring organisation.
A new cellular phone has been introduced which directly links the car to emergency aid within seconds.
It's hoped the system will prevent tragedies like the M50 murder.
Erika Barnes reports.
RECONSTRUCTION
JUNE 1988
NIGEL PHILLIPS/Automobile Association
M4/Wiltshire
Voice over
Alone on the road and in trouble.
The car's broken down and in this rural part of Wiltshire…help is a long way away.
It's a serious concern for women, the elderly and disabled drivers.
Do they wait by their car…or do they set out in search of a phone?
Marie Wilkes had to make that decision when she broke down on the M50 in the Summer of 1988.
She was murdered before she could call for help.
The case raised endless safety questions.
The Automobile Association has now provided one solution.
It's a portable car phone that can be plugged into the socket of a cigarette lighter.
By dialling 999, the emergency services can be called.
By dialling 111, there's a direct link to the AA.
Male speaker
It's mainly the feeling of insecurity when they're a long way out from a telephone.
They don't know if it's safe to leave the car or call at someone's house.
But it's not just safety, it's convenience.
They also may not be prepared for a long walk to a phone.
Voice over
The phone costs a hundred and ninety nine pounds to install and then there's a quarterly charge of about thirty pounds.
The calls are free.
It probably works out cheaper than a conventional carphone.
But whilst some women drivers on the M4 today are concerned about their personal safety, they don't agree that they should have to pay for protection.
Female speaker
Yes I'm always worried.
I do a lot of driving.
Female speaker
Do you think you could benefit from a phone in the car?
Female speaker
Yes but cost's money to have a phone set up.
But I don't feel vulnerable, I don't drive far.
Female speaker
It should be for free.
I feel vulnerable and shouldn't have to pay.
Male speaker
We've tried to keep the costs down.
We want to make sure our members are not put into vulnerable positions.
We're playing our part in making people feel safer.
Voice over
It's certainly convenient…but at a cost.
Motorists have to calculate for themselves whether the concern is worth it.
Hundreds of bus company workers have been voting on whether to accept a six per cent pay cut.
The company says it needs the cut to keep going, and union leaders agree that the alternative would be job losses.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
HEREFORD
JOHN PARTRIDGE/Transport Union
Voice over
Midland Red West, which operates in Herefordshire and Worcestershire, is blaming the recession for the cuts.
Between now and December, the company estimates that revenue will be down by a million pounds.
With shops and businesses closing, there are fewer people travelling to work.
The proposed six percent pay cut will affect management and staff.
Today, nearly a thousand bus drivers, engineers, and clerical workers were balloted on whether to accept or reject the proposal, which also includes a cut in bank holiday pay.
Union leaders say it's a choice between a pay cut and job losses.
Some drivers, however, say they can't live on less money and would prefer to lose their jobs rather than accept a cut.
The Union says such offers are becoming more common in today's economic climate.
The ballots will be counted tonight.
A result is expected by lunchtime tomorrow.
In part two:…
Paris's leading photographer launches exhibition of his life's work.
Drinks all round…the family-run pub that's an award winner.
And the latest in family pets…would you house this hen?
Welcome back.
Some of the most famous…and romantic…images of Paris are on show in an exhibition in the region.
Photographer Robert Doisneau has been taking pictures of the city for sixty years.
And as Kim Barnes reports, it's the first time his life's work has been seen outside France.
ROBERT DOISNEAU/Photographer
DAVID ELLIOTT/Museum of Modern Art/Oxford
Voice over
Robert Doisneau's Paris has become everyone's Paris.
The man who's lived and worked in the same quarter of the city all his life, has seen his images go around the world and into the hearts of millions.
Now a major exhibition of his life's work has opened in Oxford; the first time such a collection has been seen outside France.
His pictures which hang on walls all over the world show a fascination with the street life of Parisians.
I still live in the same place, but I try to vary my route, to fight laziness.
When I'm at a crossroads, if I find myself going back to the same place I had a happy encounter, I deliberately go the other way, so I don't become a slave to habit.
He began life as a commercial photographer and worked for Renault, but he was sacked for bad time keeping after late nights in the darkroom.
’ This is not the first time you have done this without thinking it necessary to warn us, other than by your late arrival.’
During the war he took some of the most enduring images of Paris under the occupation.
Later he worked as a fashion photographer for Vogue, snapping a young Brigitte Bardot amongst others.
He established links with writers and artists; shooting Picasso with bread rolls for fingers.
But he always returned to the streets of Paris for inspiration, recording aspects of city life long since lost; finding both joy and humour amidst scenes of poverty.
He has a very sympathetic approach to people and to the problems that people have.
But I think the thing that runs through the whole collection and that makes Doisneau a remarkable photographer, is that he's photographed the same locality and this is the locality where he still lives, really from the early 30s right through to the present.
It's very rare if ever that one finds a continuing document of a place and people of a particular space maintained over that length of time.
The exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art also shows his cameras including his very first Rolleiflex and his vital contact sheets; showing how painstaking was the search for the right shot.
Perhaps his most famous picture is The Kiss outside the Town hall from 1945.
It still a best-seller around the world.
Doisneau took several pictures of kissing couples.
It's because they are the best memories of my life.
I put myself in the place of the people in the picture.
Sadly it's over now.
That would be ridiculous at my age anyway.
Doisneau thinks he may have taken around 600 thousand photographs and at the age of 80 he's still working; revisiting familiar scenes in Paris in recent years.
He doesn't normally travel, but was determined to come to Oxford, to see his life in pictures.
A village that was mentioned in the Domesday Book has now been immortalised in a modern publication.
In the fourteenth century it was best known for its links with the woollen trade.
Now it's famous for being one of the prettiest villages in the Cotswolds.
Clare Lafferty reports.
SHERBORNE/Gloucestershire
SYBIL LONGHURST/Author
ALICE TUFNELL/Author
MOIRA TREMAINE/Villager
Voice over
The village of Sherborne in Gloucestershire.
First recorded in the Domesday book, it still has the centuries old appearance that makes it so popular with tourists.
But Sherborne has seen many changes over the years.
Now Sybil Longhurst who's lived here all her life and Alice Tufnell, who's been a villager for more than forty years, have recorded those changes in a book.
Many of those photographs show Sherborne as the great farming community it once was.
In the fourteenth century the village played a major role in the wool trade.
Everything was done by hand, but the famers could still shear up to three thousand animals at a time, washing all the fleeces in the nearby Sherbourne Brook.
For four hundred years the Sherborne estate was owned by the Dutton family who lived in Sherborne house.
With a hundred rooms, it's said to have a window for every day of the year.
Today it's a block of luxury apartments, owned mainly by Americans.
The third Lord of Sherborne was responsible for building the village school.
It still stands today.
The uniform's are about the only thing that's changed.
The book's appeal spans generations.
The book also serves as a guide to local phrases, translating some of the broader Gloucestershire dialect.
So should you ever bet a local from Sherborne that you can find a better village, don't be surprised if you get this reply.
A pub which has been run by the same family for more than a century has won an award for its traditional charm.
In all those years the Black Horse has hardly changed, and as Mike Rowbottom reports, it's as popular as ever.
CHECKENDEN/Oxfordshire
MARGARET SAUNDERS/Landlady
DAVID McKOWCHAR/Campaign For Real Ale
Voice over
No neon lights, no jukebox, no slot machines, so what sets the Black Horse at Checkenden apart from other pubs?
Exactly that!
The pub hasn't changed in a century.
That's why the Campaign for Real Ale has named it a regional Pub of the year, an honour the 86 year old landlady is delighted to accept.
The pub has been in the family for over a century.
The present landlady, Mrs Margaret Saunders took it on in 1941 when Polish servicemen from a nearby camp were regulars.
Some of them still are.
The family tradition carries on.
Margaret very occasionally pulls a pint direct from the barrels in the cellar, but most of the work is done by her daughter, also Margaret and her grand-daughters, Claire and Sarah.
Her sister, Rose also helps behind the bar.
It's always been a popular pub and that, along with everything else, hasn't changed.
CAMRA have picked it because it represents an ideal almost gone from the 1990s, a no nonsense drinking and talking den.
So now the Black Horse has been named a regional Pub of the Year with a strong chance of winning the national title later this year.
Many families are used to having a cat, a dog or perhaps a budgie as a family pet but there are moves to encourage us to think of chickens as an alternative.
It can't be any old chicken though…it must be one of the rare and endangered species whose survival is at risk.
Tony Maycock reports.
LAWRENCE ALDERSON/Rare Breeds Survival Trust
Cricket, and in the latest round of Benson and Hedges cup games 
Northamptonshire's match against Hampshire in Southampton has been put off until tomorrow because of bad weather 
13 die in Los Angeles riots
The main news comes from the United States.
Thirteen people have been killed and more than a hundred and seventy injured in race riots in Los Angeles.
Police predict more people will die from their injuries.
Fires and looting after assault court hearing
Fires were started and there was looting after not guilty verdicts were pronounced on four white policemen who were filmed beating up a black man.
Bush calls for calm in state of emergency
President Bush has called for calm, the California State Governor has declared a state of emergency.
FTSE down 10
Now to tonight's financial headlines.
The hundred shares index closed down ten point eight at twenty-six, fifty-four point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-seven and up at two marks, ninety-three.
Just before we go news of an item on tomorrow night's show.
We'll be looking forward to the longest raft race in the world.
Eight hundred oarsmen and women will be rowing through Herefordshire to Wales in the River Wye Raft Race.
The race, over a gruelling hundred-mile-long course was won last year by a team from Hereford…we'll be asking if they can row their raft to victory once again.
That's on Central News South tomorrow night.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
RUNS=0:10
043092Prog(4)
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
ABI DONALD/Forest Hill
VICKI STRONG/Wife
JOHN STRONG/Victim
Voice over
John Strong is scarred for life.
Although he's the one bearing all the visible marks of the attack last September, it's his wife, Vicki, who carrys the emotional scars.
She was there when John was slashed across the face with a butcher's knife.
Now, 18 days after the attacker was put behind bars, he's been allowed to return home for a visit and he lives just a few doors away from the Strongs.
Female speaker
She won't go out at night if she knows he's around.
Male speaker
You should have to live looking over your shoulder all the time wondering about what will happen next
Voice over
Anthony Purcell lives in the same road as the Strongs in Forest Hill near Oxford.
He was sentenced to two years at Springhill Open prison near Aylesbury for the attack on John, now every other weekend he can come home for a visit.
Male speaker
It's an unfortunate situation, but home visits are a privilege at Springhill and if that privilege is abused, it will be taken away.
Voice over
John and Vicki Strong say that's not good enough.
They're afraid that Purcell will only be refused home visits if he injures someone else.
So, in an attempt to prompt the Home Office into more immediate action the Strongs have written to their MP Michael Heseltine.
Female speaker
They've asked him to look at the case because it makes a mockery of justice.
You might aswell forget about the police force and let people do what they like.
Voice over
The National Association of Victim Support Schemes is also concerned about the case.
It says when decisions of this kind are made, the welfare of the victim should be taken into account.
For now, the Strongs wil just have to wait and prepare themselves for the next weekend that Purcell comes home.
A tourist video has been withdrawn from sale after fears it could threaten the safety of children.
The video guide to Oxford shows a little girl going off on her own around the city's sights.
But critics say it sets a dangerous example.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
CHERYL HOPKINS/Oxfordshire County Council
ROBIN PELLOW/Oxford City Council
THE VERY BEST OF OXFORD/Rook Films
Voice over
The shelves are being cleared of this tourist guide to Oxford.
Here at the city's Tourist Office, they say they don't want to sell it.
The video shows a little girl on a visit getting left behind.
She follows a man on roller skates and disappears off round Oxford on her own.
Child Protection officers are worried about the image it presents.
Oxford City Council which runs the Tourist Office say they've withdrawn the video because of public fears.
WH Smith's and Dillons have also taken the video off the shelves.
Up until this afternoon, it was on sale at HMV, but within the last few hours, they've stopped selling it too.
The producers, Rook Films, from Ewelme in Oxfordshire say the angle taken is the last impression they want to give.
They say the story is clearly a fantasy, like Alice in Wonderland with a vast historic precedent amongst children's fairy tales and at the end, the little girl clearly returns to reality.
But reality in the 1990s mean her story has a side retailers feel they can't ignore and that means it's off sale.
Police investigating the disapearance of Thames water company Chairman Sir Roy Watts are following up a number of possible sightings.
Sir Roy went missing after being told that he had Parkinson's disease.
KEN GOODWIN Charlbury Oxfordshire
BEVERLEY GORTON Neighbour
Insp CHRIS BISHOP Metropolitan Police
ANNE MATHON Parkinson's Disease Society
Voice over
The sixty seven year old chairman of Thames water is said to be depressed after he was diagnosed as having Parkinsons disease.
The country home he shares with his wife at Charlbury in Oxfordshire is deserted — neighbours say Lady Watts is at their flat in London waiting for any news of her husband.
She says that they are very worried about him.
The police say that they've had reports of sightings of Sir Roy around London.
Sir Roy, seen here with Princess Alexandra on a recent visit to Thames Water's headquarters, was dropped off outside his flat in London by his driver at two pm on tuesday.
He's been missing since then — police say they're worried about his safety:
He says they're concerned for his safety — it's not a natural thing for him to do.
Sir Roy's depression could have been a natural reaction to being told that he suffers from Parkinson's disease.
Fear of the illness, which affects movement and posture, is common, but often unfounded as modern drugs can succesfully control the disease:
She says sufferers often think the worse.
Lady Watts, Sir Roy's wife is said to be beside herself with worry.
All she, and the couples three children can do now is wait.
PM delighted over peace talks
The Prime Minister has said he is delighted by the news that all sides in the Bosnian conflict will meet with the United Nations in Athens this weekend.
Clinton — Bosnia decision soon
President Clinton has said he will announce by tomorrow at the latest what action the United States will take to try to end the Bosnian crisis.
More teachers take action
The majority of members of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers have voted to take industrial action over their workload.
Under-14 rape law change
A bill is to go before the Commons to allow boys under fourteen years old to face rape charges.
FTSE up 26
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-six point three at twenty-eight, thirteen point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-seven but up at two marks, forty-nine.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
(HARRIET ADLIB)(WES) Still to come on Central News, on the road from London to Sydney.
Voice over
Welcome back.
Later in the programme, Sefton, the horse who survived an IRA bomb.
(ERIKA) In Central South Sport tonight, we'll continue with our London to Sydney rally adventures as Tim Russon spins the globe.
Meanwhile closer to home, it's home sweet home for our footballing sides on parade.
GLENN HODDLE/Swindon Town Manager
Voice over
It's West Ham on the menu for Sunday lunch at Swindon.
The Central TV cameras have been invited to the County Ground too.
Last time they met, Craig Maskell gave them a 1-0 win on a plate.
This could be the aperitif before the main course, a Wembley play off final against the Hammers.
Male speaker
Mathematically we can still be caught, but we'd have to make a big mistake.
In some respects, we still have to do something right to get a point against West Ham.
If there's any justice, I'm sure we can get back to Wembley.
Voice over
Paul Bodin saved Swindon's blushes against Notts County last week with another penalty.
He's having a late fitness test, after picking up an injury playing for Wales during the week.
The team has a few ifs and buts about it.
Frazer Digby's might stand down.
He's got chicken pox.
Oxford United have done their sums.
It would take a mathematical nightmare to go down.
After their dream win against Barnsley last week, they're confident of taken some points off Notts County at the Manor tomorrow.
Last time the two sides met, they shared the spoils with a 1-all draw.
Here's Nick Cusack again.
Here's the team.
Jimmy Magilton is recovering well from his hamstring injury.
He trained yesterday and could put in an appearence.
And sad news from the Manor.
Former Oxford United player, Tommy Caton, has died of a suspected heart attack at his home at Bampton in Oxfordshire.
He was 30.
His old club will wear black arm bands on Saturday.
Last time Hereford met Doncaster, they turned up late.
Slow to start, they went down 2-1.
Tomorrow's their chance to make amends.
16 year old Mark Cross and 17 year old Paul Eversham are being brought into the side to show off the talent Hereford has to offer for the future.
You can see highlights of Oxford's game in goals extra at teatime tomorrow.
And make a meal of the soccer, with Swindon verses West Ham in the live match on Sunday.
If football's not your game…you can bank on a feast of other sports this holiday weekend.
Voice over
Disabled sportsman, Ian Hayden, to a rest from the golf course, to set a new world record in the shot putt.
The Olympic Gold medallist threw 9.99 metres from his wheelchair at the Sunshine games in Florida.
First there were 15, then there were 7.
Now there's 10.
Most of the country's top rugby sides will be in Gloucester on Monday for the National tens.
A chance for a last flourish and a bit of fun at the end of a gruelling league campaign.
The motorcyclists will be out on the grass track meeting at Kingston Bagpuize in Oxfordshire on Monday and the first round of the British Championship Kart Racing series comes to Shenington near Banbury.
Gloucestershire's Dressage stars, Carl Rupert Hester and Emile Faurie will be leading their equine partners in the Goodwood International Dressage competition this weekend.
Demonstrating the grace, style and discipline that gave the British team 7th place in the Olympics.
Meanwhile, Olympic gold medallists Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pincent have won a sponsorship lifeline that will keep their Atlanta dreams alive.
Redgrave said the £200,000 deal from a financial services company, would save his career.
And down on the River Thames, 1,000 oarsman and women continue the rowing tradition at the Wallingford Regatta.
The Gloster meteors will be slogging it out in the first round of the British baseball knockout cup on Sunday.
They'll be looking for a few home runs at their new home at Dowty Aerospace.
Brighton Buccaneers are the challengers.
And so to our sporting travels across the world.
It's been a difficult second week for the competitors in the Lombard London to Sydney Marathon.
Tim Russon reports from Istanbul.
NICK BRITTAN/Race Organiser
TERRY HUNTER/Driver
DOUGLAS MORRIS/Driver
Voice over
He was the horse the IRA couldn't kill.
Sefton was badly injured in the bomb blast in Hyde Park in nineteen eighty-two, but survived.
Today he's been celebrating his thirtieth birthday, but quietly, in his stable.
KATE GARRAWAY/Princes Risborough
LESLIE BUTLER/Stable Manager
Voice over
It's not much of a birthday present, rue.
But if your thirty, thats ninety in horse years, and a survivor of a bomb blast to boot, maybe there's no better birthday treat, than a quiet feed on fresh hay.
Sefton today is happy in retirement, but eleven years ago there were many who wouldn't have believed he'd still be alive.
The IRA bomb in Hyde Park left him with twenty serious shrapnel wounds.
He says it took him about a year to recover but now he's fine here.
The grooms at his home in Princes Risborough, believe it was Sefton's spirit that pulled him through.
His lively personality won him many well-wishers at the time and those fans didn't forget him on his birthday.
vox pops 
Ninety may be a good age but who knows for the horse the IRA couldn't kill this could only be the start of the search for pastures new.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
One of Britain's leading space engineers is seeking backing for a rocket plane which would fly from London to Sydney in just one hour.
Alan Bond's last project was shelved by the Government five years ago.
He says his new craft would revolutionise space travel.
GRAEME BOWD/Stanford in the Vale
ALAN BOND/Skylon Project
Voice over
Half space ship, half plane, this futuristic craft could shrink the world.
Designed by Alan Bond at his home in Oxfordshire.
The so-called Skylon is derived from Hotol, the project shelved by the Government in 1988, after £7 million had been spent in it.
Taking off as a conventional aircraft the plane would take its passengers into space, reaching 18,0000 mph before gliding back to earth like the Space Shuttle.
Mr Bond says the secret to his latest design is the engines.
At low altitude they work like conventional jets, switching to rocket power on the edge of space.
Male speaker
Space is 60 miles above our heads.
Skylon would take only 15 minutes to get there.
Travelling into space on a daily basis would be a possibility.
Voice over
The passenger version of Skylon is many years away.
At first it would be used to launched satellites at a tenth the cost of the shuttle.
Britain has often led the way in aerospace technology, without reaping the benefits.
Concorde broke new ground, but lost its makers a fortune.
So would it be the same with Skylon?
Male speaker
It cost $600 million to launch the shuttle once.
People cannot afford to do the things they want to do in space.
We can to it at one tenth of the cost and lots of countries want to do it.
Voice over
Mr Bond has been building rockets since his teens.
Some of them he still keeps as ornaments.
But with $10 billion needed for development, it could difficult to get the Skylon project off the ground, let alone the rocket.
Police and schools have joined forces in a new campaign against joyriding.
Children are being shown a new video, which shows just how serious the consequences can be.
KAREN THOMPSON/Reporting
Mayday Publications Video
STEVE HARRINGTON/Video Producer
Insp BILL HOLMAN/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
It's antics like this which have become a major problem in towns and cities up and down the country in recent years, generating fear on estates like Blackbird Leys in Oxford.
A video called Take Mistake is now being shown in a joint approach by Thames Valley Police and schools.
Played out by amateur actors, it tells the tale of a bored teenager.
Looking for excitement and with little thought for his family, he steals a friend's car, knocks down and badly injures a girl and is taken to court.
The producer of the video says preventing car crime is better than trying to cure it and they've drawn on the real experiences of youngsters.
Police have been encouraged by the feedback so far from youngsters who've seen it.
One video is not going to stop car crime on its own, but producers believe it may persuade some young people to think twice before they find themselves on the wrong side of the law.
County council elections are less than a week away, and one of the key issues is bound to be the state of our schools.
Education accounts for more than half most county's budgets.
In Gloucestershire, the only county to have it's spending capped by the Government, Thursday's vote could determine whether teachers lose their jobs.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
Library Pictures/GLOUCESTER
DAVID ABBOTT/Association of Secondary Heads
Lady MAVIS DUNROSSIL/Conservative
JOHN SEWELL/Liberal Democrat
MAUREEN RUTTER/Labour
SHENINGTON/Oxfordshire
ASHTON under HILL/Worcestershire
Voice over
Parents could be forgiven for thinking it's another foreign language, the current wave of political bickering about education.
Tests, boycotts, national curriculum, funding.
Most of those though, are national debates — money is the only issue which could be effected by the coming County Council elections.
In Gloucestershire for instance, it's the hottest of hot potatoes.
Threatened cuts in education spending have prompted mass demonstrations, lobbying of Shire Hall AND Parliament and yet within the Council Chamber, where no party has overall control, there's a broad concensus among the 3 main groups.
They all supported an increased budget, which meant they were the ONLY county capped by the Government for spending too much.
If the capping stands, unions say at least 94 teachers will be sacked.
Some teachers in the county believe it's this very concensus between Tories, Liberal Democrats and Labour which has led to a crisis in county education.
So is it true?
Is Gloucestershire County Council shirking tough education decisions, does it lack the courage of party convictions?
In Oxfordshire, education is less of a contentious issue; the county has only one school, at Shenington, which has opted out of local political control and the county falls in the middle of most national league tables on education.
Candidates say that on the doorstep, education questions concern mainly national policies.
In Hereford and Worcestershire, Conservatives control education decisions, but only by the casting vote of the chairman, and HE'S standing for re-election as an independent in the county elections, because he's unhappy about
Unfit to drive.
Crackdown shows one third of used cars are not safe.
Rape in a classroom.Police hunt for college attacker
And a hundred miles of torture.
Countdown to great Wye raft race.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
A third of vehicles on sale at used car dealers have been found to be unfit for the road, leaving their buyers with big repair bills.
Several dealers are now facing prosecution.
Erika Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Sgt PAUL GRANGER/Wiltshire Police
SHIRLEY HANSEN/Second Hand Car Buyer
ROBERT TAYLOUR/Wiltshire Trading Standards
JOHN RICHARDSON/Walker Jackson
A woman has been raped in a college classroom.
Her attacker forced his way in while she was alone, and the college is now reviewing security.
This report from Gareth Furby.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Chief Insp BOB EVANS/Wiltshire Police
CLIVE BRAIN/Principal/Swindon College
The TI Engineering company says its takeover bid for the Dowty Group doesn't threaten jobs.
A director of the firm making the five hundred million pound offer has visited Dowty to allay the fears of the workforce.
But Dowty says they'll be better off if the bid fails.
Richard Barnett reports:
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
TONY SUMNER/TI Executive Director
Now, they sing songs about it, dance for it, and even knock on trees in honour of it.
It's May Day of course, and for many the celebrations meant a very early, very wet and very cold start.
But others had been celebrating all night.
Debbie Kelly reports.
MAGDALEN COLLEGE Oxford
BACHE HILL Leominster
BUSSAGE Gloucestershire
Voice over
There's little room at the top of the tower, this year celebrating it's 500th anniversary, but the choiristers have been performing the traditional May Carol there for centuries.
Below another tradition; hundreds of people strain to hear them.
For many its the end of a long night celebrating at May Balls.
If you're a tourist its all a bit strange.
Female speaker
It's a bit wierd.
Female speaker
How long have you been celebrating?
He says; Since 6 0'clock last night.
Female speaker
I have been to Shotover Park for a May Ball, it was very muddy.
Voice over
It was a quieter dawn in Leominster, with morris men marking the pagan first day of summer on a hill outside the town.
There was no peace for the trees in a village near Stroud; tree knocking is a pagan ritual and the children of Bussage primary school were determined to wake them.
Back in Oxford, there's one more tradition to keep up, an early morning dip.
Man charged with father and daughter kidnap
A man has appeared in court charged with the kidnap of the bank clerk from Essex, Alison Manwaring, and her father Matthew.
More than thirty dead as US rioting spreads
More than thirty people have died and more than a thousand injured in the Los Angeles riots.
Violence has spread to several other US cities.
4
President Bush has put four thousand troops on stand-by to tackle any further rioting.
FTSE up 5
The hundred shares index closed up five point seven at twenty-six, fifty-nine point eight.
The pound is up at one dollar, seventy-eight and down at two marks, ninety-three.
If you're using the region's motorways tonight, you're advised to be prepared for long delays as the Bank holiday traffic builds up.
At one point, Thames Valley police were called to deal with more than forty accidents on the M-Forty, and traffic is described as slow moving.
It's a similar story on the M-Four, after a minor accident reduced the westbound carriageway to a single lane.
And the M-Five is also described as slow-moving.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good bank holiday weekend.
RUNS=0:10
Now golf, and to Woburn where the European Ladies tour nineteen ninety two began yesterday with the Ford Ladies classic.
It's a demanding course with, some would say, more than its fair share of natural hazards.
KRISTAL PARKER/USA
DALE REID/Defending Champion
Voice over
Hike a lift on a golf buggy on the Duchess course at Woburn and you'll quickly see the challenge.
Thousands upon thousands of stately 100 ft pines just waiting for the mis-hit golf ball.
End up amongst them and the problems are evident, unless of course the wood fairies are smiling upon you.
These are the ladies of the European Tour, the Ford classic is the first title of the season and as always, competitive golf is tense, nerve-wracking stuff.
The weather's against them, it's not just another competition.
These women are trying to earn their living and especially if you're a newcomer to the tour it's hard work.
Female speaker
I'll just do the best I can.
Voice over
From our region Sarah Nicklin of Worcestershire, a 26 year old who finished 62nd on the order of merit last year.
She's hoping for better things this time round.
Nina Holloway is another hoping to do well in the classic, she's from Warborough in Oxfordshire.
But here are the big guns of the tournament.
Bristol's Trish Johnson, ranked 19 last year and the one everyone's watching the tour number one Australian Corrine Dibnah.
Last year's winner here was Dale Reid.
This time she's carrying an injury.
Female speaker
I've got a thumb injury.
Everyone's really like a happy family on the tour.
Voice over
Golf the sport's everyone's getting interested in these days, there are all sorts among the spectators for the players there's added interest this year.
Places are up for grabs for the Solheim cup challenge against the USA, the ladies equivalent of the Ryder Cup.
In this tournament so far, Italy's Stefania Croce looks like the one to watch.
She's back in the clubhouse heading the leader board 7 under.
So a quick look at the leaders, confirming Stefania Croce heads the board.
Also there Trish Johnson, five under par for her and Lisa Hackney from Staffordshire lies fourth, she's four under.
par but bad news for American Kristal Parker who we also saw earlier, she's finished nine over par and doesn't look as if she'll be going through to the next stage.
The same I'm afraid applies to the two competitors from our region, Sarah Niklin and Nina Holloway haven't made the cut and will take no further part in the tournament.
Now a busy weekend of Bank Holiday sport coming up…here's Mark Kiff with some of the highlights.
Voice over
The Grand Prix season roars back into life this weekend.
Nigel Mansell and the Williams team from Didcot are on top of the world with three straight wins…already Mansell is in provisional pole position for Sunday's Barcelona Grand Prix.
Cheltenham Town have a relegation battle on their hands tomorrow in the GM Vauxhall Conference…they have to beat Welling United at Whaddon Road to stand any chance of staying up.
Gloucestershire have not been faring well in the Benson and Hedges Cup.
Tomorrow they play Sussex at Hove.
In the Sunday League, they travel to Lord's to play Middlesex.
The Delta Club in Swindon plays host to the National Wheelchair Tennis Championships this weekend.
More than 30 players, including juniors and novices will be competing.
And expect plenty of spills this Bank Holiday Monday at Kingston Bagpuize near Abingdon.
Many top speedway riders will be pitting their skills in the National motor cycle grass track meeting.
Two lifelong movie addicts will see their dreams come true tonight when the doors open at their very own cinema.
After months of restoration the two hundred seat auditorium will have an audience for the first time in thirty years.
Clare Lafferty reports.
WOTTON UNDER EDGE/Gloucestershire
JESS ELTON/The Town Cinema
ANDY COULDREY/The Town Cinema
Voice over
It may not be the multi-screen, stereo phonic, cinema complex that some towns can boast.
But to the people of Wotton Under Edge in Gloucestershire, this is Hollywood.
The Town Cinema opens its doors for the first time in more than thirty years tonight.
It's all thanks to the efforts of two cinema buffs from Gloucester who for years dreamt of owning their own picture palace.
The two men have invested forty fivethousand pounds getting the two hundred seater theatre ready for tonight.
The people of Wotton Under Edge appreciate all their hard work.
Earlier this afternoon, there were still a few teething problems…like plenty of signs…but no food…and a ticket machine…but no tickets.
Assuming he's back in time the crunching of popcorn and rustle of toffee papers will once again be heard in the aisles of Wotton Under Edge.
The new Education Secretary has made his first school visit since taking office.
John Patten joined hundreds of children in his constituency to see a play.
They asked him for a swimming pool and a better playground, but he wasn't making any promises.
Kim Barnes reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JIM RYAN/Headmaster
JOHN PATTEN MP/Education Secretary
Voice over
This was a visit arranged before John Patten knew whether he'd still be an MP, never mind Secretary of State of Education.
He survived a fight for his Oxford West and Abingdon seat and was rewarded with a cabinet post, but today such glories were left behind, as he joined the audience for Bottle Busters.
This is his very first school visit as secretary of state, but St Edmunds primary aren't claiming any honours.
Mr Patten sat back and enjoyed the show, as regards education policy he's still thinking a lot and saying very little.
Meanwhile, as his in-tray piles up with requests, the pupils of St Edmunds know what they'd ask for if they were granted an audience.
I'd like more drawing sessions because I like drawing and more football.
Some…
I can't remember.
I'd like an extended playground, because at lunchtime the boys take up the playground and play football and if we go on the playground just to run around, they say’ Oi get off, we're playing football.’
And posing with Bungo the dog, the new minister showed he's willing to work with both children and animals.
Eight hundred competitors will be taking to the water this weekend for the annual River Wye raft race.
They'll be rowing a gruelling one hundred mile course…all for charity.Richard Barnett reports:
HEREFORD
TRICIA HALES/Organizer
Voice over
The oarsmen and women have been training now for over 3 months to reach the peak of stamina and fitness that could bring victory in the longest raft race in the world.
Last year a team from Hereford were the winners and the Castaways raft has been back on the Wye this week practising to make it a double.
They say: It's hard to judge the competition beforehand, but they're hoping to do well.
The race is very tough.
77 rafts will take to the water at Hay on Wye early tomorrow morning and it will take 3 days to complete the 100 mile journey through Hereford, Ross and Monmouth to Chepstow.
Female speaker
The race is good fun and it makes a lot of money for charity.
The Hereford teams have been training hard and deserve to do well.
Voice over
The Wye Raft Race has been run since 1977 and it raises around £100,000 a year for charity.
This time an overseas crew from South Africa is competing for the first time.
But the locals are still optimistic that they'll take the honours on Monday.
In part two: Going down…the women golfers with that sinking feeling.
Coming soon: The rubble that will be a cinema by tonight.
And making a splash: They're deeply dippy over May Day.
Hello.
NICK CLARK
This time tomorrow we'll know at long last what the future holds for Oxford United and Swindon Town, with a dramatic finale to the football league season in store.
Are Oxford for the drop, can Swindon make it to the premier league play-offs?
The views of both managers coming up as Mark Kiff looks forward to D-Day.
BRIAN HORTON/Oxford United Manager
GLENN HODDLE/Swindon Town Manager
Voice over
It's the situation no football club wants…in the relegation zone with no guarantee that even winning their last game will save them.
Oxford United manager Brian Horton knows tomorrow's match against Tranmere is make or break.
Male speaker
It's vital for everybody at the club.
Voice over
United have already beaten the Merseyside team twice this season in the Cup and League.
Tomorrow former Oxford player John Aldridge could stand between them and another victory.
Male speaker
I don't mind if Aldridge breaks Tranmere's scoring record as long as we score more.
Voice over
Brian Horton takes a squad of fifteen…
Mike Ford returns to the team after a long break through injury.
You'd need a maths degree from Oxford University to work out United's chances of staying up.
A win for United would give them a good chance; a draw would be tantamoumt to playing Russian Roulette and defeat would be good night.
Tranmere's form has picked up of late…they could pose a real threat tomorrow…
United need that win.
And Oxford aren't the only ones…
Swindon Town's hopes of reaching the promotion playoffs rest on victory tomorrow.
At the County Ground, Derby inflicted Swindon's first home defeat of the season.
Glenn Hoddle reckons Town are a good bet to turn the tables.
Male speaker
We're confident that we can win.
The pressure will be on them.
They haven't given us many tickets and that will make our players more determined.
Voice over
Glenn Hoddle's named fifteen players.
Terry Gibson, injured in Monday's draw with Sunderland, could play.
In order for Swindon to make the playoffs they must beat Derby.
Then they have to rely on Blackburn and Charlton failing to win.
Derby are unbeaten in their last seven games.
But they've lost eight home matches this season, one of the worst records in the division.
Swindon are long overdue an away victory.
Tomorrow just could be the day.
And next week, we'll take a look back at the highlights of the Central South soccer season…
Well, first it was fifteen…then it was seven.
Now it's ten.
A new style of rugby…ten-a-side…came to Gloucester yesterday…for the first tournament of its kind in England.
Appropriately enough, it was won by the hosts who beat Harlequins 26-nil in the final.
ANDREW STANLEY/Gloucester RFC
ANDREW DEACON/Gloucester RFC
Voice over
More power than in sevens.
More pace than in the 15-a-side game.
This is tens rugby; the best of both worlds.
And Gloucester welcomed the experiment.
It's a chance for rugby to throw its weight around.
It suited some down to the ground.
Male speaker
I haven't played it before, I didn't know what to expect.
It's good we won.
It suits our game more than sevens.
There's not so much space.
We're not known for our pace.
Male speaker
It's good for the crowd.
It's an honour for us to have it here in Gloucester.
Voice over
Tens means more running rugby and more rough and tumble for the top 16 sides in England.
Keeping the ball alive and kicking.
Using the forwards to create the overlap in the wide open spaces.
Male speaker
It's very exciting.
This is the first tournament.
I think it'll be a great success.
Voice over
Reporter asks: How does it compare to sevens?
Male speaker
It's not as fast.
Fitness is important.
The support play has been brillient.
Voice over
Tens also means ice creams in the sun, a drink with the lads, a bit of star-gazing and an early introduction to rugby at its best.
Two brothers have unveiled what they say is the car of the future.
They call it a Hyper-micro vehicle, which in plain English means its small.
But the price is more substantial — a shade under twenty thousand pounds.
KEITH HUTCHENCE Oxford
ANDREW MYNHEER Concept Car Company
CHRIS MYNHEER Concept Car Designer
Voice over
Take it from here.
The car of the future and they call it the’ Urbanizer.’
It's 3 inches shorter than a Mini, 15 inches shorter than a Metro, but it's much more likely to turn the heads than your average suburban runabout.
For two years, a pair of brothers from Oxford have been locked away in their garage putting together a car, which they hope will put the Japanese micro cars in the shade.
Their aim?
To have big car luxury and performance which can outmanoeuvre the opposition.
The car's already causing a stir among the manufacturers, eager to seek new markets in energy-conscious Japan and California.
And Rover have been giving help with their 1400 K Series engine.
But do the public have their sights set on an Urbanizer?
And who does the designer think it'll appeal to?
Not surprisingly, Andrew and Chris are also working on an economy version.
For £15,000 pounds, there'll be no frills and they're afraid they can't guarantee the weather, either.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Inquiry into Arms to Iraq opens
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down half a point at twenty-eight, twelve point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-seven and down at two marks, forty-six.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
During the last few years, caring for the elderly, sick and disabled in society has become a controversial issue.
The recent changes in Community Care are designed to give more people the chance to live independent lives.
Just two days before the County Council elections, Gargy Patel reports on how the debate about social services has become a key issue.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
OXFORD
SHIRLEY BUCKINGHAM/Home Manager
GLOUCESTER
SWINDON
CATHY KEATING/Centre Manager
DERYK MEAD/Director
Voice over
At the age of eighty seven, Philip lives in a home for the elderly.
He has his own room, with privacy to have his meals here.
Since the Mayott home was modernised last year, all thirty six residents have the choice to live in small groups, almost like a home from home.
But this is still fairly unusual.
Most elderly homes are based on communal living, with pensioners spending the daytime in one big lounge and dining room.
Those who work in Social Services want to see better facilities.
More choice…beyond exercise groups…and cooking clubs.
Single rooms instead of having to share.
Social services have undergone a major change.
With the introduction of the Community Care Act, local councils are now responsible for giving care.
Social services take up a large part of the council budget.
The issue has climbed up the political agenda.
At the Hatherley Day centre in Gloucester, disabled people find help and opportunity to imrpove their quality of life.
There have been suggestions that centres like this should charge for their services.
Critics say the unit should be seen as a vital facility, not a luxury.
Councils are coming under more pressure to save money.
but when projects like the Enterprise Workshops in Swindon are threatened with closure, disabled people are putting up a strong fight.
The workshops have become an election issue.
Centres like the one in Hatherley Road are a fairly new idea.
But few people realise the huge part they play in the lives of those who need help.
The whole emphasis of social services is trying to satisfy the needs of so many different groups.
Community care has pushed forward the idea of bringing more people out of institutions to live as independently as possible.
A key election issue where those who run services have to make tough decisions.
Some are confident that the changes will mean better care.
Others say unless social services are given higher priority, they're in danger of becoming a lottery.
(HARRIET) And tomorrow we'll be looking at where seats are likely to be won and lost in Thursday's elections.
(WES) Still to come on Central News, name the game with ten players a side.
(WES) Welcome back.
Later in the programme, a look at what could be the car of the future.
(TWO SHOT) But first with the sport, here's Erika Barnes.
(ERIKA)
ERIKA BARNES
Voice over
’ That hurt,’said Swindon's manager, Glenn Hoddle.
Hurt pride; a 3-1 defeat.
Hurt players too.
A hard game that left a number of his key players battered and bruised.
Swindon dominated early on.
But it was West Ham who scored first.
Mark Robson sent Trevor Morley chasing his 22nd goal of the season.
In the second half, substitutions were the key.
West Ham's Clive Allen came on and followed on from Julian Dick's telling run through Swindon's midfield.
Squeezing past the left hand post.
Brian Marwood came off the bench to give the home side new hope.
His shot crept through Miklosko's legs and Micky Hazard made absolutely sure for Swindon.
But it was another substitute, Kenny Brown, who dealt the final blow for the hammers, with his very first touch of the match.
Swindon have just one more league game before the play offs.
They'll need to patch up their wounded defence and wounded soldiers, before they can think of premier league football next year.
The crowd at the Manor were treated to the good, the bad and the ugly side of Oxford United.
The good, from Jimmy Magilton.
This beautifully judged chip put them in front against Notts County.
The bad, from United's defence.
This fumble at the back allowed Richard Walker to equalise just on half time.
And the ugly; John Durnin's never heard the adage…never trouble trouble until trouble troubles you.
Off again, for his 4th red card in 3 years.
Oxford hung on, just like they have all season.
Hereford had a bit of a disaster against Doncaster.
After a sleepy first half, almost everyone had nodded off, except for Rovers' Peter Heritage, who nodded the ball on to a greatful Eddie Gormely.
Hereford's player of the season Alan Judge misjudged the visitors second goal.
The ball bashed him in the face, before Mike Jeffrey bashed home Doncaster's second.
Hereford 0 — Doncaster 2.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
RICHARD BARNETT/Teddington
Det Supt PETER SHAYLE/Gloucestershire Police
JUDITH LUXFORD/Villager
The Prime Minister has praised the police operation which stopped travellers from holding a bank holiday festival in the Cotswolds.
The police say the operation, costing some two hundred thousand pounds, stretched their resources to the limit.
The travellers say the police are hounding them, and that more clashes throughout the summer are inevitable.
We have two reports.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
MAY 1992
GEOFF COOPER/Acting Asst Chief Constable
Voice over
Making the headlines — the travellers who say all they wanted to do was have a party.
But this time the guest list included hundreds of police.
Streets around the normally tranquil town of Morton in Marsh were sealed and long traffic jams built up.
Tempers flared:
Three hundred officers took part in operation haystack.
Today travellers camped at Brockworth and at Dowdswell say it was a waste time and money.
They say that they don't understand why the police had to be so heavy handed.
Why use so many men just to stop them enjoying themselves?
As the convoys began to mass on friday police from six counties joined forces in a combined operation — devised after what was regarded by many as the fiasco at Castlemorton last year.
Police had been taken by surprise as fifteen thousand travellers converged on the area.
Determined not to let that happen again, forces shared intelligence and rescources.
It may have been costly, but those in charge say they had little choice.
He says that the main priority was to ensure that the travellers couldn't group up to stage a huge festival.
The few remaining travellers in Gloucestershire say that they'll soon be on the move, and predict fresh clashes with the police this summer:
He says that they don't want a confrontation, but it could happen.
But for the time being, for this group of travellers at least, the party's over.
GARETH FURBY/Moreton-in-Marsh
ROWAN KEMP/Pub Landlord
VALERIE WEST/Restaurant Owner
DICK SHEPPARD/American Tourist
STEPHEN FARNSWORTH/Antique Dealer
PAUL MARLAND MP/Con Gloucestershire West
GEOFFREY CLIFTON-BROWN MP/Con Cirencester
Voice over
The travellers have moved on and the tourists are back.
But many Cotswold traders are now counting the cost of a lost weekend.
The ugly scenes scared the holiday crowds away.
One pub's takings are down by around eight hundred pounds.
He says it's cost him dear.
And this tea shop closed its doors and sent the staff home.
She says they've got to make a living.
Some locals think the police should be even tougher in future.
She says they should go to army camps.
He says they cqan't hold the country to ransom.
And this afternoon the Prime Minister was called on to act.
He wants the law tightened.
The Prime Minister says it may not happen this summer.
He says the law must be changed.
But with another bank holiday only weeks away…the worry is the travellers may try again…and yet another confrontation in the Cotswolds will be inevitable.
A man has been fined £1200 after failing to display a car parking ticket.
The case comes on the day senior magistrates met the Home Secretary to seek changes to the new Criminal Justice Act, under which penalties are linked to a person's ability to pay.
The defendant, Mr Nicholas Kennedy was not in court.
Tonight he said he didn't even know the case was coming up.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
JANE WARDE-ALDAM/Chairman
BRIAN REYNOLDS/Thames Valley Deputy Chief Constable
KENNETH CLARKE MP/Home Secretary
Voice over
Mr Kennedy's car was found in an Oxford pay and display car park without with no ticket on the windscreen.
Today Oxford magistrates were told he had not told the authorities who was driving, or filled in a means test form.
Under the unit fine rules he therefore received the maximum penalty, a fine of six hundred pounds on each of two offences.
Tonight from his office in Abingdon Mr Kennedy said he was horrified by the penalty and insisted that he didn't even known the case was on.
It came as senior members of the magistrates association met the Home Secretary in London to seek changes in the new fines system.
The Kennedy case is one of many which have exposed the new Criminal Justice Act up to ridicule, with motoring offences in particular coming under the spotlight.
Many defendants have been fined of more than a thousand pounds, simnplky because they earned reasonable salries.
Bicester Magistrates court was one which of four which pioneered the new system.
But its chairman says many magistrates feel uncomfortable about imposing such large penalties.
Some of the country's top wheelchair tennis players have been proving that they can still serve up top-class sporting action.
Newcomers to the game joined Olympic hopefuls at the weekend for the National Championships in Swindon.
TONY CHARALAMBIDES/Junior Player
RICHARD LATKOWSKI/Novice Player
MARTIN McELHATTON/National Wheelchair Tennis Assn
Voice over
You're likely to get into something of a spin playing wheelchair tennis.
Especially when you're on the receiving end of some vicious spin served up by some of the countries top competitors.
The Delta Tennis Centre in Swindon plays host to the National Championships.
The rules are the practically the same as the regular game.
The challenge is perhaps greater.
Not only do these youngsters have to find the strength to battle against crippling disease, they have to find the motivation and the will to win.
Male speaker
The only different rule is that the ball can bounce twice.
Apart from that it's exactly the same.
Voice over
Reporter asks: How easy is it to play in your wheelchair?
Male speaker
It's quiet easy.
It's not as difficult as I thought it would be.
Voice over
Richard Latkowsky from Witny was seriously injured in a motorcycle crash several years ago.
He's new to wheelchair tennis, but sport plays a vital part of his rehabilitation.
Male speaker
It's very important.
With the work situation and being in a chair all the time, it's very important to keep active.
Voice over
Reporter asks: What does it mean to you to be playing competitive sport?
Male speaker
It's a form of self expression.
I'm glad it's over.
Now I've got through the first round, it's taken the pressure off me a bit.
Male speaker
If you've had an accident, tennis is one of the sports you can play with your family.
You in the chair, the others on their feet.
It's a way of integrating with the able-bodied world.
Voice over
These players may be wheelchair bound, but they're Barcelona bound too.
The best will be representing Britain in the Paralympics in the Summer.
Others still have a long way to go and a lot to learn about their disabilities.
But by stretching their abilities to the limit, they'll discover that success is not beyond their reach.
A company director has given a whole new meaning to the term’ house painting’.
He's commissioned a mural in his entrance hall which wouldn't look out of place in the Cistine chapel…although there are a few subtle differences, as Gareth Furby's been finding out.
BRIXWORTH/Northamptonshire
PAUL SCOTT/Owner
CHRIS FIDDES/Artist
Voice over
At first sight, it could be the work of an old master in the hall of a Venetian palace.
But its surroundings are more humble; a row of cottages in Northamptonshire.
The owner is company director Paul Scott, who says the giant painting in his entrance hall cost no more than a personalised number plate.
He says they had the space so they decorated in the grand manner.
It's taken artist, Chris Fiddes, 60 days to complete, the realisation of a lifelong ambition.
He's spent 30 years working as a teacher, but always wanted to earn a living as a painter.
He says for the first time in his life, he's known what life must have been like for the old masters.
Each wall has a different theme.
The Greek myths, war and peace and the great and the good.
He lists some of them, including Queen Elizabeth 1 and Mozart.
Also included is a portrait of the owner talking to Shakespeare and a reference to his successful tyre replacement business, with a wheel from a Roman Chariot under repair.
The latin motto translated, means offers free wheel balancing.
The owner says people don't believe what they're seeing and their jaws drop.
And impressive though it is, at the moment, the mural will remain for the owner's eyes only.
He has no plans to open up his hallway for public viewing.
The Falcons are flying again — the RAF parachute display team, that is, and as Mike Rowbottom now reports, their first jump of the new season was a nerve-wracking business despite being in many ways a routine affair.
RAF LYNEHAM Wiltshire
Flt Lt ALEX JONES RAF Falcons
Flt Lt RHYS COWSILL Team Leader
Sgt PAUL FLOYD RAF Falcons
Voice over
Jumping out of an aircraft is a nervy business at the best of times, so the first jump of a new season can be a jittery time, especially when you're the elite RAF Falcons.
So today at RAF Lyneham they made sure everything went right on the ground before they got in the air.
The Falcons are made up of the RAF's top parachute instructors from Brize Norton.
They have some 10,000 between them.
Every year they're joined by 3 newcomers and no matter how experienced they are, the first public jump with the team is still a big affair.
(He says; You can get quite apprehensive on a first jump for the team)
Today they were jumping from a Hercules onto school playing fields at nearby, Wootton Bassett.
Male speaker
it can be quite worrying for the new members of the team.
They may not have as many jumps under their belt
Nearly everyone came down according to plan, but Sgt Paul Flood surprised everyone by missing the drop zone and coming down behind the crowd.
Male speaker
I feel I've let the team down a 
Voice over
This was their first public engagement this season but it was small beer compared to this coming Saturday.
Then they jump into Cardiff Arms Park
Muslims give Federal troops deadline for withdrawal
FTSE up 2
The hundred shares index closed up two point four at twenty six sixty two point two 
The pound is down at one dollar seventy eight, and down at two marks, ninety two.
ERIKA BARNES
BRIAN HORTON/Oxford United Manager
JOHN DURNIN/Goal Scorer
JOEY BEAUCHAMP/Goal Scorer
Voice over
They came…they saw…eventually they conquered.
Oxford United's fans, more than fifteen hundred of them made the long journey to Tranmere on Saturday to support their team.
What an afternoon of drama, tension and excitement they had.
The United team, led by manager Brian Horton, unsurprisingly looked tense.
This was the crunch match they really had to win to stand a chance of staying up.
If the players were hiding their confidence, the fans certainly weren't.
When the Oxford players ran on the pitch, they must have felt they were back at the Manor so warm was the welcome.
The match couldn't have been more of a thriller if it had been written in Hollywood.
United came out all guns blazing…
Joey Beauchamp had enough chances to wrap the game up in the first half.
But each time he couldn't find a way past Eric Nixon in the Tranmere goal.
You could almost read Horton's thoughts as the chances kept going by.
And Oxford looked vulnerable on the break…fortunately Paul Kee was in superb form.
Beachamp had more chances but as half time approached the score was still nil nil.
But United battled on…a bad back pass in the 58th minute provided the breakthrough…
John Durnin taking full advantage.
It was the only time Oxford's fans let themselves down, but order was soon restored.
Then things began to go wrong…
Oxford old boy John Aldridge was looking for his 40th goal of the season…it came just two minutes after Durnin's…and gave Aldridge the eclub record he was looking for.
United were within thirty minutes of possible relegation…then Joey Beachamp made up for all his earlier misses.
Two one with twenty-five minutes left…
Tranmere came storming back…
Kee pulled off another brilliant save and United hung on for victory.
The final whistle brought an anxious time while the players waited for their rivals' results.
When they heard Plymouth had lost to Blackburn the celebrations began.
Back in the changing rooms, the only drink to celebrate at first for financially pressed Oxford was tea…
Brian Horton was overcome.
By now the champagne was flowing…all United need now is a new owner willing to keep them in the style to which they'd like to become accustomed.
It needed a miricle and a mathematician to get Swindon into the play-offs.
But at Derby, the sums just didn't add up and luck wasn't on their side.
Voice over
On the day, things just didn't go Swindon's way.
They needed a win at all costs, but so did opponents, Derby.
And it was the home side that opened their account first, through Paul Kitson.
The second half, typified the bad luck that's followed Swindon all season.
Martin Ling's shot beat the goalkeeper, but not the goalpost.
Would nothing go right?
A masterful move and a sneeky one-two, but Micky Hazard denied by the Derby defence.
From now on it was do or die.
Swindon, committed up front for an equaliser, let Tommy Johnson slip home number two for Derby.
And not even Glen Hoddle's magic touch could save the day.
Right at the death, Hazard pulled one back.
But time ran out and Swindon missed out.
8th in the table and in the second division next year.
And a disappointing end to the season too for Cheltenham Town.
They've been relegated from the Vauxhall Conference.
And all in their centenary year too.
Gloucestershire are continuing to struggle on the cricket field.
RUNS=0:03 
Drugs on the streets.Villagers anger over ravers' invasion.
Changing sides.Council Labour leader defects to the Tories.
And paddling to victory.
A record win in the Wye Raft Race.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
A big clear-up operation's now going on after the three-day rave which attracted more than ten thousand people.
Police made fifty arrests, mostly on drugs charges, but say that for most of the time, all they could do was watch.
Ken Goodwin reports.
LECHLADE/Gloucestershire
Asst Chief Con NIGEL BURGESS/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
It was the morning after the THREE nights before — a bank holiday weekend rave party that started on saturday and was still going strong last night.
More than ten thousand new age travellers and rave enthusiasts converged on the site of a disused quarry near the cotswold village of Lechlade; many had been turned away from an aborted gathering at hungerford, swelling the numbers even more.
Usually police find out in advance about the location of such events — but this time they were caught out.
By the time they arrived the party was in full swing and all they could do was watch.
Some villagers were angry at what they regarded as an invasion — others were worried about drugs.
One cafe and clothesshop owner says he was forced to close down for the weekend.
The police say that they reacted as fast as they could, but it would have been unsafe to try and stop the party.
As the ravers and new age travellers helped local council workmen clear up the site, there was praise for the way the police handled the weekend.
But from others, a clear hint that fears of drug abuse at the site were not unwarranted.
The quarry site's owners ARC have sought a court order to evoct the travellers from the site later this week, but by this evening it looked for most of them as thought the party was over anyway.
The leader of a county council Labour Group has switched to the Conservatives, just two days before the local elections.
Alan Winmill says the Labour party has lost direction, but his former colleagues say they wanted him out anyway.
Debbie Kelly reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
ALAN WINMILL/Former Labour Leader/Wiltshire
SIMON COOMBS MP/Con Swindon
PETER CHALKE/Tory Group Leader/Wiltshire
MARY SALISBURY/Deputy Labour Leader/Wiltshire
JACK CUNNINGHAM MP/Labour
Voice over
Yesterday he was leader of the Labour group on Wiltshire County Council.
Today a fully paid up member of the Conservative Party.
Alan Winmill first had doubts about socialism 5 years ago on a visit to the former Soviet Union.
Now he says Labour's going nowhere and he can't take the back stabbing from other members.
He said When they are stabbing you in the back and behaving totally idiotically.
Theses are the people that cause the problems and I have had enough and when at the same time you don't believe the slogans they are shotuing its time to leave the Labour Party.
Alan Winmill's defection is being hailed as a conserable coup by the Conservatives just 2 days before the local elections.
He said Alan Winmill is somebody I have known for many years I regard him as a man of intergrity.
He has done a lot of thinking and he has concluded the labour party is finished for him and I think a lot more people will do the same.
He said We are 35 seats out of 75 with this one 36 we have a by election on Thursday which we are hoping to win from Labour if we can persuade an Independent to join us we shall overall control of the council.
Labour members were told of Mr Winmills decision in a letter, but according to his deputy, his leadership was to be challenged at the groups annual meeting on Saturday.
She said; He was self seeking He talked a lot about a leader being able to lead but he dictated.
abour nationally launching its final push before Thursday polls, dismissed Mr Winmills defection as being of little consequence.
He said If this person who ever he is has decided to join the Tory party then it is a matter for him and a matter of small regret but not one which will cause us to lie awake worrying about.
Alan Winmill face's his first meeting as a Conservative tomorrow.
He's prepared for a hostile opposition.
One of the region's batch of new MPs has already landed a top job in his party.
Nigel Jones, who won Cheltenham for the Liberal Democrats has been named front bench spokesman on housing and local government.
His brief will include homelessness and the replacement for the poll tax.
Simon Garrett reports 
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem Cheltenham
Voice over
Nigel Jones has already proved he's a winner at the election game.
His victory at Cheltenham; the one bright spot in a night of dismal failure for his party.
8 days later, he's hardly found his way round the corridors of power, but he has got a front bench job.
Male speaker
I'm delighted with the job, it's the one I'd hoped for.
My council colleagues in Cheltenham will be only too glad to help me with it as well.
Voice over
The housing and local government portfolio has proved a contraversial one in recent years with the battle over the poll tax, the growth of homelessness and the housing boom and bust.
Opposition spokesmen are expected not to miss any oppertunity to expose government weakness in those areas.
Male speaker
We're just in the process of getting rid of the poll tax.
We've got the replacement council tax to come and many people are still unhappy.
There's a lot of work to be done on that.
Voice over
Meteoric as Nigel Jones rise to prominence among Paddy Ashdown's team, most certainly is it is far from unique.
Of the 20 parliamentary members at the Liberal Democrat leader's disposal, all but one will now sit on the front bench.
And that's not the only advantage the Cheltenham MP enjoys for being a representative of a minority party.
Male speaker
I've got a desk in Westminster.
I share it with Menzies Campbell, who of course used to be an Olympic runner, so I shall have to be quick to keep up.
Voice over
The new Liberal Democrat spokesman will first be called upon to put his party's viewpoint on his specialist subject after the Queen's Speech tomorrow.
The River Wye Raft Race…a gruelling hundred miles through Herefordshire to Wales…was won in record time over the Bank Holiday.
But hopes of a local victory were swept away by crews from outside the region who snatched a convincing win.
Richard Barnett reports:
HAY-on-WYE/Herefordshire
CHEPSTOW/South Wales
TRICIA HALES/Organizer
Voice over
Nearly 800 crew members with 74 craft took to the Wye at Hay on Saturday for the start of the longest raft race in the world.
And over the next 3 days, all their training and stamina was put to the supreme test as the rafts were rowed down river.
The top crews practice all year round for the premier event in the raft racing calendar.
And it's a combination of skilled oarsmanship and sheer endurance that brings victory.
All the rafts reached the finish line at Chepstow, but for Herefordshire, it was disappointing to see a crew from the Home Counties win, with a raft from Cheshire in second place.
As the results came in, there was delight that the rest of the top 10 rafts all came from Herefordshire.
And the teams will be back on the Wye this week training for next year's race.
A former student who was jailed for her part in the Olivia Channon drugs scandal, has begun a new career as an opera director.
Rosie Johnston was at the centre of the scandal which resulted in Olivia's death six years ago.
Now she's returned to start a new career…and a new life.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
JULY 1986
ROSIE JOHNSTON/Opera Director
DUNCAN HINNELLS/University Opera Club
ANA NEVES/STEPHAN SANCHEZ
Voice over
In part two: The Great Escape: Oxford stay up by the skin of their teeth.
Behind closed doors…the paint job the public will never see.
And flying tonight…the Falcons swoop in for a new season.
The Princess Royal has been visiting the region.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Find this man.
Hunt for dad stepped up after family is murdered.
Don't send me back to jail.
Remorse for the killing of a policeman.
And Up Where We Belong…
The Robins sing their way to the big time.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
Ports and airports have been alerted to keep watch for Dennis Garvey, who hasn't been seen since the bodies of his family were found.
HARRIET RYLEY
There've been several reported sightings of Mr Garvey's blue Volvo estate car, but as yet non has been confirmed.
Meanwhile detectives have revealed that his wife died from head injuries after being hit with a hammer.
RICHARD BARNETT/Teddington
Det Supt PETER SHAYLE/Gloucestershire Police
DUMBLETON/Gloucestershire
MARTIN HANNANT/Headmaster
Voice over
The search for Dennis Garvey has been stepped up after a post mortem revealed his wife had died from hammer blows to the head.
Julia Garvey's body was found in one bedroom of the family home at Teddington near Cheltenham…the two children Ben aged 4 and Hannah aged 2 were in a bedroom next door.
They'd apparently been smothered.
Police say they found a hammer in the house and are not looking for any other weapon.
The bodies were discovered yesterday morning by the family's nanny.
Dennis Garvey, who worked for Eagle Star in Cheltenham has not been seen since Monday night.
He's not been in touch with anyone since he left home:
Male speaker
He is very concerned about Mr Garvey.
He was acting out of character leaving home and not getting in touch.
Voice over
Police say they're following up possible sightings of Dennis Garvey’ s car from all over the country.
The vehicle is a blue Volvo 740 registration F 874 PFH.
Meanwhile at Oakhill Primary School in Dumbleton where Ben Garvey went to school, parents and pupils have been coming to terms with his death.
The headmaster remembers Ben and Hannah with affection:
Male speaker
They were both delightful children.
They will be sadly missed.
Voice over
The village of Teddington was tranquil once again today…a lone police car and childrens toys in the garden the only reminders of the triple killing there.
A motorcyclist who served six weeks in jail for killing a policeman will know tomorrow if he'll have to go back to prison.
There was a public outcry at Andrew Hayton's sentence for causing death by reckless driving.
The Court of Appeal is being asked to increase the sentence, but tonight Mr Hayton, who was badly injured in the crash, said he believes he's suffered enough already.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
ANDREW HAYTON
Voice over
Andrew Hayton was released from jail after serving just half his three month jail term.
Now he faces what amounts to a second trial — tomorrow the court of Appeal will be asked to increase the jail term.
Mr Hayton was found guilty of causing death by dangerous driving following the crash at Weedon in Northampton shire.
His victim, Pc Simon Lilley was manning a roadside checkpoint.
Back on his farm a few miles from a crash site, Mr Hayton said he'd been expecting a longer sentence.
But tonight he said he believed he'd been punished enough.
Six years ago he was jailed after another accident in which his wise was killed.
Mr Hayton still maintains that he wasn't driving the car.
Last November he was banned from driving for four years, but says he probably won't ever drive again.
But the sentence imposed ast Northamptyon Crown Court brought widespread condemnation.
If tomorrow’ s prosecutuionb appeal is successful Mr Hayton could be back in jail tomorrow night.
The mother of a six-year-old boy who suffered brain damage when he fell from scaffolding says she'll continue her fight for compensation — despite a court clearing the contractor of blame.
The firm which supplied the scaffold blames the boy's parents for letting him play there in the first place.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
DENISE MASON/Ryan's Mother
MEL JONES/Brunel Towers
Voice over
Ryan Mason is lucky to be alive.
Last August he was playing on scaffolding at a block of flats near his home when he fell 20 feet to the ground.
He fractured his skull and remained unconscious for 10 days.
The Health and Safety Executive sued the contractor, Quicksons, on Ryan's behalf, for failing to erect a safety barrier around the scaffold.
Quicksons has since been cleared of criminal negligence, but the Masons are determined that Ryan is compensated for his injuries.
But Brunel Towers, the Swindon-based firm which supplied the scaffolding which Ryan fell from, says his parents must share the blame for his accident.
The damage to Ryan's brain has affected the whole of the left side of his body.
His arm is weak, and he has to wear a splint on his leg.
His condition can also make him hyper-active, but at least he's more aware of danger than he was before.
From now on, he's getting his kicks from his favourite computer game, though his injuries have even impaired his skill at that.
A promotion-chasing football team has taken the day off from a hectic training schedule to record a pop song.
The players aren't expecting to become chart-topping superstars overnight, but their manager…who once had a hit himself…thinks the song will be good for team spirit.
ROBIN POWELL Swindon
DANNY NEWMAN Singer-Songwriter
GLENN HODDLE Player-Manager
Voice over
Swindon Town still have it all to play for in their quest for a place in the Premier League, but the sounds emanating from this Manchester Road recording studio are enough to frighten the life out of their play-off rivals.
Up Where We Belong is the brainchild of singer-songwriter and Robins supporter Danny Newman.
Notwithstanding the quality — or otherwise — of the back-up vocals, Danny insists it's not your average football song.
With the play-offs just 11 days away, you'd have thought the players would have more pressing matters to attend to, but player-manager Glenn Hoddle is convinced the recording is a worthwhile exercise.
Hoddle recorded several songs with Spurs, and Diamond Lights, a joint venture with his England colleague Chris Waddle, reached the dizzy heights of Number 11 in the hit parade.
So had he ever considered singing as a career?
Joking aside, Danny was pleased with the end result.
How well the record fares depends of course on whether Swindon can repeat their achievement of 1990 and win the play-off final at Wembley.
That year, financial irregularities deprived them of their place alongside England's footballing elite.
This time they hope they really are going up, where they belong.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
House prices for April up by 1
FTSE down 16
The hundred shares index closed down sixteen point one at twenty-seven, ninety-six point five.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-six and up at two marks, forty-seven.
Welcome back: A schoolgirl is on her way to becoming Britain's youngest pilot.
Just hours after her seventeenth birthday, she's already flown solo.
Now Donna McKemsley hopes to get into the record books by becoming the youngest woman to hold a pilot's licence.
KEN GOODWIN/Staverton
DONNA McKEMSLEY/Pilot
TINA McKEMSLEY/Mother
VINCENT McKEMSLEY/Father
STEPHEN FISHER/Flying Instructor
Voice over
Donna McKemsley was so determined to become a pilot that while her friends were playing with dolls she was drawing and memorizing cockpit instrument panels.
She's been taking lessons at the Swallow flight centre since she was fourteen — now, on her seventeenth birthday she's at last allowed to fly solo.
She says that she's been flying for three years.
After some final instrument checks and a couple of circuits with her flying instructor Donna is ready to go it alone:
He tells Donna that she's ready to fly alone.
Donna is airborn — and on her own.
Donna has three baby sitting jobs and two other part time jobs to help pay for the flying lessons.
Her ultimate aim is to join the RAF and become a jet fighter pilot.
She lands without a hitch — her first solo flight over — much to the relief of mum and dad.
He says he's proud of her.
She says that she feels great!
But what does her instructor think?
He says she sometimes flies better than the instructors!
Donna must now fly ten hours solo to get her pilots licence — which she hopes to have by the end of the week.
It could be the start of a high flying career.
One of the country's top orchid growers is getting ready for a summer show…by hiding his plants away in his garage.
It takes months of painstaking work to grow the perfect orchid, and the potential prizewinners have to be kept cool and dark to stop them fading.
RICHARD BARNETT/Bishops Cleeve
PERCY NASH/Orchid Grower
HORTENSE NASH/Wife
Voice over
Percy Nash and his wife Hortense have been nurturing orchids at their Gloucestershire home for more than thirty years.
Percy has won dozens of awards at horticultural shows.
But visiting his garden, you'd search in vain for the finest blooms destined for showing.
They're hidden away in the garage…well out of the sunlight that would fade the blooms…and kept cool to extend the flowering period.
Orchids are the supreme test for green fingers…they're notoriously temperamental:
Male speaker
Some orchids are very difficult to get to flower.
They need a dry period and a wet period as in the wild.
Female speaker
It's very exciting to win at shows.
Voice over
Six months of painstaking work goes into preparing plants for showing…the plants have to be tied up to keep the stems straight…aphids must be brushed gently off the leaves…and the orchids have to be misted regularly to keep up the humidity.
The Nashs have four hundred orchids…but just sixty are considered ready for exhibiting.
On Friday they'll come out of the garage, to be seen by around 60,000 visitors at the Spring Gardening Show in Malvern.
The Australian tourists got their first taste of county cricket against Worcestershire at New Road today.
On their last visit four years ago the Aussies were soundly beaten in two days, so this was a chance for some sweet revenge.
MITCH PRYCE/Reporting
BOBBY SIMPSON/Australian Coach
Defeat to an Australian is like a red rag to a bull.
On their last trip to these shores, the Aussies lost their opening match embarrassingly to Ian Botham's Worcestershire.
Their response was to finish the tour undefeated and reclaim the Ashes by 4 Test to nil.
This season's touring Aussies are a blend of youth and experience.
Familiar faces like Merv Hughes and Allan Border will provide the foundation for the new stars to shine…even it's at the expense of established Test players.
’ We've always gone for youth…’
A capacity crowd welcomed the Aussie openers…but it wasn't long before one of the young guns misfired…
Haden caught Lampitt bowled Tolley in the second over of the day…
’ It's an early chance to take a look at Graeme Hick…’
Bobby Simpson's judgement was to be proved right…
David Boon survived an early chance to make…— and Australia — on the back foot for much of the morning — began to blossom…
With two more days of sunshine forecast, there won't be a better place to be this week than at New Road.
And the latest from that match at New Road.
Australia all out for two hundred and sixty two.
The Worcestershire innings has just begun, and they've already lost one wicket with one run on the board.
Meanwhile, at The Parks, Hampshire were bowled out for one hundred and sixty nine by Oxford University, who've so far made twenty four without loss in reply.
Archaeologists excavating the site of a medieval leper hospital have unearthed a Roman cemetery.
They've found twelve skeletons, some of which date back almost two thousand years.
LIZ HANNAM/Gloucester
MALCOLM ATKIN/Archaeologist
SUE BYRNE/Archaeologist
Voice over
Archaeologists had just four weeks to excavate this site at Wotton in Gloucester.
Severn Trent wants to develop the land, but asked the archaelogists to excavate it before the builders move in.
They originally thought they were looking for a medieval leper hospital, but then they uncovered a skeleton almost two thousand years old.
Male speaker
It's one of the great unknown discoveries, that this was part of the Roman cemetery of Wotton.
We've known for a hundred years that there were Roman burials in this area.
But this is the first time we've been able to excavate scientifically.
Voice over
Each bone has to be removed, individually labelled, packed up and then sent to Bradford for examination.
There scientists will discover the sex and age of the skeletons and whether or not they had any diseases.
Much can be discerned simply by the way the burial ground is laid out.
Male speaker
The distribution of the burial ground is interesting.
It's a vast site, but the burials are confined to a small area.
Some are stacked one on top of another and there's three stacked on together.
It was probably part of a family plot, or a local farm estate, possibly concentrated around a small chapel or mausoleum.
Voice over
Severb Trent is paying for the excavation, but developers haven't always been that considerate.
In the nineteen twenties water workers were laying a pipe when they came across this skeleton.
They smashed its skull…and then laid it back where they found it.
Among the most interesting finds is a skeleton which had been decapitated after death.
Archaelogists think it was probably done to stop the person's evil spirit coming back to haunt the living.
With many skeletons its difficult to know where one bone ends and the next begins.
Female speaker
I'm trying to excavate this body, but he's very confused.
The skull's been crushed beneath the coffin nails and the ribs are jumbled.
There's the lower jaw bone, while the top of his head is here.
Voice over
Finally, after all the scientific tests are complete, the skeletons will be sent back to Gloucester for re-burial in a cemetry.
As the archaeolgists point out, they are still human remains.
The first big test of government popularity since the General Election comes tomorrow when the polls open for elections to county councils.
These authorities control a huge slice of public spending such as social services, education, fire and the police.
By Friday morning, we'll know what changes have been made in the make-up of six councils across the region.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
GLOUCESTER
SWINDON
OXFORD
WORCESTER
NORTHAMPTON
MILTON KEYNES
Voice over
Some of the toughest problems in Local government have hit Gloucestershire this year.
They are the only county council to be capped, and then by ten million pounds.
No party has overall control, but the Labour and Conservative groups have had an agreement to keep out the Liberal Democrats.
Currently the Tories hold twenty three seats, Labour seventeen, and twenty two for the Liberal Democrats, and it's hard to see tomorrow's vote allowing any party to take the thirty two seats needed for outright control.
In Wiltshire, nearly a third of the councillors are elected by voters in the Thamesdown borough area covering Swindon.
Since the defection of the former Labour Leader Alan Winmill, and a tory bye election victory, the Conservatives have maintained a fragile hold on power, but that could change tomorrow.
At the moment there are seventy five seats — thirty eight seats for the Conservative and Independent group; nineteen to the Liberal Democrats; and fifteen to Labour with three Independent Liberals.
A modest swing away from the Tories could see them lose ooutright controll.
No party or coalition has taken control in Oxfordshire.
Instead they have taken it in turns to chair the committees.
There are seventy seats and the Conservatives are the largest group with thirty three.
Labour has twenty three and the Liberal Democrats thirteen.
There's one independent.
The Tories held the council outright until nineteen eighty-five, and are hoping to regain control.
Labour and Liberal Democrats are determined that won't happen
The Conservatives have been in control of Hereford and Worcester through the chairman's casting vote.
There are seventy six seats with the Conservatives holding thirty eight, Labour twenty two and the Liberal Democrats twelve.
There are four independents.
The loss of a single seat would mean the Tories surrendering control for the first time since nineteen seventy four.
Northamptonshire has been under Conservative control for the last eight years but it's still tight.
They've stayed that way because outright majority has been given with the help of the council's single independent.
There are sixty eight seats with thirty four going to the Conservatives, thirty one to Labour two to the Liberal Democrats and one independent.
Full control requires thirty five seats which would be a swing of one and a half per cent to the Conservatives or six to Labour.
The Conservatives have always dominated Buckinghamshire.
The only part of the county where Labour puts up a fight is in Milton Keynes where hold eight of the sixteen seats.
But with the Conservatives occupying forty nine seats on the county council, compared to Labours twelve and the Liberal Democrats six, it's hard to see the Tories being seriously challenged.
And we'll bring you the results in a special local elections programme tomorrow night at eleven forty.
Wesley Smith
Still to come on Central News, happy landings for a high flyer.
Just seventeen…she could become the country's youngest pilot.
Plus, playing it cool…the dark secrets of an orchid grower
And, who said Robins could sing?
Yes, it's another football pop record.
Abduction mystery: Driver beaten and drugged then dumped sixty miles away.
Bomb in a charity shop.Live shell closes a town centre.
And tear it down.
Planning row threatens a giant green house.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
CLANFIELD/Oxfordshire
Det Insp TREVOR HOUNSLOW/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Police were today trying to find out what happened during an seven hour ordeal which began on this country road in Oxfordshire.
Stephen Wylie, a twenty-four year old businessman from Swindon was travelling on a minor road towards the village of Clanfield when he was flagged down by a man at the side of the road.
Assuming he was in trouble, he stopped to give him a lift…but the attacker threatened him with an iron bar and forced him to take tablets which made him unconscious.
Stephen Wylie came to sixty miles away at Cheddar Gorge in Somerset…remembering nothing of the journey.
His hands had been bound togewther and his watch and wallet were missing.
he was later treated in hospital for a head injury.
Now police are warning people to be on their guard
Officers from two police forces are now hunting the attcker who's thought to be black, around thirty, six feet tall, of muscular build.
He was wearing a green bomber jacket and dark trousers.
The victim has been helping police retrace his journey…
Part of a town centre was sealed off and buildings evacuated after a second World War Mortar Bomb was discovered at a charity shop.
The device was found among some war memorabilia donated to Oxfam, and bomb disposal experts were called in to get rid of it.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
THELMA HOPSON/Shop Manageress
Voice over
Police acted immediately to evacuate the area and seal it off to traffic.
The fifty year old mortar had been brought to the Oxfam shop in Cheltenham with other war memorabilia in a sack.
Female speaker
I was sorting through one of the sacks which people sent us and I found the Mortar in a tin helmet.
I called the Police
Voice over
The Royal Army Ordnance Corps Bomb Disposal Unit were called into to investigate and they took no chances.
The mortar just appeared in an anonymous donation and no-one knows where it came from.
It was potentially extremely dangerous and although it had survived since the war it may have been very unstable.
Female speaker
Now I think about it I am a little frightened.
I suppose someone thought it was a collectable item but we could have done without it
Voice over
Eventually the Bomb Disposal took it away with them after making certain it was harmless.
A company which sells trees and shrubs has been told to tear down its newest greenhouse after a planning blunder.The firm specialises in improving the environment, and has fallen victim to planning rules which have the same aim.
It says if the ruling stays, it may have to shut down.
Tim Hurst reports.
SHURDINGTON/Gloucestershire
JILL HURRAN/Hatherley Nurseries
KENNETH SPELMAN/Planning Consultant
CHRIS SHAW/Tewkesbury Borough Council
Voice over
The one hundred thousand pound greenhouse was built three years ago at Shurdington near Gloucester to propogate 40,000 trees and shrubs for use across the country.
But when the owners later asked for permission to erect a temporary office, they were told the greenhouse itself should have had permission…and it would have to come down.
That's in spite of earlier assurances that permission wasn't needed.
Tighter Government guidelines for areas of outstanding natural beauty like the Cotswolds are being blamed by the nurseries planning consultant, himself a former planning chief.
The decision that the glasshouse should be demolished has been taken by Tewkesbury Borough Council, criticised in the past for their decision to ALLOW the building of domed sports halls in the same location
In the meantime the company itends to fight the planners' decision, to save the £25,000 cost of demolition as well as 16 jobs.
A castle has just reopened to the public after nearly four years of restoration work.
Visitors can now see five rooms which are on view for the first time.
They include the family chapel, and a Chinese bedroom where a Queen once slept.
Richard Barnett reports:
EASTNOR Herefordshire
JAMES HERVEY-BATHURST Owner
DIETER WEBER Craftsman
SARAH HERVEY-BATHURST Owner
Voice over
James Hervey-Bathurst inherited Eastnor Castle in Herefordshire four years ago.And ever since he's been busy restoring the life and colour to both the exterior and interior of the castle, which was built by his ancestors in 1812.
Eastnor Castle boasts ninety eight rooms…including the Great Hall, which is sixty feet long and fifty five feet high.Next door the inner hall contains one of Britain's largest private collections of armour.These parts of the castle have been open to the public since the last century.
But now five upstairs rooms have been restored, and can be seen for the first time.
Male speaker
People kept asking if they could see upstairs.It's a constant challenge to restore the house.
Voice over
The newly restored Chinese bedroom still has its original hand painted eighteenth century wallpaper, and features a ceiling painting of flying cranes.Queen Mary slept here in 1937 during a visit to Herefordshire.
But since 1949, the Chinese bedroom was used as a furniture store.Pieces of furniture had also been stacked in the family chapel for the past forty years.
The chapel has now been returned to its former glory.
The principal guest bedroom features fleur de lys wallpaper specially designed to be in keeping with the period the castle was built.
Much of the restoration work…including building the four poster bed…is the result of German craftsmanship.Dieter Weber came to Herefordshire as a prisoner of war in 1944.
He's worked at Eastnor ever since:
Male speaker
You learn all the time working on antiques.I am very happy.I wouldn't want my life to be different.
Voice over
Meanwhile back upstairs in the castle, Sarah Hervey -Bathurst says she still sometimes loses her way in the maze.
Female speaker
I wouldn't want to think I've found every room in the house.I enjoy surprises..
INLA shooting condemned
FTSE up 36
Voice over
The hundred shares index closed up thirty six point five at twenty six ninety eight point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar seventy nine, and up at two marks, ninety two.
(ad lib)
28 FEBRUARY 1990
Cllr DAVID WALKER/Independents Leader
Cllr DAVID EVANS/ Conservative Leader
Cllr CHRISTINA DORWARD/Lib Dem Leader
Cllr TED COOPER/Labour Leader
Voice over
When David Walker led the poll tax rebels of West Oxfordshire out of the tory fold many pundits expected the new Independents would be replaced by more compliant conservatives at the first electoral opportunity…but two years on independents still hold more than half the council wards.
The poll tax is almost dead so could there be a reconciliation?
Not surprisingly in this sprawling rural district the tories are the second largest grouping on the council and a couple of gains for them could deny the independents overall control.
Both groups are largely optomistic about the new council tax…but neither seems interested in burying their differences
Going into these elections the political landscape for the other two main parties has changed.
The Liberal Democrat vote sagged badly at the general election and they'll be pleased still to hold seven council wards after this vote.
However both they and labour detect growing disatisfaction on housing.
Thirteen million pounds raised by council house sales has been frozen by central government and today's new build is all with private money for private buyers.
Homes and jobs are the key words in the campaign
The task facing labour makes dragon slaying lookm easy.
But the smallest party on the council managed a creditible second in the general election which is giving them hope, especially with the spectre of the poll tax still hanging over the district
In all eighteen of west oxfordshire's forty-nine seats are up for grabs tomorrow
In part two: We go back Inside the Globe.
A thousand Blockbusters and still going strong.
And, a room you can view: The castle that's giving up its Chinese secrets.
One of TV's most popular quiz shows has just celebrated its one thousandth edition.
Recording is now underway for the tenth series of’ Blockbusters’, and although the contestants are teenagers, the show is popular across all age groups.
In the second of his’ Inside The Globe’reports, Wesley Smith meets two contestants hoping to make the big time.
CORSHAM/Wiltshire
DAVID STEWART/Contestant
FIONA THORNTON-NORRIS/Contestant
BOB HOLNESS/Presenter
LIZ DAVIES/Associate Producer
Voice over
The familiar theme of one of the most popular TV quiz shows of all time.
Blockbusters goes out three nights a week and features sixth formers seeking cash prizes, foreign holidays and the experience of a lifetime.
And that's just what David Stewart and Fiona Thornton-Norris are dreaming of.
They're students at the Corsham School in Wiltshire who fought-off the competition to win the chance to play Blockbusters.
Nottingham Station on a cold Tuesday morning.
It's been a four-hour journey for Fiona and David, now for the first time they meet the competition and hopefully make new friends.
It's a short journey to the studios and the privilege of a ride in the coach used by Notts County Football Club, hopefully a bit smoother than their journey from Wiltshire.
Finally, they arrive at the Central Studios in Nottingham where they make five episodes of’ Blockbusters’a day.
Rehearsals in Studio 6 and time to meet the show's host, Bob Holness.
The idea of the game is to link a chain from one side of the board to the other by answering questions correctly.
The letters provide a clue to the answers.
David and Fiona go across the board, their opponent up and down.
Then, there's the chance of a gold run, slightly more complicated, but with great prizes at the end.
Previous contestants have won holidays in Greenland, Sydney, Macau and Brazil.
Part of the fun includes a trip to make-up.
So what does the future hold for Fiona and David?
Next time we go inside the Globe, we see if they make it through to the Gold Run before a studio audience.
We'll meet the woman who thinks up the questions, learn the secret of how the Blockbusters board works.
That's when we next go Inside the Globe.
Sport now — and the sun has been shining on Pakistan's cricketers at New Road this afternoon.
The touring side have been playing their opening three day fixture against Worcestershire — and they quickly settled into winning rhythm.Bob Hall reports.
And the latest from New Road.
Pakistan declared at three hundred and seventy four (374) for four (4) in their first innings.
Worcestershire in reply are thirty (30) for no wicket.
One match that ended today: Surrey beat Gloucestershire by two wickets in the Benson and Hedges Cup at the Oval.
They passed Gloucestershire's total of (253 for 5) two hundred and fifty three for five with two balls to spare.
Five hundred people are to lose their jobs after their firm lost a contract to clean schools just weeks after taking it on.
The company says it's a victim of competitive tendering.
Unions are criticising the local council for awarding the contract to other firms, and want the decision reversed.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
MURRAY SHEPSTONE/NUPE
BRIAN WILLEY/BET
DAVID HARKER/We Are Cleaning Ltd
Voice over
Gloucestershire's schools and colleges used to be cleaned by the county council's own in house contractors — gloucestershire services.
This was bought out by the private cleaning firm BET, which then had to compete with other firms for the contracts to clean schools.
But just a month after the buyout BET learnt that Gloucestershire county council had awarded the cleaning contracts to someone else.
So BET was left with a workforce of five hundred cleaners, with no-where to clean.
Now they've made the whole workforce redundant, and will also have to issue redundancy pay.
The public employees union NUPE says it's a scandal.
He says that the council's actions have made almost six hundred people redundant — they've been ripped off.
But BET managers are philosophical about losing the contract.
He says that they went into the deal with their eyes open, there is no way the council treated them unfairly.
We are cleaning limited, one of the companies which was awarded a contract says those made redundant will nearly all be offered jobs.
He says that in previous cases where they've taken over contracts they've offered up to 98 per cent of employees their jobs back.
A spokesman for gloucestershire county council says that BET's bids for cleaning contracts were treated as fairly as other competitors, and not opened until two weeks after the sale of glostershire services to BET was concluded.
Meanwhile the cleaners have a nintety day redundancy period, during which time they'll be waiting to hear from the firms which they hope will become their new employers.
Personal alarms are being issued to all female staff at a college where a woman was raped.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
The management at Swindon College of Further Education decided to give the alarms free after the woman was raped in a classroom.
The college is also considering issuing passes to all full-time students.
The rapist is described as black, five foot seven inches tall and looks like a body-builder.
Morland brewery has announced a thirty per cent increase in pre-tax profits.
The company, which is based at Abingdon in Oxfordshire, made three million pounds for the six months up to March this year.
In the same period last year the firm made (£2.3m) two point three million pounds.
Just five weeks after the general election, the polling booths will be busy again tomorrow, this time for the local government elections.Twelve councils in our region are holding contests, but as Chris Moore reports, in most cases there's little chance of a dramatic shift in the balance of power.
OXFORD
Voice over
Collecting household rubbish is just one of the services provided by the district councils involved in tomorrow's election.
They're also responsible for keeping the streets clean, and maintaining minor roads.
Most recreation facilities like swimming pools and sports halls are under their control.
Council houses and flats are owned by the districts who maintain them and collect the rents.
And in recent years they've played a growing role in encouraging the public to recycle their rubbish.
District Councils also look after things like environmental health, car parks and most planning applications, but it's the county councils who are responsible for things like education, major roads and social services.
Some district council's elect all their councillors once every four years — others elect a third of them each year with a year off while the county council elections are held.
This year twelve district councils in our region who elect by thirds are holding contests, and in most cases the results aren't likely to have much affect on who holds power.
On the Swindon council Thamesdown, for instance, Labour hold such a grip that they're bound to remain in control.
The same is true for the Liberal Democrats in Cheltenham, where they're trying to increase a healthy majority.
But in Gloucester, Labour are hoping to take overall control of a hung council.
And in West Oxfordshire the Conservatives are hoping to recapture some of the seats they lost when fifteen tories resigned to join the independents in a row over the poll tax two years ago.
Screen star Anne Todd dies
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten point two at twenty-seven, eighty-six point three.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-seven and up at two marks, forty-seven.
Well that's just about it for now, the late news is at ten thirty then later the Central South Local Elections special.
Wesley Smith
It's the first real test of political opinion since the General Election.
We bring you the results as they come in and find out how local services maybe affected.
That's Election Update at eleven forty on Central.
But for now have a good evening.
Welcome back: A stable owner has made an urgent appeal…to find a foster mum for a three-day-old foal.
Its real mother will have to be put down after injuring herself during the birth, and the owners fear this could leave the young Arabian horse without the vital care it needs.
KATE GARRAWAY/Deddington
LINDA HANNAFORD/Horse Owner
Voice over
Sami is only three days old but already he can almost walk.
Despite a difficult birth he's fit and healthy.
But his mother did not come through so well.
The strain of labour caused her to break her pelvis.
Her legs have been bound to prevent further damage and she's been given pain-killers.
But the injury can't be mended and vets say she'll have to be put down.
Her owners fear this will leave Sami without the care he needs so they're appelaing for a foster-mum.
She says…
We want anyone with a mare who's jut foaled to come forward.
The mare will look after the foal until he's at least five weeks old and then he'll be weaned off in the natural way.
If a foster mum can't be found Sami will have to be hand reared at the stables in Deddington, but the owners he's much likelier to have a healthy life if he's reared the natural way.
She says…he'll get good milk and be taught discipline by his mum and won't get too attached to humans.
It's been a rocky start to a short life…but Sami's owners hope with a little helping hand it could have a much happier ending.
Now cricket, and it's the second day of Worcestershire's match against the touring Australian side.
And its been a day of tumbling wickets — with Worcestershire forced to follow on after a disastrous morning at the crease…
ANNE BARKER/New Road
Graeme Hick hopes to see plenty more of the tourists this summer — this innings won't have worried them —
He'd added only the four to his overnight single, then fell to Rafeill — caught Mark Taylor.
the it was a procession from pavilion to crease —
Weston and Seymour had gone before Rafeill struck again — Lampitt lbw for four —
and in his next over Steve Rhodes went — caught Healy without scoring.
And when Phil Newport was run out for seven Worcestershire were well down the road to their 90 all out — extras top score of twenty one — and it was still half an hour to lunch.
foloowing on in that period — another wicket down — Phil Weston's caught Taylor bowled Holdsworth — Worcestershire now 151 behind the tourists
But after the refreshment came the revival —
and Graeme Hick finally came good — to the might releif of himself and all at New Road.
He'd hit just 14 in his first three innings ofthe season — so was due this one to impress the England selectors and the tourists themselves
When the hundred came up it weas from a very different Hick and Worcestershhire to what we'd seen this morning.
And the latest from that game.
Worcestershire are on (221) two hundred and twenty one for two chasing Australias first innings total of (262) two hundred and sixty two.
Graham Hick has got his century for Worcestershire and is on (104) one hundred and four, not out.
In the County Championship, Gloucestershire are playing at Northants.
They won the toss and batted and are all out for (107) one hundred and seven.
Northants are now at (83) eighty three for (3).
And at The Parks, Oxford University declared at (230) two hundred and thirty for nine, in reply to Hampshire's first innings total of (169) one hundred and sixty nine.
An Australian soap star is trying to launch a new career over here.
She's best-known as Madge in Neighbours.
But now, with the end of a gruelling theatre tour in sight, she's making a name for herself on stage.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
ANNE CHARLESTON
JUDY CORNWELL
MILLICENT MARTIN
Voice over
Tired of being known only as Kylie Minogue's long-suffering screen mum, Anne Charleston is treading the boards to prove she has other strings to her bow.
She's currently starring in The Cemetery Club at the Wyvern Theatre in Swindon, the penultimate stop on her first British theatre tour.
Ida's played by Judy Cornwell from Keeping Up Appearances.
The play has pathos, says Judy, but it's basically a comedy.
Completing the trio of golden girls is Millicent Martin — it's a formidable combination.
But no more Neighbours for Anne.
Madge left Ramsey Street last October and won't be coming back.
The Cemetery Club's showing at the Wyvern until Saturday night.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Verdicts of accidental death have been recorded on three language students killed in a coach crash.
An inquest heard how the coach swerved to avoid a car and crashed into a motorway bridge support.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
Nov 1992
PAUL ELDRIDGE/Driver's Solicitor
Voice over
Coach driver Peter Wright lost both his legs when his bus crashed into a bridge upright on the M40 at Tetsworth last November.
Three language students were killed in the accident and several were badly injured.
He can hardly remember anything about the incident.
Mr Wright was one of the first to give evidence at the inquests into the deaths of three students: Mayuree Taraket; Ketkanok Chuenjai, and Malee Jenajaroen, all from Thailand.
They were sitting behind Mr Wright when his coach was forced off the road and into the bridge.
They were part of a group of students returning from Stratford to London where they were registered at a college on Picadilly.
The weather was wet with motorway spray and traffic was heavy.
Witnesses were uncertain if the bus was in the middle or the inside lane but it was doing about 63 miles an hour when a Nissan car, driven by 74 year old Malcolm Austin, crashed into the front.
The bus swerved to avoid the car but couldn't be corrected.
It ploughed off the motorway, behind the motorway bridge crash barrier, and into the concrete upright.
The front driver's side of the bus was driven back twelve feet amputating Mr Wright's legs and killing the three students.
The court heard several witnesses say they saw Mr Austin's car suddenly swerve to the right in the outsidfe lane, then violently to the left and into the front of the bus forcing it off the carriageway.
Mr Austin said little at the inquest but told police in an earlier statement he had been squeezed off the road three times by the coach onto the central reservation.
But police experts say there's no evidence to support that.
The only evidence suggests he hit the central barrier first then the coach.
They also say the coach driver could not be responsible in any way for the accident.
The cxoroner recorded verdicts of accidental death on all three students.
No relatives were in court to hear him.
Mr Austin said nothing as he left the court.
HGe faces a careless driving charge next wek.
And Mr Wright also kept silent although his solicitor said he was happy with the verdict.
Male speaker
The evidence vindicates Mr Wright.
He has suffered terrible injuries and he's going to need a lot of help and care for the future.)
Voice over
Mr Wright's employers, London Coaches, were represented in Court but had nothing to say.
Almost a hundred jobs are to go at a lift-making factory.
Most of the redundancies at Express Lifts will be at the company's headquarters in Northampton, where it employs eight hundred people.
It's blaming the cutbacks on the recession.
