Well, the sun may have turned to storms today, but the drought goes on.
And some villagers are now worried that a much-loved river may never flow again.
Gareth Furby reports.
LAMBOURN/Berkshire
Dr GEORGE OSMOND/Local Naturalist
ANTHONY STEEL/Lambourn Valley Councillor
Voice over
It may have rained for hours, but it made little difference to the River Lambourn.
It's source, a chalk spring, stayed dry.
The river and its fish remained just a memory.
For years Dr George Osmond has kept records of local rainfall.
Nearly half an inch fell this morning, but it may as well not have bothered.
He says it may be good for farmers and gardeners, but it will make no difference to the river at all.
The reason?
This seasonal river like many others relies on groundwater.
Normally the water level is high enough during the spring and summer for the river to flow.
But this year the level is too low.
And it would have to rain for months to make any difference.
But even though the river's dry a nearby training stables is now applying for permission to drill a bore hole and pump up to £10m gallons out of the ground to water horse gallops like this.
The stable wants to keep the gallops soft.
But all some villagers are worried about is their river.
He says the river needs to get back to flowing normally before water can be taken from the source.
Tonight no one from the stables was available for comment.
But the National Rivers Authority said:
Male speaker
The NRA also says the stables won't able to pump water when the river is dry.
Voice over
But for some villagers who the remember the Lambourn as it used to be, all that matters is that it flows once again.
Two hundred new jobs are to be created at a bakery to meet a big increase in demand for its cakes and confectionery.
The bakery's expansion plans come just eighteen months after the business was hit by a disastrous fire.
Erika Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
DECEMBER 1990
RICHARD HUCK/Joint Managing Director
Voice over
Our growing appetite for the sweet and sticky has contributed to the R and K Wise success story.
Sales from this Swindon bakery are up 25%.
But disaster struck at the end of 1990.
A huge fire ripped through the production plant.
The fatty ingredients fuelled the flames and damage was put a more than £1m.
Male speaker
The fire demolished our storage area.
But we had a loyal staff who helped clear up and we got back into business in 3 days.
Voice over
Now out of the ashes comes a fresh start.
The business is expanding.
A second bakery is being set up in offices once owned by a stationary manufacturer.
It'll create 200 new jobs once production has started next year.
It's a remarkable rise for a company which in the early days operated from a nissen hut at the same site.
It was started by former West Ham footballer, Ken Wise and his brother Roger.
Their team work helped secure top clients such as Marks and Spencer.
Male speaker
It was originally a Naffi Bakery.
They didn't think they'd be able to fill the site in the early days.
But now we can't expand.
So we're using all the money we've ploughed into the business to expand.
Voice over
So despite fighting fire and recession, the Wise tradition continues because the public want their cake and eat it.
And for the family business with such humble beginnings the expansion is just the icing on the cake.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
CASTLEMORTON/Worcestershire
MARY WEAVER/Resident
JANE PERKS/Resident
Chief Insp CHRIS SIMPSON/RSPCA
Voice over
D-Day for the hippies.
Their departure started at around ten o clock this morning, at the same time as a judge in worcester was granting an order to have them evicted.
Police reinforcements were brought in but there were hardly needed — most of the hippies knew their time had ran out.
For those living nearby it was a moment to celebrate.
She says it's a relief that they're gone.
Despite a last minute clear up by the travellers the common was still strewn with waste — the leftovers of a twenty thousand strong party.
Bushes had been used as toilets, and there was evidence of drug abuse.
Joan Smith's house backs onto the common — she's glad to see the back of them.
She says they used her orchard as a toilet, and their property was invaded night and day.
As the hippies had all but gone the police and the RSPCA pounced on a lorry, inside was a horse which had been badly injured in a road accident.
He says that they mounted an undercover operation to get to the horse — it's in such a bad way it may have to be put down.
Where are the hippies going next?
No-one was telling.
Those living near the common have say the festival was like an invasion, but questions are being asked about the way the festival was policed.
She says that the police didn't offer the level of protection she felt locals needed.
The overiding feeling among local people is one of relief that the party is over — what many are asking though, is why it was allowed it to start in the first place.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Malvern/Worcestershire
DAVID BLAKEY/Chief Constable
Voice over
As police from the West Mercia force watched the last hippies leave the Common, their Chief Constable was declaring the whole operation a success.
He denied that his force could have turned the hippies away before they got onto the common.
Plans for a new intelligence network are now being worked out between nine police forces concerned with the problem of travellers.
And Mr Blakey promised the people of Castlemorton that hippies would never invade their Common again.
And the latest news on the travellers movements is that a convoy is still moving along the A-forty-six between Cheltenham and Stroud.
Other travellers are reported to be gathering at Clee Hill in Shropshire.
Police are stepping up their hunt for a man who's carried out a series of sexual attacks on women in the last seven months.
They believe the same man has raped at least two women and has sexually asaulted six others in the same area of a town.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Det Ch Insp STAN HORLOCK/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
An isolated cycle path was the scene of the latest attack in Central Milton Keynes.
A woman in her mid forties was dragged into bushes by a man wearing a black stocking mask.
He threatened her with a small knife and assaulted her.
Police belive he's the so-called Fishermead rapist, who's carried out a series of attacks on and around the Fishermead Estate.
Police are trying to trace a young woman cyclist who passed the victim moments before the attack.
She's white, in her twenties, with dark hair cut in a short bob.
She was wearing a pink striped t-shirt and black jeans.
Around 20 officers are working full time on tracking down the rapist.
They think this is the first time he's attacked since January, but are worried that there may be other victims that haven't come forward.
They've issued three artists impressions of the man.
He's described as white, five foot ten, in his late twenties, pale and slim.
A reward of £7,000 has been offered for any information.
Meanwhile police have issued a videofit picture of a youth who indecently assaulted five women in North Wiltshire…
All five incidents happened in Cricklade.
In the latest attack, a fifty-four year old woman was indecently assaulted at Calcut Service station.
Scientists say high levels of air pollution are to blame for the severe symptoms affecting people with asthma and hay fever.
Studies of air quality show that pollutants like car exhaust fumes can add to their suffering, especially during hot weather.
Gargy Patel reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
MARCELYN STRINGER/Asthma Patient
HARWELL/Oxfordshire
Dr COLIN JOHNSON/Meteorologist
Dr DONALD LANE/Consultant Chest Physician
Voice over
Marcelyn Stringer suffers from chronic asthma.
She's had the illness since she was 4 years old.
It often leaves her wheezing, very short of breath and it can be so dangerous that she needs drugs to control it and treatment in hospital.
Her asthma gets worse in the summer, but pollution in the air, makes going outside a nightmare.
The number of asthma cases is rising.
It now affects one in 10 adults and one in 5 children.
Experts think a major reason why those with asthma and hay fever are suffering more is car pollution.
In the fifties, doctors treated a number of people for the effects of smog in places like London and Birmingham.
The problem was tackled by cutting down on coal burning and introducing the Clean Air Act.
Now scientists say the level of pollution is rising.
Most people know about the Ozone layer in the earth's stratosphere.
But there's also ozone close to the ground.
Caused by pollution from cars, power stations, even paint solvents.
At Harwell laboratories, they've been monitoring air pollution and found the levels went up during the recent hot spell.
The results from their air samples go towards a national network of weather information.
But unless Governments act to reduce pollution, especially from cars, there's very little sufferers like Marcelyn can do.
The combination of hot weather and high pollution levels leads to misery for hay fever and asthma sufferers, and for many it's getting worse.
For them, the poor quality of air also means a poor quality of life.
Five hundred homes had their power supplies cut when a hot air balloon collided with high voltage cables.
The balloon was taking part in a promotional stunt for a ballooning festival planned for later this year.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
SWINDON
JOHN CLIFFORD/Pilot
BLETHYN RICHARDS/Festival organiser
ANDY RAWSON/Pilot
Voice over
It was meant to be a dry run for a much bigger event in September.
But not long after ten hotair balloons had taken off from Lydiard Park in swindon drama struck.
One of them shaped like a mobile telephone crashed into a high voltage power line cutting off 500 homes.
The event was meant to have been a demonstration of the balloonist's art and the accident was dismissed by the organisers as the exception which proves the rule.
It took an hour and a half to restore power and retrieve the balloon.
The fleet of balloons studding the Swindon skyline took second place to the collision but the organisers were trying to get a message across.
They're holding a huge festival in September with 70 balloons.
They even enlisted Swindon MP Simon Coombes, who after 8 years in Parliament, is very familiar with the principles of hot air.
Ballooning can appear a hazardous business: Bumping is quite common and the pilots have to maintain constant radio contact.
Our own landing proved quite conventional with our pilot putting down in the middle of a playing field in Wootton Bassett, but it's a normal shaped balloon; the mobile telephone is a different matter.
September will see a much grander array of weird shaped balloons, so the organisers will be keeping their fingers crossed that nothing serious happens again.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
If cricket's not your thing how about American football…a new season is underway and making a name for themselves already are the Oxford Saints…they're the first club in the country with its very own gridiron pitch.
Mark Kiff reports.
STEVE CONNOR/Head Coach
SAM RUTIGLIANO/NFL Coach of the Year 1980
Voice over
They're mean…they're tough and they mean business…the Oxford Saints are on the march.
This season they're in the top division of the British National Gridiron League and they're out to make their mark.
American football is the sort of sport where you can do yourself a serious injury before the match has started.
The Saints have got new sponsorship and a new home…the Oxford Speedway stadium.
This weekend they played their first game there against the London Gators.
Male speaker
It's a dream come true.
Voice over
The standard of American football in Britain, it seems, is on the up…that's the view of the experts.
Male speaker
I've been here three years now and it's been improving all the time.
Voice over
The Oxford Saints certainly appear to be on the right track.
Yesterday they chalked up their third win of the season…they made it look easy, the score thirty points to two…already the Oxfordshire American footballers are on target for making the National League playoffs.
Twenty travellers are staging a protest outside a police station demanding the return of their vehicles.
They've set up camp, saying the impounded vehicles were their homes and they now have nowhere to live.
Hugh Owens reports.
WORCESTER
DAVID PRICE/West Mercia Police
GEOFFREY HOPTON/Country Landowners
It wasn't the best of mornings for camping out particularly under just a make-shift tent.
But the 20 men women and children outside the police station vowed that they wouldn't move until their vehicles were returned.
’ Homes have been impounded and this is the only home that we have and so we're going to stay here until we get our homes back.’
’ If the police say my vehicle is unroadworthy then I'll accept that, but then we still need somewhere to live.’
’ I've got an A registration Transit.
It's been fully serviced up to 4 months ago when I bought it.
It's got tax, MOT, insurance.
I've got a full, clean driving licence.
There's no reasson to keep it at all.
It's perfectly roadworthy.
There's nothing wrong with it.’
The police explained why they'd held on to the vehicles which were being kept near Malvern, not at Worcester.
Some, they said had been declared unroadworthy by the Department of Transport who'd then banned then from the roads and others were needed as evidence of alleged offences.
’ No brakes, no lights, no insurance, the owners not having driving documents.
Obviously we would be open to criticism if those vehicles were then allowed on the road, perhaps having an accident involving innocent members of the public.’
Over the week-end, the last of the 20,000 travellers left Castlemorton and travelled to various destinations.
Some could be seen in lay-bys, others turned up in Shropshire and Wales.
The travellers said they never intended going to Castlemorton.
They'd been heading for a festival in Chipping Sodbury, but had been diverted by police.
’ It was a site already set up.
It was actually owned by a man who had a licence for festivals.
But because there was an injunction out every-one was pushed forcibly to Castlemorton.
The situation's actually been created by the police.’
The Country Landowners Association wants the law tightened up so that travellers can be moved on after 24, not the current 28 days.
And they've asked the Home Secretary to draw up nationwide guidelines to ensure all police forces act in the same way.
’ We're looking for a national hippy watch.
It's started in a number of places.
We're working well in Gloucestershire.
There's very good co-ordination between landowners and police.
It's obviously working well in Wales now, in Powys.
And we want to spread that right across rural England and Wales.’
West Mercia police have already been in touch with nine other forces and set up a committee covering the west and south of England, the Midlands and Wales to prevent any more Castlemorton style gatherings.
Dentists claim that Government plans to cut their NHS fees will force most if not all of them into private practice.
They say patients will be faced with higher bills, and that some people might find it impossible to register with a local dentist.
Debbie Kelly reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
PETER SANDS/Dentist
HELEN PARKER/Dental Accountant
AUDREY TRAFFORD/Patient
Voice over
Peter Sands believes in the National Health Service, but he's leaving to set up a private practice; one of 13 dentists in Abingdon.
He says, most, if not all of his colleagues, will be forced to do the same.
Male speaker
I simply cannot afford to provide NHS treatment for all my patients.
I either have to remove existing fee paying patients from the Health Service or sell up and go and do something else.
Voice over
It's the Governments proposal to reduce dentists fees, some believe by 25%, that have forced Mr Sands into private practice.
The Government claims National Health Service dentists overspent their budget last year by treating more patients than it'd estimated.
But in areas such as Oxfordshire dentists have high overheads.
Female speaker
Certainly in this area, dentists do not make 20 to 25% return for their efforts.
The cuts will wipe out what they have to live on.
Already 60% of dentists in Oxfordshire are in private practise.
It means patients pay around twice the current NHS level.
A basic check up will go up from £3.75 to £7.50.
A filling from £7.95 to £16.
The alternative to pay as you go, would be private insurance at around £130 pounds a year.
Voice over
Audrey Trafford wants to stay as Peter Sands patient, but doesn't think she'll be able to.
Female speaker
I really don't think that my husband and I will be able to afford it.
I only receive a severe disability allowance and finding two lots of money for dentists care will be difficulty.
Voice over
At the moment children, pregnant women and adults on income support are exempt from charges.
Many private practises won't treat these groups and they may find it hard to get a local dentist in future.
Male speaker
If I start making a loss seeing children then I will have to seriously consider my position.
Voice over
The Department of Health said today it was still in negotiations with dentists.
It's believed the cuts will be introduced in a months time.
Peter Sands will be one less dentist in the National Health Service by then.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
MICHAEL WINNER'S TRUE CRIMES/LWT
HAROLD ELLETSON MP/Con Blackpool North
MICHAEL WINNER/Film Director
LIBRARY PICTURES
GEOFF POPE/LWT Producer
Voice over
A bright future ahead of her, 19 year old university student Rachel Maclean was killed in April last year.
Her body was found under the floorboards of her house in Oxford.
Last December, her boyfriend John Tanner was jailed for life for her murder.
Now a new television programme re-tells the murder hunt.
It's presented by the controversial director of the Death Wish films, Michael Winner…
actuality…film intro
But six days before its due to be screened the film is at the centre of a row.
The Maclean family Mp says its ghoulish.
But Micahel Winner says reconstructions like this can legitimately be described as entertainment.
Rachel's parents say they know they can't stop the programme but they'll be switching it off.
And they say they haven't given the producers their co-operation.
For their part LWT say they approached the family through Thames Valley Police, acting on the advice of the officers involved.
According to police, the Macleans said they had no objection to the film, as long as they weren't involved.
Students at Rachel's oxford college St Hilda's say the family's feelings should have come first.
Meanwhile a local vicar who's close to the family says the film can only re-open old wounds
Police are hunting a man who brutally raped a woman student in a city centre toilet.
She was on her way back to her lodgings when the attack happened.
Detectives are investigating possible links with a series of assualts on women in the city.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
Det Insp DAVID BUCKINGHAM/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The 20 year old student was attacked as she used the women's toilets near the Martyr's Memorial in the centre of Oxford.
She was on her way home from a party…walking back through the city to her lodgings at Somerville college a few hundred yards from the Memorial.
Detectives say a man followed her into the toilets and raped her.
They describe it as a terrifying ordeal and although it was around two o'clock in the morning, they say a number of people were in the area and could help their search for the rapist.
Detectives say they are looking at possible links with recent assaults on women in Oxford.
The attacker is described as white, in his early twenties, around five feet ten inches tall.
He has short ginger hair, and is clean shaven with freckles.
He was wearing baggy jeans and a striped blue sweatshirt.
across in swindon yesterday eight hundred of the country's fittest athletes were competing in one of the summer's toughest events…the two twenty triathlon…a fifty mile race of endurance 
Voice over
what's harder I wonder swimming, cycling and running for fifty miles or driving a racing car at top speed…
Nigel Mansell was certainly whacked yesterday…on the verge of collapse after coming second to Ayrton Senna in the Monacco Grand Prix 
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
Another Central South racer after a world title this summer is Steve Kerton from Gloucestershire 
Voice over
A baby who defied the odds and survived despite being born sixteen weeks premature, has been celebrating her first birthday.
Rhiannon Petts weighed just one pound three ounces at birth and had to spend the first nine months of her life in hospital.
Nick Clark reports.
CHRISTINE PETTS Mother
MICK PETTS Father
Dr PETER DAISH Consultant Paediatrician Northampton Hospital
Voice over
When Rhiannon Petts was born nearly 4 months early in May last year she was just 7 inches long, so tiny her arm could fit through her mother's wedding ring.
This home video shows a DOLL'S dress draped across her.
At only 19 oz doctors gave her little hope.
Mum Christine thought her only child was going to die.
She never imagined, 12 months on, she'd be hosting a very special party.
They sing: Happy Birthday.
Female speaker
I thought she was going to die.
But look at her now.
Male speaker
I think she's lovely.
Voice over
Rhiannon now weighs 14 lbs and is getting bigger and stronger every day.
She still needs oxygen for her underdeveloped lungs and needs several different drugs every day.
Slowly the doctors will wean her off them and are hopeful she'll grow up without any problems.
Male speaker
She's done very well.
Male speaker
It's wonderful.
Cost of Earth Summit too high for some
Voice over
Britain and the United States have expressed concern about the Earth Summit in Rio saying that industrial nations cannot afford expensive environmental protection in a time of recession.
Halford gives evidence at industrial tribunal
Britain's most senior policewoman, Assistant Chief Constable Alison Halford, of Merseyside Police, has told an industrial tribunal that she is victim of sex discrimination
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten points at twenty-six, ninety-seven point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-two and down at two marks, ninety-four.
Finally tonight, a look ahead to a series of reports focussing on the future of farming.
After months of debate, the EC has finally agreed radical changes to its farming policy.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back.
Some of the aircraft from blockbuster films like Aces High and Indiana Jones are making a special appearance at an airshow.
Wesley Smith
It's one of the finest collections of first world war aeroplanes in existence, and it's going on show to give people a little taste of that old movie magic.
GARGY PATEL/Booker
TONY BIANCHI/Stunt Pilot
Voice over
It's 1918…
A British gunner shoots down enemy aircraft attacking his post…
A scene from the first world war…effects recreated for a unique airshow.
All the planes are museum pieces, normally kept in a museum.
But for this occasion, they're all coming out on show…
The twenties biplanes and monoplanes have been used in major films like Aces High, The Great Waldo Pepper, and Indiana Jones.
The Spitfire has featured in numerous movies including the Battle of Britain.
So this show will put together film stunts in the sky with spectacular action on the ground.
The Blue Max Collection has been built up by Tony Bianchhi over 25 years as a film stunt pilot.
Now he wants to produce his own film using historic planes set in historic places like Oxford.
The display at Booker airfield is by some of the world's top stunt fliers.
It aims to raise money and interest in the craft from that golden era of aviation.
More than six hundred men and women braved treacherous conditions over the Bank Holiday to compete in the annual Wye Raft Race.
It's one of the toughest tests of endurance held on water, but at one stage the organisers considered calling it off, after storms caused river levels to rise.
RICHARD BARNETT/Hay-on-Wye
HEREFORD
TRICIA HALES/Organiser
CHEPSTOW
ROB HOTCHKISS/Captain
Voice over
As the crews launched their rafts at Hay-on Wye on Saturday, ahead lay a 100-mile long journey down to the river to Chepstow.
The race is challenging enough in normal conditions, but this year the storms had turned the Wye into a torrent.
And by the time the rafts reached Hereford on the Sunday, exhaustion was taking its toll.
At one stage, the organizers were considering calling the race off.
Female speaker
Conditions were appalling and winds were so high some rafts were brought to a halt.
Voice over
But despite the appalling conditions, most crews stayed the course and out of 72 rafts competing, 59 made it to the finish at Chepstow.
The winners were the Different Strokes team from Hereford, who last took the trophy in 1988.
There was jubilation that a local team had come first.
Male speaker
The team is delighted and they've been busy celebrating.
Female speaker
She's delighted a local team has won.
Voice over
As well as being a test of endurance, the Wye Raft Race is also a big moneyspinner for charity.
This weekend's event raised around £70,000 for local good causes.
While most of the raftsmen and women were recounting tales of the battle against the elements, elesewhere on the River Wye quite another battle was still going on.
Some people say that lurking in its depths is a fish so dangerous that oarsmen venture out at their peril.
GARETH FURBY Hereford
GARY CLEVES Zander Victim
NIGEL BIRCH Zander Hunter
Voice over
It would have been a perfect day at Hereford Regatta, but for an unwelcome visitor.
The announcer warns people not to swim because of a dangerous fish.
He says they're really scared.
She thinks it's a wind up.
They weren't taking it seriously.
He says he's been attacked.
But the warning posters are clear.
The Zander, a cross between a pike and a perch, is the jaws of the River Wye.
And it's not just after flesh.
This oarsman says it took a bite out of his blade.
He says he saw a fish and then looked at his blade and it had a part missing.
The regatta continued regardless.
But did something take a bite out of this oar?
It was time to call in the Zander Hunter.
Nigel Birch, from Hereford Rowing Club, new to the game, but with a few tricks up his sleeve.
He says they're trade secrets and Jaws is just a trout compared to a Zander.
Then from an angler, a sighting.
Just in case the sea cadets trained their gun on the river.
But it was only a log.
And so far, the only victim of the Zander scare appears to be the man who started the rumour.
He says he's now known down the club as a fish called Zander.
And like the film Jaws, true or false, this is a story that will run and run.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Hunt abstains over 48 hour week
FTSE up 2849
The hundred shares index closed up eight point five at two eight four nine point two 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty five and up at two marks, forty seven.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodbye.
Police in three counties are counting the cost of an operation to stop travellers from staging a bank holiday weekend festival.
The total bill may be as much as half a million pounds.
One MP says that the travellers themselves should pay out of their benefits.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucestershire
Chief Supt COLIN STABLER/Gloucestershire Police
Asst Ch Con DAVID THURSFIELD/West Mercia Police
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con
Voice over
Hundreds of police spent their bank holiday weekend playing cat and mouse with travellers.
The convoys were foiled in their attempts to stage a Castlemoreton style festival, so they changed tactics, frustrating police and motorists alike by converging onto the M5.
The outcome was predictable; chaos.
Frustrated motorists waited hours for the huge tailback to clear.
With the travellers finaly dispersed — the police judged the operation a success.
But at what cost?
The bill for the 3 forces involved is likely to top half a million pounds.
Both Gloucestershire and West Mercia police admit they're short of money and manpower, but say they had no alternative.
He says that the real cost was to the public.
He says that it took officers away from other duties.
Gloucester MP Douglas French has a radical solution; send the bill to the travellers.
He says if the travellers cause problems which require policing, they should pay the bill from their benefits.
But from the travelling community, there's open contempt for the police operation and a prediction; they'll be back.
He says they'll be back every weekend.
He says why spend millions pushing them from place to place?
Today the control room which has been buzzing with activity for the past fortnight is empty, most travellers have now left the area.
But the police say they'll be ready if they decide to return.
A prisoner is being treated in hospital after another inmate threw scalding water over him.
It happened 
BULLINGDON PRISON/Oxfordshire
A couple, jailed for eighteen years for attempted murder, have lodged appeals against their conviction and sentences.
Sheila Stroud and her boyfriend Mark Evans were found guilty of trying to kill Stroud's former lover Ivor Stokle and his new girlfriend Pauline Leyshon.
They'd conspired, with a hired hitman, to push the couple's burning car over a cliff at Barrow Wake near Gloucester.
Stroud and Evans are waiting to hear if they'll be given leave to appeal.
A stolen coach has gone out of control and demolished a shop.
LEOMINSTER/Herefordshire
Repairing the grade two listed building, which houses Shocks Hardware Stores at Leominster in Herefordshire, could cost as much as (100,000) a hundred thousand pounds.
Two people are being questioned.
One of the victims of the RAF Hercules crash in Scotland has been remembered at the traditional Tetbury Woolsack Races.
The event was dedicated to Lance Corporal Garry Manning, who was the individual race champion and a member of the winning team last year.
His colleagues vowed to win the race again in his honour.
IAN MACLAREN/Tetbury
JOHN FOX-CLINCH/Woolsack Committee Chairman
Cpl JIM GLASS/RAF Lyneham
DAVE HOBBS/Rugby Club Captain
Voice over
Carrying the 60lb Woolsack down Tetbury's Gumstool Hill takes courage.
Climbing back up the one in 4 gradient requires extraordinary reserves of stamina as well.
Lance Corporal Garry Manning had demonstrated both.
He was the individual race champion and a member of the winning Tetbury Rugby club team.
The race has been taxing young bloods as far back as the 17th Century.
But Garry Manning's death in the RAF Hercules crash in Scotland last week, left something of a cloud over this year's event.
Male speaker
The Rugby Club had wanted to pull out.
But Garry Manning's widow, Elaine said that's what he would have wanted.
And now they're entering five teams.
Voice over
A minute's silence was observed before the start of the event as a tribute to Garry Manning.
Representatives from RAF Lyneham swelled the competition to a record 22 teams.
Male speaker
The squadron has turned out in force.
We want to beat his record and any others that are going…and to win for his family.
Voice over
Colleagues from Tetbury Rugby were equally determined to win, despite Garry's absence.
Male speaker
His loss will have reduced our chances by 50%.
He was a very important member of the team.
Voice over
And as a colleague?
Oh smashing.
As nice a chap as you could hope to meet.
The competiton was as fierce and as gruelling as ever.
But it was Tetbury Rugby Club who again won the team event.
And the emotion surrounding this year's event spilled over.
Fittingly, the winning team trophy was handed over to Lance Corporal Manning's widow, Elaine.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, Chocks away!
Into the Blue with the Fighter Aces of World War One.
And…a Fish called Zander: Just when you thought it was safe to go back on the water…here comes Jaws' little brother.
In Central News Tonight: Will he stay or will he go?
Is Hoddle the Hero leaving for Chelsea?
Who foots the bill?
MP says travellers should pay for Bank Holiday chaos.
And the big one that's got away.
Watch out…there's a Zander about.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
GLENN HODDLE/ Swindon Player-Manager
CLIFF PUFFETT/Club Director
Chief Insp BOB EVANS/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
The hero returns.
Glenn Hoddle back from Wembley, after helping the Robins clinch a place in the top flight for the first time in their history.
But according to the Evening Standard, yesterday's Play-Off Final was Hoddle's last match for Swindon before joining Chelsea.
The man himself is refusing to comment.
The Standard says Hoddle's number two John Gorman will join him at Chelsea, but Swindon Town insist there's been no formal approach for either of them.
Hoddle's hugley popular with the fans.
On their behalf, a local radio station has launched a campaign to keep him at the County Ground.
These supporters, gathered at a wine bar to watch yesterday's match on video, would be very sorry to see him go.
Female speaker
He should stay for at least a season in the Premier League.
Voice over
Meanwhile the celebrations have hardly stopped.
At times last night, good-humoured revelry got out of hand.
Shop windows were smashed, three police officers were injured, and a fan died after being run down in the street.
The police are hoping for better behaviour at the team's parade round Swindon tomorrow night.
Immediately before that there's a vital meeting of the club's directors.
Top of the agenda — the possibility of life without Glenn Hoddle.
The fear of Glenn Hoddle leaving Swindon can't take away what he and his team have achieved.
Three years ago Swindon were denied promotion because of financial irregularity.
This time, there were no mistakes.
Our sports editor Tim Russon was with them at Wembley.
Voice over
Swindon's day of destiny was a day of dreams…a day when Wembley was awash with the red and white of Glenn Hoddle's army of followers…the league play off final had all the spirit…all the fun and fantasy of Cup Final Day…
Nobody…nowhere…has ever seen so many Swindon fans before…and the Town players hearts must have thumping with pride as they emerged from the tunnel to be deafened by Wembley's Wiltshire roar…
And the game well Wembley can be the kindest…and yet cruelest of places…for once the cliches came true…it was the team that settled first the side that scored the opening goal that won but what a victory…what a battle…and what an opening goal…
They went in for half-time one up and within minutes of coming out were two up…with top scorer Craig Maskell raising the roof…
Going up…going up…was the swindon roar…now you're can believe us they sang…and who could argue…who could deny them as Shaun Taylor headed number three…
Yes the battle had to be over…but there was no flag of surrender from Leicester…the opposite a comeback…a charge of courage brought three goals in twelve minutes
Unbelievable…amazing…
Wembley was witnessing a classic…the drama thundered on…three goal scoring chances were conjured up by Swindon only to be magiced away by Leicester…
And then with six minutes to go fortune smiled…fate declared that Swindon were on their way up…
Glenn Hoddle says they they don't do things easily…they were the best footballing side on the day and its justice for what happened to them three years ago
and the reds went marching on…
So, will Hoddle stay or go?
And what are Swindon's chances in the Premier League without him.
(ad lib into Tim)
TIM RUSSON
RUNS=1:00est 
In Central News tonight: Stabbed in the back.
Mentally handicapped man in motiveless gang attack.
The end of a siege.
Armed man surrenders after police surround house.
And who shot my son?
Reward to catch the air rifle snipers.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Another man was also seriously injured in the incident.
A third managed to run away.
Police say there's no apparent motive for the attack.
The mother of one of the victims has decribed his assailants as savages.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Milton Keynes
EDITH WALSH/Victim's Mother
Sgt JUDY STEVENSON/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Geoff Walsh's coat gives an idea of what happened to him.
It's hacked to ribbons.
The thirty three year old had no idea what hit him or why.
He was stabbed and slashed at least three times while out walking with friends.
He suffered gaping wounds to his torso.
His mother Edith was the first to see him after he'd staggered home.
Female speaker
I took his sweatshirt off and the blood was literally running down my arms.
He was about to pass out and said he thought an iron bar had been put in his back
Voice over
Geoffrey, who has learning difficulties, had taken his newly repaired bicycle out with two friends.
One of them, Ernest Hyde, was also seriously injured in the leg.
The third got away.
As far as police are able to understand they were walking near Tescos in Bletchley when three men burst out of some shrubbery and assaulted them.
Geoffrey managed to wheel his bicycle home.
There seems to have been no motive for the attack.
Female speaker
It'; s possible someone knows who did this.
We ask people tokeep an eye out for anyone who returned home with bloody clothing
Voice over
Geoff works at the kitchens at the Open University in Milton Keynes.
He's described as a man of a very gentle nature.
Female speaker
They're savages.
You can't tell me their parents don't know who they are.
Ihave three sons and I would know, and if they'd done anything like this I would dislike them, and even hate them
Voice over
Doctors won't allow anyone near Geoff Walsh except his immediate family.
Not even detectives have been able to intervierw him.
He's still shocked after his injuries and the major surgery he underwent.
He had thirty four stitches.
His condition is described as stable.
A four-hour siege has ended peacefully after an armed man gave himself up to police.
The man had been seen firing a rifle in his back garden and through his letter box.
KEN GOODWIN/Swindon Village
SHARON HILL/Neighbour
Insp PETER BARRATT/Gloucestershire Police
GEOFFREY ALLEN/Neighbour
Voice over
Police were called to Hulbert close early this morning, after neighbours of 57 year old Derek Morley saw him shooting a rifle in his back garden.
When they arrived, it appears that Mr Morley then fired through his letterbox.
So the close was sealed off.
Police marksmen were put on standby.
People living nearby were told to stay indoors.
She says that they were told not to come out, it was frightening.
The police had put into practice their proceedure for dealing with sieges.
He says that they spoke to Mr Morley and he agreed to come out.
Police later recovered a high powered air rifle from the house.
Mr Morley is understood to have been depressed since the death of his wife from cancer nearly two years ago.
Neighbours say that he needs help.
He says that he always shunned help from neighbours, but he hopes he now gets other help.
Mr Morley was at Cheltenham police station most of the day — he was then admitted to a local hospital.
The police say he won't be facing any charges.
A mother has offered a hundred pound reward to catch the man who shot her ten year old son in the head with an air rifle.
She says he must be caught before he hurts another child.
JESSICA FOWLE/Banbury
RICHARD HALL/Gun Victim
Sgt ROB MASON/Thames Valley Police
SHARON HALL/Richard's Mother
Voice over
10 year old Richard Hall playing with his brother, Clark at the spot near their Banbury home, where just 3 days ago he was shot in the head.
It's only thanks to Clark's quick thinking that Richard didn't lose his sight and the pellet from the airrifle went into the back of his head rather than his eye.
The boys had been out on their bikes with a friend when they saw two men shooting into the brook.
Suddenly the gun was being pointed at Richard.
Male speaker
Clark said there's a man aiming at you and I turned my head away.
If I hadn't done that I might have been shot in the eye and could have gone blind.
Male speaker
Words cannot describe the kind of person who would do a thing like this.
Voice over
The brook, at the back of a trading estate is a popular playspot for local children and the boys' mother is frightened the same thing could happen to someone else.
Female speaker
If they could shoot my child what would stop them doing it to someone else?
And next time they could be shot in the eye.
Voice over
A £100 reward is offered for information leading to the conviction of the offendors.
The man who shot Richard had grey hair and was wearing a black leather jacket, a blue jumper and jeans.
He made off, with the other man, in a silver metro type car with distinctive red stripes.
Anyone with information should call Banbury police on 0295 252525.
Finally tonight, thousands of people are lining the streets to cheer Swindon Town, as the team tour the streets in an open-top bus, celebrating their promotion to the Premier League.
No doubt the Glenn Hoddle situation isn't far from their minds.
Our reporter Erika Barnes is with the team.
Voice over
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Soccer fans to be deported
FTSE up 13
The hundred shares index closed up thirteen point eight at two eight six three point zero 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty four and down at two marks, forty six.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Gardeners looking for something different are turning to a new hobby…growing meat-eating plants.
The demand for carnivores like the Venus Fly Trap and Sundew is so great that one nursery alone now stocks thirty thousand plants.
It's just won a Gold Medal at the Chelsea Flower Show.
RICHARD BARNETT/Madley
PAUL GARDNER/Grower
JACKIE GARDNER/Grower
Voice over
The plants at Marston Exotics nursery in Madley, Herefordshire are the ultimate in environmentally friendly flykillers.
The insects either come to a sticky end; lured by sugary solution onto a sundew which then slowly digests them, or they get the chop in more dramatic fashion after landing in the jaws of a Venus flytrap.
Carnivorous plants apparently hold a macabre fascination for gardeners and they're becoming increasingly popular.
Male speaker
They eat insects, which is gruesome.
But they are also very attractive.
Voice over
The Herefordshire nursery stocks thirty thousand carnivorous plants; the largest selction in Britain.
As well as Venus fly traps and pitcher plants from the United States, there are butterworts from Europe, Asia and Australasia.
And sundews from the same area.
The plants grow naturally in impoverished peat bogs, and they devour insects as a source of protein.
Jackie Gardner takes exhibits to horticultural shows all over the country and the nursery has just picked up a Gold Medal at Chelsea.
Some customers at the shows ask the strangest questions.
Female speaker
People ask if they can buy bags of flies, or if the plants eat mother-in-laws.
Voice over
In the past, carnivorous plants have been gathered by unscrupulous collectors from the wild; a practice that has depleted natural stocks.
Marston Exotics breed all their own plants in the nursery.
That's good news for conservationists, but bad news for the local fly population.
Victorian railway lines and tramroads running through a forest could be transformed into the country's top network of leisure cycling tracks.
The traffic-free routes in the Forest of Dean are already a big attraction for cyclists.
HARRIET RYLEY/Forest of Dean
JOHN ANDERSON/Forest Enterprise
HILARY CARPENTER/Cycle Centre
GARY LANGFORD/Cyclist
Voice over
100 years ago, this was a railway track in an industrial heartland.
Today it's a cycleway in part of what could eventually be a network of 140 miles of routes linking towns and villages throught the Forest of Dean.
It's a region already popular both with casual and mountain bikers who don't have to contend with busy traffic.
He says the plan will be to open up a number of railway lines and connect local communities and they'll make good family cycling; not the steep gradients mountain bikers like, but nice gradients related to the old gradients of the railway lines.
At the moment the Forest is at its busiest on high days and holidays, but the feeling is it's reached nowhere near its full business potential.
The extended cycleways could help.
Female speaker
I think it's very good.
There are the facilities here and it's a shame not to use it with the all the tramways and the railways lines.
Alot of cyclists come here and I'm sure they'll appreiciate them.
Voice over
This couple came all the way from Staffordshire because of the Forest's growing biking reputation and will definitely be back for more.
Male speaker
It's very good — we've only been there two days and couldn't even scratch the surface.
We're planning to come back later in the year for a full week at least.
It's ideal.
Voice over
Finding the money for the cycleways could be an uphill struggle, but the forest authorities are confident they'll do it by the end of the century.
A Primary school has won a national competition to produce their own newspaper.
Competition judges at the Daily Telegraph awarded the youngsters first prize…a day in London being real journalists 
SIMON GARRETT/London
MAX HASTINGS/Editor
JENNIFER CLAYTON
GABRIEL COOK
RICHARD HANES
JASON PAGE/Reporter
Voice over
The offices of the Daily Telegraph — one of the oldest newspapers in the world.
3 of the youngest journalists around are here to have Telegraph editor Max Hastings cast a critical eye over their school paper; the Ann Cam Citizen.
Male speaker
Isn't there an 'H' in Whitney Houston?
I thought so.
I found a spelling mistake in our editorial this morning.
Voice over
Classmates in Dymock voted for the three 11 year olds to represent them at the Telegraph ceremony.
Their efforts were rated very highly by the Telegraph judges.
Male speaker
The Ann Cam Citizen is lots of good consumer items.
Nice vivid pictures, despite working on old computers.
I think they do amazingly well and there's lots of lively ideas.
Voice over
The Ann Cam team were taken to the London Weather Centre, to learn how the weather is predicted — gathering information for a page of their own in a forthcoming edition of the Young Telegraph supplement.
Male speaker
That's how heavily iut's fdalling.
It's coming out at 4mm per hour.
Voice over
But would they like to be journalists?
Female speaker
I think I would some of the time, but I wouldn't mind another job because being a journalist is very hectic.
Male speaker
You have to be very strong, very offensive not very nice to people and keep on attacking the interviewee.
Male speaker
You travel round quite a few diffent places and meet famous people and type it up on the computer, 1124 things like that.
Voice over
Back at the Young Telegraph, their final copy is put together under the watchful eye of a full-time reporter.
Male speaker
What I think all journalists could learn about is the directness of their questions and the courtesy with which they were asked.
Voice over
Are there any tips you could give them?
Male speaker
Never believe anything a politician tells you.
Voice over
The Swindon Town manager Glenn Hoddle has been meeting the club's directors amid rumours that he's about to move to Chelsea.
But tonight there's still no word on whether he's staying or going.
On Monday Hoddle led his team to a Wembley victory over Leicester winning promotion to the Premier League.
Chelsea have not confirmed their approach to him and the Swindon board say they've been told nothing.
GRAEME BOWD/Swindon
PETER ARCHER/Swindon FC Director
RICKY HUNT/Swindon FC Director
CHRIS SCOTT/Swindon Supporters' Club
Voice over
Meanwhile, a man has appeared in court charged with causing death by dangerous driving after a Swindon fan was killed by a car during the promotion celebrations.
Mark Dowman is also accused of drink-driving, and failing to stop after an accident.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
Voice over
23-year-old Andrew Fry was one of thousands of fans out celebrating on Monday night after Swindon's victory in the Play-Off final at Wembley.
Shortly before midnight he was hit by a car in Victoria Road and later died in hospital.
22-year-old Mark Dowman from Kitchener Street in Swindon appeared before magistrates this morning.
He's charged with causing death by dangerous driving, failing to stop and report an accident and driving with excess alcohol.
He was remanded in custody for 7 days.
On the same night that Andrew Fry died, 3 police officers were injured and several shop windows were smashed.
There were 16 arrests.
Swindon Town have joined the police in condemning the irresponsible behaviour of a small minority of fans.
But the emphasis tonight at Swindon town is very much on celebration.
SWINDON
The promotion-winning team set off a short time ago from the County Ground to tour the town in an open-topped bus, before a civic reception given by Thamesdown Council.
Thousands of fans are lining the streets, and we hope to be joining the team, on the bus, later in the programme.
Three of the region's judges who invested in the Lloyds insurance market could stand to loose a small fortune.
According to newspaper reports, the three are Lloyds names, and they may be laible to pay out hundreds of thousands of pounds, now that the market is making huge losses.
GARETH FURBY/Reporting
TOM BENYON/Society of Lloyds Names
PAUL MARLAND MP/Con West Gloucestershire
PAULINE SPRINGETT/The Guardian
Voice over
The fall out from the downturn in the Lloyds insurance marketr now appears to be hitting hard across the region.
According to reports in today's newspapers, three Judges may face big losses.
Malcom Ward, on the Oxford circuit, may loose a hundred thousand.
Oxford-educated David Morton Jack may face a bill for one hundred and eighty thousand.
And Oxford district judge Frank Barrington Ward may loose the most — approaching a quarter of a million pounds.
Judge Barrington-Ward is on holiday at the moment and his family won't confirm the reports.
But the group which reprsents Lloyds names says many top people will be hit hard.
Among the
The Conservative MP Paul MarlandWE
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) In part two of Central News, we'll be getting it straight from the horse's mouth.
The dentist with a new plan to stop attacks on horses.
Plus: There's a fly in my plant.
Another winner from Chelsea.
And Hoddle's Heroes…a town turns out for the big salute.
Welcome back: A horse dentist has devised a system which she hopes will stop the recent spate of attacks on horses.
Wesley Smith
She's launching a unique register that will hold information on every horse in three counties.
And she's got the backing of the police.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Corse Lawn
VAL TAYLOR/Horse Dentist
Voice over
Val Taylor is best known in equestrian circles as the person every horse with a toothache wants to know.
But she's now making another name for herself as the brains behind the first horse register in the country.
Val was becoming increasingly worried by the spate of vicious attacks on horses.
So she's come up with a way of trying to protect animals in Gloucestershire, Worcestershire and Herefordshire.
Horse owners are being asked to fill in ID forms on their animals.
Val's scheme has got the full backing of police in Gloucestershire and West Mercia.
They say they'll use the information happy in the knowledge that it's coming straight from the horse's mouth.
Now, a tale of mysterious goings-on in the Bronze Age.New evidence uncovered at an archaeological dig suggests it may have been the site of ritual human sacrifices.
A reconstruction of how the burial mound must have looked four thousand years ago has led experts to believe the ceremonies were linked to the appearance of the midsummer sun.
Simon Garrett reports 
GUITING POWER Gloucestershire
4 SEPTEMBER 1991
Dr ALASTAIR MARSHALL Archaeologist
Voice over
40 centuries ago, a farming and hunting community chose this spot in the Cotswolds to bury the burnt and crushed remains of a single skeleton.
It took them several years to prepare the area.
The red crust shows where 2 fires were set, prior to a false floor being laid with clay brought from some distance away.
Trampling, possibly ritual dancing, caused the uneven surface.
8 months of excavations have shown that a ring of 65 post was driven through, probably supporting a screen which hid from the view the ceremony relating to the death of the victim discovered within.
Male speaker
The site seems to be quite deliberately prepared and constructed in a series of specific events.
The fires and entrance are oriented in direct line with the midsummer sunset.
Voice over
The posts were eventually taken down and themselves burnt before the mound was built over the top and the ring ditch dug around the outside.
But then those Bronze Age farmers, who'd worked so long and hard to build the mound, leaving their work in the fields so to do for some unknown reason, avoided going near again.
Male speaker
It could've been abandoned, they could have moved on but maybe it was seen as a taboo place, we just don't know.
It's possible there are more remains; bodies or cremations; inserted at a later date that we've yet to find.
Voice over
Thanks to the site's owners, the Guiting Manor Amenity Trust, excavation continues to search for signs of those whose victim has lain undisturbed for so long and for a reason why the site was built so carefully in a line with the mid-summer sun.
Major holds fire on Maastricht treaty
The Prime Minister has postponed a Commons debate on the Maastricht treaty, but says he still plans to forge ahead with a bill to ratify it.
The move follows yesterday's rejection of the treaty by a referendum in Denmark.
EC to press on without Denmark
The European Commission has vowed to continue with working towards closer union, abandoning Denmark if necessary.
House under guard after barmaid murder
Five people are under police guard in Dorset following the murder of the barmaid, Jayne Harvell.
Belling axes 1
More than a thousand redundancies have been announced at the Belling cooker company in Burnley and Enfield.
Bottomley defends NHS dentist price cuts
The Health Secretary has defended plans to reduce costs for NHS treatment at dentists, saying many dentists earned more than a hundred thousand pounds gross last year.
Robert Morley dies aged 84
The actor, Robert Morley, has died at the age of eighty-four.
FTSE down 25
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-five points at twenty-six, eighty point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-two and down at two marks, ninety-two.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Now to the second of our reports on the changing nature of farming.
Tonight we look at how one of the region's bigger farms is responding to the the twin pressures of environmentalists and Brussels Eurocrats.
The EC is telling farmers to grow less, while the green lobby is campaigning for radical changes in the way farmers run their businesses.
Harriet Ryley reports on how a big business farmer steers between the two.
HOOK NORTON/Oxfordshire
RAY GASSON/Farmer
ROBIN MAYNARD/Friends Of the Earth
Voice over
Ray Gasson; farmer, landowner and businessman all in one.
He's the third generation to be running Redlands farm and he's confident he knows what path he must take to ensure its future.
It must make money.
Male speaker
We are commercial farmers and have to make a profit.
We hope that environmentally we are considerate, but if we're not efficient producers then we'll go out of business.
Voice over
Bigger farms, say the experts are more likely to make money.
So the farm is well set with its 1000 acres of arable and large dairy herd.
And profitable enough to employ 6 farm workers.
The farm's now seven times bigger than it was when his grandfather ran it in the 1920's.
His grandfather enjoyed a gamble — the trick all along was to keep on increasing the size of the farm.
Ray Gasson intends to follow suit.
Male speaker
One has to be optomistic.
Our farm has shown growth right from grandfather's day in 1921 and I would expect that growth would continue.
Voice over
Indeed, I would expect it would have to continue for us to remain in business.
The cuts in subsidies which the European Community were proposing to introduce have meant months of uncertainty for Ray Gasson, but in fact the final agreement reached in Brussels was better news than he feared.
Male speaker
We don't have the full details yet, but it looks as though we'll have the status quo for the next 3 years.
The emphasis of support will be different.
We'll have to go into setaside, which I'm not keen on.
Voice over
There was huge uncertainty surrounding the proposed changes on milk quotas.
Ray Gasson's herd of 250 could have been hard hit.
But there is definitely change on the home front.
The Milk Marketing Board, which collects and delivers milk in England and Wales is to be replaced.
Despite the changes, he feels there's safety in size.
Male speaker
25 years ago there were almost a quarter of a million dairy farmers in England and Wales.
Now there are less than 30,000 and those 30,000 are producing the same amount of milk as the higher number did previously.
And it's been expansion to survive.
Voice over
Big farmers who practise intensive farming, aiming for maximum yields for mininum cost, are facing a growing hostility from environmentalists.
They argue the chemicals farmers use are damaging the countryside.
Male speaker
Friends of the Earth believe the land should be worked less hard for food production, using fewer agro-chemicals.
But we should be producing more from the land in terms of countryside and natural resources, looking after the soil, the water.
That's an excellent role for farmers, for which they should be rewarded by the public.
After all you can't sell the countryside on the supermarket shelf.
Male speaker
We have to farm commercially, otherwise we wouldn't stay in business.
We have to produce food at a price the consumer is prepared to pay.
For instance organically farmed food is more expensive.
At the moment the consumer is not prepared to pay higher prices.
Voice over
The dilemma facing Ray Gasson, is that after decades of being encouraged to expand and produce more, the message from Brussels now is to cut down production, while environmentalists are pressing for a completely different approach to farming.
He'll be walking a tightrope trying to keep the farm profitable and respond to those pressures.
Tomorrow in the final part of the series, a farmer who's spent the last ten years converting his farm puts the case for organic farming.
Cricket and in the county championship,.
A mass meeting of council workers has been told that redundancies are unavoidable.
The council must save a million pounds after being charge capped by the Government.
Now plans have been drawn up to scrap up to forty jobs and some services…the second round of cuts in a year.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
COLIN NYE/Council Chief Executive
NICK BROWN/NALGO
Voice over
900 Cheltenham Borough Council employees were in a sombre mood as they filed into the Town Hall for a mass meeting.
Just one subject was on the ajenda: cuts.
The Borough has been penalised by the Government for overspending and now faces charge capping.
So the Council's Chief executive, Colin Nye, has to try and find ways of saving £1m.
Having carried out savings of a similar amount last year, he says there's no fat left to trim.
He says that there will be cuts across the whole spectrum of services.
For council staff, already weary from last years round of cuts, moral is now said to be at an all time low.
He says that they were only just recovering from making cuts last year, now they're having to do the same again; only this time there will be redundancies.
He says that this is the most unpleasant period in his 25 years in local Government.
The full Council must approve the proposals for cuts on Monday night.
It seems that the only way Cheltenham can now avoid cuts, is if the town appeals against the charge capping and is successful.
Water experts are blaming a decade of extensive development in the south of England for worsening the current drought.
More tarmac and concrete has left fewer green fields for water to drain into underground reserves, as Sheila Brocklebank reports.
BUCKLEBURY/Berkshire
VALERIE JONES/Hydro Research and Development
OXFORD
Voice over
Dried up rivers, like the River Pang, are an all too familiar sight.
The recent heavy rain has made little difference because many of our rivers rely on ground water.
And levels in some areas are now so low, that it would have to rain for months to make any difference.
Lack of rain is one reason for low ground water levels.
But another main cause, particularly relevant to the south, is the massive rise in development.
Female speaker
What used to happen was that rain would fall on land and permeate through the ground to the ground water levels, but urbanisation has meant more roads, houses, car parks and the water can't soak through, instead it goes into drains, is treated and then goes into the sea.
Voice over
Urbanisation has also put pressure on the sewage system.
In heavy rain, the system can't cope and it floods.
This not only causes chaos, but is also a waste of water and causes pollution.
Experts from all areas of the water industry have been meeting in Oxford to look at how to deal with such problems.
They say there are schemes available that could be implemented, such as the simple water butt.
Female speaker
Rainwater is relatively clean, but at the moment, it falls down drainpipes into the sewage system and is treated which is costly and the water is lost.
With a water butt, the water is collected and can be used for gardens.
Other methods include permeable car parks, where water can soak through the surface and be collected.
Voice over
Such techniques are widely used in America, Australia and in some European countries.
But they're virtually unknown here.
The reason seems to be lack of knowledge and confusion about who is responsible for implementing the schemes.
What is clear, however, is that the problems facing the water industry are their most difficult yet and that unless some action is taken, the problems can only get worse.
In part two: It's in the genes.The family helping the fight against diabetes.
Taking care of business.
The farmer caught between the Greens and Brussels.
And a place of sacrifice.
The secrets of a Bronze Age burial site.
Welcome back:Three generations of the same family have helped doctors make a pioneering discovery in the battle against diabetes.
Research on the family has enabled scientists to identify a defective gene responsible for causing the disease.
Mark Kiff reports.
FARMOOR/Oxfordshire
Dr ANDREW HATTERSLEY/Research Doctor
OXFORD
VALERIE WIGHTMAN/Diabetic
Voice over
Anna's killer was out on bail.Andrew Hagans denies he raped her.
Dangerous drugs for sale.
The deadly dealings at the Malvern rave.
And the battle is lost.
Women-only college must admit men.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The jury at his trial at Bristol Crown Court has been told that Hagans watched the offices where Mrs McGurk worked from behind the bars of his prison cell before he was granted bail.The court has been told that after the murder, he tried to sell the victim's wedding ring.
Tim Hurst reports.
Voice over
An investigation into drug dealing at the illegal hippy festival held last bank holiday weekend has revealed that dangerous drugs were openly on sale.
Tonight's edition of the Cook Report here on Central will include recordings of drugs being offered for sale at Castlemorton Common in the Malvern Hills.
The programme comes on the day police launched a new initiative to prevent such large gatherings taking place.
We have two reports…the first from Gareth Furby.
23 MAY 1992/CASTLEMORTON COMMON/Worcestershire
ROGER COOK
Voice over
Twenty thousand so-called travellers and ravers flocked to Castle Morton common last Bank Holiday weekend for the illegal festival.
Nearby villagers complained about the noise and the mess.
And some said drugs were openly on sale.
When the convoy finally moved off — some evidence was left behind.
But tonight's edition of The Cook Report will feature this recording of drugs being offered for sale.
Roger Cook's cameraman had mingled with the crowds…and taken pictures of drug dealers.
But his camera and the video tape were stolen.
But Roger Cook says the recording is proof of the extent of drug abuse at Castle Morton Common.
He says it was widespread.
You could buy any drugs.
The Cook Report will also reveal how the prime movers behind the Castle Morton festival were not peaceful hippys…but a well organised and well financed group.
He says a group from London was behind it.
There was a lot of money involved.
y
The police have already been criticised for not stopping the travellers as they moved onto Castle Morton common.
Tonight's proof that illegal and dangerous drugs were openly on sale will increase the pressure on the police to act decisively in future to prevent another similar festival.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
Chief Supt TONY WARREN/West Mercia Police
Voice over
Trying to stop another huge build up of travellers in one area is a subject keeping several police forces across the region occupied.
The mass gathering at Castlemorton gave them problems they had never had to handle before.
Now West Mercia Police want the public to tell them what the travellers are doing.
Male speaker
we're asking for public help in telling us where the travellers are gathering, especially on common or open landThe familiar police tactic is to try and keep the travellers in small groups by continually moving them away from the others.
They did this when several hundred gathered at Enstone airfield in Oxfordshire last month.
The different police forces share their information and that has led to some proposed gatherings being stopped.
Male speaker
West Mercia police have never had to deal with this before but other forces have.
There are two sides to this, the travellers and the people who quite rightfully want a quiet life
Voice over
It's understood there's a callendar of events for travellers circulating including familiar unofficial festivals at Glastenbury in the West Country, and Stone Henge.
So any gathering may seem suspicious to the police.
Students at one of Oxford's two remaining women-only colleges have lost their battle to keep men out.
The University Chancellor, Lord Jenkins, has ruled that men can be admitted to Somerville College.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
OXFORD
Voice over
Students at Somerville College have been fighting for months to keep men out or their college.
It's been women-only for more than a century.
But earlier this year, the college authorities ruled that men should be admitted from next term.
Three weeks ago, students appealed to the University Chancellor Lord Jenkins.
Today he announced his decision…that men can be admitted…but ordered that the move be postponed for two years.
Students today were barred from talking about the decision…because ofn embargo placed on the announcement.
The students, who claim to have the backing of old girl Margaret Thatcher, had argued that an Act of Parliament was needed to change the college status.
Lord Jenkins was critical of the way the college governors had tried to push through the change without consulting under-graduates.
His decision should be binding…but students haven't ruled out an earlier pledge to take their fight to the High Court.
A motorway workman was killed when a wheel flew off a lorry and hit him.
M4/Wiltshire
It happened on the M-4 east of Swindon while the man was working on the hard shoulder.
It's the second incident of its kind on the same stretch of motorway, in two days.
Yesterday a wheel flew off a lorry and hit a car.
The driver escaped with cuts to his face.
A man died when a wall collapsed on him at a farm in Gloucestershire.
William Oliver, who was sixty seven, was carrying out maintenance work to a water pump in a well at his farm at Bisley, near Stroud, when the accident happened.
One of the most unspoilt old mills in Britain is up for sale.
The historic Longfords mill is described by historians as an important relic of the textile trade.
KEN GOODWIN/Nailsworth
IAN MACKINTOSH/Historian
ANDREW WATTON/Estate Agent
Voice over
This was once a thriving mill.
Employing hundreds of people, it was at the centre of the textile trade in the Stroud valleys.
Now it's derelict.
In the same buildings in which staff once worked at their looms, bats now flutter.
The huge water powered generators are silent.
Dusty relics lay where they were left when the mill shut down.
But now it's hoped that Longfords may be restored to its former glory.
The whole site is for sale and historians hope that a sympathetic developer may be tempted to buy.
He says that he hopes that whoever buys the site will realise the historical significance of ths site and at the same time maintain the buildings.
The agents dealing with the sale of the mill say that they've already had inquiries about the site, for a number of uses.
He says that it would make an ideal site for tourist related businesses.
The undergrowth's taking over and the dust is piling up, but Longfords Mill may yet gain a new lease of life.
Fourteen women have just landed parts in a play called The Witches.
Their qualifications are…a healthy distaste for children…an ability to act like a witch…and not least, a willingness to work for free.
The extras will be appearing in the stage version of a childrens tale by Roald Dahl.
IAN MACLAREN Swindon
EMMA CLAYTON Casting Director
Voice over
Had a bad day at work?
Are the kids getting you down?
It's not a class for stress management.
They're actually holding auditions at Swindon's Wyvern Theatre.
No experience necessary.
The witches play a vital part in a touring production of Roald Dahl's classic book.
And yes, being transformed into a witch can be a therapeutic experience.
Female speaker
Most women find it easy.
They may want to bash their children sometimes.
This way they can do it in safety in the theatre.
Voice over
These volunteers are being put through their paces by touring casting director, Emma Clayton.
14 of them will get parts, alongside the professionals, when the production comes to Swindon.
Right now, they've come across something nasty.
But what makes a good witch?
Female speaker
You must be able to hate children.
To have wide flaring nostrils to sniff out those stinkwaves.
And to have a big mouth to project.
Voice over
And you need to be able to learn your lines quickly.
Now was it bish them, squish them or bash them, slash them?
All part of the audition process.
And it seems everyone has a reason for wanting to be a witch.
Female speaker
I'm a clown.
And I don't need much make-up.
Female speaker
I read the book to my 8 year old son.
He wants me to be a witch.
Female speaker
We're out of work actresses.
We'd rather work without pay and keep our skills up.
Voice over
The applicants quickly learn their fate.
They'll be on stage in The Witches for a week in Swindon.
Now they're getting used to being bald and bad before the production opens at the Wyvern Theatre on the 20th of July…
Slash Them!
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Taylor says he won't resign
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten point two at two eight five two point eight 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty three and up at two marks, forty six.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Police hunting a drugs importer who was involved in the death of a cocaine courier say he's left the country.
Andrew Dobbs, who was twenty seven and from Gloucester, died at Amsterdam airport last year when a bag of cocaine burst in his stomach.
Police believe they've identified the man who arranged for him to smuggle the drug and that he's currently carrying out his business abroad.
The DIY store B and Q has been taken to court for allegedly breaking the law by trading on a Sunday.
It's the first time the local authority has taken a prosecution this far.
It told magistrates it had a duty to ensure shops complied with the law.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Whitminster
GLOUCESTER
Voice over
Mounds of legal documents were brought to the Court House in Whitminster for the first day of the case between B &Q and Gloucester City Council.
The Council claims that B &Q broke the law by opening it's shop in Gloucester on Sunday 17th December 1989.
Opening the case for the prosecution, the Council's lawyer, Mr Neil Calver told magistrates that by trading on that day, B &Q had contravened the Shops Act.
The DIY company argues that if it hadn't opened, it would indirectly be discriminating against the mainly female staff employed on that day.
But the prosecution gave the court details of another case where judges had declared that such an argument wasn't valid.
The case continues tomorrow and is expected to go on until Monday.
One of the region's police forces has become the first in the country to use mobile cameras in an effort to trap speeding drivers.
Senior officers say the now familiar fixed cameras have already had a dramatic effect in reducing speed.
But they admit that many warning signs are just a bluff.
GRAEME BOWD/Banbury
Chief Supt PETER VINER/Thames Valley Police
ANN MORTLOCK/Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
Speed cameras in now used by several police forces.
In Oxfordshire there are eleven sights but many motorists have got to know where they are and reduce their speed accordingly.
Now things are getting tougher for the law breakers.
Today police showed off a new mini camera which can be moved from site to site.
Liked the fixed ones it uses a radar beam to detect a driver's speed and then takes two photographs as evidence.
Trials in the village of Enstone found up to forty drivers an hour breaking the thirty mile an hour speed limit.
So far there've been no prosecutions but following a period of grace the speeders will now be taken to court.
Computerised equipment can trace registered owners and send out hundreds of summonses each day.
But police say they would rather that drivers just slowed down.
Male speaker
Accidents cost £185m a year in Oxfordshire alone.
Many of these are caused by speed.
We believe we can reduce accidents by using this equipment.
Voice over
But the cameras, mobile or fixed, cost around $25,000 each, and in fact the county only has two of them.
They get moved around and there's no way of telling which sites are live.
As an extra deterrent there are warning signs, but many are on roads where there are no cameras, a bluff for which the council makes no apologies.
Female speaker
The signs are a good thing because they remind drivers that they should always keep to the speed limit.
Voice over
And most motorists seem to accept that that the cameras are all in a good cause.
A map of the London camera sights is said to have sold more than fifty thousand copies, but Thames Valley police refused to tell the publishers where their own cameras are.
The portable cameras mean that no-one will no for sure where to find them.
The best defence is to drive within the limit.
(AD LIB ANNE)
In part two of Central News:…
coming face to face with the technicolour dream car.
We meet the schoolboy painter who's turned a BMW into a work of art.
Plus: Dyed in the wool…the textile mill that's gone up for sale
And…
On a witchhunt…the hopefuls cursing their way to stardom.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Milton Keynes
ELLIOTT SEALE/Picture Designer
CHRIS WILLOWS/BMW Judge
LINDA SEALE/Elliott's Mother
Voice over
The greatest oak still has to grow from a tiny acorn.
And so it is with the paint job on BMW's latest prestige eight series car.
The design came from the sketchpad of a 12 year old Milton Keynes schoolboy.
Elliott Seales beat 15,000 others for the honour of seeing his New
York skyline painted on to the car by artist Paula MacArthur.
The car is the 13th in a series of Art Cars commissioned by BMW.
The scheme has been running since 1975 and has included the designs of A R Penck, Matazo Kayama and the pop artist, Andy Warhol.
His BMW went on to race at Le Mans.
Elliott is following in the tyretracks of some highranking artists.
Male speaker
I got the idea from a book.
I also make models at home.
Voice over
He won a competition run by BMW and the Sunday Times.
His design shows a new York skyline on an early summer evening.
The car goes to the BMW Art Car collection.
Male speaker
It's original and is unique.
It's the product of a very fertile mind.
Voice over
Elliott spends a lot of time at home working on his designs.
He keeps scrapbooks full of them at his home in Bradwell, Milton Keynes.
Female speaker
He's always enjoyed it and spends most of his time working with it.
Voice over
One of Elliott's predecessors, Andy Warhol, said everyone would be famous for 15 minutes.
The young artist seems to have the same dismissive outlook.
Male speaker
I'll just take it as it comes.
Voice over
Art has always moved the soul.
In this case, it moves the body as well.
If it sends people into transports of delight, Elliott will be a happy young man.
In Central News tonight:Deadlock at the County Ground.
Players tell Hoddle to make up his mind.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
After a day of negotiations, Swindon Town appear to have lost their fight to keep their Player-Manager Glenn Hoddle.
The club's chairman says he's doing all in his power to persuade him to stay on.
Wesley Smith
WESLEY SMITH
Chelsea are due to announce their new manager tomorrow, and Hoddle still hasn't denied reports that it's him.
Now some of his players are saying it's time he came clean and declared his intentions.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
GLENN HODDLE
KEN BATES/Chelsea Chairman
RAY HARDMAN/Swindon Town Chairman
COLIN CALDERWOOD/Club Captain
MARTIN LING/Player
Voice over
He was top of the bill at last night's civic reception, but it's looking increasingly likely that Monday's victory in the Play-Off Final at Wembley was Glenn Hoddle's last game in charge at Swindon.
Hoddle's car has been parked outside the County Ground all day.
He was visibly tired when he emerged tonight after an apparently inconclusive meeting with club directors.
Chelsea say they'll announce their new manager in the morning.
But chairman, Ken Bates, who's today been launching a close-season tournament the Londoners are involved in, refused to be drawn on his identity.
Swindon insist there's been no formal approach by Cheslea and still hope to hold on to the architect of Monday's triumph.
Hoddle's refusal to deny that he's about leave has only heightened the suspicion that he is.
Even the players are resigned to the prospect of starting their Premier League campaign without him.
Some of Swindon's Wembley heroes, Martin Ling among them, are out of contract.
They're particularly anxious to find out what's happening.
If Hoddle does leave, there's speculation that Joe Jordan, the former Bristol City manager, would be condidered as a possible successor.
Swindon fans will be put out of their misery at eleven o'clock tomorrow morning.
That's when Chelsea are due to announce whether or not Glenn Hoddle really is to be their new manager.
Police are hunting a man who raped a fourteen year old girl as she walked home late at night.
The victim was so shocked that it was more than a month before she reported the attack.
GRAEME BOWD/Kidlington
Det Insp MARK LOWEN/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The 14 year old girl was attacked near her home on the Grovelands estate in Kidlington.
It happened late at night as she returned from an evening with friends.
The girl has told police that as she walked along The Phelps, a man grabbed her and forced her on to a grass verge.
Although she was just yards from the safety of nearby houses she was too frightened to call out.
After raping her, the man ran into an alley leading to Lyne Road.
This artist's impression is said to be a good likeness of the attacker who's thought to be in his late 30s and has a pot belly.
He has a distinctive Y shaped scar on the left of his upper lip.
Police have set up an incident room at Cowley.
The attack took place on April 30th and was not reported for more than a month.
But the officer leading the hunt says he's convinced the girl's story is genuine.
Male speaker
It is not unusual for women, especially young girls, to be reluctant to reports attacks like this.
Voice over
Police believe the rapist probably lives in the Kidlington area.
There've been no other attacks on the estate, but women are warned to be on their guard while walking alone.
The bodies of nine crewman who were killed when their Hercules crashed in the Scottish Highlands a week ago, will be flown back to RAF Lyneham tomorrow.
Today their station commander paid tribute to the men.
JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
Group Capt DAVID ADAMS/RAF Lyneham
Voice over
All 9 crew members on board the Hercules transport plane were killed when it crashed into the Grampian Hills in North East Scotland last Thursday.
The aircraft was one of 3 on attachment from RAF Lyneham in Wiltshire to RAF Lossiemouth.
The crew were involved in low level tactical training exercises at the time of the accident.
Today, announcing that the bodies will be flown back to Wiltshire base tomorrow, the station commander spoke of the sacrifice the men had made.
Male speaker
The funerals will be next week and a memorial service will be held at the base.
Voice over
The last Hercules crash was more than 20 years ago and the base say they remain confident in the safety of the transporter plane.
Male speaker
It's been in service for over 25 years and we are confident that it is safe.
Voice over
An investigation into the crash is underway, but there's still no indication of what caused it.
A man charged with murdering his wife more than twenty years ago has been committed for trial.
SWINDON
David Main, who's sixty, appeared before Swindon magistrates in connection with the murder of his ex-wife Joan.
Her body was found buried in the back garden of a house in Swindon where Main once lived.
He'll stand trial at Bristol Crown Court 
An airforce pilot is swapping the high life for the high seas to race across the Atlantic single-handed.
He expects the journey of three thousand miles to take up to a month.
And he's doing it with just five days experience of single-handed sailing.
Simon Garrett reports 
PLYMOUTH/Devon
Flt Lt FRASER BOYD/Airman and Yachtsman
Voice over
Flight lieutenant Fraser Boyd doesn't like heights; With that in mind he hopes the final adjustments he's making in dock in Plymouth will render a return visits unnecessary while half way across the Atlantic.
In real life he flies Andovers at RAF Benson in Oxfordshire, but for now he's pawing over charts of a different kind, plotting his route to the eastern seaboard of the United States.
Fraser spent eleven months racing the British entry in last year's America's cup…his single-handed experience is rather less
Male speaker
Well that's another story.
I brought the boat back from Bilbao in Spain on my own which took five days.
That's the minimum requirement for the race
Voice over
When the race starts on Sunday eighty sailors will be going it alone in an assortment of vessels.
This boat's already made it to Britain from Bulgaria to take part…some of the French contingent appears to come from another world
Male speaker
To think just one guy sits up there wearing a wet suit and goggles using all three steering positions on the boat.
Those guys deserve a medal
Voice over
The French professionals receive thousands of pounds sponsorship.
Fraser's experienced big money racing…after a year working on the Oracle boat he was dorpped before the Admiral's Cup.
Fraser's had two thousand pounds in cash and been allowed lots of time by the airforce, and the army gave him a radio used in the Falklands — the rest he's done himself with a mortgage
Male speaker
Some people work up for a lifetime to cross the Channel and then get published in a magazine.
This has taken me four years and I reckon the Atlantic's the one to go for.I'm sure it's not that difficult.
These things always seem more difficult than they really are.
Voice over
The boats can't move now until the race begins.
The record is ten days, but not even the trimarans expect to match that this year.
The Flight Lieutenant from Benson has pressing reasons for making it in under four weeks
Male speaker
It's the sixty-four million dollar question.
It should take me twenty-five or thirty days
Male speaker
How long have you got before you're absent without leave?
Male speaker
Twenty-five days!
Voice over
The man behind’ Sylvia's Mother’and’A Little Bit More’is launching his comeback with a video shot in the region.
Its seven years since the American band Dr Hook split up: now the lead singer from the group who were known for their naked encores is back on the road.
Debbie Kelly reports.
OXFORD
DENNIS LOCORRIERE/Singer
STUART CAMERON/Video Producer
Voice over
Its a new song on a new video…and seven years on from Dr Hook…
Dennis Locorriere, the voice of the American band with hits such as Sylvia's Mother and A Little Bit More.is back as a solo artist with a video recorded in Oxford.
He says; They just picked Oxford because it would be scenic.
I picked the song because I had written it for a special person and it was not a Dr Hook song.
I went on the road when I was 19, I needed to come off the road so I knew who I was.
The video was the idea of Radio Presenter and Dr Hook fan Stuart Cameron.
He says; He was a dream to woek with anything I said we wanted to do he said yes lets do it.
Dennis Lecorriere…may have new material in his solo performance…but the release of Dr Hooks hits'll mean his audience'll expect him to perform their favourites.
He says; After the farewell tour I concentrated on acting and my future and I did not want to sing Dr Hook's songs but I now understand people will want me too.
The original band will never get together again.
Something has to be behind you and that is what is behind me.
Bird watchers are travelling from miles around to view the latest addition to a clifftop nest.
Armed with powerful telescopes, they're trying to spot a Peregrine Falcon chick, born just two weeks ago.
Gareth Furby has this report.
SYMONDS YAT Gloucestershire
GRAHAM WILTON-JONES RSPB Warden
Appeal judges condemn Ward case scientists
Voice over
The Appeal court has quashed Judith Ward's conviction for three bombings, including the M-sixty-two coach blast, saying she did not have a fair trial and that three Government scientists took the law into their own hands.
Hurd in Denmark for crisis talks
The Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, has been in Denmark for EC crisis talks following their recent referendum rejecting the Maastricht Treaty.
FTSE up 1
The hundred shares index closed up one point zero at twenty-six, eighty-one point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-two and at two marks, ninety-two.
(ad lib)
In part two: uncharted waters…the pilot who's preparing for life on the high seas.
Going it alone…former Dr Hook singer is back on the road.
And a bird's eye view…keeping watch on the Falcon chick.
Welcome back.
Now to the final part of our series on the future of farming.
Farmers throughout the region have welcomed the end to the months of uncertainty which surrounded recent EC talks to reform the community's farming policy.
But there's a small group of farmers who say the reforms don't go far enough, and that there should be a complete rethink of the way we farm our countryside.
Harriet Ryley has been talking to an organic farmer who believes in putting the environment before profits.
NORTH ASTON/Oxfordshire
JEREMY TAYLOR/Organic Farmer
RICHARD WALKER/ICI
Voice over
Pulling thistles out by hand — something most farmers would never do.
They'd use herbicide to kill them off.
But Jeremy Taylor is different.
He's an organic farmer so he doesn't use any of the chemicals used on conventional farms.
Coldharbour farm is one of Britain's bigger organic farms at nine hundred acres, growing wheat, oats and barley with a herd of 90 cows and a big flock of sheep.
It's taken ten years to convert the whole farm and today it offers a vision of what organic farms of the future could look like.
The aim is to cultivate the land without worrying all the time about the biggest possible return.
Male speaker
There's a little old rhyme about sowing crops which accepts that you can't expect the maximum potential from a crop every time — you've got to allow something for the other occupants of the land and it goes:
Voice over
’ One for the sparrow, one for the crow, One for the weather and one to grow.’
Organic farming is all about muck.
They use manure from the cows to feed the soil instead of man made fertilisier.
And no herbicides to kill weeds and no pesticides.
The animals are fed with organic oats and beans grown on the farm — completing the cycle.
The organic meat, the lambs, have been a success and made money last year.
The farm sold most of them Safeways.
But Jeremy Taylor knows the demand for organic meat is limited.
Male speaker
It's still a very small market, but we do believe that consumers want meat produced in an environmentally sensitive and natural way.
Voice over
But ICI who make many of Britain's agro-chemcials and fertilisers for farmers does not agree:
Male speaker
I believe the British public really wants to buy good quality food at reasonable prices and that modern systems of farming which include fertilisers and agro-chemicals are the only way to produce that food.
Voice over
And shoppers agree.
They like the idea of organic meat, but not the higher price.
Male speaker
Certainly I'd be willing to try it — but I always think it seems to be a little bit too pricey.
Female speaker
It just seems an awful lot more expensive.
But I would buy it if it was the same price as ordinary meat.
Voice over
The price of organic food can only come down with bigger subsidies to organic farmers.
But the reform of the EC's Common Agricultural Policy, or CAP which has just been agreed barely makes a nod to organic farmers.
They are on CAP's agenda for the first time, but only as a footnote, as part of a number of so-called’ additional measures’still to be settled.
Jeremy Taylor remains philosophical — still putting his beliefs before profit.
Male speaker
Although it's important we are profitable, we're working towards different values other than purely monetary.
For instance this bit of woodland which we planted fifteen years ago — it's becoming part of the countryside and in another generation will be here as a bit of habitat for wildlife — it's of no monetary significance at all.
Voice over
This kind of approach as custodian of the countryside can only impress the green lobby — but the higher cost of organic farming means tight financial pressures on those who practice it.
Jeremy Taylor is someone who can afford to put his principles into practice.
But would-be organic farmers will need far more encouragement and money from the government and the EC if they are to succeed.
060492prog(2)
Two directors of Britain's largest independent toy company have been jailed for masterminding an eight million pounds fraud.
The prosecutors who brought the case to court had to work through eight TONS of paperwork.
Mark Kiff reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Insp SHAUN MORLEY/Thames Valley Police Fraud Squad
Voice over
Brian George from Henley in Oxfordshire was the man who thought up the idea of the fraud.
Roger Richardson, who's thirty eight, put the scheme of false accounting into practice.
Together they pulled off a crime which cost their company's banks and creditors more than eight million pounds.
The two men helped make Action Games and Toys the biggest independent manufacturer of toys in Britain.
By 1987, the company had a warehouse in Abingdon employing 157 people and a Henley office with another thirty staff.
Their customers included Toys R Us, Argos and Woolworths.
But behind the apparent success, the company was on the ropes.
Brian George, the managing director, decided fraud was the only way out.
His financial controller Roger Richardson came up with a system of false accounting, which enabled them to borrow millions of pounds over a three year period and keep the company going.
When the receivers were called in, fraud squad officers seized eight tons of documents.
Male speaker
The paperwork was very complex to understand.
A number of measures had been taken by the defendants to cover their tracks from the outside world.
Voice over
The Action Games and Toy trade name was sold to an American firm shortly after the company went into receivership.
But it was not enough to save the company's jobs.
At Oxford Crown Court both George and Richardson admitted fraudulent trading.
Sentencing the two men, Judge Richard May said he was bearing in mind that the defendants hadn't put the money in their own pockets or used it to support expensive lifestyles.
But he said both men had benefitted from keeping the company alive.
This was fraud on a large scale.
It could only be damaging to commercial life.
The Judge held that George was responsible for instigating the crime and jailed him for four and a half years.
Richardson, who wanted to end the fraud before the receivers were called in, was sentenced to three years.
Staff at one of the country's oldest breweries have joined the fight to keep it independent.
They've set up a fund to buy shares in Morland, to help resist a hostile takeover bid from a rival brewer.
If they fail, jobs will go, brewing will cease and the price of a pint could rise.
Robin Powell reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
BILL GREENWAY/Warehouse Supervisor
JASPER CLUTTERBUCK/Morland Chief Executive
BILL WIVELL/Mayor of Abingdon
Voice over
Workers unite — that's the rallying cry at Morland Brewery in Abingdon.
It'll close with the loss of at least a hundred jobs if it's taken over by the Suffolk-based brewer Greene King.
Now staff have started a share scheme to help prevent that happen.
They've so far pledged almost twenty-five thousand pounds — which the scheme's organiser hopes to transfer into Morland shares, enabling workers to vote against the bid…
Employees are right behind the scheme…
Morland's board is also in fighting mood.
Today it sent shareholders a defence document, insisting the bid undervalues the company…
It's not just Morland which opposes Greene King.
Last night Vale of White Horse councillors were unanimous in opposing the takoever that's caused the biggest rumpus in local politics since the car firm MG pulled out of the area twelve years ago.
Morland drinkers are also concerned.
The real ale group CAMRA has warned that if the Greene King bid is successful they'll have to pay another six pence for a pint of their favourite beer.
Greene King denies CAMRA's claim.
It said tonight:’ Greene King prices are cheaper than Morland prices for comparable brews.’
As for the district council's response to the bid, it said that was’ unsurprising.
But it's admirable the way Morland employees are supporting their board.’
The Government has confirmed that it's considering changing county boundaries.
It may also introduce new-look local authorities.
For some people, the review is long overdue.
Ken Goodwin reports.
PETER TEMPLE-MORRIS MP/Con Leominster
MICHAEL HONEY/Gloucestershire County Council
Voice over
Badminton used to be in Gloucestershire.
But when county boundaries were reorganised in nineteen seventy four it became part of the new county of avon.
Hereford used to be in herefordshire.
Now it's in hereford and worcester.
The changes were contreversial then, and many many people would still like to see them reversed now.
Hereford and worcester will have to wait for at least five years to see if the local government review will split it back into seperate counties, but Gloucestershire may benefit before then, as avon looks like being abolished in two years time.
This could allow Gloucestershire to regain some of the areas it lost.
There may also be new look councils in Oxfordshire, buckinghamshire and northamptonshire, although no decision will be made on these until nineteen ninety six.
The local government review is being seen as long overdue by some of those who were affected the most by the last major changes eighteen years ago.
One of the most famous sportsmen in the world, Muhammad Ali, is proving that he can still pull the crowds.
Hundreds of fans queued for hours to meet the man who became heavyweight champion of the world but in the process developed Parkinson's Syndrome, a disorder of the nervous system.
Nick Clark reports.
OXFORD
THOMAS HAUSER/Author
Voice over
Escape attempt…prisoner sprays hospital patients with CS gas.
Behind bars…toy company bosses jailed for multi-million pound fraud.
And still the champ…
Ali proves a hit with the young.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
STOKE MANDEVILLE/Buckinghamshire
CHARLES SLOANE/Radiographer
SUZANNE McHATTIE/Radiographer
KEN CUNNINGHAM /General Manager
As hospital staff try to get rid of the last traces of CS gas from the department many are still recovering from the ordeal, which left them and a number of their patients suffering the effects of the gas.
The prisoner, Terry Robinson, left Grendon Underwood jail this morning guarded by three prison officers for a routine x-ray at Stoke Mandevill hospital ten miles away.
He was given a scan at the hospital's radiology department and once his treatment was finished he asked to go to the toilet.
As he came out he made a break for freedom spraying gas in the faces of his guards and hospital staff who rushed to help.
Male speaker
I heard a commotion and went to see what was happening.
I saw the patient on the ground and went to help but was immediately overcome by the gas.
I felt naseous and my eyes were streaming, it was very unpleasant.
Voice over
The waiting area had been full and in all twenty eight staff and outpatients had to be treated for the effects of gas.
Staff prevented more serious injury by evacuating the department within minutes
Female speaker
They all asked if there was a fire.
We just asked them to leave and told them we would explain later.
Voice over
Last month a patient was shot dead at a London teaching hospital and hospital security measures were brought into question.
But staff at Stoke Mandeville believe there was nothing they could have done to prevent this incident…
He said: I am concerned that an incident like this happened but I am confident that our security measures worked well
It's believed Robinson was searched before he left prison.
So how he came to be carrying a cannister of CS gas is being invistigated…he may have had an accomplice.
The governor of Grendon Underwood would not be interviewed but said in a statement…
’ The matter is now the subject of an internal inquiry.
We are trying to find out how a prisoner was able to posess a cannister of what appears to be CS gas’.
Tonight Robinson is being transfered to Bullingdon prison in Oxfordshire.
Andrew Hagans, the man who killed office worker Anna McGurk, was questioned by a policeman just half an hour before the killing, a jury has been told.
Later that night, according to evidence, Hagans was wearing her necklace.
This report from Tim Hurst.
AUGUST 1991/GLOUCESTER
PHILLIP DAVEY/Witness
Voice over
Witnesses working near the river bank in Gloucester where a body was found the next day, told the jury at Bristol Crown Court of hearing screams.
It was late afternoon on August 28 last year, the day that Anna McGurk, an office worker with Gloucester city council, was strangled.
Andrew Hagans, unemployed, from Cheltenham, has admitted he murdered her.
He's denied raping her.
One of those who told the court of hearing screams was a 14 year old canoist.
Earlier, a former police consatble, Patrick Stennett, told of stopping Hagans and searching him on a footbridge between the council office and a staff car park, half an hour before Mrs McGurk died.
Hagans told him he was waiting for his girlfriend.
A few minutes later, on a causeway beside the bridge, a walker found Mrs McGurk's handbag — he saw a prescription inside in her maiden name, Potts.
A man appeared from under the causeway and the walker asked’ Have you got Anna Potts down there?’
The man appeared to grunt’ yes’and took the handbag.
At the Ryecroft bail hostel in Gloucester, where Hagans was living at the time, another witness said Hagans had tried to sell him a wedding ring for ten pounds, and was wearing a gold chain necklace.
The prosecution say the wedding ring and the chain had been taken from Mrs McGurk by Hagans after he'd strangled her and hidden her body in undergrowth.
He's denied rape, saying that what happened between himself and Mrs McGurk had been with her consent.
The trial continues on Monday.
Two animal rights campaigners who took part in a series of firebombings have each been jailed for four years.
Richard Duriez and Annette Tibbles helped to plan a series of attacks by the Animal Liberation Front.
The judge described their crimes as a campaign of economic sabotage.
GRAEME BOWD/Northampton Crown Court
ALF Video
RORKE GARFIELD/National Animal Rescue Association
MICHAEL SHANAHAN/Friend of Annette Tibbles
Voice over
Richard Duriez and Annette Tibbles were involved in a series of ALF raids, mostly directed at the meat trade.
Over five months in 1991 the group mounted a terror campaign across three counties.
They set fire to trucks at a meat processing plant near Northampton and at the pig improvement company at Kingston Bagpuize in Oxfordshire.
Pet shops and butchers were also among their targets.
And a raid on the pig unit at the Cancer Research Institute in Oxford was filmed by the activists themselves.
Last month Duriez and Tibbles was found guilty of conspiracy to commit arson.
Today they were each sentenced to four years imprisonment.
Judge Richard May said he accepted they were genuine supporters of animal rights.
But he told them:’ That cannot justify the actions for which you have been convicted.
You conducted a campaign of economic sabotage.
Those who participate in such campaigns must expect substantial sentences.
The judge said he accepted that the pair were not the ring leaders.
Police believe several other people were involved in the raids.
They've yet to be caught.
Tibbles, who worked at an animal rescue centre, has now been expelled from the RSPCA.
Friends and colleagues say she was motivated by what she saw as cruelty in the meat trade.
Male speaker
We don't condone arson or violence, but many young people believe such actions are justified.
Big companies will not take notice of anything else.
Male speaker
It was a one off.
She had dedicated her life to helping people and animals.
Voice over
Research centres and meat companies which escaped the attentions of the ALF will still have to pay the price.
The attacks led to a substantial increase in insurance premiums against terrorism.
A police helicopter has been called in to search for an armed robber who's raided five petrol stations in three weeks.
The man, who makes his getaway on foot each time, has been caught on a security video.
Security Video/TIM HURST/Swindon
SUSAN MORGAN/Victim
Det Sgt DAVID HURST/Wiltshire CID
Voice over
The man, armed with a knife, has raided 5 filling stations at Swindon in Wiltshire in just 3 weeks.
In his late 20's or early 30's, with a distinctive moustache, he then left each robbery on foot, convincing police he knows the town well.
The latest theft happened at a Shell garage in Marlborough Road at Swindon.
Two other garages have been hit by the same man in just 6 days and a police helicopter is on standby to track him next time he strikes.
Police believe it's only a matter of time before the robber uses the knife which he keeps out of sight while demanding money.
They're asking anyone who recognises him to call their nearest police station.
(AD LIB ANNE)
Still to come on Central News…the patients who say pressure is good for them.
Is this the relief that MS sufferers have been looking for?
Plus: Morse rides again…a chance to follow in his footsteps.
And a shortage of sheep shearers…young hopefuls are called to the Baa 
So Swindon have a new man to lead them into the Premier League.
John Gorman will be the latest in a line of influential and successful managers who've brought the little Wiltshire club from the fourth division to the top flight, in just a decade.
LOU MACARI/Speaking in 1984
OSSIE ARDILES/Speaking in 1989
GLENN HODDLE/Speaking in 1991
Voice over
Fortunes are changing at Swindon Town.
The faces are changing too.
Each new manager at the County Ground had his own troubles and tales to tell.
Lou Macari came to Swindon in 1984.
He brought class and charisma to the lowly 4th division side.
Male speaker
It's the opposite end of the scale to Old Trafford.
I called them today, they had more than 50 players training.
I had 13.
Voice over
He brought controversy too.
Sacked and then reinstated within two extrordinary days at the club.
And he brought success.
Swindon promoted from 4th to 3rd and then to the 2nd division in consecutive seasons.
Macari was lured by the clout of the Hammers.
In his place came Ossie Ardilles a small man with big ideas.
Male speaker
Last season we didn't make the play offs.
This time we want to make the 1st division.
Voice over
It was Ossie who took Swindon up into the 1st division — or so he thought.
The illegal payments scandal brought them down to earth with a bump and down into the 3rd division.
The red army fought in the courts and Swindon were given a second chance in the 2nd division.
Ossie moved on to Newcastle.
And a new Messaih moved in; Glenn Hoddle.
New to management, but wise to the footballing game.
Male speaker
The time is right.
I'm very happy about it.
I like the style of football here.
Voice over
The gamble paid off.
Hoddle gave Swindon, style and poise.
Creative football that created the big chance — a second chance at Wembley.
His goal and guidence helped them to the Premier League.
But then the tug of war.
As Swindon celebrated, Hoddle was saying his farewells.
But the man at his side throughout the campaign John Gorman, is the man making the headlines in Swindon today.
4 managers and 4 divisions; the Swindon success story will go on.
So, the guessing games are over, at the end of another dramatic week for Swindon Town.
What next for the Robins?
Tim…(ad lib)
TIM RUSSON/Sports Editor
Voice over
The bodies of eight of the nine airmen killed when their Hercules crashed last week have been flown back to RAF Lyneham.
They were met by grieving relatives.
A memorial service will be held later this month.
GARETH FURBY/RAF Lyneham
Group Capt DAVID ADAMS/Station Commander
Voice over
They came back to Lyneham as they left…in an RAF Hercules.
The crash investigators won't report until next year on why their low level training flight went so wrong.
For now the relatives can only grieve.
First to be brought off…
Lance Corpoal Gary Manning…an air despatcher…his job to drop supplies out of the Hercules while it was in flight.
And last to brought off…
Squadron Leader Graham Young…a vertan of the Hercules, who had more than 25 years of flying experience.
He says it's been a sad day, but its also a homecoming.
They gave their lives in service of their country.
Much of the crash site in the Grampian hills has now been cleared.
And the wreckage is being flown to RAF Abingdon in Oxfordshire to be laid out in a hanger like a giant jigsaw puzzle, which could help crash investigators pinpoint the cause.
Eight of the dead came home today, the ninth will be buried in Scotland.
Relatives at Lyneham will now arrange private funerals.
And the base will hold a memorial service at Lyneham Parish Church on June the 23rd.
The Marquis of Blandford has disappeared from a London flat after police arrived to arrest him.
The heir to the Blenheim Palace Estate is facing a jail sentence for failing to make maintenance payments to his wife Becky who lives at Kiddington in Oxfordshire.
Police saw him go into a flat in West London but by the time they entered he'd gone.
Police, hunting a gang who made an unprovoked knife attack on a man, have been making a fingertip search of the area where it happened.
Geoffrey Walsh, who has learning difficulties, suffered severe internal injuries and needed a blood transfusion after being stabbed and slashed at least three times.
BLETCHLEY/Buckinghamshire
He was walking near Tesco's in Bletchley with two friends when the gang attacked them.
Holidaymakers, who stand to lose their money after a travel company collapsed, have been attending a creditors meeting today.
OXFORD
The SFV Holiday Company, based in Oxford, was wound up after running into financial problems.
More than eight hundred people stand to lose holidays they'd booked in France, Spain and Italy.
In Central News tonight:
DIY store shooting: Gunman murders woman then kills himself.
End of an era: Hoddle gives Swindon the Chelsea boot.
And, I'm in charge.
Gorman gets the challenge of the Premier League.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The shooting happened in the busy car park of a DIY store just after midday.
The gunman is believed to have been waiting for the women and chidren to come out of the shop.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
MARY ROBERTS/Eyewitness
Det Supt PETER SHAYLE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
The shooting happened just after twelve o clock in the car park of the Texas Homecare store in Cheltenham.
The man is believed to have been waiting there as his ex girlfriend came out of the shop with her daughter and two young grandchildren.
Eyewitnesses say he pointed a sawn off shotgun at one of the women and fired.
Ambulance staff tried to resuscitate the couple, but they were both dead.
Staff and customers comforted each other as police cleared items from the scene; the cartridges that had been fired, and the pushchair that one of the children had been using.
The dead woman has been identified as June Smith, a mother of two in her forties.
Tonight her family is being consoled at their home in Cheltenham.
The dead man is believed to be Stuart Jobson.
He's known to have been upset after their recent seperation.
The two bodies were taken away to Cheltenham General Hospital where a post mortem is being carried out.
June Smith's daughter, Tracey and her children have been treated in hospital for shock.
Swindon Town have a new manager tonight.
In a day of comings and goings at the County Ground, Glenn Hoddle left to take charge at Chelsea.
Hoddle says he had to think of his own future career.
John Gorman, his right hand man for the past two seasons has taken over to lead Swindon into the Premier League next season…
TIM RUSSON Reporting
JOHN GORMAN Swindon Manager
GLENN HODDLE Chelsea Manager
RAY HARDMAN Swindon Chairman
Voice over
The king is dead…long live the king…
At the County Ground this morning John Gorman took over the crown as Swindon Town manager…down in London at Stamford Bridge Glenn Hoddle…the man whod abdicated was taking charge of his new kingdom Chelsea…
In 24 hours of high pitched wheeling and dealing…
Hoddle kicked off by telling Swindon he wanted to leave…he wanted a bigger club…next thing Chelsea are knocking at the door for both Hoddle and John Gorman…they both resigned…
But at the last minute the Town board played their cards…and persuaded Gorman to stay on and take over
John Gorman…
so much for the new man…what about his partner…what made Glenn Hoddle leave Swindon
Glenn Hoddle…
the moves today came as no surprise…speculation has been linking Hoddle with Chelsea for weeks…
Swindon will be pushing for compensation 300 to 400 hundred thousand pounds…theres's been talk of dirty deeds illegal approaches…and things like that but they've all shaken hands…everyone is happy…
Ray Hardman
and what of the man who's got to mastermind Swindon's first season in the big time…many only know John Gorman as Hoddle's assistant…so who is he…what's he about…
Born in Scotland he started as a young full-back at Park Head…then after 200 games with Carlisle…he hit the big time with Spurs…that's when he became pals with Hoddle…at 29 his English career was wrecked by injury…he helped pioneer soccer in the states and then came back home again to coach…
his plans…his football philsophy now…
John Gorman
one thing's for sure the appointment of John Gorman is a popular one on the terraces…he's given the fans what they crave for…and that's loyalty…from first thing this morning supporters were rolling up at the County Ground to have their say
vox pops…
football is a fickle game…
Monday's hero is Friday's forgotten man…but Glenn Hoddle still wants to say goodbye to the fans…
Hoddle
as for Gorman he's now leading the battle cry…
Gorman…
so the red and white army marches on…to the premier league with a new general…
Paratrooper convicted of murder
FTSE down 22
The hundred shares index closed down twenty two point nine at two eight two nine point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty two and up at two marks, forty seven.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
Bush won't sign environmental treaty
FTSE down 13
The hundred shares index closed down thirteen point four at twenty six, sixty eight point five.
The pound is up at one dollar eighty three, but down at two Marks ninety one,
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A coroner has called for tighter security at a psychiatric hospital, after a patient walked out of a locked ward and was killed by a train on nearby railway tracks.
Staff at the hospital say they have no idea how he got out.
But a mental health charity says it's not the first time such an incident has occurred.
Gargy Patel reports.
CHOLSEY/Oxfordshire
DAVID KEY/Clinical Manager
MARJORIE WALLACE/SANE
Voice over
Alexander Byrne was receiving hospital treatment for schizophrenia.
Last October his body was found on railway tracks about a mile from the hospital.
He'd managed to walk out of a locked ward at the Fairmile psychiatric hospital, and it's thought he threw himself under an express train.
His parents had warned staff of his suicide threats.
But although he was being closely watched, Alexander got out.
He was even seen later in nearby Wallingford, but doctors decided not to call the police.
At the inquest, the coroner recorded an open verdict, but urged staff to tighten up procedures.
The hospital says it was an accident.
24 year old Alexander had been admitted to Fairmile three days before his death, following a family argument at home in Woodley, near Reading.
He had a history of mental illness.
But pressure groups say Alexander's case is not unusual.
There are dozens like him who commit suicide.
The dangerous effects of schizophrenia aren't taken seriously enough.
After investigation, Fairmile still can't explain how Alexander got out.
But critics say unless attitudes to the illness change, people like Alexander Byrne will continue to die.
TIM RUSSON
PETER KNEALE/Organising Committee
FRED CLARKE/Banbury
TREVOR NATION/Oxford
ALLAN WARNER/ Gloucester
GRANT GOODINGS/RAF Brize Norton
ALAN BATSON/Aylesbury
TERRIE SALONE/Swindon
NICK CLARK/Reporting
DAVID FEHERTY
Voice over
A duckling which suffers from an identity crisis is being cared for by a family.
The fluffy bird thinks it's human, and follows it's owners everywhere they go.
Ken Goodwin reports.
AMBERLEY/Gloucestershire
COLETTE BRICKWOOD/Dodo's Owner
SAM BRICKWOOD
Voice over
It's enough to drive you quackers.
Dodo the duckling thinks Colette Brickwood is his mother.
Now he won't go anywhere without her.
So how did this strange relationship develop?
She says that the bird was sick when it first hatched, so she nursed it; now it thinks she's it's mother.
Dodo doesn't only like people.
He's quite keen on the family dog, too.
She says that the duckling loves to snuggle up in the dogs fur.
The trouble is, Colette can't go anywhere without dodo.
Wherever she is, Dodo is there too.
She says that she even has to take the duckling to work.
She puts it in a cat basket.
But Colette's son, Sam is fascinated by Dodo the duckling, particularly by one aspect of Dodo's behaviour.
He says that Dodo often uses a shoe as a loo.
Luckily it's his mum's shoe, so he doesn't mind.
Colette says the duckling remain a part of the houshold as long as it wants.
As for Do-Do, he's taken taken to familly life like a duck to water.
Now a root around in the attic could raise a fortune for charity.
Already a pair of earrings worth up to four thousand pounds has been donated to launch this summer's major television fundraising campaign — the third ITV Telethon.
OXFORD
MICHAEL WELCH/Phillips Auctioneers
Some of the wacky and wonderful things people got up to in the last ITV Telethon 2 years ago.
Now it's time to start again.
Phillips Auctioneers in Oxford is working with other branches throughout Britain to raise up to a million pounds for local charities in the ITV Telethon '92.
They've got off to a good start with a pair of eighteen carat gold and turquoise earrings donated by the Elizabeth Gage company of London.
They're expected to fetch up to £4,000 and every penny will go to charity.
The idea is that if you can't donate cash, you might give an antique to go towards Phillip's Telethon effort.
Chief Auctioneer, Michael Welch, suggests that silver, brass or other trinkets could well fetch a tidy sum.
Phillip's will help you decide on the value of the antiques.
This is how you should get in touch if you think you have a suitable item.
The number to call is 0891 500173, that's 0891 500173 and they'll tell you where to bring your collectables for auction on June 25th.
But Telethon is not just about antiques, here's how else you can get involved.
If you or a group of colleagues or friends have a fundraising idea call 0891 767400, that's 0891 767400.
ITV Telethon Weekend is July 18th and 19th.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
WESTON-on-the-GREEN/Oxfordshire
LESLIE GODWIN/Taxi Driver
LEIGH RADWELL/Eyewitness
Det Insp JOHN BOUND/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The hijack took place in this layby off the A34 just south of Bicester.
25-year-old Michael Johnson, who was serving a seven-year sentence for possession of firearms, robbery, burglary and theft at nearby Bullingdon Prison, was returning there from Reading Magistrates Court.
He produced a knife, ordered the taxi driver to stop, forced all but one of the prison officers out of the car, and drove off down the M40 towards London.
CLIP with Taxi Driver
CLIP with Eyewitness
The taxi — a grey Montego was abandoned and has still not been found.
Johnson, took another taxi to Harrow, where the prison officer was released.
Johnson is still on the run…
CLIP with Police
It's the third time in a year Johnson has escaped — his last breakout was from Maidstone Prison.
The police say it's how he got hold of a knife is a matter for the prison authorities — but Bullingdon Prison declined an interview.
Johnson's described as slim, six feet tall, with short fair hair.
He was wearing a brown jacket, green shirt and blue jeans.
The police are urging the public not to approach him
The parents of a young man who fell to his death from an express train say there are still unanswered questions about how it happened.
An inquest jury has returned a verdict of accidental death, and the case has reopened the controversy about the safety of carriage locks.
Mike Rowbottom reports 
OXFORD
JOHN NEWTON/Father
BARBARA NEWTON/Mother
MICHAEL BOARDMAN/Witness
Voice over
THE parents of the dead man John Newton walked away from today's inquest satisfied with the verdict of accidental death but still not knowing exactly how their son died.
John was on a train just south of Didcot travelling at over ninety miles an hour when he fell out.
His father thinks there are questions to be answered.
Male speaker
there have to be questions to answer, there have been four hundred people falling out of trains since 1979, there must be a question to answer
Female speaker
It's the best verdict we could have hoped for John Newton was doing well in the RAF.
At the age of eighteen he was a senior aircraftsman.
He'd been to see his girlfriend in Southampton and was on his way to see his parents in Sheffield.
The train called at Reading where BR staff say all doors and locks were checked.
The last person to John alive was having a cigarette with him in the carriage vestibule.
He had one arm on a handrail, the other on a half open window
Male speaker
I couldn't be entirely sure where his other arm was, but he just disappeared.
He fell out
Voice over
The inquest heard that John had been drinking but was cheerful not drunk.
He died instantly from head injuries caused by either the fall, or the imnpact of a train coming the other way.
Much of the hearing centred around the carriage doorlock.
British rail tested it exhaustively but could find no way of making it fail.
The locks have been the subject of a Health and Safety Executive investigation over the last twelve months and this was the first case to be examined.
They were tested at speed, with weights and eventually taken apart.
The evidence from today's inquest proved nothing conclusive about the locks, and BR have already said they're carrying out a review.
The inquest jury was only able to say John Newton died accidentally by falling through a carriage door.
Two hundred and fifty British troops are preparing to fly to war-torn Croatia as part of a United Nations peace-keeping force.
Many of them admit it's the most dangerous mission ever taken on by UN forces.
Tim Hurst reports.
SOUTH CERNEY/Gloucestershire
Dr VANESSA LLOYD-DAVIES
ARCHIE HAMILTON MP/Armed Forces Minister
Voice over
Latest reports from what was Yugoslavia describe the situation as a potential tinderbox, medical teams from Britain have been warned of growing ethnic tensions.
250 officers and men from the Royal Army Medical Corps and Royal Engineers, already equipped with their familiar United Nations blue berets, have been gathering at the Army's Air Movement Centre at South Cerney in Gloucestershire.
Most of them don't expect to see their families again until Christmas.
Among the medical teams, a doctor who's husband is already serving with the UN in Croatia.
The British troops expect to be working in Croatia, away from the hotspots like Sarajevo, but just how close to the fighting they'll get depends on UN strategy, according to the Armed Forces minister who visited South Cerney this afternoon.
The British UN contingent will fly from Brize Norton in Oxfordshire tomorrow morning.
A rather unusual hot air balloon has completed its maiden voyage.
You might have seen Pete the Pylon in a certain television commercial.
The balloon version of him is (150) a hundred and fifty feet high, and stitched together with (19) nineteen miles of thread.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
DAVID PARTRIDGE/Pilot
Voice over
Despite being the star of one of the most successful advertising campaigns on television, Pete the animated electricity pylon has managed to keep his feet firmly on the ground.
But now the marketing department at Swindon-based National Power is giving him lift-off.
Pete's maiden voyage during the early morning rush hour hardly went unnoticed — these cows sent scurrying for cover had never seen anything like it.
In case you missed Pete with his head in the clouds today, you can expect to see him topping the bill at air shows throughout the summer.
Like all TV stars, Pete the Pylon is in big demand.
Now, a story of how the English are finally beating the Australians at their own game.
No…not playing cricket or making soap operas…but breeding native aussie animals…
ERIKA BARNES Weston Underwood
CHRISTOPHER MARLER Wallaby Farmer
Voice over
This is Buckinghamshire…not the outback.
And these are rare snowy white wallabies, thought to be the only flock in the World.
They're being bred by farmer, Christopher Marler and this year, there's been something of a baby boom.
Male speaker
In this flock we have 16 pregnant females.
Soon they'll be independent.
They're pure white, red eyed.
They've settled well.
They're quite delightful to bred.
Voice over
These albinos are descended from a pair presented to the Queen by the Australians.
In the twenty years they've been here, they've clearly thrived.
Male speaker
We've developed a fertile strain.
I'm a pedigree cattle breeder.
This year it's a one hundred percent success rate.
Voice over
Christopher exports the Wallabies to collectors around the world.
But clearly they prefer their English home, because all the females here have produced beautiful bouncing babies.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Lords warning over Maastricht
The Leader of the House of Lords, Lord Wakeham, has warned supporters of a referendum on Maastricht, including Baroness Thatcher, that they are in danger of undermining Parliamentary democracy.
Schools boycott tests
Teachers nationwide have boycotted schools tests for fourteen-year-olds in a protest against the Government.
900 train making jobs axed
Nine hundred jobs have been axed at Britain's largest maker of trains, ABB Transportation in Derby, York and Crewe.
FTSE up 14
The hundred shares index closed up fourteen point nine at twenty-eight, forty-four point eight.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-two and up at two marks, forty-seven.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back: Coming up in a few minutes, the wallaby farmer who's got something of a baby boom on his hands.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim 
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
BRIAN ELLIOTT/Race Organiser
BRIAN ROUSE/Mechanic
TONY CARPENTER/Dietician
VALENTIN REKHERT/Team Manager
NICO MATTAN/Race Leader
Voice over
Each and every June, the world's top amateur cyclists get on their bikes to pedal the roads, lanes, hills and mountains of Britain.
In two weeks, they race over 1,000 miles.
This summer there are 17 teams of 6 from all over the globe.
Brian Elliott says the race has survived the recession and is now bigger than ever.
It's the best amateur event in the world.
The Milk Race, which has been running for 25 years, is like a wagon train as it winds its way through the country.
There are over 100 support vehicles.
Each team has managers, mechanics and masseurs.
Brian Rouse a mechanic says he goes through a thorough check every day and washes the bikes and night and sometimes has to rebuild them.
In a fast time, trial cylists can burn nearly 9000 calories; that's 3 football matches, or two running marathons.
They keep going with an endless supply of fuel.
20,000 pints of milk and 9,000 bananas.
Take care of the snacks.
Tony Carpenter, a dietician, says it's vital they drink as much fluid as they can get.
This year, there are 14 countries competing.
Among the new names, Kazakstan one of the Russian republics.
Team manager of Kazakstan says the weather is hot, but his riders are doing well on the climbs.
Thousands were out along the route to watch one of the toughest stages of the event.
7 laps in and out and around Great Malvern, leading the race into Worcestershire was Nico Matten a young Belgium rider who was wearing the coveted yellow jersey for the first time.
Nico Mattan says he is going to ride his own race.
He's good at climbing but there not many long hills in Belgium.
Mattan and the yellow jersey were right in the middle of the pack as it peddled hard in the blistering heat.
They managed to average 28 mph; that's some going, down the hill towards Welland they touched 60, up the hill into Great Malvern it was down to a running pace.
Tactics play a big part in cycle racing.
The art of winning is knowing when to push hard, when to pump or when to hold back and keep the power in reserve.
More than once a brave few tried to break away.
At one stage, there was a 30 second gap between the leaders and the pack and as much as 12 minutes to the last man, a Czech rider who was suffering in the heat.
But after 74 miles, they were all together as they charged up the last climb to the finishing line.
Winner by a squeak, was Danish rider Christian Andersen.
Irishman, Connor Henry who won the race last year was second, an Australian 3rd, Norway 4th.
After the hills of the Malverns today, was the only rest day in 14.
After that, 700 miles in 5 days to the finish line in Manchester.
while the cyclists have been putting their feet up there's been no rest day for other sports…here's our round-up of the weekend's winners and losers 
Voice over
It’ s TT week in the Isle of Man…
The Oxford Products Ducati team was on its way to first and second in the formula race…but engine trouble stopped Mark Farmer…and an injury forced Robert Dunlop to retire…
In the 400…the lone woman rider Francesca Giordano who was racing for Gloucester Kawasaki team came 29th…out of 29 with an average speed of just over eighty miles an hour…
one winner for Gloucestershire this weekend though was badminton player Nick Ponting from Cheltenham he took the bronze medal in the mixed doubles at the world championships…
there was silver…a second place for Oxford's Brookes University in the eights at London's Docklands Regatta…
and at the end of the national hunt racing season…celebrations for Gloucestershire's top stables…trainer David Nicholson reached a century of winners for the first time and champion jockey Richard Dunwoody finished with 173…a record year for them both
A specially-built Ferrari is being entered privately for the gruelling Le Mans (24) Twenty Four hour race by an engineering team…not from Italy…but from the Forest of Dean.
The (348 GT) Three Four Eight Gee Tee production model has been painstakingly prepared over the last seven weeks.
The race in France is later this month.
IAN MACLAREN/Silverstone
ROBIN SMITH/Simpson Engineering
STEFANO SEBASTIANI/Co-Driver
Voice over
In the pits at Silverstone, the Ferrari 348 GT is about to be test-driven for the the first time.
Everyone's a little on edge, but the throaty roar of a Ferrari engine bursting into life calms frayed nerves.
Behind the wheel is Robin Smith, boss of Simpson Engineering, from Alvington in Gloucestershire.
A veteran of Le Mans, he's won his class and finished 5th overall in the past.
The Ferrari is capable of hitting speeds of up to 190 mph on the track.
It costs £74,000 to put the 348 GT on the road and nearly as much again to take it to Le Mans.
Robin delivers the first verdict on it's performance.
Co-driver Stefano Sebastiani owns his own Ferrari, but this will be the first time he's driven one on the race track on one of the world's most demanding circuits.
The Ferrari has been built up from a shell at an unlikely location on the edge of the Forest of Dean.
Simpson Engineering talked the Italian car makers into approving their private entry.
It'll be the first appearance at Le Mans by a Ferrari in more than 15 years.
The Alvington entry will be competing in a new class for slightly modified production models, hoping to head off the Jaguars and Porsches when the race gets underway on June the 19th.
A leaked government report says Gloucestershire County Council should be abolished.
It would be replaced by three large district authorities, in what would be the biggest local government shake-up in the county's history.
But the people in the firing line say that getting rid of the county council won't serve the people, and would be inefficient.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Gloucester
MICHAEL HONEY/County Chief Executive
PAUL MARLAND MP/Con West Cloucestershire
Voice over
The county of Gloucestershire has seen some turbulent times over the centuries, not least of them in the present one.
They've been at loggerheads with the Government over a ten million pound capping row.
But that could all change with proposals to merge the council with the six smaller district councils within the county.
And that has ruffled a few feathers at Shire Hall.
Male speaker
They're proposing to merge Gloucester and Stroud which is unworkable.
It's also being being proposed to get rid of the county and unite other areas in it.
People have a great sense of affection for the county and for their district.
Voice over
The government has made it known it wants to shake up local administrations by combining all their services under single authorities.
At the moment Gloucestershire has a county council and six districts.
The county takes responsibility for education…social services…the county's road network…the police…and the fire service.
The districts collect the rubbish…take responsibility for housing…and look after certain environmental services.
Under the new system all of those services would be put into the hands of three authorities within the existing county boundaries.
The details have been leaked by Gloucestershire officials from a local Government commission report.
But the idea has been greeted with enthusiasm elsewhere…
Male speaker
Since the Conservatives lost control of the council the politicians have been very poor stewards of our affairs and I don't think they'll be missed at all.
Voice over
Several questions remain unanswered: would the police force be split into three at a time when the government is trying to rationalise the service.
What would happen to the existing fire and Rescure cover?
The man who will have to answer these questions, the new environment Secretary John Gummer, was visiting Cheltenham today by coincidence.
It will give him plenty to think about.
Mother Teresa of Calcutta has been talking of her concern for the victims of Aids.
But, in a speech to students at Oxford University she also reiterated her opposition to contraception.
The eighty-three year old Nobel Peace prize winner is currently on a nationwide tour.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
Voice over
Kindness, love and calm shine from the face of Mother Teresa.
Described as the first lady of Christendon.
She came to the Oxford Union to share her Christian message.
A message they were eager to hear, even if they couldn't see.
The deminutive Mother Teresa was almost drowned by the students' welcome.
Mother Teresa spoke with thoughts for the dilemmas of the young.
Against contraception and abortion.
But then with concern for the victims of AIDS.
Female speaker
Voice over
Mother Teresa told of her experience with the destitute of Calcutta.
How one man lived like an animal, but died like an angel in her care.
Her words touched the hearts and minds of the students.
Male speaker
Female speaker
Voice over
The message for the young people of Oxford: just offer a smile, a word and prayer.
(AD LIB ANNE)
Still to come on Central News, the cream of the crop.
The Milk Race brings top cyclists to the Malverns.
And the charge of the white brigade…the wallabies that really pack a wallop.
In Central News tonight:
Why was he released?
Family of shooting victim say gunman should not have been bailed.
Hercules crash theory: Was low level drop to blame?
And, sacked for having cancer.
Leukaemia victim says it's unfair.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Relatives say he should not have been released.
Meanwhile a man has appeared in court charged with supplying Jobson with the murder weapon.
He's been granted bail, provided he lives at a secret address.
June 4/TIM HURST/Cheltenham
STEVE WELLS/Victim's Nephew
NIGEL JONES MP/LibDem Cheltenham
Voice over
Stuart Jobson was on police bail when he shot his former lover June Smith in the car park of a Cheltenham DIY store and then turned the gun on himself.
The police say he'd been arrested last month and questioned about threats to Mrs Smith, but he'd been released on police bail pending further enquiries.
Mrs Smith's family say he'd written a letter threatening her and he should have been detained.
Mrs Smith's family have the backing of their MP.
He wants tougher powers for the police.
This afternoon, a Cheltenham man, former gun dealer Michael Burt, from Prestbury, appeared in court in connection with the shooting.
A new theory has emerged tonight about the possible cause of the Hercules crash in which nine airmen died.
An expert on air accidents believes that the aircraft was de-stabilised after opening its cargo door for a low-level drop.
The RAF says it can't comment until a board of inquiry reports back.
GARETH FURBY/Reporting
PETER MARCH/Aviation Expert
Voice over
The RAF's Board of Inquiry may take months to report on why the Hercules on a routine flight from RAF Lyneham crashed in Scotland.
One theory is the pilot took one risk too many on a low level flight and hit the ground.
But aviation expert Peter March claims pilot error may not be too blame.
He beleive the newer, longer version of the Hercules may become unstable when the back doors are opened to make a drop.
And such a drop on this flight could have pulled the plane out of the sky.
He says it could be an engine failure but no eyewitnesses noticed a change in engine note.
So it has to be that the load shifted backwards.
Another theory is the parachute which drags the load out may have failed to open properly with disastrous results.
He says the load would stick at the end of the plane, making it stall, and it would fall out of the sky like a lift
Tonight the RAF said it wasn't prepared to comment on speculation.
But today the Wiltshire coroner opened his own inquest into the crash.
Eight of the bodies were brought back to Lyneham last week.
The inquest heard they could only be identified using dental records.
Today's was only concerned with establishing the identity of the victims.
And the coroner said he won't continue with the inquest until the RAF Board of Inquiry reports on the cause.
In the meantime, RAF Lyneham is preparing for a memorial service, planned for June 23rd.
A woman with leukaemia says she's been sacked from her job as a secretary because of her illness.
Her employers told her the work was too stressful for someone in her condition.
But Sue Hampton says she's perfectly capable of carrying on, and has been treated unfairly.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Quedgeley
SUE HAMPTON/Leukaemia Patient
Voice over
Sue Hampton from Quedgeley loves pottering in the garden, but she'd still sooner be at work.
Last month she had a job as a secretary with a company called Office Cleaning Services in Cheltenham.
She'd been there for less than two weeks when her employers discovered she has leukaemia.
No one from Office Cleaning Services was available to be interviewed today, but a spokesman pointed out that Mrs Hampton had been advised by her doctor that the work was too stressful for her.
Sue disagrees.
The company also said that Mrs Hampton should have told them about her illness when she was interviewed for the job.
Office Cleaning Services says it regrets the situation and has the utmost sympathy for Mrs Hampton.
Meanwhile Sue has recently accepted a series of temporary secretarial posts offered to her by other companies.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
RAPE VICTIM
Det Insp TREVOR HOWIE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Its a week since the woman, a student at Somerville College in Oxford, was raped…
She was walking home from a party in the early hours of Sunday morning she'd stopped to use the toilets in St Giles when she was attacked…
She says; I just didn't know what he was going to do.
I had no idea.
I asked him whether he was going to kill me.
I had to know.
He just didn't answer.
The woman ran to a friend in college and immediately went to the Police for help…she's now too frightened to leave college at night.
She says; I have been out on my own during the day.
I am just so wary all the time.
I try to keep away from people.
I can't stand it if someone makes a sudden movement I am really nervous all the time.
Police now want to talk to a number of people who were in St Giles just before the attack…they think they are vital witnesses.
He says; There was a Jaguar parked and by it a group of four people men and women dancing to music from the jaguar car and there was a man standing far away from the group not connected but also dancing.
His description is similar to man who attacked the student…
He's in his early twenties, five feet ten inches tall, with shirt ginger hair and clean shaven…
Students at Somerville are demanding free rape alarms and self defence classes…following the rape.
The woman is now being counselled by women Police officers in a special unit to help her cope with her feelings.
She says.
I don't think there is any way that he can realise what I am going through.
He bent my glasses and that when I feel angry when I put them on.
Sometimes I really hate him.
The thought of him attacking someone else.
I could not stand it.
The man who killed officer worker Anna McGurk has told a jury he'd been having an affair with her before her death.
Andrew Hagans, who denies raping Mrs McGurk, says he only told police he didn't know her to protect her good name.
Tim Hurst was in court.
BRISTOL
AUGUST 1991/GLOUCESTER
Voice over
Oxfam is being urged to call off a charity pop concert because of fears it could attract thousands of travellers back to Castlemorton.Tickets are already on sale for the event although it hasn't yet been granted a licence.Richard Barnett reports:
EASTNOR/Herefordshire
25 MAY 1992/CASTLEMORTON/Worcestershire
KEVIN DOUGLAS/Malvern Hills Council
DAVID BRIAR/Oxfam Director
Voice over
This is the site below Eastnor Castle where Oxfam plans to hold a charity pop concert on September the 5th.
The event is already being advertised in the press and 90,000 tickets have gone on sale.
But the venue is less than a mile away from Castlemorton Common, which was invaded by more than twenty thousand hippies a fortnight ago.
And the local council is urging Oxfam to cancel the event, fearing the hippies will return.
It says the Oxfam concert was even listed in a hippie newsletter of forthcoming events which was circulated at Castlemorton.
Male speaker
People living in the area were under seige.
And there's a very real fear the travellers will return for the concert.
Voice over
Oxfam is adamant that the charity concert will not attract the hippies back to the area.
Male speaker
The price of the tickets will attract a different audience.
Also Oxfam is paying for extra security.
Voice over
But people living around Castlemorton Common say the Eastnor event must be called off.
The council is canvassing local opinion before deciding next month whether to allow the concert to go ahead.
Dozens of Maxwell pensioners from Oxfordshire have been at Westminster as part of a national lobby about their lost pensions.
OXFORD
They left Oxford this morning to join thousands of others affected by the Maxwell scandal to demand government action.
They want the government to compensate fully all Maxwell pensioners.
A government offer…of two and half million pounds as a temporary emergency measure…was condemned by many of them as inadequate.
Two sailors who went missing from the destroyer H-M-S Gloucester off the Isle of Man have been arrested in Lancashire.
RECENT PICTURES
Three navy helicopters had been searching the Manx coastline where the Gloucester had been moored, and where the two radio operators were last seen.
The ship left there shortly after midnight but it was six and a half hours before the seamen were discovered missing.
Tonight, the pair were arrested leaving a ferry at Heysham near Blackpool.
They'll now face disciplinary action.
Fifty years ago eleven wartime scientists and servicemen died when their plane crashed in flames on the Gloucestershire-Herefordshire border.
The men were carrying out top-secret research into radar, and until now the incident has been shrouded in mystery.
But their sacrifice has finally been recognised with the dedication of a memorial to their deaths.
Kim Barnes reports.
GOODRICH/Herefordshire
Sir BERNARD LOVELL/Project Leader
Dr DAVID RAMSAY/Radar Research Squadron
Gp Capt FRANK GRIFFITHS/Squadron Leader
Sir BERNARD LOVELL/Project Leader
Voice over
The calm of Goodrich Castle was shattered on a June day in 1942, when a plane carrying a key research team crashed into a nearby field.
Their story has never been properly told.
They were carrying out top secret radar research.
All 11 crewmen died.
Engineer, David Ramsay, narrowly missed being on the flight.
The accident has remained a closed book until yesterday, when a memorial window at Goodrich Castle was dedicated to the 11 men.
It was the 50th anniversary of the crash to the hour.
The team had to put the tragedy behind them immediately.
The project had the personal backing of Prime Minister Winston Churchill, who urged them on.
The research findings proved vital in turning the tide of the war, particularly in detecting U-boats.
The RAf marked the ceremony with a Nimrod flypast, finally ensuring that their colleagues are not forgotten.
Two leading ice cream manufacturers are getting hot under the collar in a row over trade.
But, as Wall's and Mars battle to freeze each other out of the market, the local corner shop has been has been caught in the cross-fire.
Robin Powell reports.
BOUNTY ICE CREAM DMB
STAUNTON Gloucestershire
PATRICIA STEVENSON Shopkeeper
SIMON BULLIMORE Mars Confectionery
FRANK WINSTONE Winstone's Ice Cream
Voice over
Another advert for a chocolate ice cream; more ammunition in what's become known as the Ice Cream War.
This one's by Mars, slugging it out with rivals Walls for the lion's share of a market worth more than £200 million a year.
Staunton Stores near Gloucester is one of thousands of corner shops nationwide which are lent a freezer by Walls.
Now Walls have told the owners they've either got to stop stocking Mars products in it, or give the freezer back.
That puts the shop in a difficult position.
The frozen version of the famous Mars chocolate bar revolutionised the ice cream business and frozen Milky Ways, Bountys and Snickers soon followed.
Wall's hit back with 2 rival brands of their own; Sky and Magnum.
But Mars say it's unfair that Walls have banned other products from their freezers.
Winstone's Ice Cream, an independent manufacturer and distributor from Rodbororugh Common, is a Mars agent.
But its Managing Director sympathises with Walls.
Walls, whose plant at Barnwood in Gloucester is the largest ice cream factory in Europe, declined to be interviewed.
But they told us: We welcome free and open competition in the ice cream market.
But having spent many years building up an effective distribution network, we see no reason why this network should be given away to our competitors.
Meanwhile Mars has pledged to keep up the pressure on Walls, with no let-up in its campaign to woolovers of ice cream.
Watchdog and Archbishop rap press over royals
FTSE down 22
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-two point seven at twenty-six, forty-five point eight.
The pound is down at one dollar eighty-three, and up at two marks ninety-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A water authority says a new technique for detecting leaking pipes underground has already saved millions of gallons of water.
Thames Water has been losing seventeen percent of its supplies from leaks, but are now confident they can reduce that figure dramatically.
Debbie Kelly reports.
KENNINGTON/Oxfordshire
CHARLES HURST/Leakage Control
JAY TOMASSO/Trainer/Thames Water
TED EMES/Thames Water
LILLI MATSON/CPRE
Voice over
Midnight and the start of the working day for the leak detectors.
Eight weeks ago, Thames Water was losing 17% of its supply through leaks.
By the end of the month, it's hoped to have reduced it to 15%, by introducing computers to plug the holes.
Male speaker
If leakage carries on increasing, we'd have to built more reservoirs.
They create pressure problems.
If we did not find it, we would have to lay more water pipes.
They work at night because fewer people turn on the taps.
The new system is much faster.
Male speaker
The old system took more men and was more complicated.
We had to wait until the next day before we got the results.
Voice over
Once they've decided there is a leak, shown here as a rise on the computer graph, the Workers pinpoint the exact location, using a sophisticated microphone and listening device.
Now and again, new technology is replaced by the traditional method; the human ear.
The night shift finished; the day shift take over.
This one was a leaking valve.
Male speaker
We are losing about 10 gallons a minute.
We would not have known it was here, unless we had carried out the exercise last night.
It could have been leaking for months.
Voice over
Since they started eight weeks ago, Thames Water estimate it's saved 350 million gallons of water.
It's on target to reduce the leaks to 15% of supply.
The National Rivers Authority has said, unless water authorities reduce the number of leaks it's unlikely to approve new reservoirs such as the one planned by Thames Water in South Oxfordshire.
The Council for the Protection of Rural England wants Thames Water to reduce its water loss even further.
Female speaker
Rivers in the region are suffering not only because of the drought, but because of water extraction.
Our environment is suffering because of the leaks.
Voice over
The days when water authorities could allow their supplies to seep into the ground are definitely at an end.
Thames Water believes by tapping new technology, it'll plug its leaks.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
YINKA IDOWU
Voice over
while Yinka enjoys being in the news…one name sadly missing from our summer sporting headlines so far is that of David Syd Lawrence the Gloucestershire and England fast bowler…
He's fighting for fitness after fracturing his kneecap while playing in the winter tests against New Zealand…so how is Syd…when's he coming back to bowl…here's a special report from Nick Clark 
SYD LAWRENCE
Voice over
Just before seven every morning come rain or shine you'll find Sid Lawerence at Bristol docks on the way to the gym…
Male speaker
it was like being shot in the knee at the time.
Voice over
That was in New Zealand in February, since then Sid's kneecap's has been wired up, and the campaign to get back to full fitness is underway…
Male speaker
I've been working hard at getting fit again.
Voice over
After the gym it's back home to his son Buster and fiance Gaynor, and then over breakfast the hard bit, to read about England's exploits in the Test match against Pakistan.
Male speaker
They seem a bit lacking in the speed merchant department.
Voice over
Dedication and commitment are part of the Lawerence lifestyle, they always said he's got a big heart, he hopes to prove it by winning his place back in the England side and then give the Australians a roasting when they tour here for the Ashes next summer.
Male speaker
That's my ambition to be roaring in against the Aussies next year.
Voice over
Gloucestershire are soldering on without Syd…in the sunday league they made it two wins in a row with a five wicket victory over Lancashire at Old Trafford 
Voice over
today the two counties have been playing on in the championship and here's how it finished…they tried hard to get a result but rain stopped play…and the game ended in a draw…
now we're going to finish off with a sport that enjoys itself in the summer…grass track racing…thousands were out over the weekend to watch the midland finals in Worcestershire 
Voice over
Forget waste disposal units, incinerators, or garden shredders…the best way to get rid of rubbish is with worms!
Two nurserymen have begun farming Tiger Worms.
The little creatures have an endless appetite, and a digestive system that turns almost anything into perfect compost.
SIMON GARRETT/Wootton Bassett
MARTIN CLIFFORD
Voice over
The Breach Lane nursery in Wootton Bassett had a problem — piles of plant waste and horse manure to get rid of.
They found the answer here.
Animal droppings, rotting cabbage or steak and chips, it's all okay for the Diet of worms.
Male speaker
They won't eat bones, but apart from that, they'll eat anything.
Voice over
Now these slimey invertibrates have wormed their way into the affections of environmentalists.
The green-thinking householder has a worm bin.
A plastic dustbin with breeding colony onto which organic waste is showered.
The result — a compost of which nurserymen can be proud.
Male speaker
Brilliant, but then I would say that.
It's lovely, peaty compost.
You can throw it on your roses.
Do anything with it.
Voice over
The worms can only live in compostable material so there's no fear of them making a bid for freedom and eating their way through the vegetable patch.
Male speaker
They don't move too fast, so they're quite easy to keep track of.
You've got to water them to keep them moist in the summer and you've got to have food of course.
But that's all there is to it.
Voice over
Money from rubbish — it's a can of worms that's every entrepenur's dream and it's good for the environment.
There must be a catch.
Male speaker
Telling people about it, that's the worst thing.
Voice over
Do you get much mickey taking?
Male speaker
If you say to people you've got worms, they tend to avoid you!
Voice over
Iggly and squiggly they may be, but maybe their undoubted usefulness could allow these creatures to finally wriggle their way into our hearts.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Blandford begins jail sentence
The Marquess of Blandford, who's heir to the Blenheim Estate in Oxfordshire, has started a jail sentence for failing to make maintence payments to his wife.
He's also charged with assaulting two police officers during his arrest.
New Bridgewater case evidence
The families of three men convicted of killing the the newspaper boy, Carl Bridgewater, have handed evidence to the Home Secretary which they claim proves their innocence.
Egyptian bomb deaths
Two Egyptians have been killed and six British tourists injured in a bomb attack on a coach in Cairo.
Major calls Mates unwise
The Prime Minister has conceded that the Northern Ireland Minister, Michael Mates, was unwise to present a watch to the fugitive, Asil Nadir.
Croats flee Travnik
Hundreds of Croats are fleeing Travnik in Bosnia where fierce fighting has erupted.
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down point four at twenty-eight, forty-four point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-two and down at two marks, forty-six.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back: Large numbers of skeletons buried in a mass grave have been unearthed by an archaeological dig.
Wesley Smith
There are almost a thousand set of bones in all.
Many are thought to have been buried at the time of the Great Plague.
Wesley Smith
KEN GOODWIN/Hereford
RICHARD STONE/Project Director
STEPHANIE PINTER-BELLOWS/Osteo-Archaeologist
Voice over
Victims of the black death — that's one of the theories being looked at by archaeologists who've dug up this mass grave.
It's on a site next to Hereford Cathedral.
So far, more than 900 graves have been excavated, though not all were mass burials.
He says that the one they're working on at the moment has bodies which appear to have been buried in a great hurry.
On hand is an expert on bones who's researching into the health of the medieval population of Hereford.
But sadly, she may never be able to prove what killed the people buried in the mass graves.
She says that the sort of ailments which killed people quickly and in large numbers — plague, typhoid, cholera — don't show up in bones.
Other relics have been discovered, like the remains of a possible Saxon building.
He says that the wall is part of a basement, which is probably Saxon in origin.
The dig is being sponsored by the Mappa Mundi Trust, the keepers of Herefords priceless map of the world.
A new site to house it and the famous chained library will be built on the site when the dig is finished.
And the bones will be reburied in consecrated ground.
For the first time in its history a top public school is encouraging GIRLS to play cricket.
They're being coached by one of the country's best female players, but they've also got the support of MOST of the boys' team.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Malvern
RACHEL HEYHOE-FLINT
TRISTRAM SHEEHAN/Cricket Captain
Voice over
It's enough to make the pupils of yester-year spin in their graves.
Not only has Malvern College gone co-educational, but the girls are actually being allowed to play cricket.
And these maidens are bowled over by the game.
The team is being coached by Rachel Heyhoe Flint, one of the best female cricket players in the country.
Despite her talents, because she's a woman Rachel was never allowed to join the prestigious Marylebone Cricket Club in London.
She's sure these girl's will to face some prejudice too.
Most of the chaps here are being very politically correct about the new team.
The girls plan to to pitch their talents against the boys at the end of term, so they're getting as much practice as possible.
They've played just two matches so far.
And in the finest traditions of the England cricket squad, they've lost both.
Northamptonshire got off to a bad start against Derbyshire in the semi-finals of the Benson and Hedges cup.
It took them five overs to score their first run and they were only saved from disaster by captain Allan Lamb.
KEITH DANIELL/Derby
After all their financial problems and sackings a semi final was just what the accountant ordered for Derbyshire.
Northants were put in to bat: but Devon Malcolm must have had his eye on an England selector: he was steaming in and picked up two quicks wickets.
Allan Lamb had probably seen the same selector: he hit sixty for Northants, their top scorer.
But Dominic Cork was also showing he's got somthing to offer too: three wickets for him altogether.
Northants bowled out for 210 inside their fifty five overs.
And Derbyshire got off to a beautiful start.
Captain Kim Barnett and the Peter Bowler the batsman putting on a hundred and two for the first wicket.
And we've just heard that Derbyshire have beaten Northamptonshire by eight wickets.
They reached their target with four overs to spare.
The Marquess of Blandford is back in prison tonight, charged with assualting two police officers who were trying to arrest him after he'd been on the run for four days.
The heir to the Blenheim Palace Estate was being sought after failing to pay more than ten thousand pounds in maintenance arrears to his wife Becky, who lives at Kiddington in Oxfordshire.
He's been taken to Pentonville Prison where he'll serve four months.
He's also been charged with a number of offences relating to the non-payment of taxi-bills.
An inquest has opened on a man and woman who were shot in the carpark of a D-I-Y store.
CHELTENHAM
June Smith was killed by her ex-boyfriend Stuart Jobson in front of her daughter and two young grandchildren in the carpark of Texas Homecare in Cheltenham.
Jobson then turned the gun on himself.
The coroner's officer was the only one to give evidence and the inquest was adjourned.
Three teenagers have been charged with aggravated vehicle taking after a police officer was injured during a high-speed chase across two counties.
A police vehicle was damaged in the pursuit of a stolen car for thirty miles from Deddington in Oxfordshire to Milton Keynes.
A sixteen year old girl was bailed to appear before police next week.
A woman accused of stealing thousands of pounds from a charity which she helped set-up has been remanded in custody.
WORCESTER
Magistrates will decide next month whether to send Ruth Hilali for crown court trial.
She's accused of taking money while a co-trustee of the Worcester Kurdish Refugee Association.
She was arrested in Turkey after up to one hundred and thirty thousand pounds disappeared from the charity.
A new scheme has begun to help foreign language students who are assaulted in Oxford.
Last year nearly a third of youngsters attacked in the city were from overseas.
Colleges say those who speak poor English are especially vulnerable.
Now local businesses are being asked to offer refuge.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
BOB LEWIS/Student Watch
SUSAN MASON/Director
Chief Supt DAVID LINDLEY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Oxford's 60 language schools stress that the country's foremost centre of learning is no more dangerous than most other cities.
But they admit that foreign students with a poor command of English are most at risk.
Many have been robbed on the street, others attacked for no apparent reason.
Today the Lord Mayor launched a new scheme to help them.
Local traders are being asked to place stickers in their windows.
Students in trouble will know they can get help where they see the sign.
Male speaker
The students are frightened about seeking help from a stranger.
Oxford is a safe place, but sometimes people are chased because our own youngsters are jealous about the perceived wealth that visitors have.
Voice over
The Oxford Academy has students from 22 countries.
Youngsters who go to the city centre at night are advised to stay in groups.
The principal says one who went alone was attacked and robbed.
Female speaker
Two boys thumped her in the stomach.
She was quite badly bruised.
They took her handbag and she was very shaken.
Male speaker
Last year foreign students were the victims in 30% of our city centre robberies.
The problem may be misunderstanding which can lead to cross words and violence.
Voice over
And most of the students at today's launch remembered at least one instance of aggression towards them.
Male speaker
A friend was speaking Spanish in a bus and someone told him to shut up because he was in England now.
Male speaker
A friend was punched on the nose because he was talking in Spanish.
Voice over
Student Watch has already proved successful in other towns.
The Oxford scheme will be the largest so far.
The pub trade has given its support to a campaign to stop people drinking too much.
The Drinkwise campaign encourages pub-goers to stick to recommended limits.
Landlords say they're keen to keep their customers, but they also want to make sure that they know when to stop drinking.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
CHARLES ELD/Morrell's Brewery
ADELE WRIGHT/Drinkwise Campaign
Voice over
The sunshine brings out the drinkers and the pubs are enjoying the trade, but only to a limit.
Landlords in Oxford are signing the drinkwise pledge.
They want customers to drink up, but wisely.
That means counting the units.
A glass of wine, a measure of spirits or a half a pint of beer equal a unit.
Men should drink no more than 21 units a week and women no more than 14.
So does that add up to conflict for the pubs; healthy drinking verses healthy profit?
Male speaker
I see no reason why people should drink themselves to death.
If they drink sensibly, then we will have more than enough income?
Female speaker
Individual licencees aren't keen.
But the big breweries are supportive.
Voice over
The drinkwise and anti drink-drive campaigns are clearly paying off.
These lunchtime drinkers know their limits, or at least most of them do.
Male speaker
Once a week on a Friday night, a glass of sherry every evening and a bottle of wine on a Sunday.
Male speaker
Personally I can't afford to over indulge, I just drink what I'm comfortable with.
Male speaker
It's alright if you don't drink to excess.
A pint of beer won't kill you, will it?
Female speaker
It's our last ever term at the Poly.
After that, I want to cut down.
I'm drinking a spritzer at the moment, I'm having a Pimms next.
I'll drink anything.
Voice over
The drinkwise message is about sensible drinking and not about abstaining.
So the drinkwise toast is to good health!
(AD LIB ANNE)
Still to come on Central News, the mystery of a mass grave.
Did the plague claim this, and hundreds more souls?
Bowled over…the girls taking on the boys at their own game.
And the secret of a better garden…get a Tiger in your compost heap.
In Central News tonight:
Shotgun attack: Police baffled by motiveless street shooting.
Back to square one.
Charge-capped council sends out new bills.
And was a hospital to blame?
Paralysed lawyer sues for damages.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Neither the family of Kingsley Sam nor the police say they have any idea why he was shot.
Two sawn-off shotguns were found nearby, and detectives are making an urgent appeal for information.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
PC ANDREW BAREFIELD/Thames Valley Police
KEVIN SAM/Brother
Insp PETER SHEPHERD/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Kingsley Sam was driving this Scirocco to his girlfriend's house in Cowley when he was ambushed.
He was hit with two shots at point blank range.
The first policeman on the scene held the injured man before an ambulance came.
Male speaker
He was conscious.
We weren't able to turn him.
Voice over
One shot went through his shoulder; the other narrowly missed a lung.
Mr Sam's now said to be seriously ill, but stable in hospital after two operations.
He hasn't been able to tell his family much about the shooting.
He says he went to park his car, saw someone, reversed the car — next thing, someone's firing shots at him.
The attack involving 2 or 3 masked men happened just before midnight.
Terrified neighbours heard 4 shots in all.
Female speaker
I was frightened, I didn't come out.
Male speaker
We were really afraid, we didn't know what was happening.
Female speaker
I was too frightened, all I heard was 3 shots, a bump and a scream.
Voice over
Two sawn off shotguns were found in this garden just round the corner.
And police believe this stolen Golf left at the scene may hold some clues.
But as the investigation got underway, detectives were baffled as to a motive for the attack.
Male speaker
We don't know, we are questioning his girlfriend and friends, to narrow down our enquiries.
It's probably the most serious incident we've had in the last 6 months to a year.
Voice over
Mr Sam's family are also mystified.
He has a criminal record, but they say that's in the past.
Those convictions were from about 5 years ago, he hasn't been in trouble since.
Does he have his own suspicions?
Nobody can understand it.
And as police step up their investigation, they're appealing for anyone with any information to come forward.
Almost a quarter of a million council tax bills are being re-printed because the Government has decided to charge-cap Gloucestershire County Council.
The change will save the average family fifty pounds a year.
The council says it will have to sack some teachers to make the savings, but one MP says he doesn't believe that.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
February 1993
JOHN GUMMER MP/Enviroment Secretary
RICHARD COCKROFT/Gloucestershire County Council
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
ASHLEY GREEN/Gloucester City Council
Voice over
New Council tax bills will be sent to every household in Gloucestershire after the Government's decision to cut the county's spending by £10 million.
In spite of campaign by parents to maintain spending on education, the Government says it won't make an exception for Gloucestershire, the only county to be capped.
The new bills will save an average household £50 a year, but today's decision has shocked county officials.
The county must also find £600,000 to pay for the new bills, which will heap extra work on city and district councils.
The new bills will sent to every home in the county, following a capping vote in Parliament tomorrow.
A solicitor who was confined to a wheelchair after a routine operation has taken her claim for compensation to the High Court.
Michelle Howard has spent her legal career helping clients involved in medical accidents.
Now she hopes to prove that her own disability was caused by hospital negligence.
ROBIN POWELL/High Court
MICHELLE HOWARD/Plaintiff
Voice over
For the past 11 and a half years, Michelle Howard has been paralysed from the chest down; the result, she claims, of a routine jaw operation she underwent at Poole General Hospital in 1982.
Despite her disability she still managed to qualify as a solicitor and now she specialises in medical accident cases at Townsends in Swindon's Old Town.
Today Michelle Howard took her case to the High Court, where she hopes to prove that Wessex Health Authority was liable.
The authority denies being negligent before, during or after the operation.
But Michelle's solicitor said the argument that the damage to her spinal cord had natural causes was totally unconvincing.
Michelle knows all too well how lengthy the legal process can be and she's relieved her case is at last being heard.
Michelle's bravery and determination recently won her a Businesswoman of the Year award.
Mr Justice Morland said that whatever the outcome of this case, the progress she's made in her legal career represents a remarkable achievement.
A judgement isn't expected for at least another 10 days.
A Gulf war hero will be flown back to his ship tomorrow to face disciplinary action after going absent without leave.
A year ago he saved an American battleship from being destroyed by an Iraqi missile.
Now he's behind bars at a Scottish naval base.
His parents blame the effects of his wartime experience.
Gargy Patel reports.
JACQUIE BUNBURY/Mother
Voice over
Stephen Bunbury was hailed as a hero when he returned from the Gulf.
The seventeen year old radar operator was on watch aboard the HMS Gloucester off the coast of Kuwait.
He spotted an Iraqi silkworm missile heading for the American warship, the Missouri.
He raised the alarm…
HMS Gloucester shot down the missile…just seconds before the ship and it's crew of thirteen hundred would have been destroyed.
Stephen even earned the nickname Hawkeye.
But tonight, a year on, he faces disciplinary action for jumping ship.
His parents say he's still affected by his wartime experience.
It's not clear why he went absent without leave from the HMS Gloucester from it's position off the Isle of Man.
He's currently under military custody at the Rosyth naval base in Scotland.
Tomorrow, he'll be flown back to his ship, where officers will decide his punishment.
He's been in contact with his family, who are trying to find out the details of what happened.
His parents want him to continue his navy career which was the cause of so much celebration a year ago.
Sixty seven jobs will be lost with the amalgamation of two factories that make mining engineering equipment.
Meco International has sold one of its subsidiary companies and so is closing a factory and centralising production onto another site.
The company blames the decline in the coal industry.
This report from Debbie Kelly.
WORCESTER
ASHCHURCH/Gloucestershire
ADRIAN BUCKMASTER/Chairman Meco
GERRY ROONEY/Managing Director Meco
PETER LUFF MP/Con Worcester
Voice over
It's been here since 1925, but in September it'll close.
250 workers are to be offered jobs at the company's headquarters near Tewkesbury 15 miles away, but at least 67 will lose their jobs.
He says; It is always sad to seepeople leave the company but the move will bring people onto one site is very positive.
Meco, an international mining machinery company, today sold one of its Worcester based businesses, which makes belt conveyors for over £4million to the Gateshead based Company, FKI Huwood.
The rest of its operation, producing mining roof supports and other conveyors will be centralised at its headquarters in Ashchurch.
The company says the decline of British Coal is a major reason for the sale.
He says; The decision I have had to make is to ensure the best for the company and its employees.
Meco was owned by the Dowty Group until 1989, when the management took it over.
200 redundancies have already been announced this year.
He says; I am going to take the matter up with the company to try to save the jobs for Worcester.
But for many workers the move didn't come as a surprise.
He says; I am looking forward to the move.
He says; It won't affect my job at all.
She says; I have been made redundant that is why I have all this in my hands.
All work will transfer from Worcester to Ashchurch by September.
The Worcester site will be sold.
An aerospace company will hear tomorrow whether it has managed to fight off a takeover bid.
Dowty shareholders must decide by noon whether to accept or reject a hostile bid from the engineering firm TI.
With Dowty share prices rising, there's been some frantic last minute buying and selling.
Ken Goodwin reports.
JOE SMOLINSKI/Dowty Shareholder
MICHAEL SIGGERS/Astaire Partners
SASHA TUSA/UBS Phillips
Voice over
Joe Smolinski is undecided about what to do with his Dowty shares.
As an ex employee, he's loyal to the company, even though it made him redundant after 34 years.
Now he's come for advice to his local stockbrokers.
In the end he decides to sell on the open market; he's against the TI takeover, but needs the cash to live on now he's redundant.
He says that he thinks it would be a pity if Dowty's fell into the hands of TI
Shareholders like Joe have until tommorrow to make up their minds whether to sell to TI.
He says many feel the same way as Joe — they are loyal to Dowty.
But it's ultimately the city which will make the final decision; the big institutions which hold the majority of Dowty shares.
So what do the city analyists think will happen?
He says that in the end it looks as though the TI offer may be taken up.
Tomorrow Dowty shareholders will learn the future of their company.
Joe hopes it will remain independent, but in the end decisions taken in the city may mean there's a different result.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
BRISTOL
AUGUST 1991/GLOUCESTER
Voice over
Andrew Hagans burst from the witness box and was restrained by police and prison officers during cross-examination about his relationship with Anna McGurk, the Gloucester office worker he's admitted killing in August last year.
Hagans threw down a statement he'd been holding, and took three paces to the centre of the court before being brought to the floor and marched to the cells, to shouts from the public gallery.
The judge, Mr Justice Hutchison, warnmed spectators twice to keep quiet or he'd order the court to be cleared.
The outburst from spectators prompted defence barrister Mr Neil Butterfield in his closing speech to warn the jury not to allow the mentality of the lynch mob to effect their judgement about whether or not Andrew Hagans had raped Anna McGurk before he killed her.
Mrs McGurk was found strangled on the banks of the River Severn in Gloucester the day aftermeeting Hagans on a causeway as she left work.
Hagans said he'd known her for two years and they'd met by appointment.
The prosecution say that she was plucked from the bridge by Hagans, who'd lain in wait for the right victim and then pounced.
Anna McGurk's husband Brian McGurk was in court to hear Hagans claim a two year affair with his wife.
Prosecution barrister Mr Charles Barton has told the jury that they are being asked to decide if Hagans raped Mrs McGurk, even though he admitted killing her, for three reasons — in the interests of the defendant, in the interests of Anna McGurk and her family, and in the interests of putting the record straight.
The judge will sum up the evidence tomorrow before asking the jury to consider a verdict.
Armed police have recaptured a prisoner who's been on the run for five days after hijacking a taxi and holding a prison officer at knifepoint.
Michael Johnson was arrested this afternoon after police were tipped off.
He was armed with a shotgun but no shots were fired.
This report from Gareth Furby.
5 JUNE 1992
Det Insp DAVID BUCKENHAM/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Michael Johnson, who's 25, is serving a seven year sentence for posession of firearms, robbery, burglary and theft.
Last Friday after a court appearance he was being taken by taxi to Bullingdon Prison in Oxfordshire.
He'd already escaped twice and three prison officers were with him…but as the taxi drove along the A34 he pulled a knife and ordered the driver to stop at this layby near Bicester.
He ordered the driver and two officers to get out…and then drove off with the third towards London.
The officer was released unharmed a few hours later…but Johnson, described by the police as armed and dangerous was on the run until this afternoon, when he was captured in a car park at Radlett in Hertfordshire.
He says he was captured by armed police and was probably planning an armed robbery.
He says is a dangerous man.
Johnson is now being held at a police station in London.
He's due to be questioned by officers from the Thames Valley region and may be charged with kidnapping and possession of firearms.
A senior police officer has criticised the way the criminal justice system handles young offenders.
In tonight's’ Tuesday Special’on Central Gloucestershire Chief Constable Albert Pacey says too many juveniles are only cautioned, when they should be dealt with by the courts.
But a senior social worker says he believes young offenders who are sent to court for first offences are far more likely to commit new crimes.
Harriet Ryley reports.
THE TUESDAY SPECIAL Central
ALBERT PACEY Chief Constable Gloucs Police
DAVID GROOM Gloucs Social Services
RICHARD DEAN
Voice over
This teenage girl was one of 22 young people arrested during a raid by police on a disco at Oxford Ice Rink last summer.
She was found to have cannabis and ecstasy when she was searched.
But because of her age and because it was a first offence, she wasn't sent to a juvenile court.
Instead she was cautioned; the official term for a telling-off and warning by police.
In tonight's The Tuesday Special, Gloucestershire's Chief of Police condemns the approach to dealing with young offenders, which relies so heavily on giving them cautions.
The programme, titled’ Our Hands Are Tied,’shows a number of juveniles — ten to seventeen year-olds, being arrested, and mostly, cautioned.
Two and a half years ago the Home Office introduced the Caution scheme, encouraging police to use their discretion to give some young offenders a warning, rather than sending them to court.
A judge interviewed in the programme says this is inviting juveniles to commit crime.
David Groom champions the caution system.
He heads the Justice Juvenile team in Gloucestershire dealing with young offenders.
In Gloucestershire the number of young offenders cuationed has risen in the last 2 years from 44% to 70%.
But the numbers reoffending has remained steady at 15%.
He says this system doesn't encourage juvenile crime.
But one of his ex-offenders says the system is not enough on its own.
Richard Dean, now 18, has appeared in court several times for theft.
He was cautioned after his first offence when he was 13.
Tonight's programme suggests such parental back-up isn't always enough, but that police will continue to caution young offenders, because the criminal justice system simply can't handle a big increase in cases.
Oftel orders BT price cuts
The Telecommunications watchdog, Oftel, has ordered BT to cut its prices and installation charges considerably or face referral to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Petrol price increase from midnight
Esso and Shell have announced petrol price rises to a record high of two pounds, forty-five for a gallon of four star from midnight with other companies expected to follow suit.
Major to sign important treaties in Earth Summit
The Prime Minister has announced that Britain will sign two important treaties at the Earth Summit in Rio.
Libyan official details IRA links
A Libyan official has handed over details to Britain of its links with the IRA.
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten point four at twenty-six, thirty-five point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-three and down at two marks, ninety-two.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Just a quick reminder; tomorrow's night's programme will be at the earlier time of 6 p.m.
Goodnight.
A new hospital unit's been created to help people who've suffered serious head injuries.
It's the result of years of fundraising and hard work by a doctor who was determined to give victims of such injuries a better deal.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
MARK BOTTOMLEY/Head Injury Patient
Dr FREDA NEWCOMBE/Russell-Cairns Unit
JEREMY DE BAGE/Head Injury Patient
LEONARD MORL/World War Two Pilot
Voice over
Mark Bottomley is picking up the pieces of his life after being beaten around the head with a piece of scaffolding.
But it's been a slow and confusing process.
For months, no-one told him he was still suffering from the effects of his head injury.
I thought it was just a bang on the head.
I had no sense of smell, or taste, no strength and I was aggressive towards people.
Dr Freda Newcombe's work setting up this unit has made all the difference to Mark and other head injured people, who can suffer all sorts of long term effects, including loss of memory and severe personality changes.
Over 80% don't have access to any help once they leave hopsital.
This has been a personal crusade to fill that gap.
The vast majority of head-injured people slip through the net and the burden falls on the carers.
But care may be needed years after an accident.
4 years ago, Jeremy De Bage was knocked down by a motorcyclist.
Initially, he was given basic help towards rehabiliation, but nothing since.
Dr Newcombe put him in touch with the ACE centre in Oxford, where he's painstakingly learning how to read and write again.
It's wonderful to see you doing so well!
These people have been a great help.
It's through them I've got my own computer.
Scores of patients came to help launch the Russell-Cairns Unit named after 2 Oxford doctors who led the way in head injury treatment.
They carried out pioneering work on soldiers shot in the head during World War II.
Those men still come back to help Dr Newcombe with her research.
We come back and we're glad to come back.
They saved our lives.
If there's anything we can do to help, we will.
We'll be coming back for as long as we can.
The new unit will also help the other victims, the carers, who are often overwhelmed by the demands of a head injured person.
It's Freda Newcombe's vision which has carried her through months of hard work and even harder fundraising.
She's ploughed her own money into the project, carrying on after retirement.
She was thanked, but she already has the gratitude of scores of patients.
Now for another in our occasional series behind-the-scenes at Central,’ Inside the Globe’.
Tonight we meet some of the unsung heroes of Inspector Morse — the extras.
Hundreds of people have been auditioning this week for the chance to be one of the faces in the crowd.
I went along to join them.
INSPECTOR MORSE/Zenith for Central
1990
OXFORD
TREVOR PUCKLE/Assistant Director
COLIN DEXTER/Author
Morse and his trusted sidekick, Sergeant Lewis have become 2 of Britain's best-loved sleuths.
They've achieved fame all over the world and have become synonymous with Oxford.
Behind each episode of Inspector Morse, there's a crew of up to 80 technicians who make the gentleman dectective look his best.
The show owes much of its success to the star names it attracts to play suspects.
But, no episode would be complete without the support of the extras, those who fill the crowd scenes and make the show look as realistic as possible.
Many of them have never acted before and came thick and fast to auditions with high hopes for a moment's glory on’ Inspector Morse.’
Hopefuls say they believe in their own star potential.
Once the final selection is made, they'll be taken on location to play anything from students and commuters to refuse collectors or police officers.
The pay; £30.
The Assistant Director describes the application process.
The most famous extra of them all is Colin Dexter, the author who created Inpsector Morse.
It's written into his contract that he should have a cameo appearence in every episode.
He vets every script and is checking-out scripts for the new series at the moment.
Colin Dexter explains how his appearances started and gives a few tips to potential extras.
It's said John Wayne started his acting career as an extra, so when you next watch Inspector Morse, look out for the people of Oxford who could be stars of the making.
A freelance musician has found himself the perfect practice room…an empty theatre which he has all to himself.
But there's one catch: he has to clean it as well.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
OXFORD
TIM BOYD/Technical Manager
JONATHON PENDROUS/Musician
Voice over
The humblest among us have dreams.
The hewers of wood, the drawers of water and the sweepers of dust.
Jonathon Pendrous; by day a cleaner clearing up the stage after other peoples' glory, but by night when the actors have gone home, and the audience has left the theatre to its ghostly past…
…he becomes the Phantom Fiddler of the Playhouse.
Jonathon is a trained musician filling in as a cleaner between jobs and he fell on his feet at the Oxford Playhouse.
They sent him along to vacuum the carpets, but he wound up with his very own theatre to practice in.
Jonathon is a graduate of the Northern College of Music and has been professional as a viola and violin player for 6 years.
He got the cleaning job as a stop-gap 3 years ago and quickly spotted his chance.
His boss doesn't mind, in fact she often turns up to listen.
For the time being Jonathon will carry on cleaning the empty theatre in the hope that one day he'll be on the stage and the seats will be full.
More than a hundred schoolchildren are paying a high price for the peace dividend…their school has been forced to close.
They're the children of American servicemen and women based in the region, and today they said a sad farewell to the airbase classrooms.
KIM BARNES/Little Rissington
HOWARD GOZZARD/Class Teacher
BERNICE JOHNSON/Principal
Voice over
It's not just the last day of term…it's the last day of school…and that means lessons on the floor because the furniture's gone.
The sisxth grade at Little Rissington elementary school are getting their report cards…and if that wasn't enough to upset them its the end of an era.
He says he'll be sad to leave all the schoolchildren.
The elementary school has been open for twelve years offering the children of US service staff a throughly American education.
But as the end of the Cold War has the miltary heading home, that's meant a final bell for Rissington
She says
But it's hard to keep the second graders happy
He says
There tears all round before the day ended on an all-american note, the school song and Rissington elementary school said its last goodbyes.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News: forced to sell the family silver.
Hundreds of items go under the hammer to save a medieval manor.
Wesley Smith
Seeing is believing…the videophone which takes the blind out of date.
Anne Dawson
And Johnny Morris brings a touch of Animal Magic to a thousand youngsters.
Welcome back: One of England's longest established families is selling its silverware to pay for the upkeep of its country home.
(WES) The items, including portraits, busts, and waxes, could fetch more than a million pounds.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Stanton Harcourt
The Hon Mrs ANN GASCOIGNE/House Owner
PETER WALDRON/Sotheby's
WILLIAM GASCOIGNE/Son
Voice over
The days of lavish entertainment are over for the Harcourt Family.
They only expect 12 around the dinner table these days at the family home at Stanton Harcourt.
But there have been grander times when dozens of guests from the Royal Family down would dine from their silver service.
Now times are hard and selling the family silver is one way of keeping Harcourt Manor in good condition.
So that and nearly 500 other lots will go under the hammer at Sotherbys tomorrow.
Female speaker
I won't be going to the sale.
The house is open to the public that day, so I'll be in the kiosk answering questions from people and occasionally thinking about what's happening in London.
Voice over
The Harcourt family is one of the oldest in England and dates back to Normandy.
In the last 800 years, they have been knighted, ennobled, given prestige diplomatic posts in Washington and Paris and taken high political office, first as Whigs, then as Liberals.
The silver service came from the Paris Embassy in the 18th century.
Male speaker
The Harcourts were friendly with royalty and there is no doubt that a lot of very important people will have dined off this service.
Voice over
The last Viscount Harcourt died without a male heir, so the title went with him.
The estate went to his daughter, now the Honorable Anne Gasgoigne, who runs it with her eldest son, William.
Male speaker
We hope to raise about £1 million.
I hope that's it.
I don't want to have to go through all this again.
Voice over
The family have kept back a lot of material at the manor.
Pride of place is given to a piece of Henry VIIth's standard at the Battle of Bosworth carried by Sir Robert Harcourt.
But a large slice of the family history is on sale at Sotheby's.
Sir William Harcourt was the last to hold office as Home Secretary and Lord Chancellor, his portrait and robes are in the sale.
The Harcourts were great patrons of the arts and literature and portraits of great figures such as Walpole, Milton and Rousseau are also in the bidding.
They hope to raise £1 million for the upkeep of the Manor which dates back to the 13th century.
Some of it still survives, but needs attention.
The old kitchen is now a tearoom and occasional entertainment venue.
Female speaker
In the old days, we used to be able to fund the house from farm income.
But that's not there because of various actions by the European Community.
So we have to do what we can to try and make sure it survives.
Voice over
Tomorrow, Sotheby's will witness the sale of centuries of English history.
For the Harcourts, it's selling the past to ensure the future.
A dating agency with a difference has been launched in the Cotswolds.
It aims to protect women by allowing them to SEE potential partners from the safety of their own telephone.
CHRIS MOORE/Reporting
SUZIE DENT
RICHARD COHEN
MICHAEL HERSON/Eyetalk
No ordinary phone call.
Not even an ordinary phone.
This new dating agency allows HER to check she's not being paired with the Incredible Hulk and he can make sure that he isn't getting a real-life Grotbags.
’ Ah, there you are, hello Richard.’
’ Oh, hi.’
’ So that's what you look like.
It's funny how you get a picture of someone.’’
Bus the new videophone agency is also designed to protect women from risky blind dates.
They get the mens' numbers, but the men can't ring them.
Female speaker
I wasn't too sure about these new video phones but it was quite good fun seeing what he looked like.
But I think I should ring a few times before I would arrange to meet him.
Male speaker
Men have got a bad press in recent years and I think it's important that women should feel safe and secure with the new contacts they make.
Male speaker
If you can see someone before, it takes the pressure out of the situation.
What we are doing is taking the blind out of date.
We're screening the men before they're allowed onto the service and then women can screen them from the comfort of their own home, so there's a double check and balance going on.
Voice over
New technology may be the only way some will get to meet the love of their life.
But it must be the first time MEN have had to make sure they look good just to answer the phone.
A man of 77 has been robbed at knifepoint by two raiders who broke into his home.
Fred Goodyear was so shocked that it was more than eight hours before he raised the alarm.
Police believe his attackers may have robbed at least nine old people in the same area.
GRAEME BOWD/Bletchley
FRED GOODYEAR
Det Insp PETER BURROWS/Thames Valley Police
DIANE CURTIS/Home Carer
Voice over
Fred Goodyear was alone with his cat when the raiders struck in the early hours of this morning.
Two men, both thought to be in their twenties, broke down the back door of his home in Bletchley.
They seemed to know there was cash on the premises and threatened him with a knife.
Male speaker
I heard the cat miaowing and I knew something was wrong.
They just asked me 'Where's your money?'
I was helpless.
Suppose one of them had used this knife onm me?
Voice over
The men stole three hundred pounds he kept in a tin.
It's the latest in a series of attacks on old people.
Last month this man had £700 stolen when two men broke into his home at East Claydon.
Police say the team may have carried out as many as nine raids, but many of the elderly victims have been unable to give good descriptions.
Mr Goodyear has been burgled before.
Like many old people he ignored advice not to keep cash in his home.
Female speaker
We do always tell them not to keep cash at home.
But they worry that they will not have enough money to pay their bills so they hoard it.
Voice over
Since the raid police have put extra locks on Mr Goodyear's home.
A man has gone on trial for the murder of his girlfriend's cousin outside a social services office.
The court heard that the cousin was stabbed during a domestic dispute.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
Voice over
Westmore James is accused of murdering his girlfrienmd's cousin cousin by stabbing hiom inthe neck.
Oxford Crown Court heard the 24 year old defendant attacked seventeen year old Ian Barnes onthe steps of Oxfordshire Social Services in Banbury in August last year.
The courtheard Mr James had been arguing with his pregnant girlfriend 16 year old Jessie Barnes at the time.
She had left him and their home in Oxford the day before.
She hadgone to Banbury social services for help at the same time as her cousin Ian Barnes.
They met there by accident.
Westmore James had followed her to Banbury guessing that'e where she had gone.
He spoke to her outside the social services and pleaded with her to come home.
Ian barnes intervened when she appeared to be pulled.
He was stabbed in theneck with a survival knife.
Jessie Barnes told the court that the defendant had told her cousin;’ You can'; t run your mouth of at me’.
She said she saw a lot of blood.
The prosecution say Westmore James ran off, dumped the knife in a toilet at Banbury Stationand was later arrested Oxford.
He denies murder.
The case continues.
A dispute has blown up between Swindon Town and Chelsea over the transfer of player-manager Glenn Hoddle.
Swindon say as a player he is worth a million pounds, and they should be compensated accordingly.
But Chelsea say they're not paying a penny.
LIZ HANNAM/Reporting
RAY HARDMAN/Swindon Chairman
SANDY COBERN/Supporters' Club
Voice over
As a manager it was Hoddle's finest hour.
After two years at the County Ground he'd taken Swindon Town to the Premier League.
It was his first job as a manager, but Town owed their success as much to his abilities as player as anything else.
And its these very playing qualities which are now in dispute.
Chelsea have offered a hundred and twenty thousand pounds compensation for loosing Glenn the manager.
But nothing for Glenn the performer, who they offered on a free transfer two years ago.
Swindon Club chairman says: Certainly, he's in the top 10 of the Premier League and probably the best in the First Division.
Swindon are using Chris Waddle, for whom F-A Cup Finalists Sheffield Wednesday paid one point two million pounds, to base their claim for Glenn.
And the supporters agree, he's worth every penny.
Male speaker
Anyone who's seen Glenn Hoddle play will know he's worth more than a million pounds.
Voice over
But in a written statement Chelsea said tonight:’ As far as the playing situation is concerned we are a million miles apart and we're quite happy if necessary for it to be settled by the Football League appeals procedure.’
And if the appeal doesn't give Swindon its million pounds, it'll leave a bitter taste when they have to defend against Hoddle's playing skills in the Premier League next season.
This week marks a special occasion for the Waterloo Band of the Royal Green Jackets.
The part-time volunteers have been sounding retreat with the massed bands of the Light Division.
Last night they were watched by Princess Alexandra.
But it could be their last royal performance.
GRAEME BOWD/London
JOHN MORGAN/Bandmaster
Voice over
For territorial army bands, the chance to join the big league comes only once in 5 years.
These men and women had spent two weeks preparing for the big occasion, many taking unpaid leave from work.
They've been marching with full-time soldiers in Horseguards Parade.
But it's likely to be their last Royal Performance.
All but one of the Light Division's regular bands are being axed in defence cuts.
So big band parade's like this will no longer be possible.
Male speaker
It's a big day for us all.
We consider it a great honour for all members of the band and bugles.
Voice over
This was a nostalgic occasion for many veterans from their regiment, the Royal Green Jackets.
And for the volunteers this royal performance will leave special memories.
The Waterloo Band will sound retreat for the last time tomorrow.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
The man who was injured says he's lost thousands of pounds and hasn't worked since.
(Wes to read next)
WESLEY SMITH
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
July 1992
SHAMI HOAD
Voice over
Matthew Gould, who's 25, was said in court to be a man doing his duty as a bailiff.
He told magistrates at Cheltenham that he never retaliated if he sensed trouble in his work.
Accused of breaking the arm of Mr Shami Hoad, a builder from Gloucester, in July last year, an injury that put Mr Hoad in hospital, he'd denied causing grievous bodily harm.
Mr Gould had gone to Mr Hoad's home in Gloucester to collect unpaid fines for parking and car tax.
Mr and Mrs Hoad, giving evidence at an earlier hearing, said Mr Gould had
been leaving the house when he grabbed Mr Hoad's arm, twisted it, hit it, and broke it.
After a two day hearing the magistrates took 20 minutes to find Mr Gould not guilty, a verdict that disappointed Mr Hoad.
Mr Hoad is now considering a civil claim for damages.
After the case Mr Gould's barrister and solicitor were granted costs from public funds.
KEITH HUTCHENCE/Reporting
ANDY LANE/Oxfordshire Money Advice
Voice over
The arrival of bailiffs often results in fear and confusion…just a fortnight ago police reinforcements were called in to help with an eviction from a house in Brockworth.
The four tenants had actually been paying their rent, but the landlord had not been using the money to pay off his mortgage.
The arrival of a bailiff can easily lead to confrontation, and most people don't know their rights.
The Oxfordshire Money Advice Project advises people to immediately call their lawyer or Citizen's Advice Bureau.
Evictions are the extreme end of the bailiff's duties.
But both they and the welfare advisors say they want the Lord Chancellor to simplify the rules governing bailiffs with clear advance warnings to those receiving court orders.
Five hundred mourners have attended the funeral of a soldier who died when an RAF Hercules crashed, killing all nine people on board.
On the base where the dead men were stationed people say this is the saddest week in its history.
ROBIN POWELL/Tetbury
Rev BRIAN SMITH/Chaplain
Voice over
Lance Corporal Gary Manning was one of nine servicemen who died when an RAF Hercules crashed during a low-level training flight in Scotland two weeks ago.
He was the only soldier on board— his job was despatch, loading equipment for air drops.
But like the rest of the crew, he was stationed at RAF Lyneham, near his home town of Swindon.
For the base Chaplain, this was just one of several funerals he'll be presiding over during the next few days.
Lance Corporal Manning married his wife Elaine three years and moved to Tetbury.
There he became a very popular member of the local community.
On its way to the churchyard, the funeral cortege passed Gary Manning's favourite pub.
At the graveside, a volley of shots…before a Hercules flew overhead to pay its last respects.
An investigation into how the crash happened is continuing.
In the meantime, all Lyneham's thoughts are with the friends and families of those who died.
A sculptor with a sweet tooth has combined her passion for art and chocolate by making a sculpture out of Mars bars.
More than a hundred and fifty chocolate bars went into making the exhibit.
And the artist took a bite out of every single one.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
SARA BYERS/Sculptor
Voice over
It's called’ Comfort Eating’…a pink satin tongue covered with slices of more than 150 Mars bars.
According to the sculptor, it symbolises the way in which victims of nasty remarks often seek comfort in chocolate.
Sara has been displaying’ Comfort Eating’in Cheltenham.
Provided it doesn't melt, she now plans to show it at an exhibition in London.
The television presenter Johnny Morris, famous for his Animal Magic series, has been entertaining more than a thousand children at a wildlife park in the Cotswolds.
The event, called Kids Out, was organised by the Rotary Club for children with special needs or learning difficulties.
IAN MACLAREN Burford
JOHNNY MORRIS
ALAN MARTIN Rotary Club
Voice over
Never work with children and animals they say.
Johnny Morris is a past master at both.
He was at the Cotswold Wild Life Park to lend his expertise for Kids Out — an annual fun day for children with special needs.
This year more than a thousand kids are here thanks to members of Rotary District 1100.
And Johnny's doing his bit to introduce the youngsters to the animal kingdom…
Male speaker
Although you see them on film, it's not the same as seeing them actually there.
Voice over
But a hungry Llama can be a little unpredictable.
Male speaker
Short back and sides?
You never know with these you know.
Voice over
There was also the chance to see this baby alligator at close quarters, but not too close.
The emphasis, however, is very much on having fun.
Male speaker
What child doesn't like fun.
Indeed what adult doesn't.
It's a chance to combine fun and fellowship.
Voice over
It's difficult to say who is having most fun, but there's plenty to grab the attention.
Female speaker
I like the bouncing castle.
Female speaker
I like the bouncing castle because you can go high.
Voice over
13,000 children, across the country, have been treated to Kids Out today.
It's been described as the biggest child movement operation since the evacuees in 1939, but infinitely happier.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Gateshead blast deliberate
Experts say the explosion at the gas works on Tyneside was deliberate.
Lamont savages Government
In a Commons statement, the former Chancellor, Norman Lamont, defended his record in the job.
He blames the policies of his predecessor, Nigel Lawson, for slow economic recovery.
FTSE up 22
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-two point five at twenty-eight, sixty-six point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-one but up at two marks, forty-seven.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Hagan's conviction for rape and murder while on bail has brought calls tonight for the law on the granting of bail to be changed.
The police believe magistrates are under pressure to grant bail, even when officers advise them it could be dangerous.
And an MP also wants the law tightened to ensure criminals like Hagans are never given the opportunity to offend again.
Gareth Furby reports.
ALAN EASTWOOD/Police Federation
TIM ROBINSON/Solicitor
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Voice over
According to the Police Federation Anna McGurk might well have been alive today but for the Bail Act of 1976.
This they say requires magistrates to exercise’ a presumption in favour of granting bail.’
The police can object strongly, but by law magistrates have to weigh up all the auguments, for and against.
With hindsight in Andrew Hagans case they made the wrong decision.
He says it doesn't make sense to point the finger of blame, it's the law that is at fault.
Even though Hagans had already admitted more than thirty offences of indecency, and was facing a charge of raping another woman, Cheltenham magistrates were not convinced by police fears that he could commit further offences.
Hagans solicitor augued there was little evidence for the earlier rape charge, he should be granted bail.
It's an augument he still stands by today.
He says if the ssame facts were put before the court that were put before it then, the same decision would be made.
The Police Federation now wants the law changed so bail is automatically refused if the police fear there's risk of a further offence being committed.
And Gloucester MP Douglas French wants the law tightened to make it harder for magistrates to ignore police advice in serious cases.
He says the magistrates overuled police advice from the highest level.
But tonight the Home office said there were no plans to change the law.
’ magistrates are already required to state publicly their reasons for granting bail in serious cases.
It will remain a matter for the courts to decide.’'
TIM HURST/Bristol Crown Court
That's it for now.
Join us in part two for the rest of the day's news.
RUNS=0:04
In part two: End of an era…
Dowty is taken over by the TI Group
Bolt from the blue…the house hit twice by lightning.
And time to party…handicapped youngsters enjoy the fun of the fair.
Welcome back.
One of the biggest employers in Gloucestershire has been taken over.
The Dowty group has failed to fight off a hostile bid by T-I, one of Britain's largest engineering firms.
Job cuts are almost certain to follow and a former Dowty director has called it the worst day of his life.
This report from Simon Garrett.
STAVERTON/Gloucestershire
Sir CHARLES IRVING/Former Dowty Director
TONY SUMNER/TI Group Plc
Voice over
TI's bid success ends sixty years of independent aircraft engineering by Dowty in Gloucestershire.
In just over a year the company's shed three thousand jobs and seen profits halved.
The TI buyout is costing half a billion pounds and job losses at Dowty seem likely to follow.
Despite the upheaval it at least means an end to the uncertainty
Union officials representing manual workers say they’ hope the company will be run in an efficient and proper manner…that employment and pension rights will be maintained…and that production stays in Gloucestershire.
White collar representatives add they’ look forward to talking to the new management and will be discussing job security and concerns over investment and training.’
TI has brand new headquarters at Abingdon in Oxfordshire.
Dowty's HQ at in Chaltenham is just fifty miles away and could be targetted for closure
The new TI becomes the second largest engineering firm in the UK and one of the biggest in Europe
We go over now live to Cheltenham and our reporter Richard Barnett who's outside the Dowty headquarters.
RICHARD BARNETT/Live from Cheltenham
BRIAN CASSIN/Mayor of Cheltenham
JOHN CANTRILL/President/Gloucs Chamber of Commerce
Voice over
Jailed for life…the man who raped and murdered a council worker.
Jobs under threat…
Dowty loses the hostile takeover battle.
And raising the roof…the house where lightning struck twice.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
KAY POTTS/Anna's Mother
HELEN POTTS/Anna's Sister
Det Supt MALCOLM HART/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Tonight Andrew Hagans starts a life sentence for the rape and murder of Anna McGurk.
But Anna's family say the authorities are also to blame for her death.
They say the magistrates, the police and Anna's employers all’ allowed Anna to be killed’.
And they fear that ten months on, the circumstances that led to Anna's death still exist.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
Det Insp WAYNE MURDOCH/Gloucestershire Police
Det Supt MALCOLM HART/Gloucestershire Police
KAY POTTS/Anna's Mother
HELEN POTTS/Anna's Sister
RECONSTRUCTION
Det Insp WAYNE MURDOCH/Gloucestershire Police
PATRICK STENNETT/Former Police Constable
JIM POTTS/Anna's Father
Voice over
Less than 3 weeks before he murdered Anna, Andrew Hagans was on remand in Gloucester prison charged with raping another woman.
With previous convictions, including one for a sexual attack, he was no stranger to jail.
From his cell in Gloucester, he could see women walking to and from the Castlemeads car park.
Police believe this was when he hatched his plot to kill.
A week later, Hagans made another court appearance on the rape charge.
His solicitor asked that he be allowed out on bail.
But prosecuting lawyers went to great lengths to keep Hagans in custody.
Despite these pleas, magistrates granted Hagans bail, provided he stayed at the Ryecroft Bail Hostel.
Here, he was able to come and go as he pleased, as long as he was in between 11 p.m. at night and 7 a.m. in the morning.
Hagans now had the freedom he needed to execute his plot.
Despite repeated requests, the magistrates who gave Hagans bail refused to be interviewed.
But in a statement, they said bail had been granted’ because the conditions they imposed were sufficient to prevent further offending.’
2 weeks after he was allowed back on the streets, Andrew Hagans murdered Anna McGurk.
Eric Morgan was the chair of the magistrates on that day.
Anna's sister has this message for him.
At the time of Anna's murder, the law stated that men charged with rape could be put into bail hostels, provided they weren't suffering from’ severe abnormality or psychopatic disorder.’
10 months on, that law remains the same.
Less than an hour before Anna was attacked another council employee phoned Gloucester police to say she'd seen a man hanging around the docks all day acting suspiciously.
When PC Stennett was sent to investigate he searched Hagans, but he found nothing and left him in the car park.
Anna's family want to know why Hagans wasn't arrested and why PC Stennett didn't find the knife hidden in his sock.
10 months on, PC Stennett has left the police force.
Today the Castlemeads car park has guards and extra lights, but before Anna's murder security was minimal.
The killing caused a storm of protest and an emergency meeting was held to demand it be made safe.
But the council have been accused of acting too late.
After the murder female employees who had previously used Castlemeads were allowed to park directly outside their office in places normally reserved for senior members of staff.
10 months on, that privilege has been withdrawn.
A man whose house was twice hit by lightning in a fortnight has been talking about the experience, which bookmakers say is a two-billion-to one-chance…
The lightning blew the roof off and set fire to its timber frame.
This report from Harriet Ryley.
CHESTERTON/Oxfordshire
TED AYRIS/Lightning Victim
Voice over
The saying,’ Lightning never strikes twice in the same place,’doesn't ring very true for Ted Ayris.
This is what was left of his council house after it was struck by a bolt of lightning for the SECOND time in 2 weeks.
The first time only damaged the chimney slightly; the second, Ted wasn't so lucky.
Male speaker
I was sitting in the sitting-room about to make a cup of coffee when I heard a huge bang and I thought the whole house was going to cave in.
I came out of the house and then I saw the roof on fire.
Voice over
The firemen who came to put out the fire had a narrow escape when the roof fell in as they were working inside the building.
The house next door was also badly damaged.
But at least there was liquid refreshment on hand in Ted's hour of need.
Male speaker
A lady from the nearby pub bought over a couple of pints — there was quite a reception aftewards.
Voice over
The two houses have been made safe by council workmen, but Cherwell District's chief Housing Officer says it will be 4 months before they're habitable again.
Until then, Ted is staying in temporary accommodation and praying that lightning never strikes 3 times in the same place.
Seven hundred children have been having the time of their lives at a special party.
It's part of the biggest event of it's kind to be staged in Britain, and it's been held especially for handicapped and underprivileged youngsters.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM Gloucestershire
ROY GRAVE Organiser
Voice over
It's a childrens' paradise; all the fun of the fair and the rides are free.
700 little whirling dirvishes from all over the region packed onto Cheltenham racecourse with just one thing in mind, to have a great day out.
The event for disabled and underpriviliged children, was organised by the Rotary organisation, with other parties being held simultaniously throughout Britain.
He says it's taken a year to edit, but it's all been worth it.
Favorite of course, was the bumper cars.
They say they love being bumped while in the cars.
It was also a great day out for the parents, teachers and helpers.
He says it brings tears to your eyes to see the children having such fun.
She says it's great that children from special schools have the chance of such a day out.
Now the Rotary Clubs are hoping the party will become an annual event.
700 children at Cheltenham racecourse certainly wouldn't argue with that.
Hagans jailed for life for Anna McGurk murder
Andrew Hagans from Cheltenham has been jailed for life for the murder of the Gloucester office worker, Anna McGurk.
He was sentenced to a further ten years for rape.
Dowty taken over by TI Group
Job losses are feared following the takeover of one of Gloucestershire's biggest employers, Dowty, by the Oxfordshire based TI Group.
Laura Davies undergoes life-saving operation
Four-year-old, Laura Davies, is undergoing life-saving liver and bowel surgery in the United States.
Police widow appeals to catch killers
Fiona Goodman, the wife of the Special Constable shot dead by suspected IRA terrorists in Yorkshire, has appeared in public to make an appeal for help in catching his killers.
Delors insists Maastricht process continues
The EC Commission President, Jacques Delors, is calling for closer European unity despite worries over the future of the Maastricht Treaty.
FTSE up 0
The hundred shares index closed up point seven at twenty-six, thirty-six point one.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-three and at two marks, ninety-two.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The Gloucestershire regiment is challenging young people to be put through their paces on an adventure training course.
The regiment says it's character building, fun, and most importantly, a useful way of recruiting.
KEN GOODWIN/Lydney
Sgt Major STEVE CLARK/Gloucestershire Regiment
Major IAN WRIGHT/Cheltenham College
Voice over
Somewhere among the trees the enemy lurks.
Paintball guns are at the ready.
These boys from Cheltenham College are out training with the Gloucestershire regiment's youth team in the Forest of Dean.
And they're getting plenty of action.
Walk the tightrope across a ravine?
No problem.
He says that you have to adopt a Charlie Chaplin style of walking.
Build a raft and then get it across a lake?
No problem.
He admits the raft had a’ duff’design.
The Gloucestershire Regiment — shortly to face being amalgamated as part of the Governments defence cuts — wants more young recruits and spending a day with them is one way potential soldiers find out if it's the life for them.
He says that they teach young people how to work as a team.
He says that they have learnt to work together.
He says that they were taught how to creep up on an enemy — quite interesting.
He says that the college has close links with the Glosters.
Next there's the paintball gun equivelant of a shoot out at the OK coral.
The orange team versus the greens.
It's a bit of a shambles, with both sides suffering losses from liberal coatings of emulsion.
Then the rafting exercise, to wash off all that paint and cool off.
The rafts won't win any design awards, but they get across the lake.
He says that they're exhausted.
The Gloucestershire Regiment will help any school, or youth group which wants to take part in adventure training.
The regiment says it's one day out you'll never forget.
There was a time when almost every small child wanted to be a train driver when they grew up.
Well, now some of them are actually getting the chance.
A course of classes on firing and driving steam trains is being offered to complete novices.
Not surprisingly, the classes have completely sold out.
JESSICA FOWLE Quainton
PHIL MARSH Buckinghamshire Railway Centre
BOB WACKETT Steam Enthusiast
STEVE WACKETT Steam Enthusiast
Voice over
It's the stuff that dreams are made of.
Would-be engine drivers and guards are lining up at the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre at Quainton for the chance to transform their own personal childhood fantasy into reality.
Railway buffs, from a range of backrounds, are abandoning their inhibitions and donning overalls to sample the thrills of the footplate on a main-line steam engine.
The half-day courses include two hours practical experience of firing and driving with full instruction on safety and how the engine works.
And then the moment of truth as the eager new recruits take the controls and move off down a half-mile of track alongside the British Rail line.
For 70 year old Bob Wackett and his son, Steve it's the fulfillment of a life-long ambition.
The courses at Quainton run once a month and cost cost £45.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Smith attacks PM
Labour's John Smith has said in the Commons that the Prime Minister's authority and that of his Government is in tatters.
Major admits difficulties
The Prime Minister has admitted to having what he called’ local difficulties’.
IRA admits Tyneside blasts
The IRA has admitted carrying out bomb attacks at an oil refinery and gas storage plant on Tyneside.
Clough denies illegal payments
The former Nottingham Forest football manager, Brian Clough, has denied claims in the High Court that he received illegal payments during the transfer of one of his players.
Les Dawson dies at 58
The comedian, Les Dawson, has died at the age of fifty-eight.
Jobs saved in BAe deal
Jobs have been saved by the announcement that British Aerospace has secured a five hundred million pound deal to sell Hawk trainer jets to Indonesia.
FTSE down 6
The hundred shares index closed down six point nine at twenty-eight, sixty exactly.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-two and up at two marks, forty-eight.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Michael Heseltine is being blamed for thousands of people losing their holidays when a travel firm went bust.
The Labour Party says the firm continued trading without insuring holidaymakers' money, because Mr Heseltine told them they didn't actually NEED insurance.
KATE GARRAWAY/Oxford
NIGEL GRIFFITHS MP/Labour Consumer Spokesman
DAVID SIBBERT/Trading Standards
MICHAEL CRATCHLEY/SFV Customer
Voice over
SFV Holidays, based in Oxford, collapsed last week leaving debts of more than £1 million and more than 3,000 customers with no holiday and no refund because the company had no insurance.
Labour's consumer affairs spokesman, Nigel Griffiths, says the President of the Board of Trade is to blame.
It claims Michael Heseltine wrote two letters to SFV saying he'd read the company's brochure and because it didn't run package holidays there was no need for insurance.
In fact, the brochure shows that more than 90% of the company's holidays are package deals.
Male speaker
The President of the Board of Trade ignored trading standards advice that insurance was needed.
Male speaker
Oxfordshire Trading Standards are investigating.
Voice over
Nigel Griffiths has tabled a bill in Parliament to provide greater regulation of travel companies but that's of little comfort to Michael Cratchley from Banbury who lost his holiday with SFV.
Male speaker
The kids will be very disappointed when they find out they're not going on holiday.
Voice over
The DTI refused to comment on today's claims.
The Labour Party is now calling for an independent inquiry to be set up to consider whether compensation should be paid to those who lost their holidays.
Seven houses which were bought and then left derelict for years by Robert Maxwell, have been opened up again to potential buyers.
The Maxwell Houses, as they became known, were labelled as a’ blot on the landscape’after they were boarded up and then simply abandoned.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
ELIZABETH BEESLEY/Former House Owner
HOWARD WESTERDALE/Potential Buyer
July 1991
Cllr JOHN POWER/Lord Mayor of Oxford
DAVID THOMPKINS/Adkins Estate Agents
Voice over
They're removing another nail in the Maxwell coffin.
These houses have been homes to squattors for the past 4 years.
Elizabeth Beesley had lived here for 37 years before Robert Maxwell made her an offer she couldn't refuse.
Female speaker
It broke my heart to leave, but my daughter said I ought to take my chance.
Voice over
Reporter asks: What's it like seeing the house again?
Female speaker
It's dreadful.
I'd love to go in again, but they tell me not to go, but to remember how it was.
Male speaker
This is the kitchen.
There's mould on the wall, plugs have been pulled from the sockets.
It's disgraceful.
Voice over
Into the dining room.
You can see the fireplace has been removed, the windows smashed and the ceiling is falling in.
The sale is creating a lot of interest with people who want a bargin, even though there are a few skeletons in the cupboard.
Male speaker
A house is just a house.
It's a question of you pay for what you get.
It's cheaper than buying one across the road.
The history is irrelevant.
Voice over
The houses created controversy from the day Robert Maxwell took them over.
He probably wanted to pull them down and re-develop the site.
He never got his way.
Two families decided to stay put and continued to live alongside the squalor.
Meanwhile protestors campaigned to keep the site for housing.
And today the City Council is delighted its persistance has paid off.
Male speaker
I said at the time of Robert Maxwell's death that he'd left a trail of wreckage across the city.
This is an example.
Today means that another Maxwellian blot is removed from the landscape.
Male speaker
There's a lot of curiosity.
We'd like to see them remain as houses.
Once people have moved in, they'll make lovely homes.
Voice over
The houses will probably sell for around £30,000 or £40,000 each.
Mr Maxwell bought them for around 5 times that much.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News:
The long and widening road.
Will it really be no jams tomorrow?
Plus: Paintballs at Dawn.
A whitewash victory for the young army hopefuls.
Welcome back: And if you're a regular driver on the M-Five…good news!
Work to widen the motorway is nearly finished.
Wesley Smith
It's taken nine hundred men just two years to complete the project.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Pershore
PHIL SMITH/Engineer
TIM JACOB/Dept of Transport
Voice over
It's almost the end of the road for the 900 people who've worked on widening a 13-mile stretch of the M5 between junctions 6 and 8.
It's taken just two years to complete the £60 million project.
In that time 150 lorry loads of steel have been used; enough earth has been excavated to bury 6,000 football pitches a foot deep in soil and 20 bridges have been demolished.
The M5 was first built in 1962.
Then only 8,000 vehicles a day used it.
Now it's more like 75,000.
That's why it needs the extra lanes.
To build it engineers used a new method called parallel widening.
That involves building one whole new carriageway at the side of the existing motorway.
The traffic is then transferred onto that while the other section is improved.
It's a method that's proved very popular.
It's also better for the environment.
The motorway will be officially opened at the end of the month.
In Central News tonight:
Our son was murdered.Parents ask inquest to rule out suicide.
Helping the Republicans.
Blandford told…you're a threat to the House of Lords
And kicking out the past.
It's open house at the Maxwells'.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
They've already complained about the original police investigation, and another force has been called in to re-examine the case.
But Mark's family hopes that the inquest will finally solve the mystery.
September 1992/GARETH FURBY/Reporting
ANN JEFFREY/Speaking Last Year
Voice over
Firemen found a body in the debris of the barn at Slade Farm near Stroud.
It could only be identified by dental records and fingerprints.
Marc Jeffery, from Stround, was 20 years old and a student of philosophy.
Forensic experts found traces of petrol on his clothes.
But after a lengthy investigation the police ruled out foul play.
It was either an accident or he'd committed suicide.
But Marc's parents are convinced he was killed.
His mother says she knew him well and he wouldn't commit suicide.
It's very suspicious.
Today they took their case to the inquest in Cirencester.
They've hired a firm of solicitors and an investigator to gather evidence.
Anne Jeffrey, who's a teacher, told the hearing Marc didn't drink, or take drugs, and he wasn't depressed.
And Reverend Michael Jeffrey said he couldn't beleive his son would go into the barn of his own free will.
It was smelly dirty and wet.
If he'd been camping he'd have chosen somewhere more comfortable.
And some of Marc's student friends told the inquest he was looking forward to going back to University.
He'd even made a series of phone calls to arrange a lift.
The inquest heard the barn burnt down last September.
Traces of petrol were found at the scene.
But Mrs Jeffrey told the inquest her son didn't drive, and the only petrol can in the house was empty.
Another neighbour told the inquest he'd seen a car with two occupants drive away from the farm just before the barn caught fire.
The inquest will continue tomorrow.l
Violent thunderstorms have caused flash flooding across the region.
Many roads are awash, and impassable in places.
MARTIN GRAHAM-SCOTT/Reporting
BIBURY/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Worst hit areas have been on the Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire border and in the Forest of Dean.
The Burford to Bibury road has been awash for most of the afternoon.
There's also deep floodwater on the A40 Gloucester to Ross on Wye road at Huntley.
Fire crews have been at full stretch dealing with flooded houses mainly in the Cotswolds.
The Hereford and Worcester Fire Service headquarters has been struck by lightening.
Calls are now being handled by the West Midlands.
More torrential rain is forecast tonight with up to four inches of rain expected in some parts of Gloucestershire.
The Marquis of Blandford has been warned that his behaviour could threaten the whole future of the House of Lords.
The heir to the Blenheim Palace estate is now serving his third jail sentence, but unless the law is changed he will still inherit the title of Duke of Marlborough.
However, an expert on the aristocracy says Jamie Blandford's antics are adding fuel to the Republican cause.
KIM BARNES/Reporting
HAROLD BROOKS-BAKER/Burke's Peerage
November 1992/THE BIG BREAKFAST/Planet 24
TONY BANKS MP/Lab Newham North West
ROGER KNAPMAN MP/Con Stroud
Voice over
The last public appearance of Jamie Blandford couldn't be much further from the role of a young aristocrat…in the firm grip of the law and on his way to Pentonville, for not paying his wife ten thousand pounds maintenance…
Now there are claims that his antics could threaten the very future of the House of Lords…
He says the tabloid press has been hitting out at the Lords for a long time.
Morte and more politicans are saying a Republic should be discused.
This adds more ammunition.
It's Lord Blandford's second trip to Pentonville…there was a drugs sentence in 1986…and two years ago he was sent to Oxford prison for driving offences.
But as the law stands, Jamie Blandford knows only high treason could stop him inheriting his father's title…and the Blenheim estate.
He says my father can't disinherioty me.
Blenheim is an irrevocable legacy.
Now Harold Brooks Baker wants a Royal Commision to vet future peers.
Noted Repulicans say Jamie's already done some damage.
He says a few lordships are cursing his name because it can't be helping them to survive.
But those in favour of the second chamber say it will survive Jamie's exploits.
He says you can have too much as well as too little.
But it does give us an opportunity to examine our institutions.
In Woodstock, beside the Blenheim estate, locals think the stocks would be a more appropriate inheritance than the Marlborough title…
She says I don't think he's the right person.
People want someone they can look up to.
He says I don't think he's a responsible enough citizen.
She says the trouble he gets in, he's not worthy.
He's a bit of a wild man.
The Marlborough motto is faithful though Unfortunate.
Now it's feared that there's more than just the family fortunes at stake.
