Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
POLICE VIDEO
Det Sgt TONY EVERITT/Thames Valley Police
PETER BUTLER MP/Con Milton Keynes East
Voice over
At speeds of ninety miles a Police car chased a stolen white fiesta…through narrow country lanes…cars coming in the oppositie direction swerve to avoid it car as it weaves in and out of the traffic…at times the Police try to overtake it…without success…forty miles after they spotted the stolen car…the road clears and the Police overtake and stop them…three schoolboys are arrested…one of them…a passenger…is fourteen…in the past eight months he's been arrested twenty eight times…the day before he'd been placed under another supervision order by Milton Keynes Magistrates where he'd faced charges of robbery and burglary and joy riding…it was from the children's home he'd been sent that his two friends picked him up.
He says; not once has he lost his liberty and we say for his own sake and others there must be consideration about whether he should be put in a secure place.
This case isn't unusual for Milton Keynes Police…last year a sixteen year committed 56 separate crimes before he lost his freedom…
Milton Keynes has been running a befriender scheme where persistent offenders are looked after and advised by adults…it was working…but yesterday closed because of a shortage of cash…
The local MP who's also a lawyer wants magistrates to have tougher powers
He says;
He says; Government should make funds are available.
The Home Office said aS far as young offenders were concerned…the aim was to find constructive altermnatives to custody…
Young people are locked up only when all other possiblities havbe failed,
At Milton Keynes Magistrates Court today the youth was remaded back into the care of the local authority and is again in the childrens home…
Police are again repairing the damage to another of their cars.
An inquest jury has returned a verdict of accidental death on an eighty three year old woman given the wrong blood after an operation.
The jury decided the proper procedure had not been followed.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
CHELTENHAM
MARGUERITE HARRIS/Hospital Operations Director
Voice over
An industrial giant which has taken over one of the region's biggest employers today assured workers there would be no major job losses.
But city experts insist that hundreds of jobs may be lost.
The engineering company T-I has taken over the Dowty Group, based in Cheltenham.
Tonight thousands of workers are wondering just what the future holds.
Gareth Furby reports.
TI CORPORATE VIDEO
DOWTY AEROSPACE/Cheltenham
CHRIS BINGHAM/Investment Analyst
TONY SUMNER/TI Group Plc
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem Cheltenham
TI CORPORATE VIDEO
Voice over
More than three thousand five hundred jobs in the region now depend on the decisions of management from the engineering company, the T-I group.
T-I which has a turnover of one billion pounds, specialises in the manufacture of fuel lines, brake pipes, and engine seals.
It also has its own aerospace business.
And Dowty will quickly be moulded to fit in with these interests.
Dowty's existing business is concentrated in four areas: aerospace, electronic systems, polymer enginering, and information technology.
City experts believe the aerospace division is secure.
Nearly two thousand five hundred jobs in Cheltenham and Gloucester are at stake.
Experts beleive there will be some redundancies as T-I seek to make improvements, but the number of jobs losses should be small.
But it's not the same story for the electronics systems division, which employs two hundred and fifty people, again in Cheltenham and Gloucester.
This, experts believe, will be sold off.
He says, across the UK, there could be two hundred jobs.
The eight hundred and thirty five people who work for the Polymer Engineering division in Ross on Wye and Ashchuch can tonight breath a sigh of relief.
Experts belive this is secure.
But the information technology division is to be sold off.
And about eighty jobs in Swindon may be at risk.
He says it won't become clear until there's a new owner but there may be redundancies.
Tonight T-I again assured Dowty employees that there would be no major job losses.
He says they can't yet say all the jobs are safe but they want to build a growing company.
T-I has also denied it has any plans to close down Dowty's headquarters in Cheltenham and move jobs T-I's HQ at Abingdon in Oxfordshire.
Cheltenham's MP has met TI management and is satisfied with the assurances he was given.
He says they're not in the business of asset stripping.
And tomorrow TI's finance team it due to visit Cheltenham for a close inspection of the company it now owns.
After nearly thirty years as a singing sex symbol, Tom Jones says he's looking to create a more mature image for himself.
His new TV show, The Right Time, is a step in that direction.
The series, currently in production at Central, features Tom singing and talking with performers from across the musical spectrum.
We went behind the scenes for the latest in our series, Inside the Globe.
TOM JONES/Singer
TOM JONES — THE RIGHT TIME/A Central Production
MICA PARIS/Singer
The atmosphere at Central's studio 7 is electric.
60 people on the studio floor are involved in putting together ITV's newest music show, which is set to be a hit.
It aims to appeal to all age groups.
The host, the legendary Tom Jones.
It's his first series on British television in 20 years.
Tom Jones says that Central has given him the opportunity to do a musical show which no-one else is doing.
Most music shows on television are plug shows, either talk or variety shows, or Top of the Pops.
I think TV needs a show like this which presents all types of music.
Each programme in the series will explore a different type of music.
The first show covered pop and featured the Forest of Dean band, EMF.
The next show, this Saturday night, covers gospel music.
One of the star guests is Mica Paris.
Mica says she thinks this show is really good with Tom recording all different types of music throughtout the series and proves that some singers don't just go on TV to plug their latest hits, but have influencess and don't mind talking about them.
It's taken a year for Central to bring the show to our screens from the first talks with Tom in the USA.
More than £1 million pounds have been invested in the series.
Tom says if this show is successful he would like to do more.
There's so much to do about the roots of music that this series hasn't even scratched the surface.
He wants to do more programmes as well as record more good songs.
He says he wanted to become a professional singer so he wouldn't have to do a job he didn't like.
It wasn't to get rich.
Singing becomes a part of your life.
To stop would be hell.
Tom says every singer wants to have a hit record.
They're lying if they say they don't.
It's always good to have a hit.
You can see Tom Jones-The Right Time on Saturday at 10.15 on Central.
Tom says it's all go isn't it?
Princess of Wales in tears on walkabout
During a walkabout on Merseyside, the Princess of Wales was overcome by tears after the crowd voiced their support for her amid the current press controversy surrounding her marriage.
Women warned after double rape
Women motorists have been urged to be vigilant after two women were raped after three men flagged them down in a country lane in Bedfordshire.
IRA believed guilty of Westminster bombing
The Police believe that the IRA planted the bomb which exploded in Westminster earlier today.
Life in jail for babysitter arsonist
June Leaning, a babysitter from Humberside, has been jailed for life for an arson attack on a house in which two children in her care died.
Major in Rio for Earth Summit
The Prime Minister has arrived in Rio for the final stages of the Earth Summit.
FTSE down 22
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-two points at twenty-six, fourteen point one.
The pound is up nearly two cents at one dollar, eighty-five but down at two marks, ninety-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Pet owners are being warned about lethal snares deliberately set to trap cats.
One animal has narrowly escaped death twice in the space of a few weeks as Simon Garrett reports 
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
EILEEN DELANEY/Pickle's Owner
Insp TERRY WINSTONE/RSPCA
Voice over
These wire snares were set to catch a cat.
They succeeded.
Twice eighteen month old Pickle dragged himself home close to death with the noose pulled tight around his neck
Female speaker
The wire was imbedded in his neck, he was panting, shaking, absolutely terrified
Voice over
How do you feel about the person who could do such a thing?
It's absolutely unthinkable.
I would like to do the same thing to them
Worryingly for Eileen Delaney Pickle has vanished again today…raising fears that he may be caught in a trap once more.
Incredibly even if the person who set the snare is found out they may be beyond the reach of the law
Male speaker
Free running snares are still legal in this country for trapping wild animals.
Although of course they still cause considerable pain to any animal caught in them wild or domestic.
The RSPCA is opposed to their use
Voice over
The snares are concealed at cat's head height in hedges frequently used by them as pathways.
The animal walks into the noose and is caught.
As it struggles the wire tightens until it gives up or dies.
Eileen Delaney has five cats in all…including Pickle's Siamese twin Branston.
She's worried any of them could be killed…and for now she can only wait for the missing cat to return
Female speaker
I'm afraid that this time he won't be so lucky…he won't come back and I'll end up losing him to some atrocious person that really and truthfully I don't think should be on this earth
Voice over
A Ukranian choir has been stranded in Britain after a visa mix up meant they missed out on a concert tour.
Now music lovers have come to the choirs rescue.
Ken Goodwin reports.
MALVERN/Worcestershire
MARGARETE ROLLE
LUBA MYKOSOWSKA/Interpreter
BOHDAN ANTKIV/Musical Director
Voice over
It's not often you get a top class soprano singing in your back garden, but this is where Ukranian singer, Alla Kravchuk rehearses.
The Boyan ensemble are from Kiev and had been booked to play dates in Britain.
But they were held up by complications in getting visas.
It meant they missed part of their British tour.
Then because of another mix up with their concert promoter in England, they discovered they didn't have enough other venues booked to pay for their stay.
Stranded and broke, Malvern music lover, Margarete Rolle stepped in.
She says that after hearing them sing and finding out they were srtanded, she lent them her house.
So the choir has a base from which they can work and now the same hills which inspired Elgar are echoing to the sound of 28 powerful Ukranian voices.
The choirs interpreter says the first part of the tour was fraught with problems.
She says they all panicked when they realised they were stranded.
They deserve better.
He says they now want to concentrate on getting more venues.
As more people hear the choir, those bookings are coming in.
Their next big venue is on Saturday night at Worcester Cathedral.
A new brewery is producing its first beer this week.
It's the only one in Worcestershire — other real ale breweries set up in the county during the nineteen eighties have all since closed down.
But the Jolly Roger brewery says its confident it wont go the same way.
Kevin Ashford reports.
WORCESTER
JEREMY WILLIAMS/Brewer
JAYNE GRIFFITHS/Sales Manager
Opening a brewery at a time when Britain's drinkers are supping less beer than they used to might not seem like a good idea.
But the makers of the Jolly Roger ales believe they can find customers for the 100 barrels a week they soon hope to produce.
They pride themselves on sticking to traditional brewing methods.
’ We extract the sugars from the malt, boil them up in the copper adding different types of hops and then cool it down.
We then run it into fermenters, adding yeast, then leave it for 3 days to ferment and rack it off into casks.
We leave it then for another 2 to 3 weeks to mature in casks then it's ready to drink.’
The new commercial brewery will be the only one of its kind in Worcestershire.
Other real ale breweries were set up in the county during the 1980s, but failed.
The Jolly Roger makers say they're confident THEY won't suffer a similar fate because they're already selling the beer across the country from Blackpool to the Isle of Wight.
And they claim it's as good for you as beer can be.
’ We use 100% natural ingredients.
We use malt, hops, yeast and water.
There are no artificial additives at all.
And I think with people being health conscious these days, they don't want lots of E numbers in their food, let alone their beer.
So that's probably a very good selling point of it.’
’ So you're trying to say that the beer you sell is healthy?’
’ It certainly is; it's good for you.’
’ As long as you don't drink too much of it.’
’ Yes, that's right.’
A Northampton-based relief agency is warning that the refugee crisis in Sudan has reached breaking point.
After coming under military bombardment, twenty-two thousand hungry people are marhcing south.
Many are dying from starvation before they reach safe havens in Northern Kenya.
Alison Mackenzie reports.
SUDAN
CHARLES CLAYTON/World Vison Director
JOHN SCHENK/World Vision
Voice over
This is the scale of the problem facing relief workers from the Northampton based charity World Vision.
Their representatives are helping thousands of orphaned children and displaced families escape from the tyranny of civil war.
The crisis affects the central African country of Sudan.
Last week homes and camps in the south came under military attack from pro-government forces from the North.
The only option to flee south.
A long and weary march across the border to Northern Kenya.
In the bombing attack, sick and wounded patients in make-shift hospitals were killed.
£50,000 worth of drugs and medical equipment were destroyed.
World Vision Director, Charles Clayton says the urgent need is to assist with providing food and shelter.
World Vision is helping to do that, but there is a very real crisis.
The refugees are sick and weary.
Conditions have been made worse by intense heat and the continuing drought.
For the relief workers, trying to cope is an overwhelming ordeal.
World Vision Relief worker John Schenk says there are 12,000 boys on the move.
They have left their homes looking for an education.
Instead they have ended up in these camps, separated from their families.
One boy walked all the way from Ethiopia.
He saw friends drown in rivers and get shot by bandits.
Now he doesn't know what his futures will be.
Many of the refugees have been on the move for several years.
They are used to dealing with harsh conditions in a hostile environment.
It's hoped the encampments in Northern Kenya will provide some respite from the suffering.
A verdict of accidental death's been recorded on a woman who was crushed beneath a coach when it veered out of control across a busy street.
An inquest heard how the accident happened when the coach driver collapsed at the wheel of his vehicle.
Simon Garrett reports 
12 MARCH 1992/OXFORD
Voice over
Katerina Webb died beneath the Oxford tube bus's wheels before firemen with heavy lifting equipment could get her out.
Moments before, Mr Collett was heard to moan’ drink, drink drink,’before keeling over.
Mr Collett's employers say he was a first class driver.
He told the inquest he remembered nothing about what happened in the crash.
At the time he had no particular health problems.
An accident in 1957 left him with a metal plate in his head, but the vehicle licencing authorities were well aware of the fact and Mr Collett held a PSV coach driver's licence.
Because of the accident that licence's now been revoked.
More people could have been seriously hurt if a passenger hadn't leapt forward and slammed on the brakes stopping the coach hitting a wall.
Ms Webb died just yards from the courtroom where she spent much of her working life, behind which a tree's been planted to commemmorate her.
The fire service has made an urgent appeal for more part-time firefighters.
In the past year a shortage of volunteers has led to an increase in the time taken to respond to emergency calls.
Unless more part-timers can be recruited, the situation could get worse.
Kim Barnes reports.
CHIPPING NORTON/Oxfordshire
TED HUCKIN/Retained Firefighter
MAURICE JOHNSON/Chief Fire Officer
JIM HUME/Retained Firefighter
Voice over
Tom Huckin and Jim Hume have to be prepared to drop everything and run 24 hours a day.
They're retained, or part-time firemen who can be called out to Chipping Norton fire station at any time.
Tom's been doing it for 18 years.
But he's a rare breed and the lack of retained firefighters is leading to worrying delays for Oxfordshire's fire service.
Last quarter, the nearest station failed to turn out to 90 calls.
Fire chiefs say there is an increased risk to the public.
Now the county council has backed a new drive to recruit more retained firefighters, as a matter of urgency.
They'll be thoroughly trained and paid around £2,500 a year.
In particular they could do with some more women.
A small town fire crew needs to be able to turn out within 8 to 10 minutes.
If that's to be maintained, more help is needed.
18 of Oxfordshire's 24 fire stations are completely staffed by retained officers.
Their key role isn't widely appreciated.
There's no extra cash to pay for the search; fire chiefs are just hoping their alarm call is answered.
Welcome back: Coming up shortly, the ghostwatchers who've taken on a whole houseful of spirits.
Wesley Smith
But first, Tim Russon with a new series of summer sport specials.
TIM RUSSON
DEREK CLARK/Inventor
ADRIAN JONES/Laser
DAVID BRABHAM/Jaguar Driver
DAVID COULTHARD/Jaguar Driver
Voice over
Hello there…this week summer sport has brought us to the south coast to take a look at a sailing revolution that's being pioneered from the heartland of Central South…we're going out on the solent to sea test a boat which is reckoned to be the formula one of the water
Welcome to the sailing revolution…and the new spacecraft of the water…the Laser 5000 is the machine which experts reckon will change the sport…
Why…
How…by balancing the boat with moving arms…and adding weights in the bottom…everyone is equal when they go sailing on this…
It means that small…lightweight people can match the strong heavyweights…
Its the same as making a formula one car go at 200 miles an hour for each and every driver…handling is down to individual skill
The laser has been developed and built in Banbury…its been undergoing sea tests on the south coast for the past few months…
Piloting it…four experts…with a track record of olympic sailing…admirals and americas cup racing…
One of them Derek Clark is the man who dreamt up the new idea…took the plunge into the sailing revolution
Derek Clark says that it will change sailing by forcing people to realise that sometimes championships are won by people who are the right weight and size rather than the best sailor…he says they're hoping to examine the skill levels…it also means that more people can go racing…
Adrian Jones of Laser…says its easy to sail…its not for the beginner but the club sailor will be able to handle it…he says it gives the opportunity for the normal man or girl in the street to sail together in a powerful boat…all the boats will be exactly the same…it means that the best sailor will win…
the new boat is just arriving in the showroom…only these two have been launched so far…it's taken just over a year to design and develop…
to test and tune in the water
Adrian says they've spent a lot of time in the water…tweaking this and tweaking that and making sure that it has come through production with flying colours…
Derek says…they've broken a few boats in testing…they've been building prototypes for the last six months and have been putting in hours at sea to make sure everything is right
music
the new craft looks good and sails good…but what will the boating world make of it…
Adrian says they've had an incredible response to the new boat…the best ever…they've had interest worldwide from Japan to South America
the experts too are fans of the boat already…
the expert sailers say its not a beginners' boat but will give an exciting performance…they think it will be a good test of skill…and it's a great boat to sail…it's fantastic…just the craft to be in
Its from the water to the racetrack for our action round-up this week…the Oxfordshire based jaguar racing team have been at Silverstone shaking down for the 24 hour race at Le Mans which fires into action next weekend…
its 40 years since the jaguar c types scored their greatest victory in the legendary race and the new look jaguars have a lot to live up to…
in the fifties the team won the marathon race five times…they were back on the winning trail in 88 and again in 90…
this year their hopes rest on three XJ220c…the racing version of the world's fastest production car…
linking the old with new is Australian driver David Brabham…the youngest son of Sir Jack the great world champion
David Brabham says his father has not got fond memories of Le mans because when he was driving it was wet and foggy…the weather was very bad…but David says he looks forward to it now because it is a classic event…he says its his first year with Jaguar at le mans
Racing for the first time at le mans will be the young British driver David Coulthard…he's can't wait to get there but after Silverstone he knows just how hard its going to be
David Coulthard says that after fifteen laps in an enclosed cockpit compared to an open single seater he realise just how tough it's going to be…it's going to be hot…deyhrdation is a problem along with getting sleepy in the night…physically he says this is going to be the hardest race of his life…but he loves the challenge…
its motor biking's big day on the Isle of man tomorrow…weather rained off today's senior TT so they race in the morning…the Oxford Products Ducati team are chasing victory with two riders…
Mark Farmer who's already recorded the fastest lap of just over a 120 miles an hour is teaming up with Robert Dunlop…they ride over six laps…
Karen Rake from the Maxwell club at Aylesbury will be chasing records in the pool at Sheffield this weekend as she competes in the British Championships…
Karen is one of the best young prospects we've got…and will be going for gold in the breast stroke…
Survival will be the name of the game on Sunday…when the country's top triathletes arrive in Aylesbury to compete in the British Sprint Championships…
A sprint to them is a 750 metre open air swim…a twenty kilometre bike ride…and a five kilometre run…
There's scores of Central South folk heading for Wales this weekend to ride and run in one of the great adventure races…its the annual Horse v Man V Mountain Bike challenge…local people have won the race for the last five years…and you can if the winning run or ride continues when we bring you the highlights on Monday…
Rare species of wildlife are in danger of becoming extinct because of a big increase in theft.
Newts and other rare reptiles are being stolen from ponds, and conservationists are worried that some species could die out altogether.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
Insp BOB PHILPOTT/Wiltshire Police
TONY VETTA/English Nature
Voice over
They might not be the most obvious target for thieves, but thefts of newts — particularly the great crested variety — are alarming both police and conservationists.
Since the change in the weather, Swindon Police have dealt with several reported sightings of rare creatures being stolen.
It's thought that children are repsonsible for some of the thefts, but there's evidence that enthusiasts are stealing newts to boost their private collections.
English Nature says the thieves are causing untold damage.
There's a big price to pay for being caught stealing rare creatures, with fines of up to £2,000 for each animal.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News:
Winds of change…
The new boat that's starting a sailing revolution.
And, if you think YOU'VE got ghosts…you can't hold a candle to this place.
A desperate father is preparing to give one of his kidneys to his daughter after the failure of two previous transplants.
It may be the only chance the ten year old child will have of leading a normal life.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Milton Keynes
REBEKAH ASHFORD/Transplant Patient
DAVID ASHFORD/Transplant Donor
GEOFFREY KOFFMAN/Consultant Surgeon
MAUREEN ASHFORD/Rebekah's Mother
Voice over
From the outside, Rebekah Ashford looks a healthy and energetic child.
But the 10 year old from Milton Keynes has already rejected two kidney transplants in the last 4 years.
Now her family are gambling on yet another operation, this time with her father, David as the donor.
Female speaker
It'll be good because Daddy can live on one kidney and I'll only have to carry on taking one drug.
Voice over
Rebekah needs a closley matching kidney and the likliest candidate was from a member of her family.
The previous transplants had come from accident victims and were rejected within days.
Ironically, the family believe that's because Rebekah is so healthy.
Male speaker
She's so strong her immune system keeps throwing them out.
They each went within 10 days.
Female speaker
I think I am too strong, that's what Mummy says.
Voice over
Rebekah still manages to lead a robust life playing basketball with her two brothers and practising her flute playing.
But she still has to take a daily cocktail of drugs.
Her kidneys are working at only 9% efficiency and they're getting worse.
If not for the operation it would only be a matter of months before she had to go on Dialysis.
But this time her surgeon thinks it will be a success.
Male speaker
If it was only an even chance, we wouldn't be trying this.
We think she has a more than 90% chance of keeping this one.
Voice over
Kidney failure has meant Rebekah has suffered from anaemia, low energy and restricted growth.
The new kidney, planted in the abdomen, will help her get back on even terms.
David will have to take 3 months off from his job as a teacher at a local school.
But he's ready for that.
He's just surprised it wasn't his wife.
Male speaker
I was surprised that it was me and not the other way round.
But I'm very proud to be doing it.
Female speaker
I was disappointed that it couldn't be me, but at least we have a very good chance with my husband.
Voice over
The operations take place on June the 21st, exactly 4 days after the first transplant.
Everyone is praying that this time it will be third time lucky.
A tenant who was wrongfully evicted from his bedsit has been awarded damages of (1900) nineteen hundred pounds.
But the judge criticised both the landlord AND the tenant, saying he didn't really believe either of them.
So, he cut the damages accordingly.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
Voice over
Danny Brady claimed damages after claiming he was unlawfully evicted by 6 men who threatened him and put his belongings on the street.
His landlord Ali Shan has already been fined five hundred pounds for unlawful eviction by Oxford Magistrates.
But hearing this claim for damages Judge Leo Clark said both witnesses Mr Brady and Mr Shan were thoroughly unsatisfactory.
He said he placed little or no reliance on either of them as to what happened.
Brady's own barrister described the assault allegations as scant and the Judge awarded no damages for personal injury.
But the Judge said he was satisfied Brady was unlawfully evicted from his bedsit on Oatlands Road, but he added he was also satisfied that had the landlord gone to court to get him out he would have been successful.
Brady was awarded nineteen hundred pounds damages — a reduced sum because he had been, the Judge said, a thoroughly awkward tenant — and because he had to pay Mr Shan his outstanding rent.
The parachutist who crash-landed on a group of schoolchildren has been talking for the first time about what happened.
Flight Sergeant Rex Pritchard was badly injured when his canopy went out of control during a display by the RAF Falcons.
It was his first accident in more than three thousand jumps.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
27 April/WITNEY/Oxfordshire
Flight Sgt REX PRITCHARD
Flight Lt ALEX JONES/Team Leader
Voice over
6 weeks after the jump which put him in hospital, Rex Pritchard is back on his feet, though he now a steel rod in his right leg.
The official inquiry into the accident is now yet complete, but senior officers are thought to be satisfied that Flight Sergeant Pritchard was not at fault.
His parachute was caught by turbulence as he came in to land on a school playing field.
A boy of 6 and his teacher were slightly hurt.
Rex broke two bones in his leg.
Male speaker
Severe wind turbulence caused my canopy to go down a lot faster than normal.
Voice over
It must have been distressing to land in the crowd?
It's something that should never happen.
But in the severe turbulence that I encountered I had no control over my canopy and there was very little that I could do.
Until the last 60ft everything was looking good.
His actions have been praised by other members of the team who confirm that the weather conditons were difficult.
They believe his efforts to avoid spectators may have added to his own injuries.
Male speaker
He made every effort to avoid people on the ground.
He showed outstanding bravery, pulling his legs up until the very last minute.
Voice over
Although his injuries are now on the mend, Rex Pritchard is almost certain to be grounded for the rest of the display season.
But he says he'll be back with the Falcons next year.
In Central News tonight:
Open verdict: Family of barn fire victim say it rules out suicide.
Expelled for dozing off.
The boy who can't help falling asleep.
And the gift of life.
Rebecca gets a kidney…from her dad.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Tonight, Marc's family said the verdict was the one they'd hoped for.
The police file on the case will remain open, while the evidence is re-examined.
But the Coroner says that for the time being, Marc's death will remain a mystery.
September 1992/ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
Rev MICHAEL JEFFREY/Marc's Father
SHAWN WILLIANS/Family Solicitor
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Just how Marc Jeffrey came to die in this barn at Slade Farm near Stroud, will probably never be know.
Why was he there?
How did petrol contaminate his clothes?
What happened to his missing wallet and other possessions?
After all Marc was described as a sensitive young man, who had no hint of trouble in his life.
He didn't smoke, he didn't drink or take drugs.
The mystery surrounding his death still haunts his family.
Male speaker
I have to take each day as it comes.
I can cope so much.
Like any parent you can't tell.
Voice over
Initially police said it all pointed to suicide.
Something his parents, Michael and Anne Jeffrey couldn't accept.
At the inquest there were too many unanswered questions.
Divisional Fire Officer Paul Gaze said at least a pint of petrol may have been used to fuel the fire.
No traces of any container were found.
But when Marc's body was found there were traces of petrol around his feet.
A Home office pathologist Professor Bernard Knight said he was killed by the effects of inhaling smoke.
But admitted Marc could have been knocked unconscious before the fire.
The Coroner said, this was the most difficult and complex case he'd had to deal with.
Marc was an intelligent man, with a respect for life.
There was insufficient evidence for a verdict of unlawful killing or suicide.
So an open verdict was the only appropriate one he could give.
A satisfactory result for Marc's parents, even though they're not satisfied with the speed and the effectiveness of the police investigation into his death.
Male speaker
I'm delighted there was such a strong emphasis on a not suicide verdict.
We must wait no for the results of a police complaint.
The sad thing is that we could have got more conclusive results.
Voice over
They feel they could be closer to the turth, if things had happened faster.
In the meantime the police file on the case will remain open.
Male speaker
All they ever wanted was not to launch a crusade, but to find out what was happening.
Male speaker
Yes there were criticism but it's not appropriate for me to comment at the moment.
Voice over
Now after almost nine painful months since the tragedy, the family can now go ahead with preparations for Marc's funeral which will be held in Stroud on Monday.
A twelve year old boy who keeps falling asleep has been expelled from school.
Richard Morris suffers from a disease which makes him fall asleep uncontrollably several times a day.
When he's woken, he can become violent and irritable.
His teachers say that kind of behaviour is simply too disruptive.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
RICHARD MORRIS/Narcolepsy Victim
DEBBIE MORRIS/Richard's Mother
Voice over
Richard Morris may look wide awake, but any minute now he could fall asleep.
Richard suffers from narcolepsy…a condition of the brain which causes him to fall into a sudden, uncontrolled and spontaneous sleep several times a day.
Inevitably, his reaction to being woken up caused Richard problems at school.
Richard was expelled from his first school in Cheltenham because his behaviour was too disruptive.
That was back in October.
In the same month he was officially diagnosed as narcoleptic.
He's been taking tablets ever since and they appear to have controlled his condition.
But despite that, Gloucestershire County Council still can't find another school that will accept him as a full time student.
No one from Gloucestershire County Council was available to be interviewed.
But a spokesman said that while the authority had every sympathy for Richard it understood why the school had expelled him.
He pointed out that the council had arranged a private tutor for him while it worked on trying to find him a school.
Rolls Royce cars from around the world are arriving for the largest gathering yet of the famous vehicles.
The rally gives owners an opportunity to meet fellow enthusiasts and even the chance to buy.
One car is expected to sell for a quarter of a million pounds.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Althorp
PETER BLOND/Rolls Royce Expert
The Rolls Royce Silverlady — the emblem of arguably the world's most famous and finest car.
This weekend hundreds are expected to arrive at the home of the Earls of Spencer — Althorp park in Northamptonshire.
It's the largest gathering of Rolls Royce's in the world.
Each year the rally is held auctioneers Sotherby's organise a sale.
This year 35 vehicles including Bentley's are on offer.
Peter Blond, Rolls Royce expert, says: The joy of this event is the cars are very affordable today.
A couple of years ago they had gone sky high.
Now for the price of a racy Ford or something like that, you can have a beautiful coach built car)
One of the stars of the auction is this 1911 Silver Ghost.
It was built for a neighbour of Henry Royce.
It's valued at a quarter of a million pounds.
This American built Silver Ghost was made in 1921.
The unusual hickery wood artillery wheels were specially commissioned by its original owner — a timber merchant.
At the other end of the catalogue are these models in need of renovation.
This delapidated shell was found rusting in a barn.
But it's the car's unrivalled comfort and distinctive appearance which attracts enthusiasts.
Ghost hunters are staging a vigil at what's claimed to be one of the most haunted houses in the country.
So far they've spent twenty four hours at the house…and in the best tradition of ghost stories, things really DID go bump in the night.
KEN GOODWIN Wotton Under Edge
JOHN HUMPHRIES Owner
BRIAN HOGGARTH Psychic Research Group
Voice over
The Old Ramshead Inn.
Over the years, it's been a pub, a guest house, now it's just home to it's owner, John Humphries.
He lives there alone, except that is, for a few dozen ghosts.
This bayonet is supposed to have been a murder weapon.
He says that a woman may have been murdered with the bayonet, which he discovered buried in a wall.
The Cheltenham Psychic Research group are staying with John to try and find out if the place really is haunted.
He records the room's temperature.
John is convinced that most of the houses ghostly happenings are come from one place; the so-called Bishop's bedroom.
He says that a Cavalier appears in the corner, a Shepherd and his dog, hands grip at those who sleep in the bed and a monk walks through the wall!
He won't spend a night in the room.
Last night, the psychic researchers did hear something strange…up in the attic.
He says that they heard a noise similar to an axe being dragged across the floor.
It wasn't a hoax because there were people asleep near the spot.
The group are staying for another 24 hours, during which they're hoping whatever did go bump in the night will make a return appearance.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Taylor sisters freed
Two sisters sentenced to life in prison for murder have been freed by the Appeal Court after it was revealed that the Police deliberately withheld crucial evidence.
Blandford released
The Marquess of Blandford has been freed from jail after serving just three days of a four-month sentence.
A High Court judge was told it was unlawful to jail him for so long.
FTSE up 1
The hundred shares index closed up one point eight twenty-eight, sixty-one point eight.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-three and down at two marks, forty-seven.
That's it for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
Major spells out environmental protection plan
At the Earth Summit in Rio, the Prime Minister has spelt out his plans to protect the environment and wildlife.
Bush arrives in Rio as odd man out
President Bush has arrived at the summit out-of-step with other world leaders on environmental protection measures.
Inflation stays at 4
Inflation stayed at four point three per cent last month bringing a significant boost to the economy.
Two men questioned over PC killing
Police officers from Yorkshire have travelled to London to question two men in connection with the killing of the PC Glenn Goodman last weekend.
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten point four at twenty-six, o three point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-five and up at two marks, ninety-two.
(ad lib)
The government is giving back nine and a half million pounds to Oxford City Council, after admitting a mistake in the calculations for the housing budget.
OXFORD
Oxford has one of the worst housing problems in the country.
Gloucestershire's teachers' unions have joined forces to fight what they say will be a disaster for the county's children.
GLOUCESTER
Students have been staging a sit-in to protest about overcrowding at a polytechnic.
They say resources are stretched to breaking point — administrators say there's little they can do without more money to pay for new buildings.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
GEOFF McGUIRE/Students' Union
BRIAN ROPER/Deputy Director
Voice over
Lecturers were turned away from one of Oxford Polytechnic's main teaching buildings this morning as students staged a sit-in in protest at overcowding.
They claim the poly's eight and a half thousand students are packed to the rafters and standards are suffering
We've tried to prevent cutbacks.
We've tried to negotiate with the directors.
We felt we had to take direct action.
They barricaded the building and ocupied it all night.
No lectures could be held and an exam had to be moved.
Poly administrators say they don't want any more disruption like that and they've agreed to talks.
Officials themselves had to move off campus to make more space available for students.
They've recently decided to halt further growth, against education policy, They say its a bold move.
The funding is decided on future growth.
We note the students' concerns, they're the staff's concerns too.
And they say they're lobbying the government for more cash to build new premises.
Meanwhile students, some of whom carried on regardless, are also demanding more facilities and debt counsellors as part of a ten point crisis campaign.
’ Don't talk to strangers’— it's a message drummed into children from an early age, but an experiment carried out by Police indicates that the message isn't getting through.
While training schoolchildren to deal with threatening situations, they found many were making the wrong decisions.
Debbie Kelly reports.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
PC MICHAEL GRIGGS/Thames Valley Police
ERIC FROST/Buckinghamshire Fire Brigade
PC KEITH CLARKE/Schools Liaison Officer
Voice over
Its a stranger's car…but all three children happily get into it…and they're not the first many of the 750 youngsters…who've attended Aylesbury Police's emergency training session…have been tricked by Police officers posing as strangers…
He says; I thought I would not make the mistake with strangers but I never acyually thought when it happened it would be so convincing.
She says; What would you do now if somebody approaches you?
She says; I would say no and go to the nearest phone and tell them.
He says; Once one of them says we will go with him then they will all go because they will stick together but I was very suprised with the ammount of people that go.
All the emergency services…and gas and electricity workers…have set up real life situations that youngsters may face.
He says; I want you to treat this as a real situation.
He says; Every child has had some training and they show me that they know what it is all about and at the end of the day they have saved a life.
He says; I do think they do forget the basic points and they go away with a lkot more knowledge and hopefully will save lives.
She says; It teaches children what to do.
He says; I went over the railway line and was killed.
I wouldn't do it again.
By the end of two hours…the children have rescued a man from a burning building,,,, handled a gas leak…learnt about electricity…and dsicvoeverd just how easy it is to be tricked into going with strangers.
TIM RUSSON
BILL MUMFORD/Team Leader
DUNCAN MARSHALL/Helper
DAVE HOPKINS/Guide
PAUL SILLITOE/Climber
Voice over
The largest gathering of American cars outside the United States has been assembling in the region.
Thirty five thousand visitors are expected to attend the show this weekend to see a collection of classic American gas-guzzlers.Mike Dolan reports.
BILLING/Northamptonshire
MEL ATKINSON/American Auto Club UK
JENNIE PALMER/Owner
Their big, their brash but to their owners, quite simply, their beautiful.
These cars once graced the highways of mid-America and cruised the strips of countless towns and cities across the United States.
Now they've got pride of place in homes throughout the United Kingdom and this weekend they go on show at the Billing Aquadrome near Northampton.
An estimated thirty thousand visitors will see classic American cars which include Cadillacs, Oldsmobiles and Cheverolets.
Clip
Music
The show is organised by the American Auto Club and its the eleventh year its been held.
Its the ideal platform for owners to show off their prized possession.
Clip.
The exhibition is the autoclub's annual show piece.
An event when enthusiasts can parade their pride and joy…a time when their hours of endless polishing chrome can be enjoyed by people who share their love for these unique examples of American automobile history.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
NICK CLARK
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
GEORGE BOWEY/Eye Witness
Det Sgt JOHN MEREDITH/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Graham Townsend was alone in his shop at three fifteen this afternoon…details of what happened are sketchy…but he was stabbed several times in the chest by one of three youths who were trying to steal jewellery…they ran off…and Mr Townsend called an ambulance…a neighbour came to his aid.
He said; There was blood all over the floor and rings scattered around.
The ambulance men were very worried because whatever he had been stabbed with may have gone through to his lung.
Ambulance crew were in the shop for thirty five minutes while they carried out vital ewmergency treatment…
Just one person witnessed the three running form the shop…she's been able to given a briefg description of them to Police.
He said; One was wearing a beige T shirt, one a white T shirt and another a striped white shirt.
She said; What kind of operation are you mounting?
He said; We are searching the area of Witney and the force helicopter has been called in, but we do need witnesses to come forward.
Mr Townsend, who's fifty nione opened his shop two years ago…when he and his brother sold the family funeral parlour next door…
He's…isa now undergoing emergency treatment at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford…
Mewanwhile Police are starting a fingertip search of the gardens around his shop.
Two million pounds stolen from the pension funds of Robert Maxwell's former employees may have been used to pay off debts at Oxford United football club.
The discovery was made by accountants sifting through the remains of the Maxwell business empire.
The new owners of Oxford United admit that if it's proved, then they have a moral obligation to pay the money back.
Robin Powell reports.
OXFORD
JIM RODGERS/Oxford United Supporter
PETER PHILLIPS/Official Receiver
KEITH COX/Managing Director/Oxford United
Voice over
Jim Rodgers has folowed Oxford United's fortunes since childhood.
Few were more relieved when United avoided relegation in their last match of the season.
After seventeen years at Nuffield Press, Jim's pension went missing along with the Maxwell millions.
Now, with accountants trying to find whether pension money was used to help Oxford out of their financial difficulties, he's coming to terms with the possibility he's been supporting United in more ways than one…
The speculation revolves around one point nine million pounds injected into the club by its former chairmen Robert and Kevin Maxwell.
Pergamon Holdings (US) Inc, or Phusi, a Maxwell in the States, says it's owed the money.
But now it's thought it may have been plundered from the pension fund, and passed to Phusi through an intermediate company.
The receiver for Robert Maxwell's private estate says that because fraud was rife throughout the Maxwell empire, there's no reason why Oxford United should have escaped…
United's new owners — the recycling business Biomass — say there's no evodence that any loan agreement with Phusi was ever signed.
The club had assumed the money was not a loan anyway but a contribution.
But if it is proved the club received pension money, it will be given back.
Phusi's lawyers in New York declined to comment, but United fans will await the result of any investigations with interest.
The Manor Ground faithful always had a strained relationship with the Maxwells — United supporters wouldn't take lightly revelations that some of them had their pensions used to pay players' wages.
Some of Britain's leading scientists have gone on strike over pay.
They're part of a European team working on a nuclear fusion project, but claim they're paid only half as much as their continental colleagues.
Sheila Brocklebank has this report.
CULHAM/Oxfordshire
ELIZABETH JENKINS/Scientists' Union
NICK HANCE/Atomic Energy Authority
Voice over
Around 170 nuclear scientists, who work on the JET project at Culham in Oxfordshire, started the first of a series of one day strikes at midnight.
They work alongside scientists from all over Europe on an experiment trying to create energy from nuclear fusion.
But they're paid half as much as their continental colleagues for doing exactly the same job.
Female speaker
We've tried negotiating with our employees over the discrimination we are faced with.
But to no avail…so we are forced to take industrial action.
Voice over
The strike is largely aimed at their paymaster, the Atomic Energy Authority, based at Harwell.
It says they should be comparing themselves with other UK scientists, and not with Europe.
Male speaker
They are paid fifteen percent more than their British collegues working at nearby laboratiies.
Voice over
Interviewer asks: But isn't it unfair that they're paid half as much as people they work along side?
Male speaker
That was the case in the nineteen seventies when this project started…it's a fct of life that there will be differences in salaries between different people.
Voice over
Today's twenty four hour strike is the latest in a thirteen year long battle over pay.
Female speaker
it's syptomatic of the government's whole attitiude to science in the UK.
Voice over
Management say they should wait until September when the results of a EC study into pay is released.
The scientists, however, are not prepared to wait…
Fans of the mystery novel have been meeting in Oxford to celebrate the centenary of one of its most successful crime writers.
Dorothy L.Sayers was born and educated in the city, so it was only fitting that other women crime writers should be there to see a plaque unveiled in her honour.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
BARBARA REYNOLDS/Dorothy L Sayers Society
GILL LINSCOTT/Somerville Graduate
CATHERINE AIRD/Crime Writer
Voice over
It doesn't take the detective skills of Lord Peter Wimsey to track down the novels of Dorothy L Sayers…she's made it into the top shelf of crime writers.
You'd need a few more clues to establish her Oxford connections…but in fact she was a student here at Somerville College, winning a first class degree…and she was born in the city, here at Brewer Street.
Now the Dorothy L Sayers Society have marked the centenary of her birth…
She says it's a joyous occasion, this little girl was born one hundred years ago and grew to be one of the most renowned writers of her generation.
How did that happen?
In an attempt to find out, society members gathered at her college to remember their heroine…but is it something in the Somerville air that makes good crime writers?
She says we have devious minds!
We were the secular college and that makes you sceptical.
She says women have an eye for minutiae, they see the curtain hasn't been drawn or the untied shoelace.
While the ladies who lunch get on with planning their next murders, it seems that the reputation of dorothy L.Sayers is alive and well, and safe in their hands.
Now, back to an age when British really was Best…at least as far as the motorbike was concerned.
Hundreds of machines, some almost a century old were spruced up and dusted down yesterday for one of the biggest events in the biking calendar.
IAN MACLAREN Banbury
MICK JAGGARD Event Secretary
Voice over
This is the enthusiasts chance to wheel out their vintage and veteran motorbikes…and show off a little.
The 45th Annual Banbury Run attracted more than 350 entrants…from the 1897 Leon Bollee to machines bearing the nostalgic names of British manufacturers of 1930.
Among the big attractions a 1910 Haleson, which still runs on the steam principle…
vox
Even the oldest machines can reach average speeds of 12 miles an hour…all of them painstakingly restored and maintained…
The more sociable types opt for a sidecar…
vox
And this BSA built in 1927 is still enjoying an active life…
vox
A push start is required to get some of the veterans going…
There are three routes…25 miles for the older machines and up to 70 miles for robust models.
Sadly our friend on the steam machine doesn't get too far.
And there was an almost disastrous end for this 1913 American motorbike, which once belonged to the actor, Steve McQueen…
vox
But it's on the country roads that these vintage and veteran motorbikes…seem to be in their element.
And it was here that the once great motorbike manufacturers of the Midlands tested the machines that are still running today.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Timex boss resigns
FTSE up 23
The hundred shares index closed up twenty three point seven at two eight eight five point five 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty two and up at two marks, forty eight.
(ad lib)
Welcome back: In a few minutes, those motorbikes of old will be firing up again.
But first, with the sport, Here's Tim.
Hello there:
TIM RUSSON
GRAHAM SHARPE/Organiser
DEREK GREEN/Wantage
SALLY HIBBERD/Gloucestershire
ANDREW BROWN/Cheltenham
SARAH BROWN/Cheltenham
BARRIE CLARKE/Winner
Voice over
Llanwrtyd Wells is the smallest town in Britain…but it's big claim to fame is being the home of one of the strangest races in the world…every year…runners…mountain bikers…and horses come to race against each other over a country course of 22 miles…
The race or the idea was born in the local pub 14 years ago…and the challenge is still running…
Graham Sharpe organiser says there is nowhere else in the world where two legs can race against four and pick up fourteen thousand pounds in prize money if they win…he explains that the horse has been beaten once by a mountain bike three years ago but they've never been able to work out a winning formula
so no wonder the horse starts favourite with 12 wins to the bikers one…what about the runners can they ever beat the horse…
Derek Green from the White Horse Harriers at Wantage won the running race last year…
Derek Green says he's come to defend his title and beat the horse…it's muddy so he hopes the horse will get stuck
and the mountain bikers Sally Hibberd from Gloucestershire is a former British Champion…
Sally Hibberd says it's a tough race and she may have to run a lot today
for the brown family of Cheltenham there's a race within a race…
Andrew is on his mountain bike…his wife Sarah is riding her horse Archer…last year
Sarah beat Andrew…this year
Andrew says he's fitter than last year but doesn.t know if he can beat his wife Sarah who says she thinks her husband might get bogged down in the mud
So much for the talk on with the race…the mountain bikers hit the road first…144 set off from the start in the centre of town…
once they were on their way the runners…370 of them were under orders for their start…
and finally the horses…19 runners and riders this time…were let lose…
the course was the same for all and it wasn't long before all three met up together…
the hills the tracks were slippy with mud…the streams were running a foot higher than normal with flood water…a recipe for a race to remember…
first home through the mud and water was mountain biker Barrie Clarke in a time of 1 hour 45 minutes and 28 seconds…
Barrie Clarke…says it was a tough race so much mud and he got thrown off quite a few times
two minutes behind came the first horse…for only the second time the wheels had won…
but the first runner Robin Bergstrand was 16 minutes further down the field…chasing the horse was hard work…
Derek Green from Wantage was the third runner to finish…
Derek Green says it was much harder than last year…the streams were like rivers and he got swept away once
Sally Hibberd won the women's mountain bike race
Sally says she even got lost on the course but the race was excellent
and the Brown family race…well Andrew got to the finishing line first but
Sarah Brown says that her husband won…and Andrew says he'll be back next year for another go…wild horses wouldn't keep him away
there were over 500 finishers…some were shattered…all were splattered with mud…and the challenge man against horse will run and ride again next year
nothing stops that race but the weather has put paid today to Gloucestershire's big game…their match against Australia was washed out and abandoned in a draw…but the water has done us some good turns 
Voice over
Swindon teenager Jaimie King is on the crest of a wave today after winning the 100 metres breastroke title at the National swimming Championships at Sheffield…victory takes Jaimie through to the European Championships…
Karen Rake of Aylesbury finished fourth in both the 100 and 200 and now has to go the Welsh Nationals next month to try to qualify for the Europeans…
Winning in Europe already…are gold medallist rowers Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent…from Henley…they won the coxless pairs at the French
International Championships…they missed out on a certain double when they had to scratch from the Paris International regatta due to an illness to Pinsent.
The British Triathlon Sprint Championship at Aylesbury was won by Steve Burton…his time to swim 750 metres…cycle 20 kilometres and then run for five kilometres was just 58 minutes and 26 seconds…
The funeral has taken place of a student who died in a mysterious barn fire nine months ago.
At first police thought Marc Jeffrey had killed himself.
But the vicar at today's service agreed with Marc's family that it was inconceivable he would take his own life.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Slad
September 1992
Voice of Rev CURWEN RAWLINSON/Slad Church
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
The body of twenty year old Marc Jeffrey was brought to the parish church in Slad, close to where he used to live.
Marc died in a mysterious barn fire in Stroud almost nine months ago.
Police initially thought he'd killed himself.
But Marc's parents the Rev Michael Jeffrey and his wife Anne have always maintained that their son was probably murdered.
Last Friday at Marc's inquest an open verdict was recorded.
The vicar conducting the service, who's also a family friend, read out part of the coroner's judgement.
Marc's parents have complained about the way in which Gloucestershire police investigated their son's death.
They're awaiting the results of an independent investigation into the force's methods, and there's a possibility that disciplinary action will be taken.
A police file into Marc's death will remain open.
Meanwhile his parents plan to start a Marc Jeffrey's woodland trust in memory of their son and his interest in the environment.
A town which was moved from one county to another almost twenty years ago is to move back again.
It's part of a plan to once again change the shape of local government.
But the people of Kingswood seem far from happy with the prospect of another shake-up.
KEN GOODWIN/Kingswood
Sir JOHN BANHAM/Commission Chairman
MICHAEL HONEY/Gloucestershire County Council
Voice over
Kingswood used to be in Gloucestershire before the last boundary changes in 1974.
Now it's in North Avon.
But under proposals revealled today it'll swing back into Gloucestershire.
Not everyone likes the idea.
He says that they should leave it as it is.
She says that they're always changing boundaries — it's crazy.
This is the document which spells out proposals for the future shape of Gloucestershire.
It was written by the Local Government Commission, which suggests scrapping the County Council and replacing it with four all powerful Unitary Councils.
He says this would make them more streamlined, understandable, and efficient.
As predicted last week after the document was widely leaked, here's what the changes will mean: Gloucestershire is at present made of up of the County Council and six District Councils.
These would be replaced by three Unitary Councils.
In addition, under proposals to abolish Avon, the county borders would expand to its pre-1974 size, forming a fourth Unitary Council in South Gloucestershire.
Perhaps predictably, the proposals have not found favour with Gloucestershire County Council.
He says that the community would be split, with strange geographical areas being merged.
He's certain people will reject the idea.
Thousands of questionnaires are being sent out to guage reaction to the plans.
The commission says it's adamant that the public will have the final say.
American B-Fifty Two bombers have returned to Britain for the first time since the Gulf War.
A squadron of the planes will spend the week at their old base at RAF Fairford.
It's all part of a NATO exercise.
IAN MACLAREN/Fairford
Lt Col RUSTY DEAN/416th Wing Commander
Library Pictures
Lt Col BEN BARNARD/Operations Group Commander
Voice over
The B-52s are back.
They're still big, still noisy, but getting on in years and with a diminishing role thanks to the peace dividend.
They're over here for Central Enterprise '93…an annual Nato exercise.
RAF Fairford with its extra long runway was a natural home to these long range bombers until the base was mothballed.
Many were sad to see them leave…
Indeed during the Gulf War they flew from Fairford on missions that decimated the Iraqi troops.
Central Enterprise will test the capabilities of tactical air operations over western europe and the North Sea…
The B52s certainly look like hulks…but how do actually handle…
The B52s have had their critics during their stays at Fairford.
This visit from the 416th Bomb Wing will be over by the end of the week.
But in the event of another crisis, they'll be back.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News:
Is it a horse…is it a bike?
No, it's a man.
But which one came home first?
Plus, wheels of fortune.
The vintage machines that once ruled the world.
In Central News tonight:
Find our son's killer: Ten thousand pounds to solve a murder.
Jailed: The hunt supporters who used a buggy as a weapon.
And the landing of the giants.
The B-Fifty Twos are back in town.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
March 1993/TIM HURST/Stonehouse
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
Richard Miles, who was 29, was known to be worried days before his body was found in the garden of the family home near Stonehouse in Gloucestershire.
The murder weapon, a knife, was still in his chest.
His family knew he was worried but didn't know the reason, and now, three months later, they've offered a £10,000 reward for information.
A national television appeal for help about people seen near a canal behind Mr Miles' home, and other potential witnesses, led to a number of calls.
Some of them suggested connections with London criminals, as well as connections in South Wales.
Richard Miles was known to smoke cannabis but police don't believe such drug use was a motive for murder.
They hope the £10,000 reward may now prompt an answer to the riddle of why he was killed and who by.
Two huntsmen have been jailed for two months for knocking down a hunt saboteur with a four wheeled buggy.
It's first time hunt supporters have been jailed for assaulting a protester.
Magistrates told them they'd used the vehicle as a weapon, with no regard for the life of their victim.
GARETH FURBY/Bicester
Amateur Video
TONY HUMPHRIES/Victim
IAN McKAY/Joint Master of Bicester Hunt
BRIAN TOON/Masters of Foxhounds Assoc
Voice over
Before today farmer Richard Cheshire was best known for his prize-winning sheep.
Now he'll be remembered as the hunt marshall who went too far…caught on video…as he delibrately pushed a protester into the path of a hunt vehicle.
The driver of the quad bike was Michael Smith, an employee of the Bicester Hunt.
Today Tony Humphries was in court — to see his attackers sentenced.
He suffered back and hip injuries, and can no longer walk for long distances.
The court heard both men bitterly regretted what happened.
Their lawyer said they'd brought shame on the whole hunting world.
And they'd never do it again.
But the magistrates chairman said they'd used the vehicle as weapon, with no regard for the life of their victim.
He says a few inches either way and he would have been killed.
Michael Smith was due to be married this Saturday, now he'll spend the day in jail.
He says it's very hard on his future wife.
He says they may have gone too far but it has to be remembered that they were being provoked by people who were trespassing.
The saboteurs want Richard Cheshire and Michael Smithr banned from the Bicester hunt…but their lawyers are now preparing to appeal against the sentence.
The jury in the trial of a man accused of murdering his girlfriend's cousin will be sent out to consider its verdict tomorrow.
The prosecution claims that Westmore James got into a row with the cousin, and stabbed him in the neck on the steps of a social security office.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
Voice over
Westmore James sat quietly in the dock during the summing up on the last but one day of his trial at Oxford Crown Court.
The 24 year old denies murdering his girlfriend's cousin Ian Barnes last August.
The court had already heard how Westmore James went to Banbury to see his pregnant girlfriend.
They met outside the Social Services and he had pleaded with her to return to him and their home in Oxford.
Ian Barnes, Jessie's cousin, had also gone to Social Services that day and they met by accident.
Seventeen year old Ian, pictured here five years ago, intervened between Westmore James and and Jessie.
There was a scuffle in which Ian was stabbed through the neck.
Westmore James left the scene, the knife was found abandoned in a toilet at Banbury Station.
The case rests on whom owned the knife.
The prosecution says it belonged to Westmore James, the defence say it could have been owned by Ian Barnes and Westmore James had been acting inself defence.
The judge, Mr Justice Waterhouse, said the death wound had needed at least moderate force.
The jury will be sent out tomorrow.
A company has banned its staff from wearing wedding rings after a worker lost a finger when her ring caught in machinery.
But the ban has upset some workers, and union officials say it's unnecessary.
Tim Hurst reports.
HEREFORD
ROGER SHUTT/TGWU
KEES KEMPENAAR/Finance Director
Voice over
The ban on all finger rings applies to men and women production workers at the Sun Valley poultry processing plants in Hereford, after an accident when a woman worker caught a ring in machinery and lost a finger.
Extending the ban to wedding rings, in the interests of safety, say the company, has upset some workers.
The company say the safety of their staff is paramount, they'll even bring in a jeweller to remove rings which may have become a fixture over the years.
The ban is already in force in one production area, it'll apply to the whole factory from the end of the month.
TIM RUSSON
KAYE GRIFFITHS/Designer
IAN ASHLEY/Driver
JOHN HORTON/Passenger
Pictures BBC SPORT
JONATHAN WEBB/Angling Expert
STUART PIPER/Angler
NATHAN WEBB/Angler
Voice over
A family which was torn apart during the Second World War has had an emotional reunion.
Mary Newport, who spent her life in children's homes and with foster parents, met up with three sisters she never knew she had.
Erika Barnes reports.
FAIRFORD Gloucestershire
MARY NEWPORT
ROBERTA IMOSSI Sister
JEANIE GUNN Sister
MILLICENT YACOMEN Sister
Voice over
Hugs and smiles for the sisters…a ready made family she's never met before.
Mary Newport and new found sisters Millicent, Jeanie and Roberta.
They were all separated from their home in London, as babies.
Mary never knew until now, that the others exisited.
Female speaker
It's marvellous.
I never thought it would happen.
Voice over
Reporter asks: What have you missed out on in the last forty years?
Female speaker
Everything.
Girls always squabble, but I often wish I had someone to talk to.
Voice over
After more than forty years, there's a lot of catching up to do.
They're all determined to be friends as well as family.
Female speaker
Mainly a sense of belonging.
It's something I've never had.
Just to belong to someone, somewhere.
Voice over
Reporter asks: Why did you decide to search for the sisters?
Female speaker
It was curiosity, when I was sixteen at school I was told I had another sister at the same school.
That was Bobbie.
I was fostered with Millie and it went from there.
Voice over
Years of searching and researching uncovered more and more members of the family.
One sister, Margaret, in Aylesbury couldn't make the trip.
One brother, Henry, has died.
But the trail didn't stop there.
Female speaker
I think there's another brother in Southend, not mentioning any names.
If he can be found…
Female speaker
It's marvellous.
I'm disappointed Margaret couldn't make it here.
Otherwise I'm lost for words.
Voice over
A chance now to identify the family traits.
Mary thinks the noses have it!
But it's clear they have a common bond.
Female speaker
A touch of madness.
We're always looking for something missing in life.
Voice over
Reporter asks: Do you think it's because of your background?
Female speaker
Yes, strongly.
Female speaker
I can never understand our Mum.
You would have thought she'd want to claim one of us.
I couldn't leave my children.
Voice over
There may be bitterness at a mother who abandoned seven children…but a sweetness now at this family celebration.
Water companies warned to restore river levels
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed up down ten point one at two five nine three point six 
The pound is up at one dollar eighty five, and down at two marks ninetry one.
(ad lib)
Knifepoint rape…
A young mother is attacked by two men
Management buyout…printworks saved from the collapsed Maxwell empire.
And hands off…workers anger at factory ban on rings.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
Two women have been brutally raped in separate attacks in the region.
In one assault police believe they know the identity of the attacker and his family have pleaded with him to come forward.
(HARRIET NEXT)
HARRIET RYLEY
The attacks come as figures for one police authority show rapes and other sexual assaults increasing by more than ten per cent on the same period last year.
But rape counsellors say women shouldn't be panicked into staying at home.
Debbie Kelly reports.
NORTHAMPTON
Det Sgt TONY EVERITT/Thames Valley Police
Det Sgt MARK KEARNEY/Thames Valley Police
COUNSELLOR/MK Rape Crisis Centre
Voice over
The seventeen year old girl was raped after she accepted a lift from a man calling himself John outside the King Billy Pub in Northampton…
He drove her to Salcey Forest.
he bound her hands and raped her…he then drove her to the nearby village of Olney…where she was raped again…
She was eventually dropped off in Northampton seven hours after her ordeal began…
Police have since recovered a car its believed the attacker was driving.
The sceond rape took place in the early hours of this morning…a nineteen year old mother was walking home through New Bardwell in Milton Keynes…after buying a drink from a garage when she was offered a cannabis joint by two men in a white car…
She was then dragged onto a canaltwoath at knifepoint and raped by both men.
One man is white…five feet four, slim with shoulder lensth blond hair and rotuding teeth…
The seociond man is black fivbe feet six with short hair he was wearinbg a dark hooded top.
These are the latest in a series of attacks…
Police at Milton Keynes are still hunting the so called Fisherm, ead Rapist who has attacked eight women…latest figures from the Thames Valley Police show an increase in the first three months of 1990 there were two hundred and one offences…in the same period this year two hundred and twenty seven…an increase of 13 per cent…
But women at the Rape Crisis centre…say rape by strangers is rare…the most common attacker is likely to be someone the owmen knows and trusts.
Rape counsellors believe only ten per cent of rapes are reported to Police…
Police have so far ruled out any connection between the rapes.
One of the oldest parts of Robert Maxwell's collapsed empire has been revived by a management buyout.
The firm's new owners say there are no plans for more job cuts and they're promising increased investment to develop the business.
Simon Garrett reports 
COWLEY/Oxford
RICHARD HOLMES/Managing Director
BOB KNIGHT/Printers' Union
Voice over
The Nuffield Press has been a leading British print supplier for seventy years.
For the last six months the managers brought into the firm by Robert Maxwell have been trying to strike a deal to wrench it from the quagmire of his estate.
Today they succeeded.
The price paid to the administrators is a secret…the new owners wish to shrug off the taint of Maxwell is quite clear
About a hundred people work here now and the months in the hands of the administrators have left them fearful
Police are still waiting to talk to a jeweller who was stabbed during a robbery at his shop.
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
Graham Townsend, who's fifty nine was attacked by three youths at his shop in Witney.
He's still seriously ill, with stab wounds to his stomach.
A butchers knife was later recovered at the scene.
His condition is said to be stable and detectives at his bedside are hoping he may be able to give them more information about the attack.
A company has been fined two thousand pounds for allowing almost fifty gallons of diesel fuel to pollute a river.
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
It took three days to clear up the damage to the River Windrush at Witney in Oxfordshire.
The leak was traced to the Wesley Barrell furniture factory in nearby Bridge Street.
The gauge on a storage tank had been damaged and was leaking.
The company admitted responsibility, but managing director Peter Barrell said the gauge had been damaged by trespassers.
Thirty retired council officers may have to pay back their early retirement golden handshakes, because of a High Court ruling.
The decision has left some of them facing financial hardship.
Mike Rowbottom reports 
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
BRIAN WYNN/Former Town Clerk
COLIN NYE/Council Chief Executive
Voice over
Brian Wynn had hoped retirement would bring a life of leisurely art studies…but the former Cheltenham Town Clerk finds he's still in the middle of local; government controversy over a year after vacating his position.
He's been told he and twenty nine other senior council officers will have to pay back golden handshake payments made to streamline the council's management.
Cheltenham has been hit by a High Court ruling originally intended for another council in the northeast.
The plan was to offer senior officers enhanced pensions and pay offs to save money.
But the ruling says they can only pay the bare minimum.
Now the council is looking at its options.
It could present a legal problem resulting in the council spending more on those costs than it saved in the first place.
Anne Dawson
Hello again.
Well one of the big talking points at the Three Counties Show this year is the controversial issue of setaside.
Farmers are being paid hundreds of pounds an acre for NOT cultivating their land.
Wesley Smith
In the UK alone, over a million acres have been set aside, to reduce surpluses of cereals.
But conservationists say that doesn't benefit wildlife.
RICHARD BARNETT/Defford
Dr GORDON McGLONE/Gloucestershire Wildlife Trust
HARDWICKE/Gloucestershire
WILLIAM NORMAN/Farmer
STUART BROWN/ADAS Adviser
Voice over
A few years ago any self respecting farmer would have been ashamed of this field, with its bumper crop of nettles and thistles…
But this is setaside…the result of an EC policy to take one million three hundred thousand acres of land in Britain out of production to reduce cereal surpluses.
And farmers watching a demonstration of grass cutters didn't bat an eyelid at the state of the pasture.
One rural planning group has already described scenes like this as’ grant aided dereliction.’
And now conservationists have joined in the criticism.
They want some of the seven million pounds the British taxpayer is putting into setaside to be spent on making farms a friendlier place for wildlife:
Male speaker
It's a missed opportunity.
The money could be better spent protecting existing wildlife areas.
Voice over
Four years ago, the whole of William Norman's holding at Hardwicke near Gloucester was setaside…he was paid 28,000 pounds a year for not farming his land.
Now he still has fifty acres of setaside:
Male speaker
Farmers should be given money to take more conservation measures.
Voice over
The National Farmers Union backs the setaside scheme…and says it can help wildlife:
Male speaker
Setaside can encourage wildlife, and farmers should take conservation into account.
Voice over
Many people wrongly believed that setaside land would soon bloom with wildflowers like this ancient Cotswold grazing meadow, which is now a nature reserve.
But fields that have been heavily dosed with chemical weedkillers and fertilizers would take centuries to become home to such a wealth of wildlife.
Conservationists say policies to help wildlife would still cut overproduction of cereals.
But here at the show staff from ADAS, who advise farmers, say setaside is already changing and can help wildlife:
In twenty years time this field full of weeds could well be supporting a wealth of wildflowers.
But by then policies will probably have changed again.
Anne Dawson
Richard Barnett on the thorny subject of setaside.Time for a break now, and then we'll be looking round at what's on offer to the visitor at this year's show.
Wesley Smith
Emma Jesson will be here with the weather forecast for the next two days.
Anne Dawson
We'll see some real daredevils…bungy jumping.
Wesley Smith
And I'll be chancing my luck…at the Ferret Road Show.Back in a minute.
Welcome back to the Three Counties Show at Malvern, where the weather has been kind, and the crowds have been flocking in.
Wesley and I have been looking round at just a few of the many attractions this year…
Wes.
Well those are some of the things which are going on around the showground…
Meanwhile in the main ring there have been displays of everything from parachuting to sheep dog displays.
I went in to watch the day's most elegant event…the private driving competition.
SALLIE WALROND/Judge
GEORGE DAVIS/Driver
HEATHER DIAS/Driver
Voice over
In the ring from the Central area were George and Mary Davis from Hartpury in Gloucestershire and their Palomino pony Orllwyn Jona.
They are last year's National Champions.
For them driving is a relaxing hobby and its all about having fun…except that is when the judge is watching…
And our other hopeful was the tandem pair driven by Heather Dias from Burford in Oxfordshire…for her driving is a family business…her two ponies are uncle and nephew…and her husband and five children all lend a hand…
In the ring the drivers and their horses must look as smart and well turned out as possible…but technique is essential too…
ABBERLEY/Worcestershire
TRACY BALLARD/Boar Farmer
Voice over
Well there's plenty foodwise here at the Show, but you want something just that little more exclusive, you might try wild boar, which until recent times was extinct on these isles.
I've been finding out more.
There are 39 wild boar including 15 breeding sows at Home Farm, Abberley in North Worcestershire.
Tracy and Ian Ballard started keeping these fierce creatures three years ago.
Their free range stock is farm bred, but originates from wild animals in Europe.
Boar has come into fashion in recent years as farmers diversify to beat the recession.
Each sow produces around six piglets, which are kept for up to fifteen months before slaughter.
The best cuts of boar meat sell for five pounds a pound…twice the price of pork.
Demand is growing, so the sight of wild boar wallowing in the mud could become commonplace for the first time since the sixteenth century.
Well I'm glad to say the boar have cleaned up a bit since wallowing in the glorious mud of Abberley.
Wes asks if Wild Boar tastes like pork, Tracy says its much more like game.
Now back to Anne and guests.
One very special guest…this is…the Welsh Mountain sheep of the type often found on the Herfordshire Welsh border.
(Owner) why's he got the blanket on in this weather?
And looking a little cooler, Emma Jesson from the weather department.
A full forecast for the next two days coming up, but have you seen anything you like here?
Wes is back from the Wild Boars, just in time to say goodbye.
(ad lib)
RUNS=1:45 est
A man who needed (250) two hundred and fifty stitches in his face after being attacked with a broken bottle, claims he's still being victimised nearly three months later.
Stephen Thomas says the ordeal has driven him to the brink of suicide.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
29 March 1993
STEPHEN THOMAS/Attack Victim
Chief Insp BOB EVANS/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
11 weeks on, Stephen Thomas isn't being allowed to forget the night he was scarred for life.
Late on a Saturday night, he was attacked in County Road in Swindon by a man with a broken bottle, and nearly lost an ear.
Since then, he claims, he's been repeatedly threatened, and now his garden shed has been daubed with graffiti.
A man was arrested shortly after the attack and is now on bail.
But the police insist that Mr Thomas has said nothing to them since about being victimised.
The 250 stitches Stephen Thomas required have now been removed, but both physical and mental scars remain.
Had it not been for anti-depressant drugs and psychitaric help, he says he could easily have taken his own life.
Meanwhile he spends more time indoors than he did before — and never ventures into Swindon alone late at night.
Police protection for members of the Royal Family living in Gloucestershire is costing council tax payers more than a million pounds a year.
The county's police committee say that's money that could be spent fighting crime, and that the Home Office should foot the bill.
KEN GOODWIN/Highgrove
Cllr JONQUIL NAISH/Gloucestershire Police Cmtte
Voice over
Gloucestershire has one of the the highest concentration of Royal housholds in the country.
There's Prince Charles estate at Highgrove house near Tetbury, Princess Anne's home at Gatcombe Park, and not far away, the Prince and Princess Michael of Kent's house at Nether Lypiatt.
All these are policed by Gloucestershire's royal protection squad — and the county's tax payers contrubute a million pounds towards the bill, which comes out of the police budget.
The county constabulary says it can't afford it, so now the local police committee is asking the Government to lend a hand.
She says that the police are overstretched, they need more cash.
Some of the people we spoke to suggested that Gloucestershire's Royal residents themselves should contribute to the bill
She says that they should pay.
She says that they should contribute, along with the government.
She says that they should could pay, but not all of the bill.
The Home Office says that it already pays fifty one percent of the cost of policing the royals, but if the county council can adequately demonstrate that it needs more then funds are available.
An official survey of Gloucestershire's roads shows that they're in their worst state for fifteen years.
Frosts and flooding are blamed for causing the damage on more than three thousand miles of the county's roads.
Councillors say they can't afford the repairs which would cost three million pounds a year.
Up to four hundred jobs could be created with the development of a new holiday village.
SOMERFORD KEYNES/Gloucestershire
Building work at the Cotswold Water Park at Somerford Keynes in Gloucestershire is due to start in the autumn.
Developers Lakewoods got the go-ahead almost a year ago but delayed starting work because of the recession.
A holiday, which wasn't going to happen because a travel firm went bust, has now been saved…all because of a chance conversation in a car-park.
BANBURY/ Oxfordshire
ANDREW WINTER/Chateau Owner
OLIVER FRASER/Aged 5
MIKE CRATCHLEY/Holidaymaker
Voice over
Until yesterday this was the nearest Mike Cratchley thought he was going to get to the chateau he had booked for a group holiday this summer.
SFV, the holiday company he'd used had gone out of business, leaving Mr Cratchley and his friends four thousand pounds out of pocket.
But by a bizarre co-incidence he was put in touch with the castle's owner and the holiday is now going ahead:
He says a mutual friend phoned to say he'd met Mr. Cratchley in the car park that morning and he realised that Mr. Cratchley had booked into our property in France.
It's an extraordianry co-incidence that we're literally just two or three hundred yeards away from eachother!
The two men came to an arrangement which means the group of sixteen will now be spending their summer holiday as planned at the chateau in Bordeaux.
The children had been especially disappointed at the thought of losing their holiday:
He says we wouldn't have had the chateau and the big garden to play in.
He says of course we were disappointed in not having the holiday but moreso the children who were absolutely devastates when they heard the news.
But now they all know they're going on holiday four weeks on wednesday so they're all over the moon, overjoyed.
So now there's cause for celebration — and the reprieved holiday-makers can drink a toast to their bon vacances.
That's all from the Central newsroom.
I'll be back with our next bulletin at ten thirty…after News at Ten.
But Anne Dawson and Wesley Smith are waiting, over at the Three Counties Show in Malvern.
Anne…
Forgive them all.
Campaign to pardon executed soldiers.
Sack the nurse.
The schoolboy sent back to class with a broken arm.
And it's selling fast.
But THAT book can't be bought near Highgrove.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
A parliamentary campaign has been launched to officially pardon hundreds of British soldiers who were executed in the First World War for desertion and cowardice.
Campaigners say the men were victims of the unbearable strain of conflict in appalling conditions.
But the move has been criticised by military experts.
Nick Clark reports.
ANDREW MACKINLAY MP/Lab Thurrock
Sir ANTHONY FARRAR-HOCKLEY/Military Historian
Col DEREK ROBBINS/Wilts Regt Old Comrades
Voice over
A family has called for a school nurse to be sacked after she failed to spot that their son had a broken arm.
The boy was sent back to his classes, where he sat in pain for two hours.Erika Barnes reports 
SWINDON/Wiltshire
TREVOR MILES
COLIN MILES/Father
GINA MILES/Mother
Voice over
Trevor Miles broke his left arm in three places when he was pushed into a wall by some boys at school.
He went to the matron.
He says didn't realise it was so serious and sent him back to class with an ice pack.
Male speaker
Pain was shooting up my arm.
I said to my mate I think I've broken it.
Voice over
Trevors parents say their son should have been taken to hospital straight away, not left in pain for two hours.
Male speaker
I think it's disgusting.
A fully qualified nurse thought it was a bruise and just gave him an icepack.
If I don't do something it could be worse next time.
I hope they dismiss her.
Female speaker
He can go back to school but I won't let her treat him.
No way, I've had enough.
Voice over
The Headteacher at Headlands School says he's conducting an investigation and won't comment until it's complete.
In the meantime left-handed Trevor is nursing the wounds he claims the nurse didn't detect.
A former students union treasurer has denied stealing forty thousand pounds from his members.The court was told that
Paul Crossland went off to France with the money.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
OXFORD
The book at the centre of allegations about the private life of the Prince and Princess of Wales has gone on sale…but NOT in the town where they live.
Tetbury's one and only bookstore isn't stocking it even though nearby shops are heading for a sellout.
Simon Garrett reports 
TETBURY/Gloucestershire
STEVE BIRT/Ottaker's Bookshops
Voice over
Whether this is a true story or not…the people of Tetbury will have to go further than the town's only bookshop for a copy.
Local traders complain the Wales's were once a familiar sight but have been hounded off the streets by pressmen.
Now many are appaled by the book's publication
Published today the book has arrived on the shelves of Gloucester shops.
It may not be there for long 
The arguaments over the truth of the book and whether it should have been made public will rage for some time to come.
The only certainty is that it'll make Mr Morton a millionaire
Simon Garrett reporting.
That's all from the newsroom for the moment.
Back now to Malvern, and day one of the Threee Counties Show.
Here's Anne…
ANNE DAWSON
(Hereford cattle entries have slumped to an all time low of just fifty nine here at the show.The ancient local breed has been hit by competition from Continental cattle.But now the Hereford farmers are fighting back with a scheme to boost beef sales.Richard Barnett reports:)
HAREWOOD END/Herefordshire
DAVID PROTHERO/Hereford Herd Book Society
LEDBURY/Herefordshire
ANDY CALLWOOD/Butcher
MAJOR MICHAEL SYMONDS/Hereford Breeder
Voice over
Hereford cattle have a long pedigree…they can be traced right back to the red cattle of Roman Britain.
But now the county breed is threatened by imports of heavier Continental beef cattle like Charolais.There's been a sharp fall in Hereford numbers.
In the mid 1970s more than 25,000 Hereford calves were bred annually.Now that figure has plunged to around 8,000.
To halt the decline the Hereford Herd Book Society is planning to label beef from the breed in butchers shops.It says Hereford beef tastes better than meat from Continental breeds.And it's cheaper to produce, because Herefords are fattened on grass rather than on expensive cereals.
Male speaker
Hereford beef is best and now the consumer will be able to identify it in the shops.
Voice over
A Herefordshire butcher has welcomed the scheme…he says it will give the county breed a much-needed boost:
Male speaker
Hereford beef is more fatty which gives it more flavour, and that's what the customer wants.
Voice over
Meanwhile one long established cattle breeder says the Hereford must be saved:
Male speaker
He's been breeding Herefords for 45 years and it breaks his heart to see us importing rubbish from overseas.
Voice over
That's it for the first half.
We'll be back after the break with a round-up of the day's events, some traditional sheep, some small cattle and plenty more.
Welcome back to the three counties show ground.
In a while we'll be taking a look around the show, and finding out about a traditional breed of sheep and a very small breed of cattle.
But first, a little bit about the church standing behind me.
It's very much a real church while the show's on, with a vicar and prayers each morning, and it's part of an entire village that's taken only four weeks to build.
ROY SUMNER/Administrator
Voice over
The village green is really a giant theatre set.It takes hours of work by the scenic artists to turn a series of frames covered in plastic sheeting into convincing buildings.Here they're working on what will become the church.
The team of painters is led by Jonathan Goodwin, a scenic artist from the Royal Opera House in London.
Meanwhile a row of ten cottages has been put up by a local builder at a cost of twenty five thousand pounds.And although they're made of plywood, there's already been one prospective purchaser:
Once the show's over, the village will disappear…until next year.
And there you have the finished item.
Now on with the show, and let's join Ann who's enjoying a particularly good view of the proceedings.
Now these are cotswold sheep, and they're here in record numbers this year — more than fifty rams, ewes and lambs.
Cotswolds are a rare breed success story, as twenty years ago they were almost extinct.Now there are around a thousand Cotswold ewes, and the future of the breed is assured.
Here's Richard Barnett again:
GUITING POWER/Gloucestershire
LIBBY HENSON/Cotswold Sheep Society
Voice over
At the Cotswold Farm Park, staff have been busy sprucing up their sheep ready for the show.The Cotswold breed society insists that these longwools are sheared before competing.In their natural state with a full fleece Cotswolds find the sweltering summer heat hard going.It's the dedication of breeders like the Hensons at Guiting Power that has saved the Cotswold sheep from extinction:
Female speaker
There were only about a hundred Cotswold sheep left and a few bloodlines.It was vital to save the breed that created much of our wealth.
There are now ninety flocks of Cotswold sheep, and nearly a thousand ewes…so the old breed is safe.And some of the finest examples of Cotswolds are here at the show.
LYNN GIBBINGS/Cotswold Sheep Society
Voice over
RUNS=1:15est 
JILL BALL/Best Of Breed Owner
LISA BOTTURA/Dexter Owner
Voice over
Well, farmers everywhere are being urged to diversify to boost their businesses…
And in our region rural entrepreneurs are doing everything from worm farming to building three wheeled sports cars.Richard Barnett reports:
HEATHER GORRINGE/Wiggly Wigglers
IAN BROWSE/Malvern Autocraft
RICHARD PARTOS/Rural Development Commission
Voice over
It may seem an unlikely way to make a living…but Heather Gorringe is a worm farmer.She sells 20,000 worms a week from her farm in Herefordshire…and it seems people can't get enough of these wriggly creatures.They're ideal for breaking down compost…and can even convert rubbish dumps into healthy agricultural land:
Meanwhile in Malvern, Ian Browse has just launched a three wheeled sports car kit.
His two man business has built four Triad cars so far.All you need is the engine and running gear from a scrap mini to create 'an open topped tourer:
In the Forest of Dean, Alison Caulkett has launched a range of upmarket country clothing.She already emlpoys two workers, and soon hopes to expand:
All these businesses have been helped by the Rural Development Commission, which was set up to encourage new companies:
The Commission helps to create around five thousand new jobs a year.And all the small firms exhibiting at the Three Counties are hoping the orders will keep flowing in.
Well, that's it from Malvern for now.
In a moment we'll be talking to the show organisers, but first let's go back to the studio and Harriet.
Neddy to be abolished says Lamont
FTSE up 22
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-two point one at twenty-six, fifteen point seven.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-five and up at two marks, ninety-one.
RUNS=0:05 
Lady ALEXANDRA COTTERELL/Show President
RUNS=1:40est
In Central News tonight:
Crippled…the boy who dived into the shallow end of a swimming pool.
Traveller Alert.Warning of another invasion this weekend.
And when in Rome…just send out for a takeaway.
Good Evening: Six hundred travellers' vehicles heading for Stonehenge for the Summer Solstice have been banned from there, so farmers here have been warned that they're looking for an alternative location.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
TIM HURST/Reporting
Library Pictures/STONEHENGE/Wiltshire
Chief Supt COLIN STABLER/Gloucestershire Police
GEOFFREY HOPTON/Country Landowners Association
ROGER HALL
Voice over
Sunrise at Stonehenge on mid-summer's day, the summer solstice, and the centre of traditional Druid ceremonies.
More recently the Solstice has attracted thousands of New Age travellers, but they've been banned this year by the same injuctions that now govern Castlemorton common in Worcestershire, where an illegal festival just over a year ago attracted 20,000 travellers.
Hundreds of New Age vehicles are heading for Stonehenge for the weekend, but they'll be turned away and could head north into Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire.
Landowners in Worcestershire, Herefordshire and Gloucestershire have been warned that the travellers may seek other pre-historic sites, like British Camp at Malvern.
The governing body that controls Castlemorton, and which this year has been granted an exclusion order, says the ban also covers sites like British 2nCamp.
Four seperate police forces are monitoring every traveller's vehicle in the four day countdown to midsummer.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
Now doctors at the Stoke Mandeville Spinal Injuries Unit say he probably only has a one in twenty chance of making a good recovery.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Nettlebed
GERALD PETTY/Robert's Grandfather
BRIAN GARDINER/Consultant Surgeon
NICK SMITHSON/Diving Accident Victim
Voice over
Robert Petty is a sports mad young man say his family.
He loved to play football and squash regularly, and he enjoyed swimming.
But it was diving into a frioend's pool at a private party in the Oxfordshire village of Nettlebed which has left him on Traction at the Stoke Mandeville Spinal Injuries unit.
Now the family hopes his fitness will get him through.
Robert dived into the shallow end of the pool at Nettlebed and sustained a broken neck and back injuries.
He was able to hold his breath while friends dragged him out.
He now has some movement in his arms and shoulder which Doctors say is encouraging.
But his chances of a fullrecovery are slim
Robert lives in Reading and had a milkround in the Goring and South Stoke area.
His younger days saw him helping with cubs and scouts and he's is so popular that already residents and storekeepers from the villages have started a fund to help him'
One man hoping he'll pull through is Nick Smithson.
He suffered the same injuries when he dived into a lake in Germany.
He's now tetraplegic with just the use of his arms.
Everything depends on how Robert progresses over the next week.
A lot of people are keeping their fingers crossed for him.
Six months after a seventy year old man was found beaten to death in his home, police say they've made an important breakthrough.
Two witnesses have come forward with information that could lead to the killer's arrest.
But more information is still needed.
Home Video/JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
RUSSELL'S WATER/Oxfordshire
Det Ch Insp ROY PAYNE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Jim Eggleton was found dead on January the fourth.
Home video shows him enjoying a family Christmas but detectives believe he didn't live long enough to see in the New Year.
His body was found in his own home in the village of Russell's Water in Oxfordshire.
He'd been badly beaten and his throat had been cut.
Ten thousand pounds has been put up by friends and neighbours together with the Community Action Trust.
Despite the reward and an extensive search of the area police enquiries seemed to have come to a halt.
But now two witnesses have come forward.
He says it's useful information but it does raise the question of how many other people have not come forward.
It may seem trivial but we are interested in all information about Mr Eggleton.
The last time Jim Eggleton was seen alive was on Boxing Day.
A lot depends on establishing his movements between then and the fourth of January.
Police are particularly anxious to hear from a man who suddenly hung up after making an anonymous call to the incident room in January.
But anyone who knows anything should make contact.
The number to ring is 0734 536740, 0734 536740
Just one call could contain the clue that catches Jim's killer.
A convicted murderer is going to court in an attempt to recover hundreds of pounds which he claims police took from him.
Danny Gardiner, from Stroud in Gloucestershire, was alleged to have stolen two and a half thousand pounds in a raid.
The money was recovered when he was arrested for the murder of police informer Alan’ Chalky’White.
Gardiner denies he stole the cash and says it should be returned to him.
A man is being treated for a partially-collapsed lung after he was stabbed several times in the arms and body.
He was found in Maidcroft Road in the Cowley area of Oxford.
Simon Hayday, who's in his early twenties, had been stabbed at least six times.
Two men have been questioned by police.
A man who's had a smiling face painted on his satellite dish has been told he's got to cover it up.
The council says the dish is an eyesore and should be painted white again.
But neighbours say it brightens up the area and they want it to stay.
CLARE LAFFERTY Berkeley
NORMAN HILLIER Dish Owner
Voice over
It may look bright and cheerful, but this dish is failing to make officials at Stroud District Council smile.
It adorns the house of Norman Hillier, one of their tenants in Berkeley.
But within a week, Norman received a letter from the council.
Norman's neighbours say they'd be sad to see the face go.
Female speaker
I don't object to it at all.
My grandchildren love it.
Male speaker
It's alright.
It doesn't worry me at all.
Voice over
Stroud District Council says it can't allow the face to stay because it might tempt other people to paint their dishes.
It's worried that the resulting jumble of colours and designs would create an eyesore.
So it looks as though this dish is about to get the smile wiped off its face.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Dawson funeral held
FTSE up 13
The hundred shares index closed up thirteen points at two eight eight three 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty and down at two marks, forty nine.
Anne Dawson
Welcome back:A new clinic…the first of it's kind in Britain…is cutting hospital waiting lists so fast that it's been described as a runaway success.
Wesley Smith
It's an appropriate title, because the clinic deals with feet, and all their problems.
TIM HURST/Hereford
NICK GILBERT/Surgeon
ALBERT WILKINS/Patient
BOB IZON/Chief Executive
Voice over
It's the first foot clinic of it's kind in the country, dealing with what's now called podiatry, formerly chiropody; bunions, ingrowing toenails, sports injuries and the like.
It may not be the most fashionable branch of medicine but it puts thousands of patients on hospital waiting lists each year.
That's why the new podiatry surgery centre at Burghill near Hereford is seen as a success; it'll handle around a thousand patients a year, patients who could otherwise spend years on the waiting list.
The new surgery was built though, inside a former psychiatric hospital, which is soon to be closed altogether.
An hour after walking into the operating theatre, patients are usually ready to walk out, with none of the effects of a general anaesthetic.
One footnote the new clinic is proud off; surgeons from elsewhere in Britain are asking for details of Hereford's runaway success.
One of the country's oldest Baptist chapels which was in danger of falling into disrepair, has been saved for the nation.
It's the first such building to be bought by a new trust which has been set up to protect some of the country's loveliest old places of worship.
GRAEME BOWD/Cote
JENNY FREEMAN/Historic Chapels Trust
Home Video
LEILA ENGLAND/Bride
JEAN LEWIS/Baptist
GRAHAM SPARROWHAWK/Pastor
Voice over
Cote Baptist Chapel dates back to 1739 and compared to many Anglican churches it's rather plain.
But the non-conformists didn't go in for much decoration.
Their churches were strictly functional, even the stained glass windows are hardly ornate.
The chapel is one of many country churches, considered architecturally important in their quiet way, but now in danger of falling into disrepair.
Unused for worship since the seventies, hymns are now left to the churchyard chaffinches and the pews have become a home for roosting butterflies.
It's now being taken over by the new Historic Chapels Trust.
With a small government grant and money from appeals, it aims to be the salvation of churches like this.
Female speaker
We want to save the most oustanding examples.
The fittings here have hardly been altered and there is a very special atomosphere.
Voice over
The chapel is not entirely disused.
Most years it sees a couple of weddings, though Leila White and Tom England had quite a job preparing for their big day.
Female speaker
We got our friends round to clean the place.
It's my spiritual home, although I don't worship there now.
Female speaker
It was a very happy church.
We really felt at home here from the first time we came.
Voice over
They now worship at a new hall, but the pastor admits that many older villagers miss the little chapel.
Male speaker
People say they're sad it's not used, but when it was used they didn't come.
Voice over
One of the first tasks for the trust could be to restore the organ, But with a Governent grant of just £20,000 to look after three other chapels, they'll have to pull out all the stops to raise the money.
Now here's a food delivery service with a difference…
Roman banquets on wheels!
The chef promises to deliver a three course meal for your dinner party, cooked and served in the manner of the Roman era…complete with togas.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Kidlington
JOHN WALDRAM/Chef
Voice over
The Roman toga went out of fashion fifteen hundred years ago, so did the Roman cookbook.
But that's all about to change if Kidlington Chef John Waldram has his way.
(He calls out: Mulsum anybody.
It's a Roman recipe for wine)
He's just started a Roman banquet delivery service.
He'll turn up with a three course meal for as many as you care to name and serve it in the comfort of your semi.
It starts with a potent aperitif called Mulsum which takes twenty four hours to mature.
Male speaker
Be careful, it's very strong.
Voice over
They have to be very careful, these days there are no slaves to drive the chariot home.
And there aren't any to do the cooking either so John combines interest in Roman history and the kitchen.
He decided to make his hobby his business afterbeing made redundant from his job at a Banbury printing works.
Tonight he is serving Lamb Tarpeius, one of six menus on offer, all in latin with English translations.
Male speaker
This sauce is a mixture of wine, herbs and olive oil
Voice over
Just for tonight the living room becomes the Tricalarium, and cutomers are encouraged to enter into the spirit by dressing appropriately.
Female speaker
I think it adds to the occasion
Voice over
Finally dinner is served…and there are still some surprises.
No knife and fork unless you really want one.
Male speaker
Eating with your fingers is difficult, especially with lentils
Female speaker
delicious, but not recommended for long fingernails
Male speaker
You name it, I can cook it.
Wild Boar, Octopus, anything like that
Voice over
Add Larks tongues and flamingos to the list.
Mind you few customers are likely to care what they're eating after a couple of glasses of Mulsum: Salute.
A man who's accused of dumping highly toxic waste into a river has been remanded on bail.
October 1992/CANNOP PONDS/Forest of Dean
Graham Feakins, from Gloucester, is charged with polluting the River Lyd in the Forest of Dean last year.
Thousands of fish died from river pollution.
The hearing at Coleford magistrates court was adjourned for three weeks.
Traders at the Three Counties Show say they're losing customers because the ground is so muddy.
Rain has turned parts of the showground at Malvern into a quagmire.
Work went on through the night to scatter wood chippings, straw and stone on top of the mud, but traders say it's too little, too late.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Malvern
CHRIS DAY/Trader
ANDREW KEAST/Trader
VIOLET DAVIS/Trader
LYN DOWNES/Show Organiser
Voice over
Wellies were the order of the day at the Three Counties Showground in Malvern.
Constant rain turned some of the walkways into quagmires.
And vistors were treading very carefully.
Workers at the show tried hard to improve the situation with layer upon layer of wood chippings.
But some traders felt it was all too little too late.
When mud caused similar problems at the Royal Show in Stoneleigh, organisers paid to have hard ground put down.
But there are no plans to do the same here.
Despite the mud, thousands of people visited the show.
With more rain forecast organisers are advising anyone planning to visit tomorrow to wear appropraite footwear or come in some foot friendly transport.
An historic mansion looks set to be sold to a private buyer, despite its owner's dying wish that it be opened to the public.
Friends say she'd be horrified to see it sold off.
ROBIN POWELL/Shrivenham
HARRY BROMLEY/Friends of Roman Research Trust
NORRIS McWHIRTER/Friend
JOAN TANNAHILL/Friend
Voice over
Fresden Manor is valued at around one million pounds.
Its former owner, the late Audrey Barrie-Brown left it to the Roman Research Trust and asked that it be turned into an educational centre.
The Trust can't afford to do that, and tonight meets to discuss the manor's sale to Paddy McNally, a millionaire friend of the Duchess of York, who already owns property in nearby Sevenhampton.
But not everyone's in agreement.
Friends of Mrs Barrrie-Brown are angered by reports of an imminent sale.
Among them, Norris McWhirter from the Guiness Book of Records.
The Trust's Chairman Alan Bowman, a don at Christ Church, Oxford, said any negotiations were private and declined to comment.
But the Charity Commission told us that he and his colleagues are fully entitled to sell Fresden Manor if they want to.
Male speaker
The trustees have sufficient discretion for future use of the estate…if they decide that its interests are best served by selling it they can do so.
Voice over
ITV has decided to axe the Telethon.
The marathon fund-raising event has run three times since 1988.
But last year's event raised far less than previously and organisers say the public are looking for a fresh approach.
SALLY BOWMAN/Reporting
ANDY ALLAN/Managing Director
JENNY STRICKLAND/Play for Children
Despite the fund-raisers' best efforts there was no disguising the fact that Telethon '92 hadn't lived up to expectations.
The grand total of fifteen million pounds fell 7 million short of Telethon'90, ratings were down and critics talked of the recession and compassion fatigue.
But the ITV Network won't concede that's why there'll be no Telethon '94.
He says,.
Telethon '92 raised one and a quarter million pounds for charities across the Central region — recipients like Play for Children in Nottingham will be sorry to see it go.
She says
He says
The promise is charities won't be abandoned — but the fund-raising marathon style of Telethon has had its day.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News: Some amazing feats at the medical centre.
Best foot forward at a pioneering clinic.
And take that look off your face…the dishy smile that the planners don't like.
Warning ignored.
Boy crushed by a wall his parents said was dangerous.
In custody.
Man charged with jewel robbery stabbing
And these machines can kill.
The concrete mixers with lethal faults.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Tonight Craig Cook's parents said the council knew the wall was unsafe but did nothing about it.
The council says it inspects properties every two years and was NOT aware that the wall was in a dangerous state.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
ROB COOK/Father
SHIRLEY COOK/Mother
PETER ECCLESHARE/Tewkesbury Borough Council
RAY WOODCOCK/Neighbour
Voice over
Four year old Craig Cook is lucky to be alive.
Ambulancemen told his parents that when they first attended Craig they gave him only minutes to live.
His liver was ruptured when a brick wall in his back garden collapsed on him.
It happened as he was watching a council workman carry out repairs to the gate which is atatched to the wall:
Craig has already undergone one operation to repair his shattered liver, but it seems there may be complications and he could undergoe further surgery.
His mother says he's lucky to be alive:
Tewkesbury borough council says that they were unaware that the wall was dangerous:
Neighbours say the council are now repairing their walls, but say it's a bit late now:
As Craig slowly recovers one thing that really upsets his parents is that no-one from the council has bothered to see them about the accident or to ask how craig is:
Craigs parents are now taking legal advice to find out if they can take action against Tewkesbury borough council — but as his mother says, it'll come too late to help craig:
One of four people arrested after a jeweller was stabbed in his shop and left fighting for his life has appeared in court charged with robbery.
The jeweller has undergone major surgery for his injuries but is now out of intensive care.
Debbie Kelly reports.
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
Voice over
Paul Caswell, who's twenty seven, arrived at Witney Magistrates for this afternoon's hearing his head covered in a blanket…
He was arrested yesterday in his home town of Portsmouth…he faces one charge of robbery…it follows a raid on a jewllers five days ago…when the jeweller…
Graham Townsend was stabbed in the chest, back and stomach…three men were seen running from the shop…
Caswell was wearing a white polo neck jumper, grey jacvket and black jeans sat quietly during the ten minute hearing.
He spoke just twice, once to answer his name and once to confirm he understood the charge.
There was no application for bail.
Mr Townsend is still in the John Radcliffe Hospital…his lung was punctured in the attack and he had to have his spleen removed in an emergency operation…
Caswell was remanded in custody by magistrates and will reappear in court on Monday…
Three other people, two men and a woman, are still being interviewed by Police in connection with the robbery.
Hundreds of do-it-yourself cement mixers have been removed from shops tonight after the discovery of electrical faults which could kill.
Trading standards officers siezed the machines after finding dangerous or loose wiring.
A major chain of retailers has agreed to withdraw them from sale, but hundreds are still thought to be in use.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
DEBBIE DENT/Trading Standards
LES MORRELL/Managing Director/Jewson
Voice over
Portable electric cement mixers have become increasingly popular with DIY enthusiasts.
But consumer experts are warning they could be extremely dangerous.
Tests carried out on the Baromix Minor Electric Cement mixers found serious faults, with loose and unsafe wiring.
In two cases the earth wire was left unconnected.
If the machine was switched on, the entire metal bodywork would have become live, seriously injuring, possibly even killing the user.
Trading standards officers urge anyone with this type of mixer to stop using it immediately.
Five out of six mixers seized by officers seriously failed safety tests.
They've been banned from sale in Oxfordshire, but hundreds are believed to be in circulation across the country.
The Jewson chain, where some of the faulty machines were found, were promoting Baromix mixers as a special offer for a hundred and seventy five pounds.
The company has now agreed to withdraw them from sale.
Trading standards officers were first alerted to the danger by someone who'd just bought a mixer.
They're holding urgent discussions with the manufacturers to trace all the mixers sold.
Dozens of shops in Oxfordshire are being contacted, but officers say anyone with one of these mixers should have it thoroughly checked before using it again.
Officers are now deciding whether to prosecute the makers and retailers.
A man has appeared in court charged with attempting to murder a couple who were kidnapped and pushed over a cliff in a burning car.
He's the third person to be charged in connection with the attack.
Robin Powell reports.
15 NOVEMBER 1991/BIRDLIP/Gloucestershire
A former students union treasurer accused of stealing forty thousand pounds in funds has described the money as a’ golden handshake or productivity bonus’he decided he was entitled to.
The court heard Paul Crossland took the money to France days before his term as treasurer was due to end.
SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
Voice over
One of Oxford University's most flamboyant graduates…
Oscar Wilde…is celebrated in a new musical which has opened in the city.
It begins at the height of his success, and ends as his career is wrecked by scandal.
And there's a special link with the man himself…with an appearance each night by Wilde's grandson.
Kim Barnes joined the cast in rehearshals.
OXFORD
MIKE READ/Writer
LORNA DALLAS/Constance
ALEX HANSON/Oscar
MERLIN HOLLAND/Grandson
Voice over
Oxford's dreaming spires have moved hundreds of artists and writers…
Oscar Wilde was a student here at Magdalen College…now disc jockey Mike read has been inspired to write a new musical about the man who wrote the Importance of being Earnest, and said I can resist everything except temptation.
He was known for being jailed for his homosexuality, but the show looks at his family life.
Lorna Dallas plays Wilde's wife Constance…
Wilde's life was filled with controversy, including tempestuous times in Oxford.
Standing at this window of his college he was shot at from Madgalen Bridge
In later years he would be at the centre oftwo scandalous court cases…
Each performance at the Old fire Station will begin with a speech from Wilde's grandson…
Wilde called Oxford the most beautiful thing in England.
His rooms at Magdalen have been gutted and turned into a function room.
But this premiere revives the links with the city he loved.
And that new show,’ Oscar’, is running at the Old Fire Station Theatre in Oxford until July the 4th.
The motorbike industry is facing some hot competition — from the Chinese.
Motorbikes from Bejing are being imported into Britain by an engineer, and by all accounts he's doing a roaring trade.
Ken Goodwin reports.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
TERENCE BIRD/Importer
Voice over
British bikes used to be kings of the road.
But they were dethroned by the japanese.
Now the Chinese are in on the act: The Nanchang company are exporting their mopeds and motorbikes to Britain.
Engineer and motorbike enthusiast Terence Bird has set himself up as the sole European importer of Nanchang bikes.
And he thinks he's onto a winner.
He says he's amazed — but also pleased — by the high level of demand.
So the motorbikes are going like hotcakes — but there are people who prefer something a little more sedate.
This moped is called the misty, and in China it's very popular with women, who often use it for shopping trips.
It's 50 CC engine will do 100 miles per gallon, so not bad from an environmental, as well as economical point of view.
The bikes mechanical parts actualy originate in Japan — but the Chinese negotiated a special deal for them, and then designed their own heavy duty frames to cope with their terrible roads:
He says Chinese roads are unbelievable: full of pot holes and almost imassable.
Terence has already had to expand his business to cope with demand, and he's hoping to take on even more workers soon.
In the meantime, he's happy taking to the road, Chinese style.
A sixteen year old busker from Oxford has polished up his act…and won a national jazz competition.
He's one of six young musicians who've earned a chance to play alongside the professionals.Chris Moore reports.
DOMINIC FRANKS Saxophonist
ELLIOT MASON Joint Winner
TANYA HARRISON Joint Winner
Voice over
They're the best in the country and they're still not eighteen.
The Daily Telegraph Young Jazz All Stars' teamed up with Paul Young, from Mike and the Mechanics, to perform 'You are the number one', soccer's European Championship anthem.
Sixteen year-old saxophonist Dominic Franks, a pupil at Abingdon school, is the region's soloist winner and already a practised performer with a host of local bands.
He also gives shoppers impromptu shows in Oxford's High Street.
Later on, the winners were joined by top pop group, Londonbeat, who sang their latest single, 'You bring on the Sun'.
This really gave the youngsters a chance to shine.
The organisers wanted to let young musicians show off their talent with established stars.
They certainly got a chance to do that.
As a competition winner, Dominic will join the rest of the band…at least the younger members…for a week at jazz musician Johnny Dankworths' summer school.
1
FTSE down 17
The hundred shares index closed down seventeen point nine at twenty-five, ninety-eight point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-five and up at two marks, ninety-two.
(ad lib)
Water quality campaigners say a new treatment works to take nitrates out of drinking water is just money poured down the drain.
They say it wouldn't be necessary at all if farmers used less chemical fertilisers on their land.
Tim Hurst reports.
STOW ON THE WOLD/Gloucestershire
ALAN NEILD/Water Quality Manager
STEVE MILES/Friends of the Earth
Voice over
It's cost a million pounds to build a new water treatment works at Stow on the Wold in Gloucestershire, to take nitrates out of spring and river water.
Thames Water, who built the plant, say they had to spend the money to stay within European law, money which is ultimately paid by their customers.
Levels of nitrates in tap water had been rising slowly over the past decade, most of it leaching into groundwater from farmers fields, where it's used as a fertilizer.
So what's happened to the idea that it's the polluter who should pay for the clean-up, farmers and nitrate manufacturers.
Critics believe there'd be no need to build such expensive treatment plants to extract nitrates if farmers were given incentives to use less in the first place.
Nitrate levels must remain below 50 parts per million to stay within the law.
In the past levels around Stow on the Wold have climbed above that — now Thames Water belive the new supply is one of the cleanest in the world.
In just twenty-four hours the fate of an independant brewery and some three hundred pubs will be decided.
The Abingdon-based Morland brewers will know tomorrow if they've managed to fight off a hostile takeover bid.
Meanwhile the Campaign for Real Ale has weighed in in support of the Oxfordshire firm.
Simon Garrett reports 
IAN BERRY/Investment Analyst
JOHN ROBINSON/CAMRA
Voice over
Morland's attempts to stay independent are made tougher by the fact that the Suffolk-based predator…
Greene King…has already bought forty-three per cent of the company.
Even so city analysts believe their spirited defence has probably worked…for now at least 
Male speaker
I think they will survive.
However Greene King could relaunch their bid in the near future…and even if they don't…they'll still be holding a forty-three per cent stake in the company
Voice over
A successful takeover would mean the closure of the Morland's Abingdon brewery and up to a hundred job losses.
But CAMRA the beer drinkers pressure group says employees aren't the only people who would lose…the drinker would suffer as well 
Male speaker
People have been drinking Morland's for a long time and they go to their Morland's pub for Morland's.
We'll have the loss of three excellent ales including Old Speckled Hen which is really taking off.
There'll also be job losses and pub closures
Voice over
The final result of the takeover bid will be announced in the city at three o clock tomorrow
In part two.
Little and Large.
Desert Orchid and a close encounter of the short kind.
The importance of being Oscar.
An earnest attempt at the Wilde life.
And blowing up a storm.
The schoolboy with definite sax appeal.
Welcome back: One of Britain's best loved racehorses, Desert Orchid has been pulling in the crowds at the Three Counties Show.
Thousands turned up to watch the retired steeplechaser go through his paces in the main ring, and Dessie even found time to make a new little friend.
Richard Barnett reports:
MALVERN/Worcestershire
COLIN BROWN/Jockey
JIM STONE/Head Lad
Voice over
It was more like a personal appearance by a pop star…just a glimpse of Desert Orchid was enough to draw the crowds and set the cameras clicking.But after all, this was the horse with his own fanclub.And he has created a few records.Between 1983 and 1991 Dezi won 34 steeplechases, picking up half a million pounds in prize money into the bargain.Now he's retired…and enjoying the fame:
Male speaker
He's a real character, and was a wonderful ride.
Voice over
The Desert Orchid fan club boasts 1700 members…and its still growing.
The man who looks helps a somewhat frisky twelve year old enjoy his retirement is Jim Stone:
Male speaker
Desert Orchid enjoys the crowds, and isn't worried by all the people touching him.
Voice over
Despite Desert Orchid's star status, he still found time to welcome the smallest horse in the world who was peeping through the crush of onlookers.
Dezi's visit to the showground continued with a canter around the main ring…and then he joined the grand parade.
The Champion steeplechaser was leading the field as usual…but his new found friend wasn't far behind.
A disabled pensioner has won an award as Britain's best fundraiser.
Trudie Sheppard collected her prize from popstar Cliff Richard, who said everyone should follow her example.
KATE GARRAWAY/Newent
TRUDIE SHEPPARD/Fundraiser
CLIFF RICHARD/Singer
Voice over
It was when Trudie Sheppard retired that she really got down to work.
Twelve years later her fundraising efforts have pulled in more than three hundred thousand pounds for disabled people in her home town of Newent in Gloucestershire.
Trudie's efforts have won her community a bus service for the handicapped and won Trudie herself national recognition.
Today at the Grosvenor House hotel in London she came first in the Webb Ivory fundraising awards…but she says winning prizes was never her goal.
She says I did it because it was good fun and I wanted to help people…
How do you feel about winning?…
It's unbelievable.
Trudie's award was presented by popstar Cliff Richard who thinks her efforts are an example to everyone…
He says if she can do it at seventy-three and disabled then so can we all.
As her prize Trudie receives three thousand five hundred pounds but she says her real reward has been the satisfaction of knowing her efforts have helped others.
Four schoolchildren have taken on the farming world — and won.
The piglet they bred at school has been declared supreme champion at one of the country's top farming shows.
Now it will go on to compete for the title of best pig in Britain.
TIM HURST Malvern
GRANVILLE SIMONS Schoolmaster
ANDREW SIMPSON Breeder
Voice over
Gladstone, a rare Gloucester Old Spot boar, was one of a litter of 12 piglets, born at Elms School at Colwall near Malvern in Worcestershire just five months ago.
Reared by the pupils, all 12 and 13, it was fattened and pampered, shampoo'd and scrubbed — and then judged the best pig of all, Supreme Champion.
Three sows from the same litter added more honours to the school's trophy list of rosettes, and plaques, alongside Gladstone's Championship cup.
Some of Gladstone's fellow competitors obviously couldn't care less about being beaten into the minor placings, but fellow breeders were more forthcoming.
Gladstone is now one of 12 Supreme Champions which'll be judged later this for the title of best pig in Britain.
If he wins a lot of breeders will think they too should go back to school.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Stephanie gives evidence
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven point three at two eight seven five point seven 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty one and up at two marks, fifty.
A joint enterprise between French and Japanese companies is creating new jobs in the region.
A new car component plant will provide seats for both Rover and Honda, and could eventually employ more than two hundred and fifty people.
ROBIN POWELL/Stanford in the Vale
JEAN-PIERRE GIBOZ/Managing Director
TAKESHIRO KAWAKAMI/President
PETER MORGAN/Rover Group
Voice over
French and Japanese expertise, British jobs…
BFT's new plant near Faringdon has a truly international flavour.
It's a joint venture between the French firm Bertrand Faure and its Japanese partner Tachi-S, and will make car seats for the Rover 600, built at Cowley, and the new Swindon-built Honda Accord.
BFT's already one of the area's biggest employers…and it's hoped there'll be more jobs to follow.
The average employee's grasp of French, let alone Japanese, isn't what it could be…and the language barrier has proved a problem.
BFT's future prosperity depends largely on how popular the Accord and Six Hundred prove.
The updated Accord has only been on sale in Britain for six weeks, but already Honda's well ahead of its target of three and a half thousand sold by Christmas.
Rover, too, is quietly confident.
Meanwhile, BFT's looking for dab hands at sewing, for which it's just acquired a range of new equipment.
Given a total investment at Stanford of around ten million pounds, successful applicants won't be required to use a needle and thread.
A new type of handcuff is being tried out by police.
Called the’ Quickcuff’, it's more rigid than normal cuffs, and officers say it's safer and quicker to use.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
PC OLIVER LAMB/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
At training sessions around Gloucestershire police officers are learning how to use the new Quickcuff.
It's an American invention and was first used by officers there two years ago.
It proved so successful it's being adopted by police forces throughout Great Britain.
The old style handcuffs were often useless in a violent situation.
As this demonstration shows.
Officers say it's quick and easy to use.
Male speaker
With old ones anyone you were trying to arrest could over power you.
With these you can over power them.
Voice over
The Quickcuff will be issued to every officer in the force.
And criminals are warned that from then, they won't even have time to tell police it's a fair cop.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News — bringing back the bats.
Welcome back.
A colony of bats has set up home along the banks of the River Thames.
Wesley Smith
Researchers have been observing their habits, and it seems they're thriving in the countryside.
ERIKA BARNES/Shifford Lock
DAVID ENDACOTT/Oxfordshire Bat Group
Dr ROBERT STEBBINGS/Wildlife Consultant
ALASTAIR DRIVER/NRA Conservation Manager
Voice over
Home is somewhere where you have space to spread your wings.
Somewhere, where there's plenty of room to hang out.
Home is box alongside the River Thames, where the views are unrivalled.
Nature's abundant larder keeps the residents well fed, and the neighbours are very friendly.
Male speaker
The species here are very endering creatures.
I think they get a bad press.
They're cute and cuddly.
Voice over
The 90 box, bat’ estate’was built by the National Rivers Authority at Shifford Lock in Oxfordshire.
And over the past five years, they've brought in experts to watch the families of pipitrelles and brown long eared bats come and go.
Male speaker
We batty people look for evidence like droppings!
They took to the boxes immediately.
We mark the bats, so we know how many there are.
Voice over
It's the first time bat lovers have built artifical roosting sites alongside a river.
The NRA are doing their utmost to make it a home from home.
Male speaker
Besides putting up the boxes we've produced other habitats.
We've provided this pond and other trees and shrubs.
Voice over
They've been following the progress of around 150 bats.
It means they can learn more about the lifestyle of the little creatures.
Male speaker
We've found out a lot, that bats live for thirty years and only have one baby a year, and usually only have a baby every second year.
Voice over
It's clear the bats enjoy their highrise homes by the Thames, it means they can hide away, when unwelcome visitors call round.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GARETH FURBY/Milton Keynes
REBEKAH ASHFORD/Kidney Patient
DAVID ASHFORD/Father
GEOFF KOFFMAN/Kidney Surgeon
Voice over
Tonight Rebekah Ashford should be in hospital in London preparing for an operation to give her a new lease of life.
Instead she's returned home to Milton Keynes, after surgeons realised at the very last moment, that a kidney donated by her father would be rejected.
She says she's disappointed.
She was looking forward to eating chocolate.
The family had been preparing for months.
David Ashford, who's a teacher, had even been given permission to take twelve weeks off work.
He says he's now trying to undo all the plans that they've made.
He's devestated.
Rebecca's body has already rejected two kidneys, and she has to rely on a daily cocktail of drugs
Until the very last moment surgeons beleived a transplant from her father would work.
He says the tests didn't show up originally and that's why things progressed so far.
She says she's hoping that they'll find a new kidney donor.
Now Rebecca's family can only hope for a suitable kidney from an accident victim.
Without such a stoke of luck this lively ten year old could be soon need kidney disalysis…and be tied to the dialysis machine for the rest of her life.
A hunt employee jailed for two months for running down a saboteur has failed in his appeal against sentence.
He was due to marry this weekend, but now the wedding has been put off until he's released from prison.
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
IAN McKIE/Joint Hunt Master
PAUL DAVIS/Hunt Saboteurs Assn
Voice over
Michael Smith was driving the quad bike which ran down a hunt saboteur.
For that he was imprisoned for two months on Monday.
Frances Hopkins hopes were dashed when the appeal was denied.
She was due to marry Smith on Saturday.
Female speaker
He says he's sorry.
We're really disappointed
Voice over
Smith's the full-time terrier man with the Bicester and Waddon Chase hunt.
He lives in a tied cottage owned by them.
Even that future now seems in doubt
Male speaker
We had to appeal on his behalf.
His future employmednt still has to be discussed and considered
Voice over
Hunt Saboteurs want him sacked
Male speaker
It's astonishing they'd consider giving work to a man who's committed such a crime.
What next, the Bicester'll have the Kray twins riding with them
Voice over
A statement written by Smith was read outside Oxford Crown court by his representative Catherine Goddard
Female speaker
I deeply regret my reckless behaviour, albeit under extreme provocation from hunt saboteurs.
Hunt supporters have always been advised to exercise restraint.
If hunt saboteurs could do the same, this sort of thing need never happen again
Voice over
Speaking for the bench, Recorder Martin Wilson QC said they'd considered increasing Smith's sentence.
He said of the assault’ Had it occurred on a street in a city like Oxford it would have merited imprisonment.
We see no reason why the same should not apply in the fields of Oxfordshire
Detectives say it could be another six weeks before they can formally identify the body of a woman believed to have been murdered twenty years ago.
SWINDON
Joan Main went missing from her home at Old Town in Swindon.
A body thought to be hers was found two months ago.
Forensic experts are now carrying out DNA tests on the remains.
Her former husband David is awaiting trial for her murder.
A truck company's sales division has been saved from closure.
Two hundred and eighty people were employed there by Leyland Daf before the company called in the receivers.
Now it's been announced that the division will continue to operate, but as a separate company and with just under half the staff.
HARRIET RYLEY/London
THAME/Oxfordshire
DAVID GILL/Leyland Daf Trucks
PAT KENNETT/Transport Journalist
JOHN GILCHRIST/Leyland Trucks Manufacturing
JANE MORBEY/Mayor of Thame
Voice over
Lining up for a photocall in front of the latest Leyland Daf trucks, just before the announcement of the rosy future the newly formed companies have predicted for themselves.
Where there was one British Leyland until February this year, there are now four companies — including Leyland Daf Trucks in Thame, which remains responsible for sales and marketing of trucks in Great Britain.
75 of the 280 staff at Thames were made redundant in February when the company called in the receivers and another 30 will go tomorrow.
Some of the remaining staff will move to other Leyland Daf companies in Birmingham and Lancashire.
The chief executives all confidently predicted that Leyland Daf trucks would make a profit over the next three years despite the loss of eighty-two million pounds at the time the company went into receivership.
One transport expert was scpetical about their optimism:
At Thame itself where Leyland Daf set up their base in 1987, there's relief the company is staying:
But with economic trends showing the recession is far from over, Leyland's optomistic predictions for itself may prove difficult to fulfill.
061793prog
A new hill painting to rival the famous White Horse on the Ridgeway has appeared on the Downs near Oxfordshire.
But this one won't be around for hundreds of years…in fact, it'll probably be washed away with the first rainstorm.
Kim Barnes reports.
BLEWBURY Oxfordshire
MARTIN WHITE Art Teacher
KATHLEEN PILE Landowner
DAWN COSTAR Art Student
Voice over
Well it's got to be better than being stuck in a classroom…art students from Abingdon took to the Downs for their latest project…
It's called The Frying pan…and it's already caused one surprised motorist to crash his car into a sign.
It tooks weeks of planning…but was surprisingly quick to create…
It's named after nearby Frying Pan Woods…the points represent the sparks of flame.
It has the backing of the farmer who owns the land…
Its made with the paint used on football pitches.
so it will either wash away or grow out.
But the benefits of creating it will be long-lasting…
It's been a great experience.
I don't think I'll get the chance to do anything like this again.
Unlike the ancient hill paintings the abstract pan doesn't have any great meaning…the artists just hope it turns a few heads.
Maxwell brothers charged with conspiracy to defraud
Kevin and Ian Maxwell have appeared in court charged with conspiracy to defraud.
Evidence has been taken from their homes, including Kevin's house in Oxfordshire.
34 massacred at South African squatter camp
More than thirty people have been massacred at a squatter camp near Johannesburg.
They were attacked at random by hundreds of armed men.
English soccer fans shame after defeat
English soccer fans have been charged after more violence at the European Championships.
German supporters have also been on the rampage.
Fireman fails to save his two daughters
A part-time fireman has failed to save two of his own daughters from a blaze at his Shropshire home.
His wife and three other children survived.
FTSE down 35
The hundred shares index closed down thirty-five point seven at twenty-five, sixty-two point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-six, and down at two marks, ninety-one 
(ad lib)
The former treasurer of a polytechnic student union has been jailed for two and a half years for stealing forty thousand pounds.
Paul Crossland admitted in court that he'd taken the cash out of union funds, but said he'd felt entitled to it because he had saved the union so much money.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
OXFORD
Det Con MARK REEVE/Thames Valley Police
TRACY NEALE/President/Student Union
Voice over
The jury at Oxford Crown Court were unanimous in finding Paul Crossland guilty of two charges of theft and forgery.
They heard that in 1989, when he was treasurer of the Oxford Polytechnic student union, he made a cheque out for five pounds to a fellow student.
He then altered it to read forty thousand and five pounds and transferred it into his own bank account.
The next anyone heard from him was a post card from the south of France saying he wanted to start a fresh life.
He was eventually traced to Lancaster University last October and arrested.
Mr Crossland's lawyer told the court that it was a tragic case of a young idealist who was also naive.
Detectives said the crime was pre-meditated.
p-t-c
Reaction to the sentence from the student union was mixed.
The student union are taking legal advice about whether they can take any further action to recover the missing money.
A lifeboat has been put out of action by thieves who've stolen and damaged rescue equipment worth thousands of pounds.
The crew say lives are at risk until repairs can be completed.
Tim Hurst reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES/SHARPNESS/Gloucestershire
JIM HEWITT/SARA
Det Sgt COLIN PEAKE/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
The lifeboat is operated by SARA, the Severn Auxilliary Rescue association at Sharpness in Gloucestershire, but thieves who raided their security compound at dawn damaged the boat's main power unit by cutting fuel and control lines.
They also stole a 15 horse power back-up outboard, a hand-held radio, and rescue flares.
Security lighting was sabotaged before the theft, and that alerted local fishermen.
The police are seeking more witnesses.
Any calls for help in the estuary will have to be dealt with by a second boat from Chepstow, until repairs to the Sharpness boat are complete.
New figures show that Severn Trent is Britain's most profitable water company.
Operating profits are up by almost a third to more than two hundred and sixty million pounds
Turnover is up by a similar amount at more than eight hundred and twenty two million pounds.
American B-Fifty-two bombers have returned to R-A-F Fairford in Gloucestershire.
FAIRFORD/Gloucestershire
Five aircraft and three hundred american airforcemen will be at the base for the next two weeks.
They're taking part in a NATO excercise.
The base has been virtually deserted since the U-S airforce pulled out two years ago.
It was used in the Gulf War when eight B-52s flew on daily raids to Iraq.
Well, as the big bombers fly in, a much smaller aircraft is preparing to fly out.
A pilot is hoping to secure a place in the record books by flying from Britain to Portugal in a microlight aircraft.
The flight's taken five months to organise, and he'll be airborne for at least four weeks.
Tim Hurst reports.
MADLEY/Herefordshire
ROBERT LAYTON/Pilot
DOUG LAYTON/Father
JOAN LAYTON/Mother
Voice over
When Robert Layton, from Leominster in Herefordshire, takes off for Portugal on Saturday, he'll be literally flying on a wing and a prayer, a wing of nylon and a prayer for good weather.
The trip has been attempted twice before by others, and failed, either because of bad weather or poor organisation.
Robert Layton has spent five months preparing the British, French, Spanish and Portugese paperwork that will allow him to make two or three landings a day as he hops across Europe in a plane that can carry just ten gallons of fuel.
Robert Layton will be flying at about 2,000 feet to stay below commercial flight routes, low enough to run into bad weather, or his worst nightmare, fog as he crosses the Channel.
His family are backing him, with reservations.
Four friends will be keeping pace with him on the ground, carrying all the spares he might need for a flight which is expected to last for a month.
Cracking up…the dream home that's become a couple's nightmare.
Round one to Morlands…brewery fight off hostile takeover.
And head in the clouds…a man and his microlight head for Portugal
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
ERIKA BARNES
SWINDON/Wiltshire
JIM MASKELL
PAT MASKELL
JAMES DIAMOND/Site Owner
Voice over
This was to have been the Maskells' dream home.
Their business had gone bust and all the money left went on the mortgage.
That was eleven years ago — since then, developers have chopped down trees, demolished a stone wall and ripped up a driveway.
Now there are cracks all over the house — the result, the Maskells say, of slippage caused by foundations being dug for a block of flats next door.
Mr Maskell suspected there'd be problems the day workmen arrived…
Plans for the flats have since been shelved and the Maskells have received thirteen thousand pounds in compensation.
But they say the repairs needed would cost three times that amount.
Now they've arranged a meeting with Thamesdown Borough Council to demand action.
But the council insists it's a private dispute between the Maskells and the site's new owner.
He says he offered to buy the house for more than it's worth, but the Maskells weren't interested.
The site's original developers, NuHomes Construction, declined to comment.
Meanwhile the Maskells are left with a house they can't insure, and can't sell.
James Diamond and Thamesdown Council say they're confident a solution will be found — right now that seems a long way off.
Fraud squad officers investigating the affairs of the late Robert Maxwell have been searching the Oxfordshire home of his son, Kevin.
This afternoon Kevin, his brother Ian and an American business associate appeared in court on charges of fraud involving more than a hundred and thirty five million pounds.
Julie Dolphin reports.
HAILEY/Oxfordshire
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
Voice over
Three officers from the serious fraud squad were involved in the search.
They took just over an hour to go through the Maxwell possession…some items were taken away in the boot of the officers' car.
The officers also walked around the grounds of the home at Hailey in Oxfordshire, before making a search of a garage.
This morning Kevin and his brother Ian were arrested at their homes in London by police investigating the affairs of their late father who used pension funds to bolster his businesses.
This afternoon the brothers were remanded on bail charged with fraud and theft.
Tonight the MP for Oxford East said every effort should continue to be made to trace the missing pension millions.
Male speaker
It's important that the pensioners' money is retrieved.
Voice over
Meanwhile, there's been no activity at the late Robert Maxwell's former home Headington Hill Hall in Oxford.
His widow Betty is believed to have left the mansion earlier this week.
One of the region's independent breweries has managed to fight off a hostile takeover bid — at least for the time being.
But the company planning the takeover has said its determined to fight on, and has extended its deadline for shareholders.
Debbie Kelly reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
SIMON REDMAN/Greene King
JASPER CLUTTERBUCK/Morland
DAVE McKERCHAR/Camra
Voice over
Morland's has fought off the first attempt by the Suffolk based company Greene King to takeover it and its three hundred pubs…
By today's deadline Green King had only picked up forty six per cent of Morland's shares…
Its now said it'll extend its offer to Morland shareholders by another fourteen days…
A successful takeover will mean the closure of the Abingdon brewery and upto a hundred job losses…
But Morland having won the first round is confident of surviving…
The Campaign for Real Ale has been fighting to keep Morland independent…claiming prices will rise and customers deserve choice…they welcome today's resutl
Even if Morland shareholders don't accept Green Kings offer within the next fourteen days…
Greene King could extend the deadline again…but at Morlanmd otnight they're confident of fighting off the takeover
The man known as the’ last great explorer’has given his entire collection of photographs to one of the region's museums.
They're a unique record of some of the world's most isolated areas…and the people who live in them.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
WILFRED THESIGER/Explorer
LIZ EDWARDS/Pitt-Rivers Museum
MICHAEL PALIN/Traveller
Voice over
Wilfred Thesiger surveys some of the 25 thousand photographs which represent a lifetime's travels.
He's trekked across some of the most inhospitable terrain in the world…and lived amongst its communities…
He says he's never travelled by car.
He travels on foot or with animal transport.
You've got the people with you, you're not a stranger, you're accepted.
An Oxford graduate he's given his collection of photographs…his most cherished possession…to the University's Pitt Rivers Musuem…
He now lives in Kenya amongst his adopted family…and he's keen to get back.
But not before signing hundreds of his books in Oxford.
Meanwhile the gift's been welcomed at the Museum.
She says it's one of the most important collections of the century.
Not just because of its range but also because of the quality of the material.
Meanwhile fellow travellers can only admire the hardiness of the last great explorer, now 83.
He says Wilfrd Thesiger's idea of a nice night is to curl up on a rock and eat some fresh camel's milk.
I always use him as an example when people ask why make travel difficult.
You can only experience what he did by living as people do.
He says in the desert he was hungry and thirsty all the time.
Reporter asks does there have to be a risk?
He says there doesn't have to be, but it adds to the excitement!
The Crown Princess of Jordan opened an exhibition of his work saying it captured the real colour of life.
Thesiger's life in Kenya is spartan with few possessions, but many memories of life with Marsh Arabs and Bedu nomads, memories he's delighted to share with Oxford.
If you're out on the roads this weekend, there's a chance you could see a squashed beetle.
No, not another insect flattened on the windscreen, but a shortened version of a favourite car.
GARETH FURBY Chinnor
CHRIS BIRKS Beetle Mechanic
ERIC BIRKS Father
Voice over
There's nothing unusual about this car…until you see it side on.
The squashed beetle, perhaps the smallest in the world, is only just over eight feet long.
There's no space for a roof…even the drivers not too sure about the basic design.
He says its very windy.
It'll be fine as long as the weather stays good.
Motor mechanic Chris Birks bought the Beetle from a scapyard for fifteen pounds.
He says some friends thought about cutting the car in two and putting it back together.
But he got a bit carried away…
Eleven months later…even the MOT testers couldn't spot the join.
But it's a skill that runs in Chris's blood, his dad's a mechanic as well.
He says the designs totally impractical.
He says it's got no space but it's fun.
In total the conversion to squashed bettle has cost just eight hundred pounds
Now Chris fully expects an VW enthusiast to offer him thousands.
But he doesn't want to sell.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
NHS complaints procedure review
FTSE up 3
The hundred shares index closed up three point seven at twenty-eight, seventy-nine point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-nine and up at two marks, fifty-one.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
QUEDGELEY/Gloucester
STONEHOUSE/Gloucestershire
BRIAN GARDINER/Stepfather
Voice over
Convicted murderer Danny Gardiner came to Gloucester magistrates to demand the return of over 2000 pounds cash seized by the police after he was charged with an armed robbery.
He never came to trial for the robbery at the Cheltenham and Gloucester Building Society in Quedgeley, Gloucester.
Because before the case came to court, key witness Alan Chalky White was found murdered in the Cotswold Water Park.
Gardiner was convicted and sentenced to life for the killing…and the armed robbery case was not proceeded with.
Giving evidence for the police, Detective Constable Mark Williams said following the raid on the building society, Gardiner was charged with armed robbery.
Detectives found 385 pounds on him, and another 1850 pounds hidden in underpants behind a wardrobe at his home.
The money was seized by the police.
Danny Gardiner's stepfather Brian appeared on his son's behalf.
He said Danny was good at making money…he'd run a successful car security etching business, and once made 6000 pounds renovating a house.
He always had cash at his home.
And the evidence for the robbery was very weak.
He demanded that as his son had never stood trial or been convicted of the robbery, police had no right to seize the money from him.
PTC
The magistrates took only ten minutes to decide to make an order that 2,235 pounds should be returned to Gardiner.
Male speaker
He's delighted at the outcome.
Voice over
As Danny Gardiner was led to the Security van, he paused to talk of the outcome:
His reply…
It's justice…
I'm glad justice has been done.
Gardiner was then driven away to continue his life sentence at Gartree Prison in Leicestershire.
Oxfam is trying to recall seven thousand potentially deadly necklaces on sale in its shops.
The jewellery, made from beans and imported from Guatamala, contains one of the world's deadliest poisons — twice as lethal as cobra venom.
Oxfam says it wasn't aware of a warning about the beads, issued seven months ago.
SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
GUATEMALA
Dr JEFFREY ARONSON/Clinical Pharmacologist
JOHN MAGRATH/Oxfam
Voice over
With a 75 pence pricetag these brightly coloured necklaces are the sort of gift one might give a child.
But a child chewing one of these Castor beans would very likely die.
Seven thousand necklaces have come from Guatamala where they're a traditional craft item.
Castor oil comes from the bean but so does a powerful skin irritant, and a deadly poison called ricin.
Male speaker
It can cause sickness, diarrohea, a drop in blood pressure and a rise in temperature.
People who've eaten castor beans or been injected with ricin have died from severe shock
Voice over
Ricin's poisonous properties are known in parts of Africa where beans have been used to kill unwanted children and neighbour's cattle.
Fourteen years ago playwrite Giorgi Markov was murdered by Bulgarian spies in London — killed by ricin in poison umberella.
A warning about the beans was published by trading standards in Birmingham last year…but Oxfam officials say they had no idea of the danger until this week
Male speaker
We're in regular touch with Oxfordshire trading standards and they take samples at random.
We've never had a problem like this before.
This one slipped through the net.
We have to tighten up to make sure this never happoens again
Voice over
A millionth of a gramme of ricin can kill if injected.
The fear is a child might put one of the necklaces in its mouth
Male speaker
That could be very dangerous.
There are reports of up to three beans killing a child so I think the risk of a child handling one of these could be very serious
Voice over
It's not yet known just how many of the bead necklaces has been sold.
They've been available for two weeks at 350 Oxfam shops.
Anyone who's has bought one is asked to return it to Oxfam's headquarters in Banbury Road Oxford.
A British mercenary killed in Yugoslavia may have been murdered by a fellow soldier, and NOT killed in crossfire as first thought.
An inquest on Grant Mann has been told that he was shot in the head at close range.
His parents were told at first that he was hit in the chest during a gun battle.
CHRIS MOORE/Reporting
JOAN MANN/Speaking in April
Voice over
Grant Mann joined the Croatian Army early this year, almost four years after leaving the Parachute Regiment.
He'd never settled back into civilian life, and after telling his family at Wood Burcote in Northamptonshire that he was going camping in France, wrote to say he'd enlisted with the Croats.
Then in March, his mother was told he'd been killed in action
Female speaker
He was caught in the crossfire.They'd been ambushed after being informed on.He was shot though the chest.
They said he'd been killed outright
Voice over
But today at Northampton Coroner's court, conflicting evidence emerged.
A letter from Grant's Coatian Army Major said he was hit in the chest during a heavy Serbian bombardment.
But a Home Office pathologist said Grant had been shot in the back of the head from just a few inches.
He may also have been hit with a rifle butt afterwards.Joan Mann told the hearing that she understood there were several traitors in the Croat camp.
Because of the conflicting evidence, Coroner Michael Colcutt said there was clearly some doubt over the way Grant had died, and he recorded an open verdict.
First World War veterans have fulfilled a lifetimes' ambition and visited the House of Commons.
And they heard the Prime Minister pay tribute to them when they sat in on Question Time.
STEPHANIE REEVE/London
WILLIAM FREEMAN/Ex-Gloucestershire Regiment
Voice over
It was a day that twenty one soldiers had waited a long time to see.
It brought back memories of the time, more than seventy years ago, that they'd fought for their country.
And now, three quarters of a century later, a chance to see how it's run.
Ninety five year old William Wyatt from Didcot, in Oxfordshire remembered killings he'd seen all those years ago.
But despite the usual rows of Question Time, no-one disagreed with what John Major had to say on this occasion.
After a little light refreshment the soldiers managed to swap notes with MP's and ministers.
And for one veteran, from Cinderford in the Forest of Dean, the excitement of coming to London had been just the start of an amazing day.
The visit clearly lived up to expectations.
For men who've seen so much they'd rather forget, this at least, was a day to remember
Wesley Smith
Still to come on Central South, the dream of the White Horses.
Welcome back.
Later in the programme, one of the world's last great explorers.
(HARRIET) And a chance to see a squashed beetle.
But first we join Tim Russon with the Summer Sport.
TIM RUSSON
BRUCE NOTTAGE
CLAIRE BEAUMONT
ALLAN STALEY
Voice over
A dream of white horses brings us a our summer sport this week…its a name of a climb from the waves up the cliffs of Anglesey…
Hello there this week we've come to the coast to go climbing with three local mountaineers…the sport is celebrating at the moment…it's thirty years since the conquest of Everest and every weekend you'll find climbers out on the cliffs and craggs of britain
Take three Central South people…first of all there's photographer Allan Staley from Oxford…
then we've got Claire Beaumont from Cricklade who's an assistant shop manager…
and finally Bruce Nottage an accountant a financial director in Wiltshire…
three very different folk from three very different trades…
and what brings them and thousands like them together is their hobby…their sport…climbing…
Bruce Nottage says that it's a release from the hum drum of life…its take you to places you'd never go to
Claire Beaumont says that it's a personal thing…every climb is different for every person
Allan Staley says that it’ s the best sport out…no other sport has as much excitement
climbing is like no other sport…there are no matches or games…no cups to be won…records to be beaten…its you or your team against the rock…
a battle of willpower…resilence…of pleasure and pain…the only reward is the achievement…
and for our team achievement is climbing from the bottom to the top of the North Stack in Anglesey…its not Everest…and its been climbed many times before but this is where you taste the true flavour of British mountaineering…
a day on a dream of white horses
Bruce says…he learnt to climb at school…
Claire says she started climbing with her brothers and Allan says he saw some people climbing when he was youth hostelling and thought that's the sport for me…
Bruce says you have to be steady…you don't have to br strong or brave…
Claire says she makes sure he has a good day out…and Allan says there's no other way to learn or get better than just climbing
Bruce shows how he holds on with a metal clip…
climbing the white horses takes anything from three to five hours…routes up cliffs or pitches as they're called are well mapped out in the mountain guides…and our team have made made it to the top in good time…
Bruce says its a lovely route…good climbing not too hard…
Claire says it was excellent…you just have to take it calmly…
Allan says it typifies what's good about British climbing open walls…
Claire says it's always a challenge…you sometimes get cold…but she does it for enjoyment there's no other reason
so while our climbers rest and enjoy the sea air we can now catch up with the rest of the sporting action…
The big cats of the Oxfordshire based Jaguar racing team might not be roaring that loud at Le mans this weekend…their three cars are facing exclusion from the 24 hour classic race which gets underway tomorrow…
The stewards say the cars should be fitted with catalytic converters to race…the team reckon they're not required by the regulations…
They've lodged an appeal and will race come what may…but whether the result is allowed to stand is another question…the winner could be decided by a tribunal…
The winner of the big greyhound race this weekend might be decided by a photograph…its the semi-final of the greyhound derby…two local dogs are running…
Forest of Dean trainer Tony Meek has Lass Java and Ringa Hustle racing for a place in next week's final…there's £40,000 for the winner…
There's no pot of gold for the big moto cross race of the weekend though…the Thamesdown club are staging the British round of the 250 cc World Championship at Foxhill Park at Wanborough…
It's practice tomorrow…racing on Sunday…
There's racing all weekend on the Thames at Henley its the women's rowing regatta…
In the water training this weekend is Cheltenham swimmer Kevin Morris…he's getting himself ready for a world first…and that's to swim the channel backstroke…it's never been done before…
Kevin tried a few years ago and failed this time…he aims to make history…and if he does we'll be there…
and finally its Wimbledon next week…
What chance a british victory…no chance in the big finals…but Oxfordshire's Tim Henman has qualified and we'll be joining up with him on Monday
Nearly sixty children have been involved in a coach crash while on a school outing.
Sixteen of them were taken to hospital with whiplash neck injuries — others were treated at the scene of the accident for cuts and bruises.
Voice over
When news of the accident got out the hospital where sixteen of the children were being treated was flooded with calls from anxious parents.
Staff set up a special emergency room with phene lines to give out information.
She says your child has been admitted but call back later to see if she is going to stay overnight.
None of the children have been seriously hurt.
The youngsters all aged between eight and eleven are pupils at Kings Meadow County Primary School in Bicester in Oxfordshire.
They were on a school trip to Pembroke Dock in West Wales and were setting off on their last visit when the crash happened.
Fifty nine youngsters and their teachers were travelling in two coaches through the town centre when police say one of the buses ran into the back of the other.
Most of the children were treated by the roadside for cuts and bruises some of them were in shock.
Those taken to hospital were suffering from neck injuries caused by whiplash.
He says fortunately they weren't badly hurt but one girl has a collar and those with neck injuries will stay in over night.
At the school parents were waiting most of the afternoon to find out when the children could be brought home.
For some of those parents the waiting is over.
Within the last hour those with minor injuries have been brought home
The police say a special operation against crime seems to be paying off.
Operation Gemini was set up as a high profile battle against criminals.
So far more than a hundred and twenty arrests have been made.
KEN GOODWIN/Cirencester
PC DINO MADDERN/Gloucestershire Police
PC KEVIN PRICE/Gloucestershire Police
Ch Insp MIKE HUMPHRIES/Head of Operation Gemini
Voice over
A van full of stolen property.
One of the latest siezures in Operation Gemini, the police crack down on crime in Gloucestershire.
Patrols like this have specific targets.
He says similar vans are used to transport stolen property.
This driver has nothing to hide.
But he doesn't mind being stopped.
He says no problem, no problem at all.
But the patrols ARE getting the right results…
He says that he stopped a van, the youths driving it ran off, inside were stolen goods.
Some patrols are deliberately high profile.
These youths were stopped and their car checked.
But much of Operation Gemini is about surveilance, observing known criminals and waiting for the right time to move in and make arrests, of which there have been more than a hundred and twenty since the operation started four weeks ago.
He says that the Gemini squad will be seen in uniform, but there are also more covert operations.
The Gemini squad says the the pressure will be kept up on criminals.
They want lawbreakers to know that wherever they are, Gemini could be watching.
Prince Edward has been chancing his arm at a new sport: Ten Pin Bowling.
The Prince was visiting handicapped children being looked after by members of his father's award scheme.
They invited him to have a go.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Swindon
MANDY PRICE/Super Bowl Manager
DAVID ROWLANDS/Award Scheme Candidate
RACHEL DUNN/Award Scheme Candidate
DAVID EASTER/Deputy Head
Voice over
So who cares about royal dignity anyway…even if you do fail completely at your first attempt.
Prince Edward was in Swindon to see Handicapped youngsters playing tenpin bowling and he had a crack himself.
The second time was much better.
He knocked over eight.
But still not as good as some of the handicapped children he'd come to see.
Perhaps they'd had a little more time.
With a little more coaching he might get the knack.
Female speaker
I told him how to hold the ball and where to aim it.
He said it was not as easy as that.
He said he'd played a few years before but was very out of practice
Voice over
The Prince was in Swindon to see the work of local youngsters taking part in the Duke of Edinburgh's Award Scheme.
Part of their work involved taking handicapped children out for entertainment.
Prince Edward was keen to promote his father's scheme.
Male speaker
He seemed very friendly.
Heasked me about how the Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme was going and what level I'd reached
Female speaker
He was looking when I scored my first ever strike.
He congratulated me
Voice over
The handicapped children are from the Brimble School in Swindon, a centre for youngsters with learning difficulties.
There they learn how to deal with the outside world, and the Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme is an essential part of it.
Male speaker
The scheme is very important to us.
It's a way of getting the children out into the community and teaching them how things operate
Voice over
The prince proved a willing ambassador for his father's scheme.
It was a fleeting visit, but in the best traditions of a charming Prince, he bowled them over.
Two councils have obtained high court injunctions in an attempt to stop an illegal rave party going ahead.
Farmers have barricaded their fields to prevent partygoers from trespassing on their land.
Tim Hurst reports.
STAUNTON/Gloucestershire
RICHARD PADFIELD/Farmer
SEPTEMBER 1991/STROUD/Gloucestershire
Supt DAVID JACKSON/Gloucestershire Police
JOHN DUDFIELD/Farmer
MARTIN JONES/Malvern Hills Council
Voice over
A 700 acre farm at Staunton in Gloucestershire is being blockaded by farmers, after national promotion of a laser disco party, which was later refused a licence by the local council.
Even so there are rumours of an illegal rave.
Worried by a repeat of last year's illegal raves in Gloucestershire, the police are now backed by a High Court injunction covering the site.
One farmer was offered thousands of pounds for a site for the laser disco, police warned him it turn into a rave party.
The site is close to Castlemorton, in Worcestershire, devastated by a new age travellers gathering last month.
Malvern Hills District Council, tipped off that ravers moved from Staunton may move across the county boundary, have also taken out an injunction.
The message from landowners, police, and the High Court…ignore the runours, it won't happen.
In part two.
The ultimate challenge…the race between man, horse, and bike.
High Society…
The millionairess on a round the world flight.
And, it's in the bag…
A tribute to one of television's best producers.
TIM RUSSON
GORDON GREEN/Landlord
TIM MOSS/Race Co-ordinator
ZOE JENNINGS/Race Champion
JOHN SCHUTTERLIN/White Horse Harriers
DEREK GREEN/White Horse Harriers
SARAH BROWN
ANDREW BROWN
MARION JONES/ALAN JONES
DEREK GREEN/Winning Runner
Voice over
A millionairess with a taste for adventure is facing the biggest challenge of her life.
Barbel Abela is competing in the first round-the-world air race in a fifty-year-old bomber.
Barbel, who just two years ago was terrified of flying, says she's out to prove what a woman can achieve.
Robin Powell reports.
EWELME/Oxfordshire
BARBEL ABELA
Voice over
Two years ago Barbel Abela's world felt empty.
The two sons she'd reared had left home, and even being married to one of the richest men in Europe couldn't compensate.
So she took a break from the family business and learnt to fly.
Now she's about to compete in the first ever round-the-world air race.
It's a challenge all the more remarkable for the fact that not so long ago jetting off on holiday made her weak at the knees…
Barbel's flying the world in a fifty-year-old Douglas Invader like this.
A veteran of Vietnam and Korea, it weighs in at fifteen tons and guzzles a hundred and fifty gallons of fuel an hour.
The propeller blades alone are more than twice Barbel's height.
When the finishing touches are applied, this is how her plane should look.
She even sold her house in Germany to pay for it, and while she's happy to stretch this little two seater to the limit in practice, lasting damage to the Bar-Belle Bomber would be too high a price to pay for victory…
Barbel's the only woman among thirty competitors lining up for the start in Geneva this weekend.
From there they'll head for Scandinavia, across the C-I-S, through North America, then back to Europe, with the finish in Cannes scheduled for July the twelfth.
Three weeks…and twenty-five thousand nautical miles…just by finishing Barbel hopes to strike a blow for womankind…
Barbel says the key to happiness is adapting to different situations and enjoying them equally…bomber pilot and society hostess, she's having the time of her life.
Outraged: Family's anger as McGurk killing inquiry is rejected.
Was Browning innocent?
New doubts about the M-Fifty murder
And keep out.
The barricades go up to block an illegal rave.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
The parents of murdered council worker Anna McGurk say more lives will be put at risk after the Government refused to hold an inquiry into bail procedures.
Anna was raped and strangled by a man who was on bail awaiting trial for rape.
GARGY PATEL
The case prompted an M-P to demand a full review of the rules on the granting of bail.
But the Government has rejected the call saying that it's already taken steps to reduce the risk of such an incident happening again.
Kim Barnes reports.
GLOUCESTER
JOHN BUTCHER MP/Con Coventry South West
KAY POTTS/Anna's Mother
Voice over
23 year old Anna McGurk was raped and strangled as she walked home from Gloucester City Council.
Her body was found in undergrowth near Gloucester docks.
Andrew Hagans who's 26, was senetenced to life imprisonment last week after being convicted of rape and murder.
He'd been released on bail by Cheltenham magistrates after being charged with raping a twenty year old woman.
MP John Butcher immediately called for a full inquiry into bail procedures, but the government says no…
In a commons written reply Home office minister of State Michael Jack says…
Although I fully understand and share the concern that has been widely expressed about the implications of this case, I have no plans to institute any formal inquiry.
Steps have already been taken and and others are in train to reduce the risk of such incidents ocurring again.
Anna's family are appalled.
meaningful pay-off
Andrew hagans was staying at this bail hostel when he murdered Anna McGurk.
John Butcher says at this moment a man on bail for rape is on the run ine the Midlands.
He says changes are needed now.
New evidence has been revealed about the murder of the pregnant mother Marie Wilkes which may cast doubt on the guilt of the man jailed for her killing.
A nurse has said she was accosted by a man soon after the killing on the M-fifty, while the man jailed for the murder was hundreds of miles away in Scotland.
Keith Wilkinson reports.
RITA LLOYD/Witness
JIM NICHOLL/Browning's Lawyer
Nursing sister Rita Lloyd had driven along the M50 motorway.
The spot where Marie Wilkes from Worcester was later found murdered.
It was the day after Marie went missing four years ago.
Like Marie her car had broken down.
She was about fifty miles from the murder scene.
But she says she was approached by a man in a silver car.
Police suspected a man in a silver car was the murderer.
The man tried to give her a lift and wouldn't take no for an answer.
But he drove off when her husband appeared.
She says’ Had I been alone and not so near a phone box who is to say I would not have said yes.
Thank you very much’.
What do you think would have happened?
’ God knows.
I wouldn't like to think.’
Mrs Lloyd says she told the police.
But they took no interest for four years.
Until last week when a detective took a statement from her.
The man who approached Mrs Lloyd had brown hair.
The man who was arrested and jailed Eddie Browning was blonde.
Greater Manchester Police are now looking into other aspects of the murder inquiry including this interview with a policeman witness under hypnosis which recently came to light.
Browning's defence lawyer says this and other evidence could have been crucial if heard by the trial jury.
Male speaker
’ I think it's outrageous.
Voice over
I think the police should have been to see her within hours and not waited four years to see her.’
’ My husband asked them why they didn't take a statement from me four years ago.
They said because my description of the chap was different to everyone else.
Mr Browning is blonde and the chap had brown hair.
But I have heard since that two other witnesses described a chap with dark hair.’
West Mercia police would not comment because of the ongoing inquiry.
But a spokesman said the murder was painstakingly investigated by professional officers.
And people should not assume there had been a miscarriage of justice.
Gloucester Prison has the worst record in the country for overcrowding, according to a new league table.
It's claimed that the jail now houses almost double the number of prisoners it was designed for.
But the Home Office says the figures are wrong.
Gareth Furby reports.
GLOUCESTER
PETER HALL/Prison Officers' Association
According to Nacro, the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders, Gloucester Prison has the worst figures for overcrowding in the country.
Nacro says it was built for 107 prisoners, but contains 195. making it eighty two per cent overcrowded.
Conditions inside, says Nacro, are cramped and uncivilised, and prison officers are often under severe pressure.
The Prison Officers Association at Gloucester agrees.
He says the solution is single cells with proper toilet facilities.
But this afternoon the Home Office said Nacro had’ got its facts wrong.’
Gloucester prison had’ 160 inmates not 195.’
And the Home Office says conditions were improving…single cells were now only shared by two prisoners instead of three or even four.
One of the founding fathers of independent television has been celebrating sixty years in broadcasting.
Bill Ward was one of the guiding lights behind Central TV's predecessor ATV, and he's still working.
Mike Rowbottom reports 
LONDON
MORECAMBE AND WISE SHOW
1965 DAME JUDY DENCH A Golden Hour of Drama
1963 BRUCE FORSYTH Royal Variety Performance
BILL WARD Television Producer
1968 ITV THIS IS YOUR LIFE
NAT KING COLE SHOW
ANDY ALLAN Programme Director Central TV
MICHAEL GRADE Channel Four Controller
BERNARD BRADEN
THE BRADEN BEAT
MARIA CALLAS A Golden Hour
PINKY AND PERKY Royal Variety Performance
Voice over
Make em laugh, make em cry, the Muppets from Lord Grade's ATV, a pioneering puppet show…and right at the heart of it was Bill Ward.
He celebrates sixty years in broadcasting this month, six decades which have seen him directing, producing and managing comedy, tragedy…variety…
He was a founding father of Independent television joining the new ATV with Lord Grade at the helm.
Last night television's aristocracy came together to pay homage to his service…still unfinished by the way, attempts to retire have failed and he's still running the Sunday evening programme Highway with Harry Secombe.
Male speaker
he has no plans to retire he enjoys it too much
Male speaker
I can remember yo offering some help in Paris and I said why not, everyone else is)
Male speaker
I've met some wonderful people, Bob Hope and Nat King Cole who much have been the nicest person I have ever seen
Voice over
Bill joined the BBC as a radio engineer's assistant in 1932 and went to the fledgling Television service a few years later.
He finished up as Programme controller and deputy managing director of ATV, laying the foundations for much of what became Central Television.
Something recognised by the kingpins of the television industry
Male speaker
I can remember producing an edition of ITV This Is Your Life when Eamon Andrews handed Bill the Big Red Book 
Male speaker
he was quite excitable when negotiating but you always nkew where you stood with him
Male speaker
The thing that alwaysd impressed me was his ability to stay calm when the going got tough
Male speaker
The technology has changed but the people are the same.
You have to dig a little deeper to find the dedication, but it's there
Voice over
There's little Bill Ward hasn't turned his hand to in the first sixty years…from Tragic opera…to Singing puppets
RSPCA video to shock dog owners
FTSE up 22 points at 2584
The hundred shares index closed up twenty two points at twenty five eighty four point eight (2584.8)
The pound is down at ($1.86.) one dollar eighty six cents, and up at (DM.1.57) one mark fifty seven.
(ad lib)
Michael Heseltine is recovering in hospital tonight after suffering a heart attack while on holiday in Italy.
The MP for Henley and President of the Board of Trade has been labouring under what's been described as the heaviest workload of any Cabinet Minister.
KAREN THOMPSON/Reporting
DAVID CROSSMAN/South Oxford Conservatives
PETER TEMPLE-MORRIS MP/Con Leominster
Voice over
Michael Heseltine, who's sixty, was on a private holiday in Venice with his wife Anne, when he was taken ill early this morning.
He was taken to the city's main hospital where it was confirmed that he'd had a heart attack.
He's now in the cardiology unit.
Doctors say he's awake, lucid and chatting, and his condition is not serious.
Mr Heseltine is known for his hard work and mental and physical stamina.
He seldom drinks and never smokes.
But he has been under intense pressure recently.
He's one of a number of prominent conservatives linked to the fugitive businessman Asil Nadir.
He found himself under severe pressure last year when the pit closure programme was announced.
Tonnes of Coal were dumped by angry miners from Yorkshire at the entry to his house in protest.
His constituents were surpirsed to hear about the heart attack.
There was noone at his home at Thenford on the border of Northamptonshire and Oxfordshire today.
Mr Heseltine who's a millionaire has been MP for Henley since 1974.
He's been Environment Secretary twice and also Defence Secretary.
Having lost the Conservative party leadership contest to John Major he took up the position of President of the Board of Trade after the last election…
He says there've been messages of support coming in.
One Mp says the government can't afford to lose such a man.
He says he's one of the front bench's two main performers.
Another senior politician to suffer a heart attack was John Smith.
He left active political life for six months and then bounced back to become leader of the Labour Party.
No doubt Mr Heseltine will be urged to slow down, at least for a while.
But he's not the sort of politician to keep a low profile for long.
A new way of jobfinding is being pioneered in the Cotswolds.
It's called going down to the pub.
A village landlord has teamed up with two jobfinding organisations to help his customers and neighbours find work.
Now his pub entrance has become a mini Jobcentre.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Northleach
CHARLES KNOWLES/Landlord
IVOR JONES/Unemployed Building Worker
BARRY NECCHI-GHIRI/Unemployed Labourer
LEN SMITH/Rural Development Commission
Voice over
It's a dream come true.
Forget hours of hanging around the local job centre, just pop down the pub, have a pint, and see if landlord Charles Knowles has any new employment opportunities.
He's allowed his pub the Red Lion in Northleach, to advertise vacancies supplied by the jobcentre.
The notice board went up outside the pub today and Charles will update them very week.
He's helping in a scheme started by the Rural Development Commission, and backed up by the Workout Charity.
Male speaker
it gives people a chance to come from the surrounding area, have a beer, relax, and still look for a job
Voice over
One of the problems faced by rural communities like Northleach is the distance unemployed people have to travel to get to the nearest Jobcentre.
In this case twenty miles in any direction…
Ivor Jones has been out of work for six months.
He was one of the first to check the board.
Male speaker
There's nothing there today.
The tyrouble is I haven't got any transport.
But it is good to have the board there
Male speaker
I have been out of work for four years.
I haven't any skills so there's nothing much on the board for me
Voice over
Northleach has an unemployment rate of about three per cent.
But jobs are threatened because defence establishments and agriculture are cutting back.
The jobs noticeboard is the first of what is hoped will be many scattered around villages in England's heartland.
Male speaker
This area has an acute public transport problem and the notice boards help to bring the jobs to the people
Voice over
The scheme is supported by the Workout Charity which will turn up once a week to helpwith applications and enquiries.
It also gives a ready answer to anyone asking why you don't get a job instead of going down the pub.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central South, the green shoots of a Wimbledon recovery.
Is this the boy to restore Britain's fortunes?
Plus, turning Japanese.
His Worship tries his hand at Sumo.
In Central News tonight.
Detained indefinitely…the man who snatched Lizzie Lamplugh.
Two million pound fraud charges.
Financial advisor goes on trial.
And Hesltine's heart attack.
Friends say he's taken on too much.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
But his victim, Lizzie Lamplugh managed to calm him down, and then escape.
Today the judge dismissed reports from two psychiatrists who said they did not believe Bourgois was dangerous.
He said he had a duty to protect the public.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
According to the judge Elizabeth Lamplugh showed great courage when confronted by her attacker.
He approached her outside her Oxford home and held a knife to her neck as he tried to force her in to her car.
But she managed to calm him down and seek help from a neighbour.
At an earlier hearing French air force deserter Anthony Bourgois pleaded guilty to false imprisonment and was sent to Fairmile secure hospital near Wallingford for reports into his mental state.
At Oxford Crown Court his counsel argued that he did not intend to harm Miss Lamplugh and had planned to commit suicide by crashing her car.
Two psychiatrists said that although Bourgois was mentally ill they did not believe he needed to be detained further.
But Judge Leo Clark said the public had to be protected.
Sitting today at Warwick Crown Court the judge oprdered Bopurgois to be held in a mental hoispital without limit of time.
It will now be for the Home Secretary to decided when he'd released although he could be transferred to a hospital in France.
Six yearfs ago Mis Lamplugh's sister was abducted by a man who made an appointment with her London estate agency.
She's now presumed dead.
A former businessman has gone on trial accused of a two million pound investment fraud.
The court has heard how some couples lost their life savings after investing with a financial advisory service run by Christopher How.
They thought their money was safe, but it's alleged that How used it for risky property deals which led to him losing everything.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
Voice over
Former investment cosultant Christopher How faces nineteen charges, the culmination of a four year investigation by fraud squad officers.
Dozens of boxes of documents were taken into court at the start of the complicated trial, a trial which the jury were warned by the judge, is going to be a long haul.
In the public gallery were some of those people who it's alledged were victims of Mr How's company.
The nineteen charges read out to Mr How cover fraud, deception and theft through to running an unautherised investment business.
He pleaded not guilty to each of the charges.
The thrust of the prosecutions case is that Mr How, who had offices in Gloucester, Cheltenham and Worcester, used money which his clients believed to be safely invested, to pay for high risk property deals, which fell through causing his customers to lose almost two million pounds betwen them.
In the words of the prosecutor, they'd been conned.
These investors were not rich entrepreneurs who could aford the loss, the court was told, but ordinary savers who wanted, and were promised, a good return on their savings.
One couple lost fifty thousand pounds which they had put aside for their retirement.
Mr How had set up a property firm called Prosperpoint, and transfered cash from his clients investment funds through to a bank in the Isle of Man, then on to Switzerland, then back to Prosperpoint.
This cash was then invested in France:
180,000 pounds was spent aquiring a hoiliday Chateau in Narbonne in the south of France.
200,000 pounds was spent on 12 holiday chalets,
and 100,000 pounds spent on an option to develop land in the same area.
The investments failed, and all the money was now gone, the court was told, With little or no chance of anyone getting it back.
Christopher How's trial is expected to last ten weeks.
A mother has appeared in court charged with murdering her newborn child.Twenty seven year old Susan Gooch was remanded in custody, for her own safety.
A foprty five year old man was also questioned about the child's death, but has been released on bail.
ERIKA BARNES/Swindon
Voice over
The baby girl died last Wednesday at a house in Frobisher Driver in Swindon.
A post morteum revealled she'd died from a large fracture of the skull, soon after she'd been born.
Susan Gooch spoke twice when she appeared before Swindon Magistrates today.
Once to confirm her name and address in Frobisher Drive in Swindon and once to say that she understood the charge, of murdering an infant female baby.
During the hearing, she wept as details of the baby's death were explained.
The Magistrates refused an application for bail.
They said it was for her own protection and they felt she might not surrender to the court.
They remanded Ms Gooch in custody for seven days, due to the nature and seriousness of the offence.
A whole city is turning Japanese for a week, to celebrate its links with the land of the Rising Sun.
It's already the only place in Britain where eleven year olds are learning Japanese under the National Curriculum.
Meanwhile the grown-ups are joining in ancient tea ceremonies, and taking part in Sumo wrestling.
RICHARD BARNETT Hereford
IZUMI ARAKI Teacher
LUCY HURDS Two Red Dragons Trust
Voice over
Teacher Izumi Araki and colleague Takago Kaminaga exchange a traditional Japanese greeting with a class at Haywood Lower School in Hereford.
It's one of five schools in Hereford teaching children how to speak Japanese.
The city is the only place in the country where 11 to 16 year olds are studying Japanese under the national curriculum.
First the pupils have to master the complexities of the alphabet:
Then there is the chance to repeat a few words:
Female speaker
The children are learning well.
She enjoys being in Hereford.
Voice over
It's thanks to a local charity called the Two Red Dragons Trust that Hereford leads the country in the teaching of Japanese in schools.
Female speaker
With more and more companies linked with the Japanese it's a valuable language.
It's not as hard to learn as people think.
Voice over
To celebrate Hereford's pioneering link with the Orient, the city is holding a Japan week.
At All Saint's church there's a chance to take part in the 800 year old Japanese tea ceremony…a mystic ritual that means it can take an hour and a half to have a cuppa.
Meanwhile there's nothing mystical about the version of Sumo wrestling going on in the city centre.
The aim is to leap around in an inflated suit and push your opponent off the mat.
To get the event off to a good start, the Mayor of Hereford agreed to take part…complete with chain of office.
The Japan week also includes adult language lessons, an art exhibition and a business briefing.
It ends on Saturday.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Major on attack in Copenhagen
FTSE up 24
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-four points at twenty-nine, oh-three point four.
.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-eight and down at two marks, fifty-one.
Welcome back: Coming up in a few minutes.
the city that's gone Japan-crazy for a week.
Bur first, with the sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
We know the answers to the first two and possibly the third as well.
First round…second round…will we ever get a Brit winning at Wimbledon?
We have to live in hope and look to the future…and young players such as Tim Henman from Oxfordshire…who's the Junior Champion…
Erika Barnes serves up this special report 
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
TIM HENMAN/British Junior Champion
SUSAN BILLINGTON/Tim's Grandmother
DAVID FELGATE/Tim's Coach
Voice over
Whilst all eyes are on Wimbledon, Britain looks again for it's next great hope.
It may be some time coming.
But he…or she might be here.
This is the satellite circuit.
Where young players take their first steps on the international ladder at senior level.
Out in the cold…far from the public gaze.
There's no glamour…no recognition.
Just hard slog to move up the world rankings.
Amongst the hopefuls is Oxfordshire's Tim Henman…the reigning British Junior Champion.
He's been playing since the age of three…
Now at 18 he's one of Britain's top twenty players.
He's ranked around 600 in the world singles list…even higher in the doubles.
Determined to make his name.
Male speaker
You've got to look at it realistically.
There's no point kidding yourself.
I believe I'm good enough.
Voice over
So to Wimbledon…this year Tim's entered into the mens doubles with Davis cup player, Chris Bailey.
They'll face the French open champions in the first round.
He's the third generation of Wimbledon players in his family.
He follows his great grandmother who played there in 1904.
And his grandfather and grandmother, who also made their mark on the Wimbledon scene.
Female speaker
My mother had an overhead service, one of the first.
I served underhand.
She never let me change.
My husband said stick with it.
Voice over
Nowadays, competition is intense.
There's little reward.
Few make it to the top.
So will Tim?
Male speaker
He's not going to be the next Boris Becker.
He'll probably make the top one hundred.
Then it comes from within to go higher.
Few make it, like Stefan Edburg.
But we've got to deal with the grass roots.
Voice over
Obviously he has a long way to mature physically, but he's surpassed our hopes.
Male speaker
More juniors are playing and having more success.
They're getting through more rounds in Wimbledon and in time, a British player could win Wimbledon.
Voice over
Britain may have to bide it's time for it's next tennis hero…
It could be Tim Henman.
hard on the heels of wimbledon comes another British institution and that's the Royal Rowing Regatta at Henley…the women were there at the weekend and that's where we start our roundup 
Voice over
Crews from all over the world were competing at Henley this weekend…for women rowers this is the big event of the year…but times are a changing…there'll be a women's single sculls at this years main Henley Regatta…they've been there before in invitation races or coxing in men's crews but competing in international competition is quite a breakthrough
vox
so is this the start of a rowing revolution…some women want just one Henley Regatta…racing for all
vox…
British rowing officials are not known for making sweeping changes and for the time being they say Henley will stay as it is…
one great sporting event that is changing is the Le mans 24 hour race…many of the great names were missing over the weekend…but thankfully one lives…
The Jaguar team from Oxfordshire won the GT crown…the winning drivers were David Brabham…
David Coulthard…and John Nielsen…
Twenty thousand were at Foxhill Park near swindon yesterday for the British 250 cc Moto Cross Grand Prix…
South African Greg Albertyn won two of the three races…
Belgian Stefan Everts won the other…british rider Kurt Nicoll gave the home fans something to shout about he came second overall
and finally congratulations to Gloucestershire greyhound trainer Tony Meek he's got two dogs…
Lassa Java…and Ringa Hustle through to the Greyhound Derby…
Hundreds of young people with a wide range of mental and physical disabilities have taken part in a unique sporting event.
The KEEN Olympics are organised by Oxford students committed to giving disabled children a taste of the sporting life 
SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
ANTHONY/Athlete
RICHARD/Athlete
TOM/Helper
CHRIS/Helper
Voice over
Kids Enjoy Exercise Now.
That's the name and the aim of the group of students who set up sporting events and experiences for young people with disabilities.
The parents and teachers of many of these youngsters have their hands full enough just looking after them.
They haven't the time or the engergy left to provide a sporting outlet for them.
KEEN regularly fills that gap.
The KEEN Olympics at the New College sports ground is the highlight of the year, for children, helpers and parents alike
Male speaker
We did football, tennis and athletics.
They're all good
Male speaker
I'm so happy with myself.
I'm proud
Male speaker
I come here fed up and end up happy.
I think I get more from the athletes than they do from me
Male speaker
I've had a wonderful day and learnt a lot here
Female speaker
It's wonderful the way the students give up their free time to help our children
Female speaker
It's the one chance our children get to participate like other children
Voice over
Who's the best friend you've made here today?
Male speaker
Tom
Male speaker
I paid him to say that
Voice over
All the children were given a medal and certificate by television personality Judith Hann to commemorate the day.
The applause from their fellow athletes a welcome sound some had never been fortunate enough to enjoy before
Cricket…
There was enough drama at Bristol to rival the excitment at the Lords test yesterday.
Careless batting and tight bowling typified Gloucestershire's Sunday League game against Warwickshire.
BRISTOL
Voice over
Things for Gloucestershire went from bad to worse.
Hodgson went in the 5th over for 9 held behind by Holloway.
Then Athey tipped a half volley onto the stumps for a measley 5 and they were in trouble at 28 for 2.
Captain Tony Wright came in to save the day.
Enjoying his 50.
But straight after he landed a miss hit safely into the hands of Munton.
Out for 51.
Then came the collapse.
Typified by Babington, who went for one, tried for 2, but was run out for 6.
Gloucestershire completed a modest 171.
Warwickshire's Roger Towse kept the home side on their toes, until Andy Moles closed down the opening partnership with this easy catch for Babington.
After that Gloucestershire gobbled up the middle order.
Reeve provided the only resistance until he was run out.
And it all rested on the very last ball of the last over, with both sides on 171.
Donald was surrounded, almost, but he found the only gap and secured the points for Warwickshire.
Well, a fitting finale for tonights sport comes from the dirt tracks around Swindon.
The 250cc British Grand Prix in Sundays sunshine provided some of the most exciting action you'll see for some time.
FOXHILL/Swindon/Wiltshire
Voice over
This is no rain dance…motocross riders don't like it wet and muddy.
Some like it hot though…it means top speeds and top action.
A wash and brush up keeps the wheels in good shape…but sometimes mechanics can only sratch away at the problem.
The Foxhill Park near Swindon is probably the most demanding track in the world.
Hosting the 250 cc Grand Prix for the first time…but not the last.
The race is on…for forty top riders…or at least thirty nine of them.
Hollands William Van Vessel over and out before he's begun.
For the rest it's twenty five minutes of speed and skill…and then two more laps for good measure.
After three legs of the some of the best action the series has seen…
Bob Moore from the Yamaha team was proclaimed Foxhill's motocross master.
A twelve year old boy who's tipped as the next Aled Jones is taking part in an open-air production of Benjamin Britten's opera’ The Turn of the Screw’.
The performance is part of a small opera festival, now in its fourth year, which is growing in popularity and reputation.
Opera fans come from all over the country to see open-air performances in a unique setting.
GARSINGTON Oxfordshire
SAM BURKEY Miles
WASFI KANI Conductor
LEONARD INGRAMS Organiser
Voice over
Garsington Manor is unlike any other venue.
This is the ice-cream tent and this is the Ladies and changing rooms for some of the performers and instead of looking at the back of the bar during the interval, the audience can look out over the rolling Oxfordshire countryside.
It's the fourth year running that the Tudor Manor is playing host to a mini opera season in the three hundred seater auditorium set up at the side of the house.
This year along with the regular performance of a Hadyn opera, Pimlico Opera is appearing in Benjamin Britten's’ The Turn of the Screw’.
It's based on the short story by Henry James; a young Governness arrives at a remote country house to look after 2 young children who turn out to be possessed by the ghosts of two dead servants.
The part of the boy Miles, is sung by Sam Burkey, a 12 year-old who has been tipped as the next Aled Jones; he's already sung the part with the English National Opera.
Male speaker
It's a very psychological part — you have to keep saying what the scene is about in your head.
I like the serious side and the fun side as well, like when I'm playing with Flora.
Voice over
The company Sam is performing with, Pimlico Opera, likes taking challenges.
They've performed’ The Marriage of Figaro’to inmates in Wormwood Scrubs.
’ The Turn of the Screw’was written by Benjamin Britten for a company he formed to tour around the country, making opera more accessible to more people.
Female speaker
Each scene starts off relatively normally — in a churchyard, or the schoolroom and in each one, something strange happens.
It petrifies the governess and she gets into an acute state of anxiety.
Then the scene changes, it starts all over again and by the end we're all wound up.
The screw is wound tighter and tighter.
But I won't tell you the end!
Voice over
When owner Leonard Ingrams and his wife Rosalind first organised opera at Garsington 4 years ago there were just two performances — now there are 10.
Male speaker
I think there are limits to what we can manage here on the premises because it disrupts life a bit.
But next year Glyndebourne will be closed so we'll be under pressure to extend the season.
We don't have an ultimate ambition for Garsington — we just muddle through — it all depends on whether performances sell out and what we can afford.
Voice over
Rosalind Ingrams performing the honours with Garsington's latest bit of kit — a forty thousand pound specially designed canopy which opens out over the stage — protecting the performers.
In fact the canopy is deliberately being kept up whatever the weather for’ The Turn of the Screw’, because the company found it has acoustic properties and projects sound out to the audience.
So they have all the advantages of being indoors and outdoors at the same time, making performances at Garsington a unique experience.
Protests follow South African killings
Protests have followed the weekend killings in South Africa, President De Klerk has cut short a visit to attend to the crisis, Archbishop Desmond Tutu is calling for South Africa to be expelled from the Olympic games if action is not taken.
FTSE down 34
The hundred shares index closed up down thirty-four point five at twenty-five, fifty point three.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-six but down at two marks, ninety-two.
(ad lib)
In part two: She's game and set…but can Sarah match the opposition at Wimbledon.
Taking the hump…a flying finish to the motorcross grand prix.
And the bantem of the opera…he's only twelve, but he's already a star.
Welcome back.
ERIKA BARNES
OXFORD
SARAH LOOSEMORE/Founder/Atalanta Club
CLAIRE CALDERWOOD/Hockey Blue
LARA COLENSO/Lacrosse Blue
PICTURES BBC SPORT
Voice over
Oxford inspires dreams of sporting excellence and this gathering boasts a talented and elite guestlist.
These are the members of Atalantas; a new sports club exclusively for women.
Set up by one of Britain's top tennis players, Sarah Loosemore, it's out to redress a sporting imbalance.
Female speaker
There's a tradition of chavinism in sport as women haven't been involved as long as men.
Women's sport is just as good.
We train as hard and deserve recognition.
Voice over
Sarah's the ideal sporting ambassador.
She turned professional at 15 and spent 2 years on the tennis circuit and is now ranked in the top 5 in Britain.
Now she's waiting for Wimbledon and a chance to beat her second round jinx.
Female speaker
I'm looking forward to it a lot.
I haven't played a major tournament for ages.
I think I'm improving and hope to make the top 50, or even top 20.
Voice over
A tall order, when tennis time eats into valuable study time.
A flick through the history books reveals the story of Atalantas, after whom her club is named.
The moral is, women sport is a force to be reckoned with.
Female speaker
Atalanta was a mythical huntress and athlete.
If anyone wanted to marry her, they had to beat her in a race.
If they lost, she would have killed them.
No one succeeded, apart from one man who laid golden apples in her way.
He won by cheating.
We thought it was apt.
Voice over
And it goes to show these sportswomen are shrewd as well as skilled.
Female speaker
Within Oxford University, the emphasis is on males.
This is reflected, as the University goes to considerable lengths to import sportsmen.
This doesn't happen in women's sport.
Female speaker
People really laugh and don't take us seriously.
Rugby and rowing are seen as important as is football and hockey at College level.
With this voice, Atalanta is making it known it's not putting up with it for much longer.
Voice over
The men might have been centre stage on day one of Wimbledon, but thanks to Atalanta, the women will soon have their day in more ways than one.
The British men's hockey team have been putting the final touches to their preparations for the Olympics.
Great Britain are the reigning champions, but with the Barcelona Games appraoching fast, the odds are against them striking gold again.
Robin Powell reports.
WOUGHTON-on-the-GREEN/Milton Keynes
SEAN KERLY
ROB HILL
NORMAN HUGHES/Coach
Voice over
For armchair fans back home, it was one of the highights of the Seoul Olympics; the British men's hockey team beating Germany in the Final to take the gold medal.
4 years on, repeating the feat seems a difficult task.
They've had a string of disappointing results and in this weekend's 4-cornered tournament at Woughton in Milton Keynes, the pressure was on to prove their critics wrong.
For the first 2 matches, things seemed to be going to plan, with comfortable, if unspectacular, victories over Egypt and Spain.
Then a one-all draw with Germany in their last match, meant them finishing in second place on goal difference.
But Britain's most famous hockey player insists it's wrong to write them off.
Those 7 old hands will be joined in Barcelona by several younger players with no Olympic experience, like left half Rob Hill, scorer of both goals against Egypt.
Rob took time to settle in but is now an important member of the team.
The fans who turned up at Woughton can expect to see plenty more top class hockey in the area.
The National Hockey Centre's being built near the city centre and Britain's coach for one is happy that Milton Keynes is to become hockey's equivalent of Lord's and Twickenham.
This weekend's results, of course, will count for nothing in the Olympics.
All eyes now turn to Spain and Britain's last 2 warm-up matches against the host nation in the Olympic Stadium.
Three dead, two injured: Road crash kills mother, father and young son.
On trial.
Former Swindon boss accused of tax fraud
And driven out.
The disabled man forced from his home by criminals
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
LIBRARY PICTURES
Voice over
A young woman has been sexually assaulted in her own home by a burglar.
Police are warning people living in shared houses to take security precautions to keep intruders out.
Simon Garrett reports 
COWLEY/Oxford
Det Sgt PAUL ORGAN/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
It's thought the burglar got into the shared house in Divinity Road in Oxford through an open window.
In the early hours of the morning he ransacked downstairs rooms before going upstairs into a bedroom.
Male speaker
A 21 year old student was laying asleep in bed.
He indecently assaulted her, she woke up and raised the alarm and he made off.
Her housemates then came to her aid.
Voice over
The fear of attacks has led Oxford polytechnic and several University Colleges to hand out rape alarms to women students.
There were two more attacks in March, but Detectives don't believe the incident in Divinity Road is connected.
They are warning people living in shared houses to take care.
Male speaker
Often people in shared houses leave downstairs windows or even front doors open.
There are lots of keys, lots of people coming in and out.
Even so, if people can just remember to secure doors and windows, it will do a lot to deter such opportunist attacks.
Voice over
The student's attacker is described as white, in his mid-twenties, chubby faced with short dark gelled hair.
He wore a purple t-shirt and jeans.
A man is recovering from an emergency operation after his pet alsation turned on him.
After the attack, police and the RSPCA were unable to control the dog, and it was shot dead.
Animal welfare experts say alsations need special care and can be unpredictable.
Gargy Patel reports.
NORTHAMPTON
Insp JOHN MILLAR/Northamptonshire Police
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
JULIE THOMAS/Animal Shelter Manager
Voice over
Three members of the same family have been killed, and two others injured in a collision between an articulated lorry and two cars.
The dead were a man, his wife, and their four year old son.
Their eight year old daughter is among the injured.
The crash happened at a notorious accident blackspot.
An MP who's been campaigning for years to have the road improved said tonight that he'll be pressing the government yet again to have it upgraded to a dual carriageway.
This report from Sheila Brocklebank.
LONGCOT/Oxfordshire
Sgt PAUL NORRIS/Thames Valley Police
SIMON COOMBS MP/Con Swindon
Voice over
A disabled pensioner is being forced out of his house by vandals and thieves.
He's moving after being burgled three times in one week.
In one attack his invalid car was stolen and smashed.
Now he says he's had enough.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
HAROLD MARTYN/Pensioner
Insp STEVE NORTHGATE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
This is the only way 82 year old Harold Martyn can get about.
But thieves almost put paid to his invalid car, by stealing the battery and then trying to smash the car when they couldn't get it started.
In the same week, they also got into his ground floor flat twice and stole his cheque book and card.
He says he was about to go out, so left his doors open.
Someone nipped in and stole his cheque book and wallet.
Mr Martyn says the thieves have driven him out of his home.
He says it's sad that the thieves are so cowardly that they can't face a cripple.
The police say they've increased patrols in the St Peters area of Cheltenham where Mr Martyn lives.
He says that residents must have seen what happened.
It was in broad daylight.
He hopes someone will come foreward with information.
Until Mr Martyn moves, he must now keep his invalid car safely locked up inside his flat.
He says he can't understand the mentality of people who would want to prey on him; and his message to the thieves is clear.
He says they ought to jump in the nearest river!
Soon he hopes to be at a new home in a different area, where he hopes to be able to live his life in peace.
Dozens of children who survived a rare blood disorder have met for the first time at a special party.
They joined doctors and parents who were celebrating ten years of research into Rhesus disease.Nick Clark reports.
OXFORD
BRIGIT CUNNINGHAM/Mother
Dr IAN MACKENZIE/Consultant Obstetrician
Until recent years these fit and healthy children wouldn't have survived childbirth.
Every year there are about two hundred at risk babies, a blood condition that without special treatment can lead to death in the womb from inaemia or jaundice.
But thanks to pioneering research here at the John Radcliffe hospital, often involving transfusions of blood to the unborn baby, these children have survived.
The reserach team say there's still more work to be done, but the fact that these children are here at all is good reason to celebrate a decade of pioneering work.
70 homes destroyed by bomb
FTSE up 4
The hundred shares index closed up four point two at two nine zero seven point six 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty seven and down at two marks, fifty.
It's cup day in cricket today with the minor counties thrown into the first round of the Nat West Trophy against the championship sides…
Oxfordshire…
Buckinghamshire and Wiltshire are all in action as are the big guns of Gloucestershire…
Tim Russon reports 
Voice over
The bell usually tolls for one of the big championship teams on cup day…this is cricket's FA Cup…where the small teams the non leaguers get a chance to take on the big boys…the pros…
At the county ground in Bristol Gloucestershire are playing the giantkillers of Hertfordshire…the county got off to a flying start with 13 runs of the first two overs…
Chris Broad looked set for a good knock as he crashed the first four of the day…but Gloucestershire then got themselves into trouble against the bowling of Gordon Harris…
Dean Hodgson was first to go…caught behind…for 9 and then in the next but one over Broad was leg before for 14…at 26 for 2 the Gloucestershire folk must have thought they were in for a hard day but Mark Alleyne came to the rescue…he made 73…
Tim Hancock knocked 45 and Gloucestershire finished on 274 for 9…
At Marlow…
Buckinghamshire are playing Leicestershire…just the day for a game of cup cricket…just the day for the local people to come out and see if their team could knock down one of the high and mighty…
Leicestershire batted first…
Boon was their hero…he cruised to his century and set his team up for a big score…
but Buckinghamshire enjoyed themselves with ahat ful of quick wickets after lunch…ten out of ten for fielding…
Robinson went for one big hit too many…a real skier which was well caught…by Gary Black…then Boon was caught…117 he'd made…this was his last stroke…
Leicestershire felt the full force of Buckinghamshire's keeness in the field when Winston benjamin was run out…a real mix up…which didn't go down too well with Mr. benjamin the batsman…
just to prove it was no fluke Bucks went and did it again moments later when they ran out Nixon…
Leicestershire finished on 289 for 9…quite a total for Buckinghamshire to chase in sixty overs,, their start was slow but sure…
Oxfordshire have had the toughest task of all against the championship leaders Glamorgan at swansea…they got some early wickets but then came up against a chap called Richards…
Viv Richards…for most people one of the greatest batsmen of all time…he's getting older but on his day is still a wonder…today sadly for oxfordshire was his day…he made 162 not out…and smashed the ball all around and out of the ground…
A country pub that's been in the same family for more than a hundred years is about to be sold off.
The Bull's Head is a traditional drinking spot for everyone from shepherds to pony trekkers.
And it's changed little over the centuries.
RICHARD BARNETT/Craswall
WILFRED LEWIS/Landlord
BEATTIE LEWIS/Landlady
Voice over
They come from all over to drink at the Bulls Head in Craswall, on the Herefordshire Wales border.
For centuries customers have made their way here on horseback.
Nowadays they're holidaymakers ponytrekking…once they would have been shepherds riding down from the Welsh mountains.
The pub has made no attempt to keep up with the times…no karaoke here…just conversation.
For 120 years the Bulls Head has been kept by the same family…this is landlord David Gane outside the pub around 1920.
His daughter Beattie was born in the Bulls Head, and took it over 44 years ago.
But now Beattie and her husband Wilfred are about to retire, and the pub's up for sale.
Male speaker
They feel it's about time to retire.
But he'll miss the pub.
Female speaker
She'll miss the pub too, but she's not planning to move too far away.
Voice over
Old fashioned haunts like the Bulls Head are few and far between these days.
The customers are all agreed this is the way a pub should be…and the way it should stay:
The Bulls Head is on the market for around 100,000 pounds.
And although the landlord will change…everyone hopes the pub remains the same.
A man is being sponsored by a Government scheme to train as a Winston Churchill impersonator.
Joe Mahoney hit on his new career when someone told him he looked like the wartime leader.
But imitating that famous voice doesn't come quite so easily.
GRAEME BOWD/Swindon
JOE MAHONEY/’ Sir Winston Churchill’
SARAH OGLEY/Windmill Training Scheme
Voice over
When someone told Joe Mahoney he looked like Winston he took it very seriously.
Give me the tools he said, and I will do the job.
The tools didn't cost much.
With a cane from a car boot sale, and a battered case from a junk shop, his biggest investment was the cigar.
Joe is being sponsored by a Government training scheme in Swindon.
The act has made him the star of the show.
Now the Irish Winston is going on the road.
Male speaker
I've tried at out on the public at shows and festivals.
Next year is the 50th anniversary of D Day.
There are will be many celebrations and I am sure they would love me to entertain them.
Voice over
Joe has been learning the great man's speeches and studying his mannerisms, but does he really look likely Winston at all?
On walkabout in Swindon most people seemed to think so.
One person recognised him from the Bath Festival.
Female speaker
I just happened to have a photograph.
Voice over
But can he make a living from being a lookalike?
Don't give up your day job said someone.
But as Joe didn't have one anyway his employment counsellor thought Winston wasn't a bad bet.
Female speaker
His age is against him and her can't get work in his previous field.
He is a good entertainer and is a chance to see if he can use that as a springboard for a new career.
Voice over
For anyone else trying to find work in middle age it's worth remembering that the real Churchill didn't get his big break until he was 66.
That means Joe's got another 16 years to grow into his new role.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
The family of a five year old boy who was crushed when a wall collapsed are to sue their local council.
Craig Cook suffered severe internal bleeding after the accident.
His family claim they had warned the council that the wall was dangerous.
17 June 1992/RICHARD BARNETT/Brockworth
Voice over
Craig Cook was playing in the back garden of his family's council home a year ago when the brick wall of a shed collapsed on top of him.
He spent several weeks in hospital, and needed three operations to repair his damaged liver.
Craig's parents say they had warned their landlords, Tewkesbury Borough Council that the brickwork was dangerous.
And now they plan to sue the authority for failing to make the wall safe.
Craig's father Robert says his son is still suffering from nightmares, and has to see a psychiatrist weekly for counselling.
A spokesman for Tewkesbury Council said he couldn't comment on the parents plans to sue.
A Church warden in a Worcestershire village has resigned after being criticised for keeping his churchyard’ too tidy.’
According to a church advisory committee it was’ too ordered for a rural churchyard.’
Reg Canning was so hurt by the comments that he resigned from the post at Offenham near Evesham.
DAVID CRABTREE/Reporting
REG CANNING/Former Church Warden
TONY HIGGS/Care of Churches Committee
For the past twenty four years Reg Canning has looked after the St Mary and St Milburgh Churchyard.
Before he set up a special fund for its upkeep it looked like this.
In 1969 he formed a committee to raise funds and got together a band of volunteers who transformed the churchyard.
It's even won awards.
But the Worcestershire diocesan advisory committee for the care of churches has been critical.
A recent report praised Reg for his hard work, but said, perhaps the yard is too tidy/too ordered for a rural churchyard.
Because of this and other recent incidents Reg resigned.
’ I think they don't know what they're talking about.’
’ Honestly they haven't got the feeling for it.’
’ If you have been attending to it for twenty four years, I came here into this church as a choir boy.’
’ The Church is like a picture a lovely picture in a bad frame.’
’ I was determined I was going to change that.’
’ I think we have put an excellent frame around it.’
The comments from the church authorities came after Reg applied to lay a concrete strip for memorial plaques.
’ We commended Mr Canning very highly for the work that he's done on that particular churchyard.’
’ There are different schools of thought on how a rural churchyard should look.’
’ We made the comment that perhaps it was too tidy.’
’ What about upsetting the man who has spent twenty odd years looking after that churchyard?’
’ I think the advisory committee is entitled to make the comments that it feels appropriate to the situation that it is addressing.’
’ I just feel sad over the whole thing.’
’ It will blow over.’
’ But it will never be the same.’
Reg says many other decisions were being made about the churchyard without involving him.
He says he'll continue to wind the church clock — but a twenty four year old labour of love is over for good.
A woman with Downs Syndrome has won a national award for’ insprirational achievement’.
Lisa Adams has worked as a packer for three years — the Downs Syndrome Association hopes her prize will encourage other employers.
HARRIET RYLEY/Gloucester
LISA ADAMS/Award Winner
GILL POWELL/Friend
MONICA ADAMS/Mother
Voice over
Lisa Adam's fingers weren't always so nimble in her job as a packer for Lanes in Gloucester.
When she first joined the company, packing vitamins and herbal medicines three years ago, she took a little time to get used to the work.
But with patient training and understanding, Lisa is now a much-valued member of the workforce.
But Lisa's mother points out that it's unusual for people with Downs Syndrome to be given a chance to prove themselves in the first place:
Lisa's prize for inspiration and achievement is one of three awarded by the Downs Syndrome Association every year — former Doctor Who Peter Davison, their patron handed out the prizes.
The other two national winners are Tracy Young, who was born with two holes in her heart and couldn't walk til she was five — her prize was for her personal achievement in ballroom and latin dancing…and Ronnie Broomhall who is the first person in the country with learning difficulties to become a qualified amateur gymnastics coach.
Lisa's award is in recognition for the good job she does — the Downs Syndrome Association hope it will also publicise the fact that the opportunites for adults with Downs Syndrome to do ordinary jobs are few and far between.
They're hoping more employers will follow Lanes example in giving more of them a chance.
Anne Dawson
Still to come on Central News, a big day for the cricketing minnows
The minor counties get their chance in the NatWest trophy
And V for victory…a Churchill lookalike gets Government funding.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
An MP who's at risk of losing much of his personal fortune in the Lloyds insurance scandal is calling for legal action to stop what he calls the swindling, fraud and insider dealing in the insurance market.
WESLEY SMITH
Paul Marland is one of twenty eight thousand people who will have to share the three billion pound loss announced today by Lloyds.He says the law must be changed, and the victims compensated.
CHRIS MOORE/Reporting
PAUL MARLAND MP/Con West Gloucestershire
STEPHEN DEXTER/Financial Expert
Voice over
Paul Marland is one of thousands who used his own personal wealth of at least a quarter of a million pounds to become a Lloyds name.
He joined a syndicate which invested in the insurance market…underwriting policies all over the world, from family cars to ships' cargoes.
Now though, his personal fortune is threatened.
Male speaker
The syndicate that I did business with is being investigated by the Serious Fraud Office.I'm convinced that myself and thousands like me have actually been swindled.
Voice over
For years, names did well…the income was tax free because it was a form of gamble.
The gamble seemed worthwhile as the lean years were few.
The social prestige was formidable.
Male speaker
Not everybody has that sort of money.
It is therefore an elite club.
Not very much is known about Lloyds so it's somewhat more mystical than an ordinary club.
Those two aspects mean that a small number of people can be members and they are held in some esteem.
Voice over
But a series of disasters changed everything.
Piper Alpha…
Exon Valdez…
Lockerbie…and two years of serious storms.
Claims rocketed, and as confirmed at today's annual meeting a three billion pound loss was incurred for 1990.
Mr Marland says the safe and lucrative deals were creamed off by the syndicates, and the risky ones left for the unsuspecting to pick up.
Mr Marland wants action to clean up the mess once and for all.
Male speaker
There must be financial recompense for victims of this negilgence and fraud and insider dealing.
Many people are faced with serious losses.
Accountants are losing their businesses, old people are losing their pensions, families are losing their homes and farmers are being thrown off their land.
Voice over
That rule of unlimited liability for Lloyds names has now been changed, so future investors won't face the same problem.
But of the 28,000 names affected by this scandal, 16,000 are currently taking legal action.
Two men have denied murdering a twenty two year old man at a remote picnic spot.
The court heard the killing followed a row over money from the sale of illegal drugs.
April 1991
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Luton
Voice over
Stephen Francis died after being blasted twice in the chest with a shotgun.
The 22 year old's body was found at the remote Longslade picnic site near Milton Keynes.
The victim came from Milton Keynes as do the two men accused of his murder.
Sixty year old George King and 25 year old Greg Price deny murder but Price has admitted manslaughter.
Witnesses have told the court today that Stephen Francis regularly hit people.
It's already heard that he and Greg Price had been friends.
They are alleged to have dealt in drugs in the Milton Keynes and Aylesbury areas and were involved in car crime.
But they had fallen out over the collection of some money.
Greg Price is alleged to have spoken to George King about killing the victim.
George King is said to have suplied the shotgun.
On the night of the killing Greg Price and Stephen Francis went to the picnic site in a stolen BMW.
There the killing was done.
Greg Price later admitted it to friends.
He's also said to have telephoned George King saying:’ That little bit of business has been taken care of’
The case continues.
Pressure from parents has forced a hospital to think again about the way it treats some young patients.
Lifesaving treatment for children with an inherited lung disease had to be provided by parents because of a shortage of trained hospital staff.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
ANNE BODEN/Cystic Fibrosis Trust
TRISH ROBERTS/Mother
PAUL BYRNE/Gloucestershire Royal Hospital
Voice over
Parents of young children with the lung disease cystic fibrosis, like 3 year old Poppy Roberts, have to give their children intensive physiotherapy twice a day to keep their lungs clear of congestion.
The treatment continues when the children spend periodic time in hospital, but at Poppy's local hospital, the Gloucestershire Royal at Gloucester, parents have had to continue the treatment themselves.
Poppy's mother was concerned her daughter might regard the home therapy as some kind of punishment.
Staff at the hospital accept that if parents felt pressured into treating their own children on the wards then they something should be done.
The hospital is also considering nursing help to visit children like Poppy at home.
Nine years and ten years.
Judge comes down hard on acid attackers.
Murder hunt.
Police name the body in the lake.
And under suspicion.
Are badgers to blame for TB in cattle?.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
The judge desribed the pair as cowards who had no bravery in their nasty little bodies.
Their victim says she's delighted that they've received long sentences.
Simon Garrett reports 
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
JOAN COOPER/Victim
Voice over
Joan Cooper can still not see properly.
Two days after Christmas at her home in Banbury two men pushed her through her front door…one of them punching and kicking her to the ground.
He then twice poured kettle descaler into her eyes.
They had bought the acid liquid from a hardware shop carefully choosing the most caustic brand available.
But Mrs Cooper fought them and refused to say where any money was kept
Female speaker
I thought they were going to kill me.
I thought well they're not really going to get away with all of it.
I've worked hard for my money all my life and I don't see why anyone should be able to break their way into someone's home and just take what they want
Voice over
Eighteen year old Jason Raby who carried out the attack…and Anthony Langton who's twenty-three and told him what to do…both admitted causing Mrs Cooper grevous bodily harm.
In the past six months while they've been in prison doctors have been battling to save thir victim's eyes.
Today she wanted to thank medical staff…police and hordes of well-wishers who've sent cards and letters…including a surprising number of prison inmates
Female speaker
They've sent me flowers and choclates, and they've expressed a desire to accommodate the two young men who've done this at their own institutions
Voice over
At Oxford Crown court today Langton was sent to prison for ten years…
Raby to a young offenders institution for nine.
Mr Justice Rugier said
Despite what's happened Mrs Cooper says she feels no bitterness
Female speaker
I'm not bitter but I am very angry, angry that someone should be able to do this to me.
That will take a long time to go I think
Voice over
What do you want to do now
Female speaker
Go and have a large gin and tonic!
Voice over
Detectives have started a murder investigation after part of a human torso was found in a lake.
It's thought to be that of a man last seen in May after a fight in a pub.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
CROYDON/Surrey
Det Insp FRED WHEELHOUSE/Surrey Police
Voice over
Police first suspected Mr Davison had been killed when they the upper part of a man's torso was found in a lake at Reigate in Surrey.
It was in a plastic sack and had gunshot wounds.
It had been there for about a fortnight, and was in the right age range.
Mr Davison, normally from Dulverton Avenue in Swindon, had gone missing after a pub fight in Carshalton.
Mr Davison, who was 39, was a regular vistor to the Carshalton and Worcester
Park area of South London.
He had been drinking in the St Heliers Tavern, got into a fight, and was last seen out side.
His estranged wife and two children lived nearby, they're said to be on holiday at the moment.
His common law wife and child were not available to speak today their Swindon home.
Police are almost certain the torso was Mr Davison but they're awaiting confirmation by a DNA test.
For the moment what happened to Mr Davison after the fdight remains a mystery.
The captain of Swindon Town football club has told a court how former manager Lou Macari paid him thousands of pounds in cash bonuses.
On the second day of the Macari trial at Winchester Crown Court, Swindon players past and present have been giving evidence.
Macari and two other former club officials are accused of cheating the Inland Revenue out of hundreds of thousands of pounds by not disclosing the payments.
Gareth Furby reports.
Voice over
A family are demanding an apology after finding a gun and live ammunition in their holiday villa.
The parents who found the pistol and bullets in an unlocked cabinet say their children could have used them as toys…with tragic consequences.
Debbie Kelly reports.
HOLIDAY VIDEO
FAIRFORD/Gloucestershire
CLIVE POSTLETHWAITE/Father
Voice over
An unlocked cupboard; inside a handgun, live ammunition and six 12 bore cartridges.
The discovery in a rented villa in France horrified Anne and Clive Postlethwaite; now back home from their holiday with their two children Rachel and Matthew, concerned that their find could have had tragic consequences.
Male speaker
We had been to Euro Disney and had a toy gun for Matthew.
If the children had found it and Rachel had pointed it at Matthew in a child's game, I dread to think about the consequences.
Voice over
The family contacted the villa's owner who took the gun away, but the family, worried at what they else they may find, demanded to be moved to another villa
Male speaker
What really annoys me.
This was our one holiday a year and 3 days of that holiday I was on the phone.
Voice over
The villa was rented from Meon Travel in Hampshire.
The brochure says Villa St Joseph in provence is suitable for up to 3 children.
In a statement, the company said: All Meon Villas are inspected a few weeks prior to the start of each letting season, with particular emphasis on safety.
Villa St Joseph was inspected in February and the gun was not found.
Male speaker
Thank goodness we found it.
The children were playing in the room and they could have found it and I dread to think what may have happened.
Voice over
Meon says it regrets that the Postlethwaites had to bring the gun to their attention and is advising all villa owners to remove dangerous articles from their properties.
The Princess of Wales may have foreseen the latest controversy over her marriage in the stars.
But if her astrologer gave her any warning, she's not telling anyone.
The princess has been calling on the skills of an astrologer in the region for the past three and a half years.
Debbie Kelly reports.
WATLINGTON/Oxfordshire
DEBBIE FRANK/Princess of Wales'/Astrologer
Voice over
It's in a tiny cottage in Oxfordshire that the first signs of the latest trouble for the Princess of Wales may have been predicted.
Female speaker
She contacted me through a friends, that's the way most people contact me.
Female speaker
How interested is she in astrology?
Female speaker
I've been seeing her for 3 and a half years.
Voice over
It's been a difficult few weeks for the princess; after a book on her life and marriage was published; it's at time like this problems with relationships or turning points, that many people consult Debbie.
But if the Princess has, she's not telling.
Female speaker
I am very disturbed by people who are therapists who seem to be divulging private information about their clients.
Female speaker
But you have used Princess in your book?
Female speaker
All the information in my book is approved by the Princess and is common knowledge anyway.
Voice over
Astrology is now hi-tech.
Your personal astrological chart, from which Debbie works out your character, past and future are on software.
All she needs is the date, time and place of your birth.
Female speaker
If I have accurate information, I can plot your star chart and produce detailed information about you.
Female speaker
But isn't it just baloney?
Female speaker
People have a right to be cynical, but I didn't write my book for people who don't believe in astrology.
Voice over
There are plenty of famous faces in Debbie Frank's new book, but don't expect secrets.
If the Princess is being guided by the stars on her next move, her star gazer isn't letting on.
Now to the next in our occasional series going behind-the-scenes at Central,’ Inside the Globe’.
So far we've looked at Spitting Image, Blockbusters, Tom Jones and Inspector Morse.
Tonight, we meet the people who actually put those programmes on the air.
HILARY HOLDEN/Announcer
DAVE JAMIESON/Head of Presentation
ROGER SIMPSON/Presentation Director
SU EVANS/Presentation Director
TOMMY BOYD/Presenter
Voice over
Tight security surrounds these corridors at Central Television Master Control.
They keep a low profile here, but this person and her colleagues have been chosen to perform some of the most important jobs on the station, though they're never seen.
As a Central Announcer, Hilary Holden writes her own scripts and has to be able to cope in a crisis.
Hilary explains how she deals with on-air technical problems.
Hilary is just part of the Master Control team.
They're the people who press all the buttons to make sure that Central's programmes, commercials and trailers are in the right place at the right time for you to watch.
That includes putting Central News South, East and West on air simultaneously.
Head of Presentation, Dave Jamieson explains that all three regional bulletins on Central must begin and end at the same time.
Indeed, split-second timing is crucial.
Central is an important part of the ITV network made up of 16 companies throughout the country who all work together to make programmes, like Coronation Street from Granada and Emmerdale from Yorkshire for the network.
Each produces other programmes, like Central News, for their region.
Here, Thames Television in London is waiting to play’ Home and Away’out to Central at an agreed time.
Roger Simpson controls Central's output.
He explains that viewers complain if programme times are switched at short notice.
Roger's Assistant today is Su Evans, a well-known face to viewers who enjoy Central's antiques programme, Something To Treasure.
She explains how she started as an announcer, then turned to the technical side.
Next door, in the Children's ITV studio, presenter, Tommy Boyd is given instructions from Roger via an earpiece.
Tommy sits in the studio alone and broadcasts to Children all over Britain.
During Children's ITV and other programmes, Roger and the team also play out the commercials.
Each of these cartridges has a different item on it.
It might look hi-tech, but very soon Central will be operating new equipment which will speed-up the operation even more.
There's a lot more to smooth transitions between programmes than you might realise and as long as the team here stays on the ball, you'll probably continue not to notice they're there.
NHS GPs vote to scrap 24 hour cover
FTSE up at 2560
The hundred shares index closed up ten point three at twenty-five, sixty point six.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-six and up at two marks, ninety-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Gloucestershire County Council has won a partial victory in its appeal against poll tax capping.
The Government is increasing the council's spending limit by two and a half million pounds.
Clare Lafferty reports.
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem Cheltenham
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
Cllr KEVIN STEPHENS/Gloucester City Council
Cllr ALEXIS CASSIN/Cheltenham Borough Council
Voice over
Gloucestershire County Council had been told to cut services to the tune of almost ten million pounds or face being poll tax capped.
This afternoon, the Environment Secretary Michael Howard, back pedalled a little by announcing that he would allow the authority to spend another two and a half million pounds.
Cheltenham Borough Council lost its appeal against capping.
As did Gloucester City Council.
The cities MP says that simply isn't fair.
The two councils must now decide whether to go to the expense of appealling through the courts.
Farmers say an increase in the badger population is leading to more cases of tuberculosis in cattle.In the past three years, cases of bovine TB have doubled in one county alone.
It's thought that badgers may transmit the disease, and now new tests may be introduced to try to combat the problem.
Ken Goodwin reports.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
RICHARD CHAPMAN/Dairy Farmer
JOHN STERRY/Vet
TONY DEAN/Badger Protection Group
Voice over
This is a rare sight; badgers are normally only active at night, but because these cubs are so tame, there's an eager audience waiting for a glimpse.
It's the badger living up to it's cute and cuddly public image.
But for dairy farmers there's another side to the badger; a carrier of the lung disease TB, which can be passed onto cattle.
Richard Chapman, who's vice chairman of the Gloucestershire NFU, says some of his cows have been infected with TB.
He says something must be done.
He says that badgers which are found to be infected with TB must be destroyed.
A consultative panel on badgers has been meeting this week; it'll make recomendations to the Agriculture Minister, John Gummer, which may include the introduction of widespread TB testing.
In the past, badgers in an infected area were gassed.
That was abolished after an outcry from conservationists.
Now a new method has been developed, in which the animals are trapped, tested on site and released if they're free from the disease.
But outbreaks of Bovine TB have doubled in Gloucestershire and some surrounding counties over the last 3 years and some vets say we must throw aside sentimentality and act now BEFORE the problem reaches epidemic proportions.
He says that if it were rats which were passing on TB to cattle there would be no hesitation: the rats would be killed.
These children are oblivious to the row over badgers and TB, for them there's just the magic of seeing the cubs at close range.
He says that he loves badgers; he's a nature person.
She says that the badgers eat worms, slugs, and peanut butter sandwiches.
He says that's a very unusual diet for an animal which lives underground!
Tony Dean believes dairy farmers have nothing to fear from badgers, but if that view is not shared by the Ministry of Agriculture and widespread TB testing begins again, he fears the badger may have a bleak future.
In part two: Behind bars.
The burglar's haul just waiting for an owner.
Behind the throne.
The astrologer who advises the Princess of Wales.
And, behind the scenes.
Inside the Globe with the people who bring US to YOU.
Police have uncovered a hoard of stolen property which may be the tip of the iceberg in a million-pound series of burglaries.
Some items are so valuable that the owners have been forced into bankruptcy by their loss.
Now the police are trying to trace other victims.
Tim Hurst reports.
COLEFORD/Gloucestershire
Det Insp WAYNE MURDOCH/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
The stolen goods, ranging from sit-on lawn mowers to electric drills, are likely to have been stolen to order by thieves who found easy pickings from garages, garden sheds and DIY stores.
The owner of industrial tools worth thousands of pounds went bankrupt when he lost these tools of his trade.
Other items are likely to be part of much larger burglaries which could amount to £1million.
The property has been stolen from Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, perhaps Oxfordshire and the police want to trace the owners to help them build a pattern linking the burglaries.
All the items are being stored in 4 garages at Coleford police station in the Forest of Dean and owners who may be able to help should phone 0594 836494.
Be patient; staff are dealing with the calls as fast as they can.
The families of nine airmen killed when their Hercules aircraft crashed in Scotland have taken part in a memorial service at RAF Lyneham.
They were joined by John McCarthy, who spent his first days of freedom at the airbase after five and a half years as a hostage.
SIMON GARRETT/RAF Lyneham
Voice over
John McCarthy asked to attend the service.
He and his fellow former hostages feel a debt of gratitude towards the men and women at Lyneham who looked after them on their return from captivity.
In perfect weather flanked by four Hercules the service was conducted by Catholic, Church of England and Church of Scotland clergy.
In the first reading Wing Commander Angus Morris told the congregation the men had met their death at an appointed hour
Male speaker
For everything is a season and every activity under heaven a time.
A time to be born and a time to die.
A time to plant and a time to uproot.
A time to kill and a time to heal
Voice over
The Prince of Wales and the Princess Royal both sent representatives, as did the Scottish emergency services who tried to rescue the men of flight XV 193.
Reverend Brian Smith told of the reaction at Lyneham as the extent of the tragedy became clear
Male speaker
The tragic events of 27th May left us shocked and numb.
No one could believe this had happened to us at Lyneham especially after such a long period of accident-free flying
Voice over
At the end of the service…
Five Hercules…one from each Lyneham squadron…flew overhead as Station Cammander Group Captain David Adams read the names of the dead starting with Lance Corporal Gary Manning
Male speaker
Sgt. Al King.
Sgt. Craig Hilliard.
Master Engineer Terry Glimore.
Flying Officer Johnnie Owen.
Flt Lt Steve McNally.
Flt Lt Graham Southard.
Flt Squadron Leader Stan Muir.
Squadron Leader Graeme Young
Voice over
Meanwhile a memorial service has been held for the former cabinet minister and Cotswolds MP Nicholas Ridley.
Members of both Houses of Parliament turned out to pay tribute to the controversial MP who died in March.
ABI DONALD/Westminster
GEOFFREY CLIFTON-BROWN MP/Con Cirencester
Library Pictures
Voice over
The church of St Margarets in the shadow of the Houses of parliament was filled today with politicians from both sides of the house who paid tribute to the former MP for Cirencester and Tewkesbury Nicholas Ridley.
The Prime Minister and senior Cabinet colleagues gathered at the House of Commons Church…it was a fitting place for Nicholas Ridley's memorial service, he'd spent 33 years of his life at the centre of British politics.
Male speaker
A very great man, who contributed to every area of politics and never avoided making difficult decisions.
Voice over
The Cotswolds MP was known as a political firebrand, and often got himself into trouble by speaking his mind.
He held numerous cabinet posts and was an ardent supporter of Mrs Thatcher.
That feeling was mutual,…it was Baroness Thatcher who addressed the congregation at the service today, telling them that Lord Ridley had’ style, elegance originality and special courage.’
Nicholas Ridley retired from the house of commons at the last election after his outspoken remarks over Europe, he took a peerage and spent the last few months of his life in the House of Lords.
Although Lord Ridleys aggressive and forthright manner sometimes rubbed people up the wrong way it also gained him the respect of colleagues…
That was proved today by the number of people who turned up to pay tribute to Lord Ridley of Liddesdale.
A former secretary general of the United Nations, a bishop and an artist were among those receiving honorary degrees from Oxford University today.
But one woman who should have been there couldn't attend the ceremony — because she's been under house arrest for the past four years.
HARRIET RYLEY/Oxford
GEORGINA FERRY/Oxford University
Dr MICHAEL ARIS/Husband
Voice over
One of Oxford University's oldest tradition — Encaenia, when honorary degrees are handed out to a select few from public life and academia.
Roughly translated it means new beginnings — it dates back to the thirteenth century and confers a purely honourary degree — something to put in a’ Who's Who’entry.
This year's list includes Javier Perez de Cuellar, Secretary-General of the United Nations from nineteen-eighty-two to ninety-one.
Also honoured was Bishop Trevor Huddlestone — a prominent activist in the anti-apartheid movement in South Africa.
The only woman present today was artist Bridget Riley, famous for her innovative op-art paintings in the sixties which made her world-famous.
There should have been a second woman here to receive her honourary degree — Aung San Suu Kyi — founder of the fledgling Burmese democracy movement.
However she was unable to attend, having been under house arrest in Burma which is ruled by the military, for the past four years.
She says the university wishes to give her a degree, both because she's a graduate of the univesity — she was at St. Hugh's — and because we regard her a as a world leader of distinction, and of course a world peace prize winner.
University protocol means it's not possible for a degree to be collected by proxy, but the attention her nomination brings to her cause is welcomed by her husband who was at the ceremony.
He says it puts heart into her people, because it confirms their belief that her cause has wide support in the world today.
Reporter asks when he last saw her.
I was with Suu for two and a half weeks in April and I was able to tell her that this was going to happen today.
Reporter asks how she was.
She was in good spirits — she's very strong.
She was physically weak, but by the time I left she was regaining her strength and her spirit and commitment remain unchanged.
Both Dr Aris and the university look forward to the day when Aung San Suu Kyi will be free to come to Oxford to collect her honorary degree.
