(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, what to do with abandoned wildlife.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
TIM HURST/Pershore
ALICE CROOKE/Neighbour
BETTY COOPER/Friend
Supt BOB MULCASTER/West Mercia Police
Voice over
The shooting happened in a quiet residential road at Pershore in Worcestershire shortly before midnight.
The woman who died was Mrs Gillian Haynes, also of Pershore, who'd gone to house to collect her 21 year old daughter Vicky.
Neighbours had earlier heard arguing, and seen a man drive off at speed in a white van.
One police officer was then questioning people in the house.
Vicky Haynes was injured in the arm, as was a 33 year old Pershore woman Jackie Norton.
Friends have been devastated by the shooting.
The police officer who saw the shooting is being treated for shock.
He'd thrown his personal radio at the gunman to distract him.
Armed police later surrounded a house in High Street, Pershore and arrested a man in his 30's.
They recovered a pump action shotgun.
A man who telephoned a jail to say he'd committed’ serious crimes’, is being asked to call back before he strikes again.
The prison authorities say it was a genuine call for help.
Police say it's possible the man is responsible for two sex attacks and he must give himself up.
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
Library Pictures/GRENDON UNDERWOOD/Buckinghamshire
TIM NEWELL/Prison Governor
MAIDENHEAD/Berkshire
Det Supt MICHAEL SHORT/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
It was a call for help from a man claiming to have committed serious, awful crimes.
He telephoned Grendon Underwood Prison in Buckinghamshire in the early hours of Friday morning.
He'd heard about the jail's reputation for handling violent and dangerous offenders.
The prison Governor says he was in a disturbed state.
Male speaker
He was anxious.
He was nervous.
He felt he was going to do something and wanted help.
He was realistic enough to see help.
He knew he'd have to give himself up.
Voice over
The call lasted half an hour.
Too short to give him the help he needed.
But long enough to learn something about the man.
He said he hadn't been in trouble before.
The Police wouldn't know who he was.
He called from a phone box: probably from not too far away.
The prison officer felt he was probably young, but he couldn't detect an accent.
He said he'd committed two awful offences.
Police said it's possible he could have been responsible for two sex attacks in Berkshire…one in Maidenhead and one in Slough.
These are likenesses of the man who committed those attacks.
It's not clear he's the mystery caller.
But it is clear he must contact the prison before he strikes again.
Male speaker
This man is desperate for help.
It supports the theory he will strike again.
Male speaker
There's a feeling of guilt soon after.
And a feeling of helplessness that they can't go through it again.
Voice over
The prison is waiting for the man to call again.
He would have to face the consequences of his actions.
But he's also being given the chance to take responsibility for them…to take control of his life before he ruins another.
A nurse who saved a security guards life after he'd been shot in the chest by an armed robber has received a top award.
Joyce Miller was walking past a bank when gunmen opened fire as security express guards were unloading money.
One of the guards was badly injured, and says he owes his life to her prompt action.
KEN GOODWIN/Cheltenham
January 1991
TOM COTTERELL/Former Security Guard
JOYCE MILLER/Nurse
Voice over
It's a kiss that says it all.
Former security guard Tom Cotterell thanks the woman who saved his life.
It was back in january two years ago when he and a colleague were delivering money to a branch of LLoyds bank in Cheltenham.
Armed raiders attacked.
Tom found himself looking down the barrel of a gun.
He says the man said give me the money.
He shot him in the chest, he went down on the ground.
Tom's life was slipping away, but by sheer luck Joyce Miller, a nurse who works in the intensive care unit at Cheltenham General hospital, happened to be passing.
She says Tom was slipping away.
She gave him mouth to mouth, and cardiac massage.
The ambulance came, and she ended up looking after him in the intensive care unit.
He says it was a miracle.
The way she brought him back from the dead, what can you say?
And Joyce has received official thanks from the company Security Express, as well as a top commendation from Saint John ambulance.
Tom says he owes his life to Joyce, and he can't thank her enough.
But he hates to think what would have happened if Joyce hadn't been there.
He says he would have been dead and buried now.
Six feet under.
The best-selling novelist Joanna Trollope has caught the film bug.
For the past three months, camera crews have been working near her Cotswold home on a television adaptation of her book The Rector's Wife.
The author's been unable to resist popping down to the set once in a while to keep an eye on how it's going.
ROBIN POWELL Cherington
JOANNA TROLLOPE Author
LINDSAY DUNCAN Actress
PRUNELLA SCALES Actress
GILES FOSTER Director
Voice over
There's been no keeping Joanna Trollope away from filming for The Rector's Wife…most of it's taken place not far from the author's home near Cirencester.
Now she can't wait to see the end result, when Channel Four screens its adaptation of her best-selling novel early in the New Year.
The Rector's Wife is the story of a woman who swops the routine of coffee mornings and delivering the parish magazine for a job in a supermarket.
It's success has surpassed all expectations.
A hard act to follow, but its stars are confident that the small screen version will prove just as popular.
Everyone involved in the filming has enjoyed working in such idyllic surroundings.
Joanna had hoped to play a cameo role…but pressure of time meant she couldn't.
Plans are already under way to televise Joanna Trollope's latest novel, A Spanish Lover.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
2 die in mid-air crash
Two bodies have been found in the wreckage of a civilian helicopter which was in a mid-air collison with an RAF Tornado jet over the Lake District.
The jet landed safely.
Govt challenged over donations
The Labour MP, Clive Soley, has accused Michael Heseltine of meeting a Saudi prince to discuss donations to the Conservative Party.
Harefield Hospital under threat
A report is recommending that nine London area hospitals be closed including the world-renowned Harefield Hospital used by heart patients.
Cabinet discusses Trident refit
The Prime Minister and senior Cabinet colleagues have been discussing whether the contract to refit Trident submarines should be given to the Rosyth or Devonport dockyards.
FTSE down 6
The hundred shares index closed down six point nine at twenty-nine hundred point seven.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-seven and down at two marks, forty-nine.
Welcome back.
An animal sanctuary is appealing to the public NOT to bring in abandoned wildlife.
Wesley Smith
Staff say birds and small animals often have more chance of surviving if they're left where they are.
SIMON GARRETT/Burford
NIGEL MASON/Manager
Voice over
This jackdaw has already been tamed by someone and let go.
It was brought to Burford because it was found unable to feed itself.
Now staff at the Blue Cross Sanctuary in Burford are trying to untame it.
Many of the birds brought here don't fare so well.
A third of all fledglings die within days or even hours.
Often when concerned people think they are rescuing abandoned babies they are actually intefering with the course of nature
Male speaker
Fledglings are in a transitional stage because they can't quite fly yet but there having to learn how to feed and their parents are teaching them.
If they could fly straight away their parents would never find them and they would starve?
They're on the ground for a week or two where they can't quite fly and they're being weaned off their parents
Voice over
Not just birds but small animals like foxes are often left for life training by their parents.
Well meaning as human intervention may be, picking up healthy young is almost always counter-productive
Male speaker
They really do stand a better chance being left there to their own devices for the parents to feed them the right diet than being picked up and brought here.
We're quite good at rearing them these days but even so their chances are hugely reduced by being picked up in the first place
Voice over
Blue Cross staff say they do still want to see sick or injured animals brought in for treatment.
They'll use their experience to try to nurse them back to health.
Those which are well but just look lost…are best left where they are to take their chances
The Australian Cricket team has been causing mayhem again.
Not content with beating England twice so far this summer the players have been making runs galore again.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
MIKE SLATER/Australian Batsman
JASON GALLIAN/Universities Captain
BOBBY SIMPSON/Australians Manager
Voice over
It must be summer the sound of willow on leather, the rattle of the scoreboard as Australian batsmen yet again plaster the ball all over another English Cricket Ground.
In this case The Parks at Oxford.
Not content with beating seven bells out of the test team at Lords The Aussies took on the Combined Universities in a three day game today and almost strangled it at birth.
But then the cricket at the Parks is perhaps less important than the social festival it brings with it.
The champagne atmosphere brought out the best in the Australians.
New boy Mike Slater followed his century at Lords last week with another today.
The annual fixture against the tourists is completely different tom any other in first class cricket.
The universities side are all students and in this case they seem to know their place.
If England got Stuffed, what chance have they got.
Yes it was an Australian accent but skipper Jason Gallian is registered with Lancashire as a player and has qualified to play for England.
Anyway perhaps it was kidology.
The morning session saw the Aussies score a hundred eighty for no wicket.
But the afternoon was different.
Durham Paceman Jeremy Hallett inspired a mini-Australian collapse.
He took three wickets leaving the tourists to declare at 388 for five at tea.
Not that many were taking too much notice.
The sunny weather and the end of exams brought on other priorities.
There were some Aussies in the crowd enjoying a good joke at our expense.
But apart from that the tourists enjoy coming here.
It's more English than anywhere else.
Of course it was England which gave cricket toAustralia.
Unfortuynately they don't seem to want to give it back just yet
And the latest score we have from the Parks:
Combined Universities are 80 (eighty) for one in their first innings.
A soft drinks company says its could run dry if it doesn't get enough elderflowers.
The firm has to collect enough blossoms during the short flowering season to maintain a year's production of their elderflower drink.
It's recruited an army of gatherers to help out.
KEN GOODWIN/South Woodchester
SHIREEN MORRISS/Bottle Green Company
Dr KIT MORRISS/Bottle Green Company
Voice over
Country lanes, fields, gardens — at this time of year the fragrant Elderflower blossom is everywhere.
Now people can earn pocket money by picking it.
A soft drink made from the Elderflower is selling well, but the blossoming season is short, and the makers need as much as they can get to see production through the rest of the year.
Anyone who brings blossom to the bottling plant at South Woodchester will be paid — but beware, there's a proper way to pick.
She says that they want the blossom, not stalks and leaves.
The Elderflower juice is part of the booming market in adult soft drinks — it's one of the few businesses that's beaten the recession.
He says that they're doing well.
They've been expanding for the last four years.
Pickers are turning up all the time — this lady expects to be paid about five pounds for her blossoms.
She says that it tastes good.
She doesn't think Elder bushes are under threat!
The company is toasting the success of a business that's blooming, thanks to the Elderflower and an army of pickers.
Now to another in our occasional series’ In Praise of Folly’.
Thousands of visitors come to see the world famous collection of thirty-eight follies in the landscape gardens at Stowe in Buckinghamshire.
Not so well known is a thirty-ninth folly, also paid for by Lord Cobham of Stowe, in the centre of nearby Buckingham.
BUCKINGHAM
CLIVE BIRCH/Buckingham Heritage Trust
Dr JOHN CLARKE/Historian
Visitors to Buckingham are hard pressed to guess what the gothic style building in the town's centre once was.
A tiny castle?
A toy fort?
In fact it was built as a gaol in the mid 18th century.
But if a folly is a decorative building with no purpose, how can the gaol be a folly?
Male speaker
You could say it was a folly on the part of Lord Cobham of Stowe, a local landowner and eminence grise.
He was asked to produce a gaol so that the town could justify the return of the court, which was the administrative centre of the old town.
But he planted this gaol in the middle of Buckingham as a sort of rebuke to the townspeople.
Here you are.
You can have a medieval gothic monstrosity in the middle of your otherwise pleasant townscape.
Voice over
The fanciful style of the gaol might be explained by the fact that the man who paid for it, Lord Cobham, was also the man who had the biggest collection of follies in the country in the grounds of his nearby estate, Stowe, including a gothic folly.
But the gaol was the brainchild of Browne Willis, MP for Buckingham in the early 18th century.
He lived at nearby Whaddon Hall, also built in his beloved Gothic style.
He was obsessed with the historic importance of Buckinghamshire and wrote a history of the county.
He campaigned tirelessly to win back the twice yearly courts or assizes, which Buckingham had lost to Aylesbury.
But the town had to have a gaol to justify its claim.
Male speaker
Unlike Lord Cobham's flirtation with the gothic style, he really believed in gothic architecture as a statement of social values.
He really wanted to get back to a medieval world and he thought Buckingham should be a symbol of that world.
Buckingham had been the county town in the middle ages and he felt it should be again.
Voice over
An act of parliament was passed in 1747 which returned the summer assizes to Buckingham.
Court cases continued to be held in the town for the next 100 years, with the bowed front added in 1839 to provide living quarters for the gaoler.
Inside the gaol little has changed.
There are still 8 of the original 14 cells with fully working locks, but its security record was poor to say the least.
Male speaker
There were a number of escapes.
Perhaps the most notorious was a forger; Coiner Varley who escaped sliding down a rubbish tip which the market traders had pushed up against the wall of the gaol.
He got as far as Rugby before he was caught.
Voice over
Amongst other escapes, a common criminal, Wesley Scroggs who is supposed to have just slung a rope over the battlements to get away and another prisoner who just ran out of the main door into the street.
The gaol was at its busiest during the 1840s, when labourers on the Buckingham railway line were continually being hauled in for petty crime and drunkeness; a spell in one of the cells was guaranteed to sober them up.
Towards the end of the last century the gaol became a lock-up and a police station, gradually falling into disrepair.
It's since been a cafe, a grill and a bric-a-brac shop, with plans now to turn it into a museum and heritage centre; something Browne Willis would doubtless have approved of.
Cricket now…the amateur players of the Minor Counties have been taking on the game's elite in the first round of the Nat West Trophy.
Oxfordshire, who haven't won a game in the history of the competition, faced the might of Lancashire, who've won the trophy five times.
Mark Kiff reports.
OXFORD
MICHAEL ATHERTON/Lancashire Captain
PHIL GARNER/Oxfordshire Captain
Voice over
Meanwhile, Worcestershire have been playing Nottinghamshire in their first round match.
Nottinghamshire are looking for their first win in a one-day competition at Trent Bridge this season.
This from Russell Trott.
Worcestershire didn't have the best of starts.
Notts opener, Chris Broad in commanding form, striking Radford for an early boundary.
The Nottinghamshire opening partnership of left handers kept up the pressure on a shaky Worcestershire attack.
Paul Pollard driving Stuart Lampitt for another 4.
But Lampitt got his revenge, removing Pollards off stump.
Pollard out for 28.
The Worcestershire bowlers and fielders began to find their form when Notts skipper, Tim Robinson was acrobatically caught by Neale off Illingworth for 5.
Notts Vice Captain Paul Johnson hit 78 and Broad, 72 in a Nottinghamshire total of 307 for 7.
And the latest score we have from Trent Bridge.
And at the Parks, Oxfordshire were all out for 88, losing to Lancashire by 195 runs.
At Bristol, Gloucestershire won their match with Cheshire by 204 runs, bowling out the visitors for just 68.
Cambridgeshire are 134 for 6 after 55 in reply to Northants' total of 234 for 4.
And at Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire are 125 for 9 after 47. in reply to the Sussex total of 327 for 6.
The former Swindon Town striker Duncan Shearer has been among the players giving evidence in court against his former manager Lou Macari.
Shearer, who was transferred to Blackburn Rovers last season, told the court he was paid seven hundred pounds cash as a reward for winning three games in a row.
Macari denies conspiring to cheat the taxman out of hundreds of thousands of pounds.
Gareth Furby reports.
Voice over
A survey has found that some hospitals are so badly designed that doctors spend four hours of every working day just walking from one ward to another.
Its found some doctors walk up to eighteen miles every day just getting from patient to patient.
Now health officials are working out how to cut the waste of the daily medical marathon.
Richard Barnett reports:
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Dr GUY ROUTH/Trust Medical Director
Dr JOHN BERY/House Physician
Voice over
For house physician John Bery, the day begins at Cheltenham General Hospital when he puts on a pedometer.He's one of a group of doctors who've been helping in a survey of the distances covered while on duty.Soon Dr Bery is heading for a ward at the opposite end of the hospital.It's the first of many long walks along the corridors during the day.The problem at Cheltenham general is identical to many other hospitals…where an old Victorian block has been extended with newer buildings forcing doctors to travel great distances from department to department.
At last Doctor Bery arrives at the ward.After discussing a patient's blood test results, he checks the pedometer…it registers just over a mile.Then the bleep goes…and there's another trek to another ward.Doctor Beri covers a quarter of a mile…just to fill in a form to authorize a patient's attendance allowance.Cheltenham General Hospital is run by the East Gloucester NHS trust.It's worried by the excessive distances doctors cover:
Male speaker
The distances doctors cover are a great waste of time…some spend up to four hours a day walking from department to department.
Voice over
Meanwhile back on the ward, Doctor Beri's bleep goes again…this time it's a call to casualty…and the weary house physician has to run half a mile from one end of the building to the other…along the new corridor linking the old part of the hospital with the new.By the end of the morning, he's covered six miles…one day recently he covered eighteen miles:
Male speaker
It's very exhausting and when doctors are tired it affects the compassion doctors show to their patients.
Voice over
Now hospital chiefs are planning to group some wards closer together to save doctors having to walk so far.
And as Doctor Beri manages a brief break in the staff rest room…his shoes tell their own tale of how sole destroying a day like this can be.
In part two: Medieval monstrosity…a folly built to teach the town a lesson.
And, full speed ahead…the business sideline that's helping farmers rake in the cash.
Welcome back.
Parents whose babies have died or were stillborn have produced a special memorial to help them come to terms with their loss.
They hope that it'll help many others to cope with their bereavement.
Debbie Kelly reports.
OXFORD
LUCY TODD/SANDS Member
JENNY THOMAS/Bereavement Counsellor
Voice over
Mother and baby get to know each other a few hours after birth…but for some mothers its a felling they cannot appreciate…
Lucy Todd miscarried her first child…her second Ankeret was still born…
She now has a eight month old son Joseph…but is still coping with the loss of Ankeret…with the help of Sands, the Stillbirth and Neonatal Death Society…a self help group of bereaved parents.
She says; We went to the first Sands meeting.
I could not believe I was not the only one and it was such a relief.
I felt other people felt the same way about silly things.
Sands have presented a special Book of Rememberance to the maternity unit at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford…
The book will contain dedications from parents who have lost babies…the first entry is Ankeret.
She says; It is something there that I can see of her, something I would not have had if she had not existed.
She says; It is very important to have a memory of the time when people were here and to be able to record it in the hospital is very important.
The hospital becomes a very important place for them it is their babies home.
Nothing can replace a baby…but the recognition that parents need to discuss that loss with others…and have some form of memorial to grieve over can help.
Out of control…the joyrider who's father says he'll sue social services.
Shop fire…arsonists strike in county with spiralling crime rate.
And, keeping them on their toes…the doctors who walk eighteen miles a day.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
POLICE VIDEO
JIM CROOK/Buckinghamshire Social Services
Det Sgt TONY EVERITT/Milton Keynes Police
Dr PETER MARSH/Social Psychologist
Voice over
A stolen car being chased by the police at speeds of up to ninety miles an hour.
On the back seat…a fourteen-year-old boy from Milton Keynes, who just the day before had been given a supervision order after being convicted for burglary, armed robbery and car theft.
He's supposed to be staying at a children's home, but he spent last night in police cells after being arrested for the thirtieth time — for breaching bail conditions.
Now his father's announced he's suing social services for negligence…
Buckinghamshire Social Services wouldn't comment on this particular boy, but did point out that in cases like his it shares responsibility with the parents…
The police say the alarming thing is that they're having to deal with much worse cases.
Another fourteen-year-old was convicted yesterday for his one hundred and seventy second offence, yet neither the police nor the courts seem able to stop him offending again…
Mr Everitt says the answer is longer sentences, but experts are divided on whether institutionalising young offenders is the best solution…
Meanwhile, the father we spoke to fears the worst…
Once they're seventeen, of course, young law-breakers can be sent to prison.
This father for one fears his son may never even get that chance.
Crime has increased dramatically in the region.
Some of the worst figures are to be found in Gloucestershire where police say they're up by more than twice the national average.
The Home Office says a crime is committed every six seconds.
The figures are published on a day when arsonists destroyed part of a shopping centre just a few hours after thieves stealing television sets had also tried to start a fire.
Tim Hurst has this report.
FIRE BRIGADE PICTURES/CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Det Sgt BRIAN DOCHERTY/Gloucestershire CID
Chief Con ALBERT PACEY/Gloucestershire Police
NASHREEN ASHREF/Owner
Voice over
4 shops in the Spring Bank shopping centre at Cheltenham in Gloucestershire have been destroyed by a fire that was started deliberately early this morning.
It began in a betting shop, targetted by thieves on Monday night; they too had tried to start a fire after stealing TV sets.
The fire and burglaries highlight Home Office figures which show that crime in Gloucestershire leapt by a third last year, from 44,000 offences to 58,000, the second highest increase in Britain.
Assessors are still trying to work out the full cost of the fire at the Spring Bank shopping centre, but initial estimates have been put at a quarter of a million pounds.
It's expected to be some weeks before all the shops damaged in the arson attack can be re-opened.
The Director General of the Prison Service says he's concerned about overcrowding at a prison which a national report says is the most overcrowded in the country.
But after a five-hour long visit he said he was satisfied with what he'd seen.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
GLOUCESTER
JOE PILLING/Director General/Prison Service
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem Cheltenham
Voice over
Joe Pilling, the head of the prison service, spent five hours touring Gloucester jail.
He spoke to staff and prisoners to hear first hand what conditions are like inside.
His visit follows a report released earlier this week by Nacro…the National Association for Care and Resettlement of Offenders…showing Gloucester prison to be the most overcrowded in the country.
Nacro says it was built for 107 prisoners, but now houses almost double that.
And conditions inside are cramped and uncivilised.
After his visit, Mr Pilling said steps were being taken to improve conditions…
Male speaker
there is still serious overcrowding…but there are measures being taken which should improve conditions…it'll still be overcrowded, but not as overcrowded.
Voice over
Nigel Jones, the MP for Cheltenham, says overcrowding is putting pressure on magistrates not to send offenders to prison.
He's worried that it could lead to another tragic case like that of council worker Anna McGurk, who was raped and murdered by Andrew Hagans whilst he was on bail on another rape charge.
Male speaker
I have friends who are magistrates and I know they feel tempted to give a fine or bail, when they should be giving a prison sentence.
Voice over
Mr Pilling said overcrowding shouldn't sway a magistrates decsion.
And he said he was confident that conditions were improving.
Hard-hit farmers have discovered a new way to make money…by turning their fields into racing circuits.
It's all part of a craze for driving high-speed all-terrain vehicles.
Richard Barnett reports:
BROOKTHORPE Gloucestershire
JENNIFER WARNER Farmer
Voice over
A traditional rural scene; as sheep graze a Gloucestershire pasture, but this is the new face of farming.
Honda pilot all terrain vehicles hurtle along a half mile track around the field.
Landowners are turning pasture into racetracks in an effort to boost flagging incomes.
Already 10 farmers have established circuits like this and the number is growing all the time.
Female speaker
As beef farmers, they are not able to get grants to setaside their land.The racing is an alternative way of making money.
And it is great fun.
Voice over
It's a relatively cheap sport to set up; the pilots cost under £5,000 each and each driver pays about £30 for a session.
For farmers a regular income of hundreds of pounds a week from a single field, makes a racing circuit a very attractive cash crop.
This evening a group of slightly nervous looking insurance workers are about to try their hand at pilot racing.
First there's a run down on the basics of all terrain driving.
Although these machines only have 400 cc engines, they can reach almost 70 mph.
Luckily for the driver, they do stick tenaciously to the track, are very manoeuverable and are hard to turn over.
Soon the drivers are in their stride and enjoying every minute of it.
There's no doubt that pilot racing is proving popular with the visitors; what the locals make of it, is hard to tell.
Crime committed every six seconds
New figures show an increase in the crime rate to one committed every six seconds.
Police shoot gunman dead
The Police have shot dead an armed man who was holding two women hostage at a flat in South London.
Lloyd's investors told of huge losses
The insurance company, Lloyd's of London, has told investors of its worst losses in more than three hundred years, leaving some facing financial ruin.
FTSE down 28
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-eight points at twenty-five, thirty-two point six.
The pound is up more than a cent at one dollar, eighty-eight but down at two marks, ninety-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The ancient art of charcoal burning is enjoying a revival — thanks to the growing fashion for summer barbecues.
In many countries charcoal production is threatening rainforests and mangrove swamps — the revived British version causes no environmental damage.
RICHARD BARNETT Kings Thorn
RICHARD FLEMING Charcoal Burner
Voice over
In the heart of one of Herefordshire's oldest tracts of forest, Richard Fleming is just starting the twenty hour long process that turns wood into charcoal.
His portable steel kiln is modern…but the technique he uses dates back thousands of years.
The wood is piled into the kiln, which is then lit at the bottom.
As soon as it's well alight, the kiln is almost sealed up.
The lack of oxygen halts the burning process halfway…and creates charcoal.
Richard says he has a tremendous sense of history as he works in the woods.
Male speaker
The wood has been there since the days of King John.
There are many signs of ancient charcoal burning.
Voice over
Each kiln takes a ton and a half of wood…and produces about a quarter of that weight as charcoal.
Richard sells the charcoal to local shops and garages.
As much as 97 percent of our barbecue fuel is imported…much of it from Indonesian rain forests and mangrove swamps.
Environmentalists say that's a disaster.
But Richard says his charcoal production works with nature, not against it.
His wood comes from forest that's been coppiced.
That means the trunks have been cut to encourage vigorous new growth from the base of the tree.
Male speaker
Coppicing is sustainable and doesn't threaten the environment.
Voice over
At the moment there's only a handful of charcoal burners in England.
But Richard Fleming says eventually we could home produce all the charcoal we need.
And that would provide much needed cash to preserve British woodland…and save the threatened rainforests.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Mates resigns
The Northern Ireland Minister, Michael Mates, has resigned from his post over the Asil Nadir affair.
Devonport gets Trident contract
Devonport dockyard has been awarded the contract to refit Trident nuclear submarines ahead of Rosyth in Scotland where there will be job losses.
11 die in Moscow tragedy
Eleven people were killed in Moscow when fuel from a tanker set light to several trolley buses.
Kurds hold hostages
Five Kurdish gunmen are threatening to kill twenty hostages at the Turkish consulate in Munich.
FTSE down 6
The hundred shares index closed down six points at twenty-eight, ninety-four point seven.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-seven and up at two marks, fifty-one.
(That's all the news from Central South.
Our next bulletin will be at 10.30.
Goodbye.)
Litter louts are causing death and injury to pets and wildlife.
The RSPCA has begun a new campaign, warning of the dangers of rubbish, like plastic, tin cans and fishing tackle to birds and animals.
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
Chief Insp DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
Voice over
Absolute agony for a swan.
The victim of a moments carelessless by an angler.
It's a painful task too for the rescuers, who saved the swan even more anguish.
Male speaker
One of the major problems is fishing tackle for swans.
Another is this old friend, which acts as a snare.
Voice over
The results are distressing to see.
It's a constant amazement how an apparently harmless piece of rubbish can become an animal's enemy.
Underwater there are hidden dangers for river-life.
Some are obvious…others less so.
Male speaker
Another problem is the supermarket trolley.
We recovered a swan whose head was jammed.
It drowned.
No one would have dreamt the suffering and the cruelty it can cause.
Voice over
People don't realise these things are death traps.
People wouldn't deliberately do it.
It's just thoughtlessness, laziness and ignorance.
A moment of carelessness can cost an animal its life.
The RSPCA want us to take responsibility for our rubbish…and take it home…out of harms way.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the final parade.
The last young RAF engineers step into history.
Plus, that old black magic.
Charcoal making…the traditional way.
Welcome back: Seventy years of RAF tradition ended today.
Wesley Smith
The last graduates left an apprentice scheme which has produced some of the top airforce brass.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Halton
Air Commodore DICK BOGG/Ex-apprentice
Senior Engineer COLIN FIELDER/Ex-apprentice
Group Capt BILL TAYLOR/Ex-apprentice
Voice over
The apprentices from RAF Halton In Buckinghamshire have been keeping the air force flying for the last seventy two years.
Today saw an end to that tradition with the last forty engineers graduating.
The Duke of Gloucester was there to mark the occasion…so were some of the planes…
A VC10 from Brize Norton…
Harrier jump jets…and Hercules from Lyneham.
The Apprentice training scheme at Halton has produced over thirty five thousand graduates.
More than seven thousand have gone on to become officers, some of them of high rank.
It also inspires tremendous loyalty and a voluntary support squadron led by Air Commodore Dick Bogg was a major feature of today's parade.
Male speaker
I can just remember my days here.
I do feel sad, so did everyone else here today…all volunteers by the way.
Voice over
Today's graduates have a long way to go to match the service of the RAF's longest serving ex-apprentice.
Male speaker
It was very hard when i joined in 1947.
Discipline was verystrict, we weren't allowed civvies.
It's changed a lot
Voice over
The Training scheme has a long and proud history.
It was started by Marshall of the Royal Air Force Lord Trenchard.
He wanted an efficient and elite engineering team.
Everyone started as a trainee technician with no rank.
Their proudest graduate was Air Commodore Sir Frank Whittle, the designer of the first British Jet.
The highest rank was achieved by Sir Air Chief Marshall Sir Michael Armitage.
Altogether sixty three Halton Apprentices have gone from junior technician to High rank.
Male speaker
The RAF took into its care a lot of youngsters and instilled some qualities into them which we'd like to see in the youth of today
Voice over
One of the apprentices' last projects was to build a microlight aircraft to fly to Gibraltar.
They fitted it in while doing normal training on Jaguars and Harriers.
Today they were well aware of their heritage.
Male speaker
the old boys have been telling us the stories and it's brought a tear to the eye
Male speaker
It's very emotional, to say the least
Male speaker
I am proud to be one of the last apprentices
Voice over
In future trainees will go to another school and everyone will be trained together.
The elite of RAF Halton will be no more.
It is the passing of an era.)
A gothic folly built by an eccentric as a museum is up for sale.
The forty foot tower is now a home — complete with three bedrooms and a garage.
HARRIET RYLEY/Stow on the Wold
DESMOND BONNER/Owner
DAVID FELTON/Estate Agent
Voice over
Just off the Chipping Norton road on the edge of Stow-on-the-Wold there's a curious four storey tower.
It was built by one Richard Enoch in 1848 next-door to his home, the Counting House.
He needed somewhere to store the various artefacts he'd collected on his travelsand decided to build a gothic tower complete with mullioned arched and trefoil windows…crenellated battlements at the top and even a gargoyle to complete the effect.
Little is known about the eccentric Mr Enoch and even less about the collection he kept here.
The tower was converted to a house around the turn of the century and has been lived in ever since apart from a couple of years when architects used it as offices.
He says it's really marvellous the vista from the top…you can see three counties…
Warwickshire, Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire…anbd on a clear day you see about 10 or 11 miles.
For just under a £150,000 the tower offers a sitting room in the basement, a dining room on the first floor…one bedroom on the second floor then up the stairs again to the top bedroom…plus the view from the top…
It is a grade two listed building, but before it was listed, an extension was added to the back, which houses the kitchen, a further bedroom, bath-room and a garage.
He says we've had wide and varied enquiries — especially from London-based purchasers looking for something for the weekend — something he can tell his friends’ Well actually I live in a turreted folly in the Cotswolds!’…
With the housing market still struggling to recover, the Bonners may not be moving in the very near future — but it's rare for follies to come on the market, especially ones you can live in — so it may not be long before a buyer comes along keen to take up residence in Enoch's Tower.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
IAN MACLAREN/Newton Longville
EDDIE EPHGRAVE/Stepfather
FLO EPHGRAVE/Mother
Chief Supt CAROLINE NICHOLL/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Sharon Griffiths, who was fifteen, died instantly when this Datsun Cherry driven by her sister Sandra was hit head on by a stolen car.
The Cavalier Sri had just overtaken a JCB tractor on the brow of a hill on the Wadden to Newton Longville Road near Bletchley.
The tragedy comes a month after these wedding photographs were taken.
The family are stunned by the loss…
Eighteen year old Sandra Griffiths, a kennel maid, has been undergoing surgery in Milton Keynes General Hospital.
Also being treated is a twenty-one year old woman who was travelling in the stolen car, and was apparently carried from the scene of the accident by the car's driver.
Both were arrested nearby.
The incident highlights what the police describe as a significant problem of car thefts by young people in Milton Keynes.
Up to 400 cars a month are stolen in Milton Keynes…
Tonight an eighteen year old man from Milton Keynes was charged with causing death by dangerous driving, the aggravated taking of a motor vehicle, driving while disqualified and without insurance…
Lee Staines from Milton Keynes is due to appear in court tomorrow.
A hospital is investigating a woman's claim that a botched operation led to her suffering months of pain.
That was followed by an unnecessary operation to remove her appendix and the eventual discovery of a contraceptive device left inside her body by mistake.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
ALISON FERN/Patient
Voice over
A thirty six year old man has appeared in court accused of murder, after a woman died from shotgun wounds and two others were injured.
He's been remanded in custody, partly for his own safety.
TIM HURST/Pershore
Voice over
The woman who died, Gillian Haynes, from Pershore in Worcestershire, had gone to a house in the town to collect her daughter from a party.
Three shots were fired into the house from a pump action shotgun, killing Mrs Haynes and wounding her daughter Vicky and another woman.
This morning at Evesham, 36 hours after the shooting, a carpenter from Pershore, Duncan Gilchrist, who's 36, appeared in court accused of murdering Mrs Haynes.
The court was told that Gilchrist was arrested at a house in Pershore after he himself had telephoned the police.
Gilchrist, who had appeared in the dock casually dressed in jeans and a striped open necked shirt, will appear at Evesham court again next Wednesday.
While the inquiry into the crash which killed nine airmen from RAF Lyneham continues, low-level flying missions from the base carry on as before.
In the latest training exercise, aircrews with six months experience of the Hercules have been practising cargo drops from just two hundred and fifty feet.
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
Flt Lt MARK PHELPS/Student Captain
Sqdn Ldr DAVE RAE/Support Training Sqdn
Voice over
Yesterday they were on the apron at RAF Lyneham commemmorating the lives of nine dead colleagues.
Today they're flying low over Salisbury Plain, undertaking roughly similar work.
The mock load could be ammunition or supplies for ground troops…or emergency aid for refugees.
The lessons to be learnt are the same
Male speaker
The most difficult part as a captain is generally making decisions early and sticking to them.
There's always the temptation to think you shouldn't have done that and try to go back again.
If you're low level in a valley you can't go back and do it again
Male speaker
You have seen in the past operations around the world dropping relief supplies etc.
This is a good way of doing aerial drops into inaccessible areas
Voice over
These cargo drops are a combined services affair.
The loads are constructed and pushed out of the aircraft by men from the army's Royal Logistic Corps.
Part of today's cargo was assembled some weeks ago by Lance Corporal Gary Manning…a soldier who lost his life in the crash in Scotland.
The safety records of both Lyneham and the Hercules are exceptional, but the incident provides pause for thought
Male speaker
Certainly it's a sad loss for Lyneham and particularly the squadrons involved but our operational task remains and the training goes on to achieve that
Male speaker
It just generally makes you more aware of the closness of the ground and that you've got to be more careful at these sort of heights
Voice over
After a five week training course the crews will be deemed qualified for most low-level missions.
Despite the crash the demand for those special skills remains high (1)
Britain's toughest young offenders prison has been criticised for not being secure enough to take the most dangerous inmates.
The criticism comes from her Majesty's Inspector of Prisons.The jail's governor says action has already been taken to solve the problems, as Mike Rowbottom reports 
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
Judge STEPHEN TUMIM/Chief Inspector of Prisons
CLIVE WELSH/Governor
DAVID LIDDINGTON MP/Con Aylesbury
Voice over
Category A prisoners are reckoned to be the most dangerous to the public if they escape.
6 of them had to be transferred from the Aylesbury Young Offenders Institution when Judge Stephen Tumim's prison inspection team found it was not secure enough to take them.
Their report is published today.
The inspection took place last July just after two suspected terrorists broke out of Brixton.
The team found buildings too close to the prison wall.
They were also concerned about security around the main gate.
Work has since taken place to make it more secure and some Category A prisoners have gone back; although not all.
The report hasn't pleased some people living nearby.
Apart from security, the report highlighted problems with Food and Hygiene, including cockroaches in the kitchen.
The young offenders aged between 16 and 21 are amoung the toughest in the country.
Many are transferred to Aylesbury when other establishments can't handle them.
The prison includes most young long term prisoners and it it's described as problematic and volatile.
But despite the criticisms, the prison is described as well run and the report praised staff relations with the inmates.
A woman who tried to take over Swindon Town Football Club has been giving evidence against the former manager Lou Macari, who's on trial for tax fraud.
Carol Embury failed in her bid to win control of Swindon three years ago.
Another witness has claimed that Macari once told him he could break any rule that he wanted.
Gareth Furby reports 
Voice over
Thieves have stolen seven thousand pounds from a supermarket 
BERINSFIELD/Oxfordshire
Nuclear Scientists working at the Joint European Torus project in Oxfordshire will be going on strike for the second time.
6 JUNE/CULHAM/Oxfordshire
A woman who learnt to dive just three years ago has found a Viking relic which is more than a thousand years old.
She and her husband were part of a team on an archaeological dive off the coast of Wales.
It's thought the find is evidence of the first Viking wreck to be found off the British coast.
AMATEUR VIDEO
KARIN ANYON/Diver
NICK ANYON/Diver
3 years ago, Karin Anyon decided she'd had enough of being a diving widow; her husband Nick was always away diving with the Milton Keynes Diving Club.
So she decided to join him.
Now she's completely upstaged him by finding a Viking relic over 1,000 years old.
The couple were diving near the Smalls reef off the Pembrokeshire coast, an area which is notorious as a grave-yard for ships over the centuries.
Karin went down with a group of 20 divers expecting to come across the usual remnants from ships like portholes and anchors.
Instead she found something much more important.
Female speaker
It was bright blue.
That's what drew me to it.
I picked it up, then didn't know whether to leave it or bring it up.
I did bring it up and no-one knew what it was.
So I took it to the British Museum, who identified it for me.
What she had found was the guard for a Viking sword.
12 cm long, it's covered in Celtic style animal engravings in silver.
It's thought it came from a Viking long-boat carrying arms from Dublin which was a big Viking settlement, to Bristol.
Female speaker
I couldn't believe it.
It's 1,000 years old and I haven't been diving that long to make a find like that.
Voice over
Now the Anyons will be returning on dives to search for the boat the sword guard came from.
If they find it, it'll be the first Viking wreck to be found off the British coast.
There are meticulous preparations for each trip, because of the dangerous conditions around the Smalls reef.
Male speaker
It's a very difficult dive.
The site's 23 miles off-shore, so it's beyond alot of people's reach.
It's a small reef with a lighthouse on it.
It comes up from very, very deep to the surface and then back down deep again to the other side.
Voice over
The Smalls reef is now a designated site which can only be explored by diving teams working alongside the Museum of Wales.
The Anyons will be back there again at the end of the month to help search for the Viking wreck, although future dives will depend on raising sponsorship.
It's thought the sword guard will be bought by The museum of Wales when it's put up for auction by the Receiver of wrecks later this year.
In part two: Gibraltar or bust.
The fighter pilot taking a little light relief.
Follow that hoople.
An uphill task for the blind mountaineers.
And what a sauce.The secret ingredient for the latest taste in cheese.
A nest of traitors.
Secret files reveal an Oxford spy ring.
Named.
The man police are hunting after double rape.
And not up to standard.Security criticised at young offenders jail.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
One of the country's leading experts on the secret services says the evidence confirms what he's known for some time.
He's convinced spies based in Oxford caused serious damage to national security.
Robin Powell reports.
CHAPMAN PINCHER/Spy Writer
RUPERT ALLASON MP/Con Torbay
Voice over
The new information comes from Moscow, where previously secret KGB files are being made public by the authorities.
It suggests there was an Oxford spy ring in the 1930s which passed secrets to the Soviet Union.
The writer and secret services expert, Chapman Pincher, says the evidence re-inforces what he already knew — that Oxford-based spies caused serious damage to national security.
He says he was told about the Oxford ring 12 years ago by the former MI5 agent, Peter Wright, whose book Spycatcher caused such a stir.
The Cambridge ring of Blunt, Burgess, MacLean and Philby is already well known.
So why isn't the Oxford ring as famous?
Roger Hollis, a former head of MI5, who studied at Worcester College, Oxford, in the 1920s, is already a well-known suspect.
The rest of Pincher's Oxford ring looks something like this.
The former Labour MP, Tom Driberg, the former chairman of Sotheby's Peter Wilson and the journalist Claud Cockburn.
The evidence also points to a spymaster known as Scott.
He was Scottish, studied at Eton and Oxford, and later held a senior post in the Foreign Office.
Pincher says there are several people who fit Scott's description, but he's not prepared to speculate.
Today in the Commons the Tory MP and spy writer, Rupert Allason called for an immediate investigation into the latest findings.
The KGB is unlikely to reveal such sensitive information as who the Oxford ring members were.
Besides, its new paymaster — the Russian leadership — is keen to avoid anything that would embarrass Britain, just when it's asking for Western aid.
The picture of Oxford between the wars as a place where the privileged few neglected their studies in favour of laid-back, often decadent lifestyles, will remain.
But we may never know the full story of espionage and treachery among those Dreaming Spires.
Dr ANTHONY GLEES/Espionage Specialist
Voice over
Police have taken the unusual step of naming and releasing the photograph of a man they wish to question in connection with an alleged double rape of a teenager.
Detectives are warning the public not to approach the man who they say may be dangerous.
Liz Hannam reports.
NORTHAMPTON
Det Sgt TONY EVERITT/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
This is the face of Philip Tilson, the man police want to question after a 17 year old was allegedly subjected to a terrifying 7 hour ordeal of rape, violence and kidnap.
The woman from Northampton, was offered a lift outside the King Billy pub in the town, but instead of driving her home, she says the man drove her to Salcey Forest, bound her hands and raped her.
He then drove her to a house in the near by village of Olney where she was raped again.
She was eventually dropped off in Northampton.
Tilson, who's married and used to be a school cleaner, hasn't been seen since the attack 3 weeks ago, and it's for this reason, police have taken the unsual step of naming him as a suspect.
Tilson's car, a cavalier estate is similiar to the one described in the alleged attack.
But police are warning members of the public not to approach him.
Tilson's family have asked him to contact the police.
He's described as being white, 38 years old, 5ft 10ins tall, of medium build, with brown wavy hair which is slightly greying.
He sometimes wears round’ John Lennon type’glasses.
Welcome back: A group of RAF technicians and pilots are taking a busman's holiday.
Not happy with simply maintaining and flying powerful jet aircraft, they've built a tiny propellor-driven plane from a kit, Now they plan to fly it all the way to Gibraltar.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
RAF HALTON/Buckinghamshire
Sq Ldr MIKE WOOD/Pilot
Sq Ldr TIM FARMER/Pilot
Voice over
When you join the Royal Air Force you expect to work on some of the world's deadliest aircraft, Jaguar Fighters, and harriers, but there's another side to aviation.
The Microlight and RAF personnel seem to lavish as much attention on this flimsy machine as they do on any other.
A team of 6 instructors and apprentices from the technicians training school at RAF Halton have spent 3 months putting this lightest of light aircraft together.
They've put 400 hours into building the Wallingford made kit and now they plan to fly it to Gibraltar in October.
The sternest test the plane has yet faced.
Mike Wood normally flies Hawk jets but he's happy to go down a step to share the piloting with Squadron Leader, Tim Farmer who's happy to step up from his normal ground based job as a health and environment officer.
The AX3 Microlight is powered by a 500 cc 2-stroke engine and seems to be no more than a few metal poles covered with canvass.
It's a long way from the sturdy frames the technicians normally handle.
The plane will be part of a static exhibition at RAF Halton this weekend.
The team hope that the microlight will eventually prove to be an inexpensive way of teaching cadets and trainee technicians about flying, so for them, it's been a mixture of business and pleasure.
Back to earth now for another tale of intrepid travellers.
A blind student and his partially-sighted friend are preparing to climb Ben Nevis with the aid of something called a hoople.
It's a new mobility aid designed to help blind people cover rough terrain.
Clare Lafferty explains.
HEREFORD
BOB MATTHEWS/Student
CLIVE ELLIS/Hoople Designer
GARY LOMAS/Student
TONY LARKIN/Hoople Designer
Voice over
A new type of cheese is about to go on sale, which it's hoped will rectify an oversight of history.
It's been developed by a farmer's wife.
And the crucial ingredient…a bottle of sauce…as Tony Maycock reports.
ALYSON ANSTEY/Farmer
COLIN ANSTEY/Farmer
Disabled people from all over the country have been competing for honours in a carriage driving contest.
The drivers had to negotiate a testing two-mile course on the Princess Royal's Gatcombe Park estate.
Richard Barnett reports:
GATCOMBE PARK Gloucestershire
RON HANCOCK Driving for the Disabled
Voice over
It's the first time the disabled driving championships have been held at Gatcombe and the prestigious venue attracted a good entry of competitors determined to master the challenging course.
But first harness, tack and carriages had to be spruced up to ensure top marks for turnout.
Each carriage carries 2 drivers; one able bodied, the other disabled.
And it's the disabled driver who's expected to guide the pony and carriage through a tortuous maze of obstacles.
The carriage driving championships are a race against the clock, so it's vital to follow the correct route around the 2 mile long course.
Carriage driving for the disabled began about 20 years ago and it's been growing in popularity ever since.
Male speaker
The sport enables the disabled to ride around fields and see over hedges like the rest of us.
And it is great fun.
Voice over
The array of tyres and cones failed to daunt the 20 competitors, most of whom managed clear rounds.
The event has broad appeal for the disabled, and for those who used to ride it's especially satisfying.
Female speaker
She broke her neck in a car accident 5 years ago.
Carriage driving is the closest thing to riding.
Voice over
As the championship contest hotted up, the carriage drivers proved an important point; that in this sport, being disabled is no handicap.
Lords ruling backs councils on Sunday trading
A ruling by the Law Lords has allowed local councils to prevent illegal Sunday trading without having to compensate businesses for loss of earnings.
Navy intervenes in fishing boat dispute
A fisheries protection vessel has been sent out after more clashes between French and British trawlers off the Scilly Isles.
New plans to widen M25
New plans have been announced which could expand a stretch of the M-twenty-five between the M-four and M-three to seven lanes in each direction.
Major hints of backing for Delors as EC President
The Prime Minister has hinted that the Government will support Jacques Delors for President of the European Commission.
Hopes for Sarajevo ceasefire
The leader of the Bosnian Serbs has given an assurance to the United Nations that they'll stop firing on non-military targets in Sarajevo.
FTSE up 24
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-four point seven at twenty-five, fifty-seven point three.
The pound is up at one dollar, eighty-nine and up at two marks, ninety-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A chain of kitchenware shops has made a hundred and twenty people redundant and called in the administraors because of financial difficulties.
The retailers Carpenter's have been trading for more than a century.
KATE GARRAWAY/Oxford
TERESA MEADOWCROFT/Store Manager
DAVID MASON/Morton Thornton
Voice over
This Carpenter's In-House store at Headington in Oxford is one of twenty-six accross the country that has shut up shop for good.
A hundred and twenty people have lost their jobs and the future of the remaining three hundred staff now seems unclear.
The company has been trading since 1876 and staff say they'd always thought the firm was financially successful.
News of the redundancies came as a complete shock.
She says I was so shocked I couldn't believe it…
Shops have closed in…and twenty jobs have been lost from the firm's headquarters at Thame in Oxfordshire.
Traditionally the chain has always relied on hardware and ironmongery sales.
But in the mid-eighties it developed a line of kitchenware going completely over to this at Christmas.
HE says when the recession came people were not buying kitchen utensils.
This store in Thame is one of those which will continue trading, but people in the town say they are not surprised other shops have run into trouble…
Vox pops…
You used to be able to get odd knick nacks in there now it is just like any other store and we have enough up market stores in Thame.
It's the recession nobody has any money for that kind of thing…
The administrators Morton Thornton are now planning a complete restructuring of the company they are confident they can turn Carpenter's around so that it will be trading in another hundred years.
A new chief constable for Gloucestershire has been appointed.
He's Anthony Butler, currently deputy chief constable in Leicestershire.
He takes over at a time when latest figures show Gloucestershire with the fasting rising crime rate in the country.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
ANTHONY BUTLER/Chief Constable Designate
COLIN HAY/Police Committee Chairman
Voice over
There were six candidates shortlisted for the post of Gloucestershire's Chief Constable…and late this afternoon the winner was announced…
Anthony Butler, who comes from Leicestershire where he was Deputy Chief.
He arrives in the County to face a crime rate rising at more than 32 percent a year.
And pleas from his predecessor for 50 more officers to fight crime have so far gone unanswered by the Home Office.
The people of Gloucestershire had this message for the new man in charge of policing:
Male speaker
Police need to break the cycle of crime by getting through to the juveniles.
Voice over
The new Chief Constable replaces Albert Pacey, who's leaving the force to head the National Criminal Intelligance Service, which co-ordinates the fight against drugs, football hooliganism and pornography.
Police committee Chairman Colin Hay said he doesn't expect the new man to come up with instant solutions to the problem of rising crime:
Male speaker
It would damage morale if someone came in and said everything was wrong.
It will take time for changes to be made.
Voice over
Mr Butler will take over within three months.
Plans for a space-age bridge across the Thames have angered residents of a Cotswold village.
The architects say the carbon fibre structure is a design for the nineties.
Campaigners against the bridge call it the Yuppie Tennis Racket from Hell.
SIMON GARRETT/Buscot
ELLEN ANN HOPKINS/Protestor
SUE HOMERSHAM/Local Councillor
MICHAEL DOWER/Countryside Commission
Voice over
It was in March that the winner was revealed of a competition to build a bridge at Bloomer's Hole to link the Thames Path on the Gloucestershire — Oxfordshire border.
The design chosen from more than two hundred is one of carbon fibre dusted with diamond.
It'll cost a hundred and forty thousand pounds to build but some locals say it's the wrong bridge in the wrong place
Female speaker
Locals call it the yuppie tennis racket from hell.
It's made from carbon fibre like new expensive tennis rackets.
We imagine a giant tennis racket across the Thames.
I think Concorde's a wonderful design but I wouldn't want it in this water meadow.
Likewise the bridge won't fit in a rural setting
Voice over
Protestors believe if necessary the path could run along the top of the weir across the river in Lechlade.
They say improvement to that and the existing road bridge would remove the need for a new one altogether
Female speaker
We believe there's a perfectly adequate and scenic footpath which with a small amount of adaptation could do the job perfectly well
Voice over
The Countryside Commission says its plans have been calculated especially so the path avoids the beautiful National Trust village of Buscot.
Despite the protest they're sticking to location and design
Male speaker
We decided we ought to give people the opportunity to see some of the water meadow.
And we've deliberatly gone along with local wishes to avoid going through Buscot itself
Voice over
Mr Dower insists the bridge's design is one whose time has come
Male speaker
We chose it for it's elegant design.
We wouldn't turn it down because it's made from new materials Indeed we welcome the use of such material in the countryside
Voice over
Now planning councillors on both side of the Thames will have to consider if the plans are for a bridge too far
A rave festival that's being billed as the biggest in Europe could, police believe, end in disaster.
The event, on thirty acres of farmland, could attract up to 30,000 people.
The organisers have been granted a licence in the face of strong local objections.
IAN MACLAREN/Wavendon
Chief Supt CAROLINE NICHOLL/Thames Valley Police
MURRAY BEETSON/ESP Promotions
CHARLES BENSON/Landowner
Voice over
The tranquil scene at Fen Farm will be shattered when thousands of dance music fans converge on Wavendon near MIlton Keynes.
Details were being finalised today after the promoters, ESP, were granted a licence, on appeal, despite strong objections from local residents and the police, who fear there is the potential for a major disaster…
The promoter, Murray Beetson, says he doesn't condone the use of drugs and he prefers to avoid the term Rave for the event, which gets underway on August the 20th.
He's calling it Woodstock 2…the new generation.
There'll be no musicians, just DJs specialising in techno, garage, house and hard core dance music…
But in the picturesque village of Wavendon, a mile from the festival site, residents are totally opposed to the event…
vox
Landowner Charles Benson understands his neighbours' fears, but is confident the festival will be properly run, with adequate safeguards…
And for fans of the specialist music sold at shops like this one at Wolverton in Milton Keynes, the festival is a major boost for dance music…
vox
With a potential 900,000 pounds to be earned from ticket sales alone, the rave scene culture is now moving into the world of big business.
A teenager has appeared in court after a schoolgirl was killed in a crash involving a stolen car.
Relatives of the dead girl were in court to see Lee Staines remanded in custody.
JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
Sharon Griffiths, who was fifteen, was killed when a car driven by her sister Sandra was hit by a stolen Vauxhall Cavalier on the Newton Longville Road near Bletchley in Buckinghamshire.
Sandra is still under sedation in hospital, suffering from internal injuries and a broken collar bone.
Sharon's other sister Lisa was in court this morning when Lee Staines, who's eighteen, appeared before Milton Keynes magistrates charged with causing death by dangerous driving.
He's also accused of aggravated vehicle taking, driving whilst disqualified and driving without insurance.
He was remanded in custody for three and a half weeks.
His girlfriend, Susan Wormsley, who was seriously injured in the crash is still in hospital.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GRAEME BOWD/Watchfield
SHELLEY WILLIAMS
MARY DRAPER/Paul Draper's Mother
PAUL DRAPER
MIKE ROBERTS/Director of Housing
Voice over
Three months pregnant, yesterday Shelley Williams lost her baby, today she returned from hospital what's been her home for the last two months, a tent pitched on a grass verge outside the home of her boyfriend's parents.
The couple say this is the only way the can live together.
And unless they do the chances of getting a real home are slim.
Female speaker
The council told us the only way we could get a home was if we were living together.
Voice over
Boyfriend Paul Draper used to live here before he met Shelley.
But the house is too overcrowded for an extra person.
His parents sleep on a setee in the living room.
Sister Felicity and brother Lee have one of the bedrooms.
Fifteen year old Justin has another, 17 year old David's room is locked.
He's a chef and doesn't want the younger children to get to his knives.
Mrs Draper says they've been trying to get a larger home for years.
Female speaker
I feel very sorry for them.
The council knew we were overcrowded even before Shelley came.
Voice over
The couple insist that the pregnancy was an accident, and not an attempt to jump waiting list.
They also believe that their poor accomodation may have been a factor in loosing the baby.
Male speaker
We are very angry.
The conditions are very bad living in a tent.
Voice over
But the Vale of White Horse Council says the couple will have to wait their turn.
Male speaker
The council has a points system.
There are 1,500 families on the waiting list.
Voice over
Tonight they'll be sleeping in the tent again.
Both accept that there's little chance of getting housed.
But if they live seperately, they'll be no chance at all.
A gliding club which lost its home to a new car plant says business is on the up and up.
The Vale of White Horse Gliding Centre now operates from a nearby farm, and will soon be offering flights seven days a week.
GRAEME BOWD/Shrivenham
GORDON WALKER/Instructor
PETER HOGAN/First Soloist
JIM ROGERS/Glider Pilot
Voice over
Like many adventure sports gliding was badly hit by the recession.
But now business seems to be taking off again.
Five years ago the Vale of White Horse Gliding Centre had to leave South Marston airfield to make way for a Honda car plant.
But gliders don't need a real airport, a field will do.
And the club's new home near Shrivenham looks like being a soaraway success.
Male speaker
’ At the weekends we've been getting so busy that we havn't been able to fly all the members.
So we're going to open seven days a week.’
Voice over
Gliding costs much less than flying powered aircraft.
But it's still not exactly cheap, especially if you buy your own machine.
This one cost £34,000.
Most members fly the club's planes.
It's three pounds for a launch and around ten pounds an hour, if you can stay up that long.
This was a special day for Peter Hogan.
More than 20 years since he started flying, he went solo for the first time.
Male speaker
I joined the Air Cadets when I was young but I got more interested in chasing girls.
It's taken me 24 years to go solo.
Voice over
But can you actually go anywhere in a glider?
Yes you can, but without an engine you can't always be sure of getting home again.
Male speaker
I took off from an airfield near Stroud and flew to Basingstoke.
I was going to go back but I didn't think I'd make it so I landed here to be safe.
Voice over
This summer the centre will have many of corporate customers, high flyers out for a trial lesson with their colleagues.
But they say the best pilots start young and David Leech will have to wait till August for his first solo.
He can't go up alone until he's 16.
Voice over
A film company has turned the clock back one hundred years to recreate a bustling Victorian dock scene.
It's shooting a film for American television based on’ Heart of Darkness’— the Joseph Conrad novel that's been described as the greatest story of all time.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
NICOLAS ROEG/Director
PETER VAUGHAN/Actor
Voice over
A shirehorse stands next to a warehouse bearing the sign’ Solomon Gills Nautical Instrument Maker’.
Nearby a dockworker snatches a moment's rest.
It's a typical Victorian waterway scene.
But the illusion is soon shattered…the moored sailing vessel alongside is heaving with 65 members of a film crew.
They're shooting a feature film of Joseph Conrad's epic novel’ Heart of Darkness’.
The story tells of a man's journey of self discovery up an African River…and most of the shoot was done in tropical Belize.
But the main character Marlow…played by Tim Roth…looks back on his life when he returns to port.
And that's where the two days filming at Gloucester docks comes in:
Male speaker
Gloucester is one of the few unspoilt Victorian docks left.
They wanted to create an atmosphere.
He's enjoying making the film.
Voice over
Among the stars of Heart of Darkness is Peter Vaughan…well known to television viewers for his roles in Porridge and Chancer.
He plays the shipping company boss Mr Jaeger:
Male speaker
He's only filming for two days.
It's a far cry from Chancer, but that's what's good about being a character actor…there's plenty of variety.
Voice over
Filming in Gloucester docks ends this evening.
Heart of Darkness will be shown first on American television.
But the makers hope it will come to our tv screens and to the cinemas later.
We may be useless at football, cricket and the Eurovision Song Contest, but there is still ONE thing that the English excel at.
One man, and his garden shed, are living proof that when it comes to eccentricity, we've got the market cornered.
DOMINIC HEALE/Reporting
JOHN WARD/Inventor
It looks like something from the planet Zog.
Its inventor looks like he's on a flying visit to the twentieth century.
But this bodpod is designed to solve a down to earth problem…how to fit six people into a car designed for five.
It's been knocked up in a shed in the back garden of John Ward's home at Highan Serrers in Northamptonshire.
He says
The neighbours have grown used to Mr Ward's wacky ideas.
In the past he's invented a Dolly Parton boob rack, a one man irrigation system and a silent door knocker.
He says
Some may think all this fresh air has gone to Mr Ward's head but undaunted, he's already working on his next project.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Michael Heseltine leaves hospital
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven point three at two eight eight seven point four 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty eight and up at two marks, fifty one.
(That's all the news from Central South.
Our next bulletin will be at 10.30.
Goodbye.)
A couple have taken a neglected West African monkey into their home after discovering that he was being kept tied up in a freezing garage.
They say that monkeys are often badly treated by people who bring them into the country without really understanding how to care for them.
JESSICA FOWLE/Milton Keynes
GREG STANIK/Vet
MONICA KING/Rescuer
Voice over
This is what Charlie looked like when Monica and Roger King took him into their home in Milton Keynes.
When they rescued him he was suffering from frostbite and had a broken tail which eventually had to be amputated.
Now, getting to grips with his new home, he's changed beyond recognition.
Male speaker
It's taken a lot of effort to get Charlie into his present condition.
Voice over
Unfortunately Charlie's story is far from unique.
The problem of abused and neglected monkeys is becoming alarmingly common.
Female speaker
People don't realise what it means to own a monkey.
When they're faced with financial problems it's the monkey that suffers.
Voice over
Charlie's the ninth monkey the Kings have saved and brought into their home.
Now they're planning to set up a sanctuary for exotic wild animals.
They're happy to come to the rescue but most of all they want to see tighter rules regulating the ownership of such animals.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) After the break we're on the water and in the air.
Welcome back.
comng up later, the’ greatest story of all time’becomes a new film.
(WES) But now its time to join Tim Russon for Summer sport.
TIM RUSSON
JASON APPLEGATE/Instructor
PAUL REED/National Organiser
TONY MEEK/Trainer
Voice over
hello there this week our summer sporting action is whitewater rafting…we've come to the water sports centre at Holme Pierrepoint which is the only centre of its kind in Britian…
Whitewater rafting…in Britain…yes what was once part and parcel of adventure holidays in America and Africa is now floating into this country both as a leisure activity and a competitive sport…
Holme Pierrepoint…which has a man made whitewater course…is the only place guaranteed to wash you away although there are rivers in Wales and Scotland which are being used when the water's running high…
We're off rafting with a group of lads from Gloucestershire way…they're here as part of the National Boys Club activity day…
Coaching them…steering them down stream will be one of the centre's instructor's Jason Applegate from Milton Keynes…
Jason says that you can take any group down the course and give them a thrill you don't have to be good and special needs groups such as blind people can also have a go…
and what our boys…our volunteers…the boys all say they are looking forward to it some have been canoeing and they expect it to be fast and bumpy…
Paul Reed the National Organiser says the sport started on the rivers of wales and is now spreading throughout the country…
He says over the last five years it's got far more popular…it's a sport which is developing…it's just opening up as a competitve sport…
Paul says you don't have to have any ability at all because all the guides are highly trained…the groups that go rafting can turn up and have a good time…everybody enjoys themselves…
the boys says they all had a good time…one fell into the water but he thought it was excellent fun…
Jason the instructor says they made out very well and worked together well as a team…
Paul says it's a sport for all the youngest who's been in a raft is 5…the oldest is 95…anyone can come and see what it's like playing in whitewater
from the wilds of whitewater we're off to the Forest of Dean in Gloucestershire for the start of our action round up…there we're meeting up with greyhound trainer Tony Meek…and his two dogs…
Lassa Java and Ringa Hustle…tomorrow night they're off to wimbledon the track not the tennis courts for the Greyhound Derby…it's the biggest race of the year…there's 40,000 pounds for the winner…millions will be bet…it's the grand national of the greyhound world…
to have one dog there is quite something…to have two in a six dog race is something special…
Tony Meek says it means the world to be in the race and its a dream come true…he gets his dogs ready by walking them in the forest every morning…they have good food…weetabix…honey and milk for breakfast…cooked meat…raw meat and vegatables for tea…he says his dogs have a good chance of winning they're second and third favourites and he's not bothered which one does it…
most days you'll find Tony Meek racing his dogs at the Oxford stadium…not tonight…because the speedway machines are there…its a gala night…the top twenty riders from the second division are racing for the Service Master Trophy…
racing for the British Modern Pentathlon championship this weekend are two Gloucestershire rivals…
Richard Phelps and Graham Brookhouse…they were in the British team at the Olympics in Barcelona…this weekend they're competing against each other for the British Title in Bedford…
they're racing on the Thames at Henley as well…950 competitors are rowing in the qualifying rounds for the royal regatta…10 women scullers are trying to make it through…for the 950 there are only 330 places to be had so it's going to be hard and fast…
they're racing against the clock at Prescott Hill climb in Gloucestershire this weekend…as the Midland Championship reaches the half way stage…practice gets underway in the morning…the green light for the competition runs will go on at 10 on Sunday…
and finally we've off road racing…to look ahead to…that's our action in next week's summer sport
Find our parents' killer.
New appeal on Dixons murder three years on.
Too soft.
RSPCA says courts should be tougher on cruelty.
And Tarzan meets the Big Cat…a car fit for a President.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
On the anniversary of the murder, the Dixon family have said — for the sake of their parents and for the sake of a civilised society — please help catch the killer.
Erika Barnes reports.
1989/LITTLEHAVEN/West Wales
KEVIN DIXON/Peter's Brother
TIMOTHY DIXON/Son
JULIE DIXON/Daughter
Voice over
Peter and Gwenda Dixon were at the wrong place, at the wrong time.
Murdered at their beloved Little Haven on the Pembrokeshire coast.
Tied up and robbed, before they were shot and thrown over a cliff.
They'd been taking their very last walk of a well earned holiday.
Now their family share their thoughts and sadness, three years on.
Male speaker
A day doesn't pass when we don't think of Peter and Gwenda.
I think we just learn to carry it with more discretion.
We keep it to ourselves.
Someone said to me you take three years to mourn.
You need more than three years.
Voice over
Police have interviewed sixteen hundred people — some of them fellow walkers -in their search for the killers.
No link could be found with the Oxfordshire couple.
A scruffy cyclist who used the Dixons credit cards was never found.
There was even talk of an IRA link, after an arms cache was found eight miles away.
But three years on, there are still too many unanswered questions.
The Dixons hope someone holds the key.
Male speaker
For the sake of my parents, for the sake of their loved ones, for the sake of justice, and for the sake of a civilised society, please come forward to the police with your information.
Female speaker
I want justice to be done.
I'm sure it will be.
Someone must know someone who knows something.
Voice over
The Dixons hope their emotional appeal will trigger a concience somewhere, somehow.
But it seems their wounds will never heal.
Male speaker
As people go back to normal life, we're left with the consequences.
We take one day at a time.
We're just left with the memories of Peter and Gwenda.
Voice over
For the children, those memories will always be tainted by their terrible death.
Three years on it's impossible to forgive and forget.
They need to find the killers of Peter and Gwenda so they can rest in peace.
The RSPCA says magistrates are too soft on people who are cruel to animals.
Inspectors want tougher sentences, including lifetime bans on keeping animals and heavier fines or even imprisonment.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
BILL STEWART/Vet
ALAN BROCKBANK/RSPCA
Voice over
Another day in court for RSPCA inspector Allan Brockbank and his colleagues.
Today a couple are on trial for cruelty to a dog, which starved to death after being left in a flat in gloucester for more than a week without food or water.
Julie Hilton from Gloucester failed to turn up to answer the charges and was found guilty in her absence.
She'll be sentenced at a later date.
He ex husband George Hailes pleaded not guilty to cruelty, but magistrates banned him from keeping a dog for 6 months and ordered him to contribute towards prosecution costs.
Vet, Bill Stuart says it was one of the worse cases of starvation he'd ever seen.
For RSPCA officers, it was a case where they would have liked to have seen tougher action.
The RSPCA says that cases like these often bring just token fines from magistrates, when in fact they could impose fines of up to £2,000 and or 6 months imprisonment.
In a statement, a spokesman for Gloucester magistrates says: The magistrates hear the facts on each case and will obviously sentence on it's merits.
If they are considering a financial penalty, then they of course have to have regard to the defendant's means.
The RSPCA though maintains tougher sentencing is the only way to make scenes like these a thing of the past.
A farmer and his wife have been teaching their son at home for over two years because they don't want him to go to a special school.
Richard Ford, who's fourteen has speech and learning difficulties, and the local council says he should be at a special school.
But his parents want him to be taught with normal children.
Richard Barnett reports.
DRIFFIELD/Gloucestershire
JOHN FORD/Father
RICHARD FORD
Voice over
Two men who raided a supermarket after kidnapping the supervisor and her husband at gunpoint have been jailed for a total of twelve years.
Harry Palmer and Anthony Thomas, who are both from Bicester in Oxfordshire, raided the town's Macs Store in December last year.
Palmer, who's twenty six, was jailed for ten years…
Thompson, who's thirty three, was jailed for two.
BICESTER/Oxfordshire
The last aircraft to leave RAF Abingdon in Oxfordshire have flown out from the base.
RAF ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
The fastest production car in the world was taken for a test drive today by the President of the Board of Trade Michael Hesletine.
The Jaguar XJ two-twenty has already sold out, even though it costs more than four hundred thousand pounds to buy and may cost another twenty thousand pounds a year to insure.
Liz Hannam reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
MICHAEL HESELTINE MP/President/Board of Trade
TOM WALKENSHAW/MD/Jaguar Sport
1988/BIRMINGHAM MOTOR SHOW/National Exhibition Centre
Voice over
One of the slowest vehicles on the road, and coming up beind the world's fastest production car the Jaguar XJ220, which has a top speed of 217mph, was making its debut in Banbury.
The car costs more than £400,000 and the first one has just rolled off the production line.
There to mark the occasion was the President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine.
He was offered a test drive and gave his verdict; a big thumbs up, before he even left the gate.
Jaguar is only making 350 of the cars.
The company isn't saying who it has sold to, but the pop singer, Elton John is rumoured to be among the customers.
The car is nicknamed’ The Cat’and is capable of reaching 100mph in 8 seconds.
The interior is finished in leather and boasts luxuries such as a compact disc player which can still be heard clearly at 200mph.
Each car is being hand built at JaguarSport's factory at Bloxham in Banbury.
The prototype of the XJ220 was first shown at the Birmingham Motor Show almost 4 years ago.
When it was offered for sale 1,500 people applied to buy the car and it was sold out within 2 days.
That was 2 and a half years ago.
In the next few weeks the first lucky 10 will take delivery of the fatest road car in the world.
In part two: Challenge of Gold.
The youngsters hoping to make waves in Barcelona.
And they're number one…they're top of the pops…but who are they?
TIM RUSSON
PAUL BUSH/Team Manager
RICHARD COX/Sports Pyschologist
MADELEINE CAMPBELL/Captain
JO DEAKINS
JAIME KING
MARK KIFF/Reporting
Voice over
A chart-topping pop group with two number one records and a gold disc will be performing in Oxford tomorrow night.
They're in the middle of a world tour, playing new and traditional songs.
But it's unlikely you'll have heard of’ Awatinas’…as they're the number one group in Bolivia.
OXFORD
MARIO CONDE Awatinas
Voice over
Awatinas' most recent number one hit; a song called Kullakita which means sister in the band's native Aymara language.
Their songs celebrate their ancient culture which dominated Bolivia before the Spanish conquistadores invaded 500 years ago.
Today the Aymara people are still second class citizens in their own country, but Awatinas which means guardians, are determined to keep their native songs alive.
They are the first Aymara band to have anumber one in Bolivia and are currently on a world tour.
The band plays on traditional siku pipes, the tiny charango, a 10-stringed guitar, a Spanish guitar and drums called lequemia.
The shell-lie bangles are actually goat's nails.
Their songs celebrate the land, which they regard as owning mankind and not the other way around and also about the gods they pray to, principally Patcha-mama, the Aymara earth-god.
Their philosophy is summed by the single word Awat kipas pxana naka sataki.
Conditions for UK relief for Bosnia
The United Kingdom has agreed to send forces for humanitarian relief in Bosnia as long as an effective ceasefire holds.
Major warns against EC super state
At the EC summit in Lisbon, the Prime Minister has called for measures to prevent the Community becoming an out-of-control super state.
Health Secretary rules out new HIV laws
The Health Secretary has ruled out new legal measures against people with HIV.
FTSE down 23
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-three point two at twenty-five, thirty-four point one.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety but down at two marks, ninety-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Finally, what was billed as a spectacular display of gunpowder, fire, balloons and art…featuring Halley's comet speeding through the cosmos.
It was all prepared by a Chinese artist whose work appears in a new exhibition.
But WAS it art, or just a bit of a damp squib?
IAN MACLAREN Oxford
HOU HAN RU Chinese Artist
LYDIE MEPHAM Exhibition Organiser
Voice over
Cai Guoqiang is masterminding this frankly baffling artistic project in Oxford's Angel Meadow.
Basically, the Chinese invented gunpowder 3,000 years ago and the Oxford astronomer, Halley observed his comet, in 1707.
And no-one really connected the two…until now.
There's much earnest talk of communicating with the universe and creating a sculpture in time…
Male speaker
There is an important eastern conception of the permanent and the temporal.
The explosion will live on in the memory for a long time.
Voice over
The perturbed look from Cai Guoqiang suggests all is not going to plan or time…
But experts from a theatrical pyrotechnics company and the police are happy.
They said it would be all over in 30 seconds.
In fact it takes considerably longer.
The fuse burns…and burns.
Two and a half minutes later…it all happens…
Explosion!
And yes if we're not mistaken, there goes the comet…
Everyone looks a little mystified.
And on and on it goes.
Female speaker
Does it look like Halley's comet?
Female speaker
Well I've seen Halley's comet and it doesn't to me.
But it might to someone else.
Male speaker
If the fuse had burned quicker, it would have been more dramtic.
I was struggling to grasp the aesthetics of it all.
Voice over
Afterwards the organisers put a brave face on it…
Female speaker
It could have been really much quicker.
But still it was fun to see it.
Voice over
The exhibition of New Art from China will run through the summer months at The Museum of Modern Art in Oxford.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Yorks officially separate
The Duke and Duchess of York have formally separated, ending speculation about a possible reconciliation.
They say they will spend as much time as they can together in the interests of their children.
Major's Iraq attack warning
Downing Street has said that the Prime Minister warned President Clinton to make sure the American missile attack on Iraq was’ limited and proportionate’bearing in mind there are British people in jail there.
Police reforms unveiled
Proposals to reform the police have been revealed.
They include giving local forces more control over how they spend money and deploy resources.
FTSE up 9
The hundred shares index closed up nine point five at twenty-eight, ninety-seven exactly.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-nine and up at two marks, fifty-four.
Anne Dawson
Before we go a reminder that after the late news tonight's edition of The Way We Were in which our reporter, Kim Barnes, investigates the relevance of The Oxford Union in today's Britain.
That's Part of the Union tonight at ten forty.
Wesley Smith
For now, Goodnight.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE)
Still to come on Central South…the attack of the Tigersharks.
The British team that's found the secret of winning.
And it's explosive, it's Cosmic…but is it really art?
Welcome back:In a few minutes, some strange goings-on with Chinese fireworks and balloons.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
DAVID LYLES/Coach
JAIME KING/British Champion
Voice over
Dateline…swindon monday morning…six o clock…the Link Centre…for most folk the start of the working week is still a few hours away…but the Tigersharks are wide awake and raring to go…
this is just one of thirty sessions a week for Swindon's young swimmers…lack of facilities and pool time dictates they start at the crack of dawn and go back for more at dusk…
they have to beg and borrow all the local pools they can to keep going…and yet their success is helping swindon on to the top board of swimming…
the Tigersharks are one of the most successful clubs of its kind in the country…20 have qualified for the national championships next month and in sixteen year old Jaime King they have one of the best breastrokers in the world…
here at last is a British sports team who've found the secret of winning
David Lyles, the coach, says their winning secret is constant hard work and dedication and determination…they have problems finding enough pool time because there are so many clubs in Swindon but it is a nationwide problem because there are only two good pools in this country which is not a lot for fifty million people…
to get themselves on top form and at full fitness the Tigersharks are off to San Fransisco on Wednesday…club fund raising and the mums and dads are paying the bill…why abroad…
David Lyles says they’ ll be able to train in good pools and compete against some of the best swimmers in the world…they'll be racing the top youngsters from America and Canada
sunny California may sound good…but for swimmers like Jaime King it's all hard work…this summer she'll be swimming for Britain in the European championships…she's just won the senior title…and on top of all the training has also been taking her GCSE's at school…
Jaime King says it will be good to get a break away…it is hard work because of the early starts there's no going out at night…but she enjoys it
all the Tigersharks are enjoying a record breaking season…they're hungry for more success too…so Swindon best be ready to celebrate another big win
celebrating a big win already is local greyhound trainer Tony Meek…the Forest of Dean has never enjoyed such sporting triumph…on Saturday Tony's dog Ringa Hustle won the big race of the year…the Greyhound Derby…and that's where we start our roundup 
Pictures from SIS
Voice over
Ringa Hustle…was one of the last dogs to go into the traps at wimbledon on Saturday…he was drawn in three alongside his kennel mate Lassa Java…the derby is the race of the year for greyhounds…40,000 to the winner and there was only ever going to be one winner…
Ringa Hustle got off to a flyer and never landed…
Lassa Java pushed him early on…what a night it was for the Meek family from the Forest of Dean as they watched their dogs dominate…
Ringa Hustle raced home a 5-2 winner…he may be given one more race in Ireland before they retire him to stud…
another Gloucestershire winner at the weekend was Richard Phelps…there was no betting or prize money for him though…as he took the British title in the Modern Pentathlon Championships in Bedford…after running…fencing…swimming…shooting and riding all weekend he was just a handful of points in front at the end…
just missing out on a win was local powerboater Steve Kerton…in the French round of the world formula one championships at Chalon he took second place but is still chasing hard for the crown…which he's never won…
flying high in California is hanglider Pete Harvey from Milton Keynes…the world championships have just got underway and Pete is leading the British challenge…last time out the team won gold…
and rowing for gold all this week will be the best oarsmen…young and old…from all over the world as the royal regatta takes off on the Thames at henley…we'll be on the water tomorrow night to look ahead with the fastest school crew in the country
Midlands Electricity has been fined more than (29,000) twenty nine thousand pounds after a contractor was killed in an explosion at a power station.
The company admitted it had failed to protect the worker from danger.
The victim's father said the fine should have been bigger.
7 August 1992/RICHARD BARNETT/Hereford
MICHAEL GRANT/Victim's Father
Voice over
Contractor Michael Grant, who was 24, died last year in a blast at the Midlands Electricity heat and power station next to the Bulmers Cider factory in Hereford.
He was welding on top of a 900 ton oil storage tank which exploded, hurling him 120 feet into a wall.
Today at Hereford Magistrates court Midlands Electricity admitted endangering workers by failing to maintain safety standards at the power station.
Prosecuting for the Health and Safety Executive Terry Aston said the oil in the storage tanks was meant to be kept at a safe temperature of 40 degrees centigrade.
Normally there was a thermostat submerged in the oil to monitor the temperature.
But at Hereford, the oil level had been allowed to drop, leaving the probe high and dry.
So it failed to turn the heating element off…and the oil was boiled up to 185 degrees centigrade…turning the liquid into explosive vapour.
Mr Aston told the court that the oil tank was like a large unexploded bomb.
It could have gone off at any time.
No one knew exactly what caused the blast.
But it was likely that the oil was ignited when Michael Grant turned on his welding kit.
Nicholas Worseley QC, appearing for Midlands Electricity, said Michael Grant's death was a terrible, terrible tragedy.
He said the management at the site hadn't given permission for welding on the oil tank.
But new safety procedures had been introduced so such an event could never happen again.
Midlands Electricity was fined more than 29,000 pounds with 5,000 costs.
But Michael Grant's father was dissatisfied with the outcome:
Male speaker
Thirty thousand pounds is nothing for someone's life.
Voice over
Midlands Electricity still faces a family claim for compensation over Michael Grant's death.
An inquiry has begun after a hospital patient was found hanged.
The sixty-two year old man's body was discovered just a short time after he went missing from his ward.
It's the second incident of its kind at the hospital this year.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
MARIELLA DEXTER/Gloucestershire NHS Trust
Voice over
The man was a patient at Gloucestershire Royal NHS trust Hospital, undergoing routine treatment.
At 11.30 on saturday night ward staff discovered he was missing — they began a search and found him fifteen minutes later.
She says that he was hanging by his dressing gown cord from a banister.
They couldn't revive him.
In february a woman patient committed suicide by jumping from a tower block window.
Managers are now asking for an independant review of both incidents.
She says that the South West Regional Health Authority have been asked to look into it.
The hospital says it will fully co-operate with the coroners investigation into the death.
Summing up has begun at the High Court in the case of a woman who claims that a routine jaw operation left her paralysed for life.
Michelle Howard says the surgeons who operated on her were negligent, but the hospital denies its staff did anything wrong.
ROBIN POWELL/High Court
Voice over
Now into its fourth week, Michelle Howard's High Court battle with Wessex Regional Health Authority is at last entering its final stages.
Michelle has been paralysed from the chest down for the past 11 years — the result, she claims, of a routine jaw operation she underwent at Poole General Hospital in November 1982.
She was 16 at the time, but later succeeded in qualifying as a lawyer.
Now she works for Townsends Solicitors in Swindon, specialising in medical accident cases like her own.
The court has considered several possible causes for Michelle Howard's injuries.
Among them, the suggestion that during surgery her head wasn't properly supported, or that a surgical hammer used in the operation was applied with so much force that it damaged her spinal cord.
The health authority says it still doesn't understand what went wrong, but it denies acting negligently in any way whatsoever.
The final witness to be called, neurosurgery expert John Hankinson, gave evidence this morning, and Mr Justice Morland is expected to complete his summing up tomorrow.
Michelle Howard would say nothing outside court except that she's looking forward to it all being over.
That may be some time yet — the Judge will almost certainly reserve his decision until a later date.
A new club which aims to give homeless and unemployed people what could be their only good meal of the day has opened its doors for the first time.
It's been started with a local council grant, and caters for some of an estimated one thousand people who would otherwise have to eat from rubbish bins…or simply go hungry.
IAN MACLAREN/Swindon
BOB JOHNSON/Club Organiser
MARY MATTHEWS/Health Visitor
JOHN GARBUTT/Club Co-ordinator
Voice over
A sight to get the taste buds going…especially if you've been sleeping rough the night before.
Breakfast is served from half past six in the morning at the The Broadgreen Centre in Swindon.
Typical customers are out of work, living in hostels…or without a proper home at all…
vox
And the chance of getting a traditional English Breakfast under your belt first thing is a welcome change…
vox vox
It's estimated there are up to a thousand homeless people in Swindon…and the Breakfast Club is seen as one way to make life more tolerable…
Health visitors who specialise in the welfare of the homeless believe it's one way of ensuring families do get a decent meal in the morning…
Customers are charged a nominal 50 pence donation…but people who can't pay won't be turned away.
The response so far has been promising.
The club will open only at the weekends, but the organisers eventually hope to extend the service to seven days.
In Central News tonight: Jailed…the judge's daughter arrested after student drugs death.
The tank that became a bomb.
MEB fined for explosion that killed a worker.
And, hospital inquiry.
A missing patient is found hanged.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
But the court was told that there was no evidence that Grifiths had supplied the drug which Henry Skelton took.
His mother has told Central News in an exclusive interview that she doesn't blame anybody for his death.
We have two reports, the first on today's court hearing.
SIMON GARRETT/Birmingham Crown Court
Det Con PAUL KYBERD/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Georgia Griffiths pleaded guilty to supplying LSD and possessing amphetamines with intent to supply.
But it was claimed in court she was not a drug dealer.
Defence counsel Richard Benson said she was part of a syndicate of ten or a dozen young Oxford people who bought amphetamines in bulk to save money.
The intention being to keep them at Georgia Griffiths house…even though she made no real profit from the deal.
3 tablets of LSD, a drug Georgia Griffiths never used, were left in her fridge by another man.
She sold them to Henry Skelton's girlfriend shortly before he fell from a third floor window and died.
Georgia Griffiths said she just wanted to get them out of her house.
A bundle of letters and references was handed to Mr Justice Tudor Evans in her defence.
But he said’ The offence with which you are charged is so serious that despite your personal mitigating factors a non-custodial sentence cannot be justified.’
He sentenced her to nine months in prison for supplying LSD and a concurrent six months for possessing amphetamines
Male speaker
In the world of drugs there are no winners.
It's a total tragedy.
She's lost her liberty a young man's lost his life.
All in all there are no winners
Voice over
Georgia Griffiths father Peter, himself a barrister and court recorder left the court knowing her dreams of becoming a solicitor are finished.
It was said the publicity surrounding Henry Skelton's death and Georgia Griffiths subsequent arrest had damaged her health and caused substantial emotional stress to family members.
Ironically medical evidence brought out in court failed to find a link between the drugs sold by Georgia Griffiths and those found in the body of Henry Skelton 
KIM BARNES/Reporting
HILARY SKELTON/Henry's Mother
Det Con PAUL KYBERD/Thames Valley Police
SHIRISH KULKARNI/Working Party Member
NIGEL HUDDLESTONE/Students' Union
Voice over
At 21 Henry Skelton had his life before him…a brilliant artist and musician he was studying at New College, Oxford.
But following an all night drink and drugs party he was found close to the Bridge of Sighs…having fallen from the top floor of this house.
The inquest into his death found he'd taken nine times the usual dose of LSD…but recorded an open verdict.
Now his mother says she doesn't blame anyone in particular for his death…
She says each tragedy has a unique set of circumstances.
Henry had a vulnerable personality.
Police launched an investigation into Henry's death the next morning…they talked to party-goers and tried to trace the supply chain of the drug.
He says we had to climb an imaginary ladder.
One of the girls my colleague interviewed gave us some information.
It lead them to this house on Magdalen Road in Oxford…where law graduate Georgia Griffiths was living with her sister and two other girls.
We found some drugs.
To anyone who thinks you can take drugs, this shows the risks.
Georgia Griffiths' drugs charges attracted national attention when it was revealed she was the daughter of a court recorder…and the crown court case had to be moved to Birmingham because the Oxford judge knew her father.
The case also threw the university's drugs problem into the spotlight yet again…seven years after minister's daughter Olivia Channon died from heroin and alcohol.
Henry Skelton's college responded by setting up a drugs working party involving students.
He says I'd like the university to look at the problems, not just the symptoms.
There is a mood of change within the university and that should be continued.
Meanwhile the students' union has examined the Oxford drugs connection.
Their survey found that forty per cent of students have tried drugs…but have little idea of the risks.
He says that many students knew very little about the drugs they were taking.
They didn't know that if you have ecstasy you should drink a lot of water because of the risk of heat exhaustion.
There was little respect for the drugs and that's very dangerous.
Meanhwile Henry Skelton's mother believes there's very little the university authorities can do to deal with drug-taking
She says after each of these cases people say you should do something but it's very difficult to see what you could do.
Both the Skelton family and the Griffiths family now find themselves paying the price of those risks.
Spitfire crash.
Pilot's widow says it's the way he wanted to die.
Ecstasy, Cannabis, and LSD: The drugs siezed at a LEGAL rave.
And back to Russia with love…a tearful farewell for the Moscow orphans.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
The pilot David Moore had twenty five years experience.
Tonight, his widow praised his skill and dedication.
She said that this was the way he would have wanted to die.
Richard Barnett reports:
WOODFORD/Lancashire
HORSLEY/Gloucestershire
DEANNA MOORE/Widow
DAVID OGILVY/Historic Aircraft Association
Voice over
Pilot David Moore from Gloucestershire was at the controls of the forty seven year old Spitfire as it took part in an air display near Manchester on Saturday.The fighter plane looped the loop but as it neared the ground it plummeted down, bursting into flames.Firefighters were on the scene immediately, and confirmed that the pilot was dead.David Moore, who was 47, flew with the Royal Navy for ten years before joining Rolls Royce as a pilot in the mid 1970s.He flew the company's executives around Europe…but in his spare time he enjoyed piloting vintage planes like the Spitfire, which was owned by Rolls Royce.Today at the family's home near Stroud, David Moore's widow was coming to terms with the tragedy:
Female speaker
He was an experienced pilot who loved flying.
He was too young to die.He never spoke about the risks.
Voice over
Meanwhile an expert on historic aircraft has paid tribute to both pilot and plane:
Male speaker
The aircraft was well maintained and the pilot was very experienced.
Voice over
A number of vintage aircraft have crashed in recent years…so are old planes unsafe:
Male speaker
There is always an element of risk in flying but historic aircraft are not unsafe.
Female speaker
He loved the Spitfire and if he had to die, that was the way he would have wanted it.
Voice over
The family of a woman who died from cancer are claiming that she wasn't fed for four days while she was in hospital.
Her husband and son say that cleaners had been left to hand out meals to patients.
The hospital management insists that everything was done under proper nursing supervision.
Simon Garrett reports 
GLOUCESTER
GEOFFREY LICENSE/Son
KEN LICENSE/Husband
Voice over
Rita License died from cancer last month aged fifty-nine.
She'd undergone treatment at Gloucestershire Royal Hospital two weeks before.
She was admitted on a Tuesday, and her husband and son visiting her on the Friday found she'd had no food in that time.
They say they had to stop a passing cleaner to take a plate from her trolley
A spokesman for the hospital said’ During the four days in question Mrs License had an intravenous drip supplying all her essential nutrients.
If she did not eat it was due to her feeling nauseous because of her condition.
A domestic did miss her on one occasion when her husband and son were present and corrected the situation.
It would not have gone unnoticed.’
However following a visit from a hospital manager today the Licenses understand a mistake was admitted and changes agreed
In the end the lisences made their complaint for mrs liscences sake
Mrs license returned home after two weeks in hospital where she died from her cancers
Drug pushers have been warned to stay away from legal rave parties after almost a hundred people were arrested at an event over the weekend.
There was a large police presence at the rave, despite it being licensed by the local council.
Police say they were astonished at the openness of the drug dealing.
Robin Powell reports.
BRAFIELD/Northamptonshire
Chief Supt PHIL VICKERS/Northamptonshire Police
PAUL BERNSTEIN/Rave Organiser
Voice over
Drugs seized at this weekend's rave on the outskirts of Northampton include ecstasy, cannabis, L-S-D and amphetamine sulphate, and have a street value of tens of thousands of pounds.
Billed The Midsummer Night's Dream, the party at Brafield Stadium was granted a licence by South Northants District Council, and even had the blessing of the county's police force.
But by the time the dancing stopped in the early hours of Sunday, ninety-six arrests had been made — sixty-five for the possession of illegal drugs, twenty-six for supplying or intending to supply them.
For the police — a relatively easy victory in the war on drugs…
While stadium staff spent the day clearing up at Brafield, the organisers expressed regret at the number of arrests, but insisted that Saturday night's rave is the shape of things to come…
So far fifteen men and women have been charged with drugs-related offences as a result of the Brafield rave and are due to appear before magistrates in a month's time.
Meanwhile the police are warning drug pushers to stay away from future events or face the consequences…
The drugs seized will be analysed over the next few days and more arrests are expected to follow.
An independent brewery which is in the middle of a take-over battle has pledged to buy more than seventy new pubs.
The deal, which is worth almost seventeen million pounds, depends on Morland winning its fight for survival.
Liz Hannam reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JASPER CLUTTERBUCK/Morland Chief Executive
Voice over
The agreement to buy seventy-two new pubs from Inntreprenuer Estates Limited will bring the total number of Morland pubs to just under four hundred.
It'll mean half a dozen new jobs at the brewery's headquarters in Abingdon.
The deal is strategically important for Morland which wants to stretch its influence to the South East of England where all the new pubs are.
But it could be stopped if the Suffolk based brewery Greene King is successful in its take-over bid.
Under City rules, it has until Thursday to win control of Morland.
For bosses at Morland damage caused by a Green King take-over would be incalculable.
Morland has also issued new profit forecasts today showing that next year it expects pre-tax profits to rise by twenty-eight per cent.
But Greene King has countered, calling the forecast’ feeble’.
It says Morland is paying too much for the new pubs and that it's’ the latest in a series of flawed actions by an increasingly desperate board.’
Fifty Russian orphans who'd been having the holiday of a lifetime in Britain have returned home…many of them in tears.
It was an emotional parting, not only for the children, but also for the English volunteers who'd looked after them.
They're now working to bring the children back.
Clare Lafferty reports.
MALVERN WELLS/Worcestershire
OLGA PETROVA/Interpreter
TIM ALEXANDER/Organiser
Voice over
The fifty orphans all aged between eight and twelve made the most of their last day in Malvern Wells.
They'd been here on holiday, enjoying a lifestyle worlds apart from the one they endure in Russia.
There, orphans live in very deprived conditions.
They're treated as if they're mentally retarded, ending up as factory fodder.
Within three months it was obvious that, given the opportunity, these children could be very bright.
As the coach was loaded on Sunday morning, the children looked on sadly.
For many, this was the first time they'd owned anyting.
They struggled to carry all their gifts and mementoes home.
In Russia the children will be split up and sent to different orphanges.
So they stuck closely to their new friends for these last precious hours.
At Heathrow airport the tears started.
Children so unused to hugs before, clung onto their English friends until the last minute.
Many asked to be allowed to stay.
But the volunteers could only pledge to try and improve life for them.
The volunteers now want to establish their own orphange in Moscow.
And they're looking into the possibility of bringing some of the children over to Worcestershire permanently.
One of the country's most popular artists has died, just as a new exhibition of his work gets under way.
John Piper was best known for his very English pictures of the countryside, including his own house near Henley-on-Thames, where he lived for more than fifty years.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
JOHN WHITELEY/Ashmolean Museum
DAVID BUTLER/Nuffield College
Voice over
This new exhibition brought John Piper's work to his home county just this month…but what began as a look at a private collection has now become a timely retrospective.
John Piper died yesterday at the age of 88, after a hugely varied career as an artist.
He's very much in the English tradition.
In the thirties he took up abstract painting then in 1942 he was commissioned as a war artist, painting the bombed Coventry Cathedral.
Later he would design a window for the new cathedral.
In 1961 he designed a chapel from Nuffield College in Oxford.
We were really gratified, and the chapel has given much pleasure.
The private collection will be given to the Ashmolean when the exhibition closes in August.
It's taken on a special significance.
It celebrates the work of John Piper, one of the best artists of the twentieth century.
He lived in the same house near Henley on Thames from 1935, and remained inspired by English country scenes, like St Matthews near Lechlade and classic buildings like the Oxford buildings ensuring that his links with this region remain strong.
In part two: Home Run: The Gloucester Meteors strike gold again.
Uphill task: The drivers on the fast track to the top.
And breathing fire: Full steam ahead with the Dragon Boats.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Long jumper Yinka Idowu from Carterton who competes for the Oxford City club won her place in the team a couple of weeks ago when she won the British title at Sheffield…she only finished third in trials at the weekend but is still regarded as one of our best young athletes…
Hurdler Lesley Anne Skeete from Swindon is one of the country's most experienced competitors…she's competed in the commonwealth games and the world championships…
There's also an Olmympic place for sprinter Stephanie Douglas from Milton Keynes…she'll be running in the 100 metres…
An independent brewery which is in the middle of a take-over battle has pledged to buy more than seventy new pubs.
The deal, which is worth almost seventeen million pounds, depends on Morland winning its fight for survival.
Liz Hannam reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JASPER CLUTTERBUCK/Morland Chief Executive
Voice over
The agreement to buy seventy-two new pubs from Inntreprenuer Estates Limited will bring the total number of Morland pubs to just under four hundred.
It'll mean half a dozen new jobs at the brewery's headquarters in Abingdon.
The deal is strategically important for Morland which wants to stretch its influence to the South East of England where all the new pubs are.
But it could be stopped if the Suffolk based brewery Greene King is successful in its take-over bid.
Under City rules, it has until Thursday to win control of Morland.
For bosses at Morland damage caused by a Green King take-over would be incalculable.
Morland has also issued new profit forecasts today showing that next year it expects pre-tax profits to rise by twenty-eight per cent.
But Greene King has countered, calling the forecast’ feeble’.
It says Morland is paying too much for the new pubs and that it's’ the latest in a series of flawed actions by an increasingly desperate board.’
Fifty Russian orphans who'd been having the holiday of a lifetime in Britain have returned home…many of them in tears.
It was an emotional parting, not only for the children, but also for the English volunteers who'd looked after them.
They're now working to bring the children back.
Clare Lafferty reports.
MALVERN WELLS/Worcestershire
OLGA PETROVA/Interpreter
TIM ALEXANDER/Organiser
Voice over
The fifty orphans all aged between eight and twelve made the most of their last day in Malvern Wells.
They'd been here on holiday, enjoying a lifestyle worlds apart from the one they endure in Russia.
There, orphans live in very deprived conditions.
They're treated as if they're mentally retarded, ending up as factory fodder.
Within three months it was obvious that, given the opportunity, these children could be very bright.
As the coach was loaded on Sunday morning, the children looked on sadly.
For many, this was the first time they'd owned anyting.
They struggled to carry all their gifts and mementoes home.
In Russia the children will be split up and sent to different orphanges.
So they stuck closely to their new friends for these last precious hours.
At Heathrow airport the tears started.
Children so unused to hugs before, clung onto their English friends until the last minute.
Many asked to be allowed to stay.
But the volunteers could only pledge to try and improve life for them.
The volunteers now want to establish their own orphange in Moscow.
And they're looking into the possibility of bringing some of the children over to Worcestershire permanently.
One of the country's most popular artists has died, just as a new exhibition of his work gets under way.
John Piper was best known for his very English pictures of the countryside, including his own house near Henley-on-Thames, where he lived for more than fifty years.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
JOHN WHITELEY/Ashmolean Museum
DAVID BUTLER/Nuffield College
Voice over
This new exhibition brought John Piper's work to his home county just this month…but what began as a look at a private collection has now become a timely retrospective.
John Piper died yesterday at the age of 88, after a hugely varied career as an artist.
He's very much in the English tradition.
In the thirties he took up abstract painting then in 1942 he was commissioned as a war artist, painting the bombed Coventry Cathedral.
Later he would design a window for the new cathedral.
In 1961 he designed a chapel from Nuffield College in Oxford.
We were really gratified, and the chapel has given much pleasure.
The private collection will be given to the Ashmolean when the exhibition closes in August.
It's taken on a special significance.
It celebrates the work of John Piper, one of the best artists of the twentieth century.
He lived in the same house near Henley on Thames from 1935, and remained inspired by English country scenes, like St Matthews near Lechlade and classic buildings like the Oxford buildings ensuring that his links with this region remain strong.
In part two: Home Run: The Gloucester Meteors strike gold again.
Uphill task: The drivers on the fast track to the top.
And breathing fire: Full steam ahead with the Dragon Boats.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Long jumper Yinka Idowu from Carterton who competes for the Oxford City club won her place in the team a couple of weeks ago when she won the British title at Sheffield…she only finished third in trials at the weekend but is still regarded as one of our best young athletes…
Hurdler Lesley Anne Skeete from Swindon is one of the country's most experienced competitors…she's competed in the commonwealth games and the world championships…
There's also an Olmympic place for sprinter Stephanie Douglas from Milton Keynes…she'll be running in the 100 metres…
Now the sport the Americans call their summer game…baseball is beginning to take off in this country…the city of Gloucester has just launched its own team…the Meteors…
Mark Kiff has been to weigh them up 
DAVE LARKIN/Meteors' Manager
WAYNE BREMER/Catcher
SIMON WATERHOUSE/Pitcher
Voice over
Baseball may have become a parks game in Britian in recent years but now in Gloucestershire there's a new name to put alongside the Chicago Whitesox and the Los Angeles Dodgers…the name on the shirt is the Gloster Meteors.
Not surprisingly it's all the idea of an American.
Male speaker
I've been over here for 12 years.
Baseball was my favourite game and I really missed it.
I heard there was a West Midlands League and when I contacted them, they said if I could get a team together we could join.
The players just came out of the woodwork.
Voice over
After a shaky start, the Meteors are on a roll…yesterday against the Solihull Dodgers they were looking for their fifth successive win.
The trick seems to be their enthusiasm.
Male speaker
It's a family game.
It's not like cricket; there's something happening all the time.
Male speaker
We had 23 players coming to practise.
There was great enthusiasm.
Voice over
After almost four hours of play, the Meteors proved too strong for the visitors, running out winners 18 — 8…the Meteors well and truly making a home run.
to the British summer game next…cricket…and a historic day for the City of Hereford…for the first time ever Herefordshire are playing in the Minor Counties League…they opened their innings against Devon today 
TRACEY GOODWIN/Chairman
RICHARD SKYRME/Captain
Voice over
and good news from Hereford…in reply to Devon's first innings total of one hundred and eighty one the county are one hundred and ninety six for two…a bit of speed to finish off with tonight…we're off to Gloucestershire to the Prescott Hill Climb with Mark Kiff 
RICHARD MARSHALL/Benetton Team
PATRICK WOOD
Voice over
The Bugatti Owners Club has been holding meetings at Prescott Hill near Cheltenham for more than half a century.
It's a sport which attracts all sorts of racing car enthusiasts.
From the owners of vintage cars to drivers who've invested thousands of pounds in buying and maintaining former racing cars.
There's also the odd curiosity…and nothing could more than unusual than this Peugeot 205.
It looks ordinary enough…but inside it's packed with high tech electronics…it's the work of local man Richard Marshall, who just happens to head of electronics for the Benetton Formula Grand One Prix team, putting some ideas into practice.
The fastest cars at Prescott were the big engined racing cars and the leading contenders were what's affectionately known as the Cheltenham Mafia…
Russ Ward, Steve Jewell and Patrick Wood.
They've been racing each other for years and have developed a friendly rivalry.
Patrick Wood finished fastest in his class…
Steve Jewell was second in his class…
Russ Ward in a borrowed car struggled…but the chance to see vintage cars like this seemed enough to make everybody's day.
Hundreds of people took to the water over the weekend to recreate ancient and strange boat races.
Dragon racing uses skills learned from a two thousand year old legend…yet it's claimed to be the fastest growing sport in Britain.
Simon Garrett reports 
WILLEN LAKE Milton Keynes
JOHN WARREN Dragon Racing Association
CAROL BANGHI BEN Motor Trades Charity
Voice over
Take half a tree.
Hollow it out and attach an ornate dragon's head and tail.
Drop it in the water and add twenty oarspersons a steersman and a drummer…and you have a dragon racer
Male speaker
It's a forty foot long boat paddled by twenty people driven on by a drummer and steered by an oarsman
Voice over
The teams are all from the motor trade racing in support of their own industry charity
Female speaker
They asked me to get thirty-six teams, at one point in was fifty-seven but it settled down to thirty-six
Male speaker
We are ready, we've been eating raw meat and some of us can still move which is a major bonus to us
Female speaker
I'm the drummer the dragon boats arise from an ancient chinese legend about a council official who drowned himself because of the poor service the people were getting.
Local fishermen went and beat the water with their paddles to stop the fish eating him.
They stayed in their boats of course competition is ruthless
Voice over
Dragon racing draws big crowds these days…at Milton Keynes even the ducks were Peeking
Care worker jailed over sex attacks
FTSE down 18
The hundred shares index closed down eighteen point three at twenty-five, fifteen point eight.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety and down at two marks, eighty-nine.
(ad lib)
Lord Attenborough is directing a new film about the life of Oxford Don and writer CS Lewis.
Shadowlands stars Sir Anthony Hopkins, who was joined by hundreds of extras for a scene recreating university life in the 1950's.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
Lord ATTENBOROUGH/Director
DIANA HAWKINS/Co-Producer
PENNY ROSE/Costume Designer
MICHAEL STRUTT/Film Extra
DOUGLAS GRESHAM/CS Lewis's Stepson
Voice over
It has to be perfect.
Lord Attenborough has a vision of how he wants the story of CS Lewis and his wife Joy Gresham to be told.
Male speaker
It's a love story.
A devastating, tragic love story about mature people.
I'm interested in human beings.
Here the background is not as large.
But Oxford University ain't bad.
It's very intimate.
Voice over
Back to the 1950's…and all the pomp and ceremony of an Encaenia at the Sheldonian Theatre.
They sing: God save the Queen.
Female speaker
It's purpose, in thirty five seconds is to show the splendour of Oxford.
Although we are taking a whole day to film it, it will only occupy thirty five seconds of real time.
Voice over
It's a long and patient wait for a moment of fame.
Eight hundred extras are made ready.
Most will never be seen on the screen.
But attention to detail is the director's trademark.
Not a hair out of place.
Female speaker
The marvellous thing is that a lot of the clothes are still available.
Everyone has original clothes.
So it's a combination of hiring and buying.
Voice over
It's a chance for the film makers to make the most of the true Oxford experience.
To get close to the people who were close to the man.
Male speaker
I actually knew CS Lewis.
I worked as a lodge boy.
He was very helpful.
He knew I didn't have an education so he lent me books.
Voice over
Here the stars for the day rub shoulders with the stars of the show.
Sir Anthony Hopkins plays CS Lewis.
And Debra Winger, the love of his life Joy Gresham.
For Joy's son, this is an emotional journey.
Back to the Oxford of his youth.
Male speaker
It's a tribute to my step-father's life.
He's not portrayed as a saint.
Voice over
CS Lewis was a great man of words.
But through Attenborough's pictures we'll understand more of his life.
And indeed of his great love of a woman and his great love of Oxford.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Pensioners protest over VAT
FTSE down 11
The hundred shares index closed down eleven points at two eight eight six 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, fifty four.
A piece of farming tradition passed into history today: the burning of straw and stubble is now illegal.
It'll mean cleaner air and fewer road accidents, and although farmers don't like the new law, the green lobby says it's a chance to practice organic farming on a wide scale.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
GRAHAM SMITH/Oxfordshire Fire Service
1989
ALAN ROBERTS/NFU
HELEN BROWNING/British Organic Farmers
Voice over
It's now illegal for farmers to get rid of the straw stubble left over after harvest by burning it.
It's an easy, efficient way to clear crop fields and for the last twenty years strict guide-lines were laid down to control it.
But the increasing threat of air pollution and the danger caused by those farmers who ignored the rules have meant a complete ban on stubble-burning.
He says they caused considerable damage to property, hedgerows were burned out, buildings affected, farmers' own equipment set on fire and their own crops.
Probably the worst example was a serious traffic accident on the A34 which didn't result in any deaths but did involve serious injuries.
Research is continuing into alternative uses of straw — but for most farmers it's a waste product.
The only exception to the ban will be linseed — which farmers can carry on burning for another three years because its fibrous stalks are difficult to plough in.
He says burning was an easy way of getting rid of straw — it meant that after harvest, providing you followed the rules, all you did was put a match to it and in 10 minutes your field was burned.
Now it's another operation — they've got to chop the straw up in many cases, they've got to plough it in, remove it from the field if it's for livestock bedding — so it's a new operation altogether.
Organic farmers are delighted by the ban.
They argue the initial expense of ploughing in will be repaid by greater yields in the future.
She says in the longer term there are substantial benefits from returning organic matter to the soil.
Over a period of 10 or 15 years we will see our soil improving by using this technique.
It's a case of balancing the short-term costs to the long-term benefits that we'll see to our soil in this country.
Farmers produce between five and six million tonnes of surplus straw a year — with the ban on stubble-burning, they're going to be spending alot more of their time dealing with it in the future.
(wes ad lib)(anne) Still to come on Central News, a look ahead to the Henley Regatta.
Voice over
Welcome back.
It's champagne and strawberry time on the Thames tomorrow, as the Henley Regatta gets underway.
(WES)
But for the rowers taking part there's more pain than pleasure in a contest where only the fittest survive.
GARETH FURBY/Henley-on-Thames
LEO DOWNER/Trialist
ANDY JACKSON/Trialist
GRAHAM WELLS/Coach
TIM WAITE/Successful Trialist
STEVE REDGRAVE/Olympic Gold Medallist
MATTHEW PINSENT/Olympic Gold Medallist
Voice over
Henley Royal Regatta, the ultimate test not only of the giants of this sport, like Olympic gold medalists Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent, but of the little men as well.
Forty schoolboy crews have entered this year.
And their supporters will come from across the region for Central South is the heartland of schoolboy rowing.
Most these blades will be recognised on the Henley course this week.
The winners will take the Princess Elizabeth cup.
But for many just to race at Henley will be prize enough.
The library at St Edwards School, Oxford, and two sixth formers are finding it hard to concentrate on their work.
Leo Downer and Andy Jackson are being considered for a place in one of the fastest school eights in the country.
St Edwards have already won the this year's national schools championships in Nottingham, but one of that crew has had to drop out.
So Leo and Andy, friends in library, are now arch rivals on the river.
A series of gruellinng time trials will decide who goes to Henley.
He says its going to be close.
He says he's going to do his best, but it's all down to him.
Andy is realtively new to the sport.
He used to play rugby, and according to the coach it shows.
He says his technique is not very good.
He drops his hands over his feet.
But Leo is smoother.
The trial will see who is more powerful.
Despite his inexperience Andy wins the first race.
Leo, who's a year older, fights back to take the next sprint by a length.
But overall Andy is the faster boy.
He says he'll have to break it to them now.
The coach tells Andy he's in, but Leo is not.
He says he's pleased and he hopes he can cope with what they want.
But just a week later the St Edwards coach changes his mind.
Andy is dropped, and another boy takes his place.
He says that Andy just didn't fit in.
He knows its hard on him, but the boat went better with another boy.
He says Andy has taken it well, they're good friends still.
To succeed in this sport you be prepared to take the knocks.
And to win at Henley you have to take the pain.
Because according to the best it hurts all the way.
He says the pain starts very early.
It takes fifteen strokes to get going.
Then you row past several marker points on the course.
The first is the barrier, where its really hurting.
Then there's Fawley which is very important.
Its the middle of the race and its easy to relax but you can't.
Then there's the enclosures which are very noisy and you just have to hope you've won.
In their last fixture before Henley at Marlow Regatta, St Edwards took on another Oxfordshire school Radley College, and were shocked to loose by just a few feet.
The new man in the boat took defeat badly.
But the two crews are likely to meet again at Henley and the scene is set for a classic confrontation.
The action starts tomorrow.
The parents of a nine year old girl who died while being treated at hospital say an internal inquiry was just a white wash.
They say a letter they've received exonerating the doctors involved is an insult to their daughter's memory.
KATE GARRAWAY/Reporting
ARTHUR MCCONNELL/Father
VICTORIA MCCONNELL/Mother
Voice over
Lexie McConnell was being treated for an eye compalint but the steroids she took hampered her bodies natural defences.
At Oxford's John Radcliffe hospital she died from the treatment and from chickenpox.
Her parents say they had no idea of the risks.
He says we were never told of any side effects even though we specifically asked.
If we had known of the risk of infection we would have kept Lexie off school she would never have caught the infection and would never have died.
The drug in question prednisolone has led to three such deaths in ten years.
There are forty-five known side effects.
Arthur and Victoria McConnell made a formal complaint to the hospital after an inwquest recorded a verdict of death by misadventure.
They say they were promised a full inquiry.
They have now received a five page letter exonerating the doctors involved from the general manager Tony Stapleton.
It says the dose of steroids used was appropriate to achieve the anti-inflammatory effect required…it also says that the side effects were discussed.
She says this is an insult to my daughter and to myself they say that by implication we are lying
The McConnells claim the letter is a whitewash.
They are now considering legal action and the Department of Health is investigating their case.
Mr Stapleton says everything possible has been and will be done to answer their inquiries.
He says the steroid was an effective and appropriate treatment for Lexie's eye problems.
The McConnells ask how the treatment could have been correct if the patient died.
Anti drink drive campaigners have criticised a brewery for producing a special summer ale.
They say it's intended to encourage drinking in hot weather, just as the Government is launching a new campaign against summer drink driving.
IAN MACLAREN/Crickleyhill
Government TV Commercial
GRAHAM BUXTON/Campaign Against Drink-Driving
MIKE HOWARD/Flowers Brewery
Voice over
Lunchtime drinkers in a Gloucestershire pub enjoy a pint of Summer Ale…a new brew aimed specifically at quenching a summertime thirst.
It has been produced at Whitbreads' Flowers Brewery in Cheltenham, using hops from Czechoslovakia.
According to the brewers, it's a light and golden ale, fragrant and flowery and refreshingly clean on the palate…ideal for the summer months.
The Summer Ale's launch coincides with National Pub Week.
But the marketing campaign conflicts directly with the government's latest hard-hitting message for drink-drivers.
Music!
Mungo Jerry's In the Summertime, a number one hit in the summer of 1970 highlights the tough TV advertsing campaign.
The Department of Transport believes the warm weather encourages more drink-driving…with horrifying results.
The message: Summertime Drink-driving wrecks even more lives.
Anti-Drink Drive campaigners say the brewing industry should take note.
Male speaker
Drivers go to pubs and if they're encouraged to drink more alcohol, the liklihood is they will cause an accident and kill themselves or other innocent people.
Voice over
The brewers say they support sensible drinking and brews such as the Summer Ale fit the bill…
Male speaker
The Summer Ale is designed to be light and is only about 3.6 per cent alcohol.
So long as people are carfeul and obey the law, there should be no problems.
Voice over
Landlords say they're increasingly serving more food than drink, especially in country pubs.
But the campaigners say they want to see even more promotion of non-alcoholic drinks for drivers.
A search for what was thought to be a body has been called off after police found an aircraft cargo net.
Rescue teams were alerted when two golfers reported seeing a body falling through the sky.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Bagendon
Sgt PETER MAUNDER/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
When police and soldiers resumed their search of the area around Cirencester Golf Course this morning they were looking for a body.
Golfers had reported seeing what looked like a human form wrapped in a brown shroud falling through the sky.
They were concerned that the object might have been a hang glider who'd got into difficulty.
Rescue teams used everything from golf buggies to a sea king helicopter to search the area adjoining the golf course.
But they couldn't find anything.
It turned out to be this cargo net.
Police have contacted RAF Lyneham which uses these nets but airmen there says it's not one of theirs.
So the identity of the’ falling body’may have been revealed…but the mystery of how the net got there still remains.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
TIM HURST/Hereford
JOHN TROUT/Father
TERESA THOMAS/Haywood High School
MIKE WILLIAMS/Hereford Rowing Club
Insp DUDLEY HARCOMBE/West Mercia Police
Voice over
The River Wye at Hereford is a tempting playground for adults and children alike, but last night, one of the hottest of the year, it killed schoolboy Scott Trout, the 15 year old son of Hereford's Tory party agent.
His parents thought he was selling raffle tickets, but first he went for swim with friends in the River Wye at Broomy Hill.
His body was recovered two hours later.
Scott was a pupil at Heywood High School, the second pupil at the school to drown in the River Wye.
Regular users of the Wye at Hereford say the river may look tempting on a warm evening, but looks are deceptive.
A businessman whose brother and nephew were killed in the American raid on Baghdad has criticised the Government for defending the action.
Kais Al-Kaisy,(PRON KYSE AL KYSEE) who has settled in this country says Britain is condoning the murder of innocent civilians.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
KAIS AL-KAISY/Businessman
SIMON COOMBS MP/Con Swindon
DAVID CHANDLER/Brother-in-Law
Voice over
Hours after the American strike on Iraq, a Swindon businessman learnt that his brother and 18-month-old nephew had been killed.
Two days on, Kais Al-Kaisy's shock has turned to anger.
Mr Al-Kaisy left Iraq in the Sixties, but kept in close contact with his brother Ma'an, and his wife Zhara, now critically ill in hospital.
Though he's proud of his adopted country, he's angry that the Foreign Secretary has defended the raid.
But Mr Al-Kaisy's MP insists the bombing was justified.
Meanwhile relatives of Paul Ride, imprisoned for illegally entering Iraq, have also expressed their concern about the raid.
Paul's family in Swindon have given up hope of an early release.
The Foreign Office said a British official who visited Paul Ride in prison yesterday found him well and in good heart.
But it denied the visit was anything to do with the bombing.
The raid was a very specific response to a very specific problem.
No-one, though — least of all Kais Al-Kaisy — doubts that relations with Iraq have been stretched to breaking point.
One of the rising stars of motor racing has been to meet the men who've put him and his car back in the running for success.
Johnny Herbert has returned to Formula One after a crash that almost ended his career.
He says much of his success is down to the backroom boys.
Robin Powell reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
JOHNNY HERBERT/Racing Driver
MARK POYNTON/Team Lotus
AUGUST 1988
Voice over
A racing driver's only as good as the car he drives; even when he's the prodigious Johnny Herbert.
Appropriate then, that the man tipped as the next Nigel Mansell should take time out of one of the most hectic weeks in the Grand Prix calendar to visit Swindon-based Raychem, the hi-tech firm which sponsors his car and supplies its electrics.
The visit was a goodwill gesture to Raychem, which employs 1,300 people at its sites in Dorcan and Cheney Manor.
Lotus don't have as many millions at their disposal as Williams or McLaren, but with Raychem equipment they can compete with the best.
But Johnny Herbert's had his fair share of hard times.
A crash in a Formula 3000 race at Brands Hatch left him seriously injured and his career in jeopardy.
He's since made a full recovery and now has a realistic chance of becoming Lotus's first world champion since Mario Andretti.
No time for day-dreaming now though.
Just a few more autographs and it's off to France to prepare for 2 Grand Prix in a week; at Magny Cours on Sunday, then Silverstone 7 days later.
Now, you can't beat a bit of bully!
One of Central TV's greatest hits,’ Bullseye’is still going strong after twelve series.
For the next in our reports Inside The Globe I joined two contestants from our region when they met Jim Bowen and the Bullseye crew.
TREDWORTH/Gloucester
BULLSEYE/A Central Production
JIM BOWEN/Presenter
TONY GREEN/Darts Champion
PHIL TAYLOR/World Darts Champion
ROY MORGAN/Contestant
JUDY PERRY/Contestant
MICKEY BRENNAN/Talent Spotter
Voice over
Roy Morgan from Gloucester is a life-long darts fan and enjoys nothing better than a game over a glass of rum at his local, the Plough in Tredworth.
He's won awards for his skill, now he's putting that to the test and hopefully earn a bit of cash at the same time.
Roy's fans show their support.
Roy's partner for the feat, Judy Perry, who runs her own acupunture therapy centre.
She's well used to aiming right on the mark in her work, but admits she needs a little more practice when it comes to a dart board, especially when it's in front of an audience of millions on Bullseye.
Rehearsals begin.
There are big prizes at stake, although Roy, Judy and the other contestants don't yet know it, they could win a car not forgetting a bendy bully for the mantlepiece.
Presenter, Jim Bowen, puts the contestants at ease with his own brand of humour.
Jim jokes with Judy and explains that the contestants are the real stars of the show.
His assistant, Tony Green, explains how he helps Jim with his maths.
It's all hands on deck as the crew work as team to make the show look its best.
Behind the scenes, the controller puts the finishing touches to the dart board and makes sure that the score counter is working properly.
Back in the Green Room, Roy and Judy psyche themselves up for the performance.
There a few tips from the World Darts Champion, Phil Taylor.
Phil Taylor explains how popular darts is.
Time marches on and the tension rises.
Hundreds of people audition each year.
Mickey Brennan explains that 500 people apply every year, but he can only select 75 couples.
Roy and Judy are taken to make-up to have those nerves calmed and for a bit of pampering.
Meanwhile, the audience gets into the spirit of the occasion, courtesy of comedian, Bobby Bragg from Banbury.
Fans of the show say why they enjoy it.
Countdown to recording and the contestants prepare for battle.
At the end of the night, the luck was with the opposition, but Roy and Judy still had a good night out.
Judy and Roy say they're disappointed, but enjoyed the experience.
The game's over for Roy and Judy, but the memories will live on, like the series which you can see on Central towards Christmas.
Tough measures come in against bad drivers
FTSE up 5
The hundred shares index closed up five point four at twenty-five, twenty-one point two.
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety and up at two marks, eighty-nine.
And finally, builders have stopped work on a three million pound sports centre in Cheltenham because they don't want to disturb a blackbird's nest.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
The builders discovered the nest in the ceiling of the new hall.
There are five chicks living in the nest and they fear that bad luck will follow if they remove it.
So, for now, the contractors have re-arranged work schedules until the family of chicks move on.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Meanwhile, the MP whose constituency covers Castlemorton Common is demanding that the Government take strong action against the travellers.
Michael Spicer wants greater powers for the police to stop hippies gathering in large groups.
He's backed by fellow MPs and the residents of Castlemorton.
Clare Lafferty reports.
PAULINE EARL/Castlemorton Resident
MICHAEL SPICER MP/Con South Worcestershire
COLIN SHEPHERD MP/Con Hereford
Voice over
Patches of scorched earth are the only physical evidence that remains of the invasion that took place on Castlemorton Common.
But mentally, many residents are still suffering.
Now the MP whose constituency covers Castlemorton is demanding that the Government take steps to ensure that an invasion of this kind never happens again.
Mr Spicer is being backed up by other MPs in rural areas.
Mr Spicer fears that unless the Government takes action, the public will.
Residents in Castlemorton welcome Mr Spicers demands.
Mr Spicer also plans to look into ways of encouraging better communication between police forces and local authorities.
Thousands of staff at two of Britain's biggest aerospace companies are worried there may be yet more redundancies following Germany's decision to pull out of the European Fighter project.
But the firms themselves say it's far too early to assess the impact on jobs…there could even be MORE work rather than LESS.
Tim Hurst reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
CHARLES LOMAS/MSF Union
PAUL BEAVER/Jane's Defence Weekly
Voice over
The European fighter aircraft is a joint project between Britain, Germany, Spain and Italy, but Germany's decision to pull out leaves the project in doubt.
Smith's Industries at Cheltenham in Gloucestershire, make the plane's cockpit diplays, management are understood to feel there may be more work not less because Britain could now play a bigger part in the project.
Unions though are worried, that after 500 job losses in two years, uncertainty about the aircraft may lead to more redundancies.
The landing gear division of Dowty Aerospace at Staverton near Gloucester, is working on the project, but the company say they've shifted their emphasis to civil, not military aircraft.
The unions also feel there's cause for optimism.
In the meantime, development work is continuing on the European fighter and production is due to start in 1997.
In part two: Cancer lifeline…the new drug that could stop a killer spreading.
Rising star.
The man who hopes to be the next Nigel Mansell.
And super, smashing, great.
Three reaons why you can't beat a bit of Bully.
Welcome back: Cancer patients have been given new hope by the development of a drug to prevent tumours spreading through the body.
The drug's being tested by cancer specialists…although it could be some years before it's generally available.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
Dr PETER LEWIS/Research Director
Dr COLIN ROCH-BERRY/Cancer Consultant
Voice over
Breast Cancer patients can never be certain they've beaten the illness.
The cancer growth may be removed from their breasts, but there's always the chance it may have spread to other parts of the body.
That means lengthy and usually uncomfortable treatment.
But all that may end with the drug BB94.
It's designed to prevent secondary tumours from developing.
Male speaker
It's too early to call it a breakthrough but it is different because it doesn't set out to kill tumours, it stops the process which spreads them.
Voice over
The drug has been developed By British Biotechnology in Oxford and is undergoing tests on Breast cancer patients in Manchester.
The idea is that the drug neutralises cancer forming enzymes before they get into the blood.
Male speaker
It's a very good idea and it will help the fight if secondary cancers can be eliminated.
Voice over
Doctors believe the majority of cancer tumours grow to a certain stage before their cell walls rupture and release enzymes.
If these enzymes spread around the body, they form more tumours elsewhere.
BB94 attacks them before they can get anywhere.
Male speaker
At the moment there don't appear to be man side effects because it isn't a poison.
It will be used in conjunction with other treatments.
Male speaker
It worked on mice and if it works on humans it will be just what we've been waiting for.
Voice over
Now they're waiting to see if humans will respond.
It could be 5 years before the drug is fully proved and generally available.
Armed robbery.
Guard shot as gang raids security van.
The electronic vacuum cleaner.
But is GCHQ now sucking in the innocent?
And cancelled.
The biggest thing since Live Aid falls victim to the fear of hippies.
GOOD EVENING:
WESLEY SMITH
A security guard has been shot several times during a bungled armed robbery attempt outside a bank.The guard was shot in the leg by two men just after he arrived in a security van, but it seems the raiders escaped empty handed.
HARRIET RYLEY
Armed police are still combing the area for the robbers.They've warned that the men are dangerous, and may shoot at anybody who approaches them.Mike Rowbottom reports.
LAMBOURN/Berkshire
NIKKI HALL/Eyewitness
Det Insp PHIL BUSBY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Police, some wearing body armour, swarmed into Lambourn within minutes of the shots being fired.
A Security guard was shot in the leg and other shots discharged into the air sending passers by running for cover.
Female speaker
I was in a flower shop when I heard the noise.
He was a very big man and I saw him threatening and banging.
I became really scared and then he started walking towards me.
I thought I'd seen enough.
Voice over
The two robbers banged on the side of the Security Express van, spread-eagled one of the guards before shooting him in the legs.
At least two other shots were fired before the men, wearing halloween type masks, made their getaway.
They took nothing from the van which was delivering to Barclays Bank.
The security guard was taken to the local surgery then the Princess Margaret Hospital in Swindon.
Male speaker
Anyone wwith a gun can find an easy target especially in a sleepy little town like Lambourn.
Voice over
A major hunt was launched using police helicopters but the two raiders made a clean geataway.
Police have little to go on.
The red Rover getaway car was abandoned two miles away and was carrying false number plates.
And the descriptions of the two men have been too varied to give much help to detectives.
The lives of charity workers in sensitive parts of the world may be at risk because of electronic snooping by the British government.
It's claimed that the secret GCHQ listening centre is even trawling through personal phone calls abroad in its search for useful information.
And it seems likely that charities are being specifically targetted, as Simon Garrett explains 
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
DUNCAN CAMPBELL/Intelligence Specialist
CHARLES CLAYTON/World Vision
Voice over
The GCHQ spy centre in Cheltenham justified its existence for many years as a legitimate weapon of the cold war.
Intercepting radio and telephone traffic from and around the Eastern block, trying to stay one jump ahead of a dangerous enemy.
But now the enemy is a friend and GCHQ still listens.
Sixteen years ago this man was prosecuted for revealing the spy centre's true purpose.
Today he says British people are under surveillance from Cheltenham…particularly charity workers with access to governments in unstable countries
Male speaker
Members of charities working abroad if they do not used coded information systems all sensitive communication will be monitored.
That may well put them at risk, but then the government doesn't asses such things on the grounds of the impact on charity workers
Voice over
Campbell faced more legal problems when he exposed plans for a seventy million pound spy satellite caled Zircon.
Then as now government refused to comment on security matters.
For charities like World Vision from Northampton the implications of surveillance are serious
Male speaker
We are aware of the likelihood of such monitoring.
We are apolitical although we have to be aware of the political impact our work can have in some areas.
For such monitoring to go on unsupervised would be wrong
Male speaker
What has to be opened up is the unsupervised way in which internationally and nationally the sum of all our communications is sucked up into the electronic vacuum cleaner that is Cheltenham
Voice over
But despite the citizen's charter there are no signs that Cheltenham's veil of secrecy is lifting
Oxfam has cancelled a charity pop concert amid fears that it would attract thousands of travellers back to the Malvern Hills, the scene of last month's illegal Bank Holiday festival.
The charity says scrapping the event is a big blow to its fiftieth anniversary celebrations.
But the decision has been welcomed by people living near the planned venue.
This report from Mark Kiff.
MAY 1992/CASTLEMORTON/Worcestershire
JOHN McGRATH/Oxfam
MARTIN JONES/Chief Executive/Malvern Hills Council
FRIDAY I'M IN LOVE/Cowboy Films Ltd
Voice over
Meanwhile the funeral has been held of a fifteen year old girl who was killed in a crash involving a stolen car.
Sharon Griffiths was travelling in a car driven by her sister when it collided head on with the stolen vehicle.
IAN MACLAREN/Newton Longville
Rev TONY WHALLEY/Rector
EDDIE ELPHGRAVE/Stepfather
Voice over
The mourners were led by Sharon's parents Flo and Eddie Elphgrave.
Sharon's 18 year old sister Sandra, who was injured in the fatal crash, was allowed out of hospital, in a wheelchair, to attend the service.
Only a month before Sharon had attended the wedding of her sister Lisa at Newton Longville Church.
At the request of the family the music of the Small Faces' Lazy Sunday Afternoon was played at the service.
They say the sentiments of the song epitomised Sharon's outlook on life.
The church was packed to overflowing with villagers and pupils from Sharon's school in Milton Keynes.
The headmaster Stan Hughes in his address spoke of the senseless loss of one so young…
Male speaker
I don't think I can remember a community reacting with such shock.
But above all I shall remember the community spirit that emerged.
Voice over
The village rector asked the mourners to try to show the same love that brought them to the service…
Male speaker
We should try Not to seek vengeance.
But also realise where the limits are in society.
Voice over
Sharon was buried in the churchyard annexe.
Among the scores of floral tributes were those from her schoolfriends.
Afterwards Sharon's stepfather appealed for a concerted campaign to end the spate of car thefts that so often ended in tragedy…
Male speaker
Come on, get behind the police and stop car thieves.
Female speaker
Will something good come out of it?
Male speaker
Yes, or it's just another tragic waste of a life.
Voice over
An 18 year old man has appeared in court accused of causing death by dangerous driving and other offences following the accident last week.
A racehorse trainer who appealed against a cruelty conviction has had his fines and costs more than doubled.
The court was told how a gelding was found emaciated and covered in lice.
Animal welfare workers say they're delighted with the judges's decision.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford Crown Court
Insp TERRY WINSTONE/RSPCA
SUSAN PIKE/Brenda Spooner Trust
Voice over
When animal welfare officers first saw the ten year old gelding Sunset Court he had been reduced to skinand bone.
Virtually his entire skeleton was visible through his coat, he had lice and a weeping eye.
He was totally dejected said RSPCA inspector Terry Winbstone.
His owner Roger Pike from Great Rollright in Oxfordshire today lost an appeal against a conviction from Magistrates for cruelty.
His fine was increased from three hundred pounds to two thousand and he was oprdered to pay extra costs of two thousand.
The court heard Pike had bought the horse in 1991 with an injury.
It continued to lose weight until it caught the attentioin of a neighbour who reported to the RSPCA that winter.
Pike based his appeal on the contention that he had fed the horse properly but it hadn't absorbed it.
It's condition had improved dramatically with the spring grass.
But the judge Mr Charles Harris said he simply didn't believe him.
He thought it quite possible that Pike had starved the horse to help it recover from its leg injury.
Pike refused to say anything after the case.
But animal welfare officers were pleased with the result.
Male speaker
I don't think he was feeding it.
When a horse is broken down it's not doing anything for him.
Female speaker
I'm delighted that justice has been done by that poor horse)
Voice over
Sunset Court went on to race again, but died this spring after breaking a shoulder
Parents and staff at a primary school are calling for compulsory seat belts on coaches following a crash in which thirteen children were injured.
Some parents say they won't allow their children to travel by bus until the law is changed.
But transport workers say bus seats are safer as they are.
KIM BARNES/Bicester
EUGENE SIMONS/Deputy Headteacher
KATHY DUNFORD/Parent
PAUL TAPPIN/Bus and Coach Council
FIONA ROBINSON/Parent-Governor
Voice over
Life is back to normal at Kingsmeadow school following the accident earlier this month.
Thirteen children suffered slight injuries when two coaches on a field trip to wales bumped into each other.
She says I was thrown forward.
He says I hit my head on the ashtray.
Now parents, governors and staff are joining forces to call for seat belts on coaches.
They say belts would have prevented any injuries in wales…
He says if that small an accident can wreak such havoc think what a major one could do.
Seat belts would have lessened the injuries considerably.
She says most of the injuries were caused when the children were thrown forward.
Road tests carried out twenty years ago show how passengers can be thrown around in a crash.
And two years ago, there were calls for coach seat belts after two people died in this crash on the A40 near Oxford.
But coach experts say it hasn't been proved that belts are safer.
He says coaches are very safe.
The regulations say there has to be a cell between the seats to absorb the kinetic energy if the bus stops suddenly.
But parents at Kingsmead are unconvinced
She says I was uncertain before.
Now I won't let my children use the Park and Ride bus.
The Coach Council say they've got an enviable safety record.
Parents in Bicester want to make sure that can only be improved.
In Central News tonight.
Not on our doorstep…town says’ no’to sex offenders clinic
Mindblowing recklessness.
High-speed chases caught on camera.
An innocent victim.
The teenager killed in crash with stolen car.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
HUGH OWENS/Upton on Severn
MARIANNE ABBOT/Protest Organiser
MARIE PARKER
BARONESS FAITHFUL/Faithful Foundation
These are the children of Upton Upon Severn in Worcestershire — children who, parents say, will be at grave risk if the plans go ahead.
That's why this afternoon their protests were loud when they gathered outside the building
Much of their anger was levelled at Baroness Faithful, who's foundation is behind the scheme.
’ She should come here and see for herself what's going on.
Don't stay up there, come down here.
Come and see the houses, come and see the people.’
’ I think Baroness Faithful should put them up in her own house.Or her own town.Why come here?’
’ Its just not on, we just don't want it here do we?.
We just don't want it.’
’ We must do everything now.
The fight is on now.
There's no way we can back off, just because they have now bought the property and its going to go ahead.
The fight is on now bigger and better than ever.’
The parents say they've not been told anything official by the Faithful Foundation.
But what they believe is that twenty six sex offenders will be brought for treatment here.
At some stage they'll be taken out of the clinic under strict supervision, but later will be allowed unsupervised trips out…
This woman is the nearest parent with children
’ Well I'm totally frightened.
My children are frightened.
Our quality of life is going to do down considerably.
The property prices will drop.
We're just going to be living in fear all the time.’’
The Foundation has called off a meeting with local people scheduled for tonight.
This afternoon security men were wiring up the holes caused when a hedge bordering the planned clinic was set alight.
Those behind the clinic want to allay local fears
’ I've got great sympathy for the people of Upton because unless they understand the situation, then I can see why they're fearful.
But their fear is groundless, I do have to say.
The men we are putting at Upton will be the less dangerous.
They will not be the men who abduct children or who are on drugs or drink.
They are men who will have committed an offence within the confines of their family and community.
And therefore they are unlikely to damage any othgr child.’
Parents, however, remain unconvinced and are determined to halt the scheme.Coincidentally Upton is the town once served by priest Samuel Penney, a convicted sex offender.
SIMON GARRETT Bletchley
Det Sgt ALAN YOUNG Thames Valley Police
Chief Insp COLIN HANDY Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
It took an iron gate and the persistence of four police forces to stop the Austin Montego.
Police were alerted at Teignmouth in Devon after three men allegedly drove away from this petrol station without paying.
Minutes later it rammed a police car which tried to stop it and headed up the M5.
Avon and Somerset police tried to catch it…as did Wiltshire officers on the M4 and A420.
At Bicester it hit a roundabout but kept going with a flat tyre heading for Milton Keynes.
The Montego was going so fast in places persuing officers saw sparks coming off the engine.
Male speaker
Having got to the outskirts of Bletchley it turned into a housing estate and ended up hitting the gates of Wellsmead School.
Three men have been arrested and have been sent to Exeter where the original theft of the vehicle took place
Voice over
The three men under arrest are all in their twenties and from the Milton Keynes area.
Police in Gloucester also followed a Ford Escort which was involved in a crash.
After a short persuit through the city streets the driver tried to dodge traffic at the Barton Gates junction on Eastgate street.
The pictures were captured by the city centre security cameras installed in Gloucester earlier this year.
Police say the pictures tell a success story
Male speaker
You can see from the qualtiy of these pictures how good they are.
We will use these in court.
I can see security pictures helping police solve a lot of problems in future
Voice over
The eighteen year old driver of the Ford Escort is still being treated in hospital for facial injuries
Labour to repay donation
FTSE up 14
The hundred shares index closed up fouorteen points at twenty nine hundred 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty nine and down at two marks, forty four.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, it's been marvellous boating weather 
Voice over
Welcome back.
Well, the sun's been shining for the opening day of the Henley Royal Regatta.
(WES)
The good weather guarantees one thing — sales of Pimms and champagne look set to reach record levels.
HARRIET RYLEY/Henley
MIKE SWEENEY/Chairman
EDA ROSE/Milliner
Voice over
This is what it's officially all about — the rowing — and competition is always fierce — with a dead heat in one of the early races.
But brilliant summer sunshine and the fact that this is a well-established part of the English season mean it's also a chance to see and be seen.
It's an occasion bristling with tradition — women in long hemlines and men in blazers and ties — but there is one major change this year which even the man in charge of the whole event can only approve of.
He says Henley does change but very gradually…it's been difficult to introduce women's racing, but we have this year and there's a very high standard here…up to Olympic standard
Women rowers can't take part on anything like the same scale as the men yet, but the feeling was they're here to stay:
Henley is also famous for what ladies are wearing on their heads…this year's crop of headgear was dominated by big simple straw hats and the usual splash of colour…
She says it's very stylish this year — with fashionable straw top hats — some dressed up and also alot of colour and spots and stripes.
Female speaker
If you can afford it this is what you do — come to Henley in style…then partake of some of the 3,000 bottles of champagne, 4,000 bottles of Pimm's and almost two tonnes of strawberries on sale in the Steward's Enclosure.
then it's time to picnic in the car-park.
Voice over
These people are serious picnicers, with traditional hampers in the back of the motor, silver cups for the champagne and even special arrangements to keep the drinks cool.
She says she's a bit of a philistine and doesn't know much about rowing, but hopes to find out.
She's there to socialise.
She says she's not there for the rowing, she wants to top up her tan.
There's certainly plenty of opportunity to do that in the current glorious weather…and to simply sit and enjoy some of the traditional treats at Henley.
Subjects like robotics and micro electronics are on the curriculum for a group of gifted ten year olds.
The children are being invited to attend special masterclasses, using facilities not available at their own schools.
KEN GOODWIN/Hereford
JIM ROGERS/Teacher
Voice over
The problem: Programme a computerised robot to drop a screwdriver into a rubbish bin.
It's not as easy as it might seem.
Primary school children wouldn't normally be given lessons in robotics until they were several years older.
But these youngsters have been picked from Primary schools in the Hereford district because they're clever.
Haywood High school is offering them the chance to attend weekly masterclasses, to stretch their minds that bit more.
She says that she likes the classes, they're interesting.
He says that he enjoys science.
He says that micro-electronics is his favorite subject.
Teachers deny that the scheme is elitist.
They say they're just trying to stretch brighter pupils by letting them use facilities not available at most primary schools.
He says that they can make full use of the science labs and workshops.
It stops them becoming bored.
The masterclasses certainly seem to be going down well with parents.
He says it's a good idea.
She says that it's good to see the children's abilities stretched.
She says that she's pleased her daughter attends, but it hasn't changed her!
Other masterclasses include mathematics, electronics and music.
But for now these pupils — and the robots — have got their hands full.
To most people he's plain old Clive Powell who runs a car valeting firm.
But to his friends and family, he's Sheriff Powell of the Crest Hill police department in Illinois USA.
Clive never fulfilled his ambition of becoming a real American police officer.
But he's done the next best thing by getting himself a uniform and a car.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Longlevens
CLIVE POWELL/’ American Police Sheriff’
Voice over
Twelve hundred hours and Sheriff Clive Powell prepares to get out onto the streets…
But these aren't the streets of New York or Chicago…in fact Clive lives just outside Gloucester.
And far from being an American law enforcer…in reality he runs a car cleaning firm.
But two years ago Clive restored his first American police car.
Since then they've become his passion.
Clive uses the Chevvy like a normal family car…he takes it to work and uses it to pick up the shopping.
But because it's so authentic people often mistake him for a real policeman.
So would the officers of Gloucester swap their patrol cars for one of these.
Male speaker
It's a good size.
I'd like to take it for a spin.
Male speaker
It compares well to the British cars.
It's bigger.
I prefer the American uniforms too.
Voice over
Not everyone likes the Chevrolet.
Clive knows he'll never fulfil his ambition of chasing criminals through the streets of San Francisco.
But for now he seems happy using his imagination on the A forty.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Charges against the Marquis of Blandford alleging that he assaulted two policemen have been dropped.
The Marquis still faces charges of dodging taxi fares, but the case was adjourned after a court heard he was receiving psychiatric treatment.
SIMON GARRETT/Horseferry Road Court
8 June 1993
Voice over
The Marquis was due to appear at Horseferry Road magistrates on two counts of assaulting policeman, and four of dodging taxi fares.
The alleged assaults happened when two officers went to arrest him at a house in Cathcart Road in London.
The prosecution admitted in court today that the paper work was wrong and the arrests therefore unlawful.
Defence counsel Roger Eastman was awarded costs on behalf of the Marquis who wasn't in court because he's undergoing treatmnent for his drugs problem.
A letter from a psychiatrist in an unnamed clinic said of the Marquis' absence’ It would be against his medical interest to come out today’.
He still faces four charges of dodging taxi fares of between eleven and 50 pounds.
But after the letter was read out it was deceided he'd be granted bail for four weeks pending further medical treatment, that being so he's due to reappear in court on July the 28th.
Poisonous beads, used to make hundreds of necklaces sold through charity shops, have also been used to decorate covers for food and drink.
Trading Standards officers say most of them have been recovered, but one cover containing the deadly poison still has to be traced.
TIM HURST/Reporting
SYMONDS YAT/Herefordshire
CHRIS HITCHINGS/Gloucestershire Trading Standards
Voice over
The beads, containing ricin, one of the world's deadliest poisons, were imported as necklaces and sold by Oxfam through the charity's national chain of gift shops.
Most necklaces were still unsold when the beads were identified and withdrawn, but some had been bought by a craft worker in Gloucestershire.
She dismantled them and used the beads to weight the edges of crocheted food covers, which then went on sale at a craft workshop at Symonds Yat on the Gloucestershire/Herefordshire border.
They were withdrawn almost immediately, but not before one of them had been sold to an unkown customer.
The covering, with distinctive beads around the edge, was sold in a plastic bag marked Wye Valley Craft Association.
It was bought in Symonds Yat on the Gloucestershire/Herefordshire border six days ago.
Attempts have been made to blind two horses by cutting them with Stanley knives as they were grazing.
Their owner says she's sickened, and can't understand why anybody would do such a thing.
KAREN THOMPSON/Kidlington
CAROLE BARRETT/Owner
Sgt BOB TIMMS/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
These are the latest victims of attacks on horses and ponies…
Dandy, a ten year old gelding who's competed at the Royal International Horse Show, and his grazing companion Lady were cut with a knife as they stood in their field at Hampton Poyle near Kidlington in Oxfordshire.
Their owner says she's can't understand why anyone would want to injure two defenceless animals…
She says it's horrific I'd rather they'd have hurt me.
Dandy and Lady both needed stitches to their wounds.
There's no sign of any sexual attack.
Police say they're keeping an open mind.
He says it's some kind of sadist that carries out this kind of attack.
Both animals are recovering and have been moved to stables nearby.
Police have renewed their appeal to the public to join the fight against horse attacks by reporting anything suspicious.
One and a half million people are going without treatment for a bone disease which can cause severe pain and deformity.
Campaigners say it's a scandal that many older patients are being dismissed as untreatable even though drugs and therapies are available.
Now they've come up with a guide aimed at bringing sufferers out of the shadows.
KIM BARNES Minety
NANCY HARRISON Osteoporosis Sufferer
LINDA EDWARDS National Osteoporosis Society
Dr ROGER SMITH Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre
Voice over
Nancy Harrison has to take life one step at a time…after she found she has osteoporosis, a disease which weakens the skeleton and causes fragile bones.
She's had four serious breaks in the past twenty years, and lost two inches in height…but was only diagnosed last year.
She says a great many doctors say it's part of ageing like grey hair, your bones become less dense.
Many people won't know they have osteoporosis until there's a nasty break.
Then a machine like this can be used to measure bone density.
In fact over two million people in the UK have the disease, but only a quarter of them are getting any treatment.
Nopw the National Osteoporosis Society has produced this new information booklet.
They're particularly concerned about people over 60, many of whom are being dismissed as untreatable, even though they're suffering pain and deformity.
She says it can mean premature death.
One in five will die from a hip fracture.
It's a scandal that this is not being adequately treated at the moment.
Bones should constantly renew and rebuild themselves…in osteporosis this doesn't happen and the bone structure breaks down.
There's no cure, so the emphasis is on avoiding falls and looking after yourself.
Take plenty of exercise, use the skeleton, take calcium, and avoid the usual risks like alcohol, smoking, lack of mobility and excessive thinness.
It's hoped the guide will help others like Nancy deal with osteoporosis before the accidents happen.
Britain and US rule out troops
FTSE down 27
The hundred shares index closed down Twenty seven point three at twenty four, ninety three point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety one and down at two marks, eighty nine.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Britain and US rule out troops
FTSE down 27
The hundred shares index closed down Twenty seven point three at twenty four, ninety three point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety one and down at two marks, eighty nine.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
PETER CONI/Regatta Chairman
PAVIL KAMAROV/Russian Oarsman
MARK JAVALET/Regatta Steward
Voice over
The Regatta chairman talks about the way hospitality had taken over the regatta course and howm glad they are that it seems to be declining.
He adds that while the bestv rowers are away practising for the Olympics this year there will still be a lot of competition and younger rowers will get the chance to be at Henley.
Male speaker
The Olympic contenders may not be here but that has, 't stopped it being a record entry for the regatta with 498 entries.
There are also 89 visiting teams.
It's more than even the 150th anniversary three years ago.The entry includes South Africans and Russians.
The Russians, as opposed to Soviets are making their first appearance at Henley.
They come from a Moscow Club, and are still quite overwhelmed by the experience.
Male speaker
It's my first time in England and We want to win
Voice over
And just because the Heavyweight contenders aren't here doesn't mean there won't be heavy competition.
Male speaker
the lack of heavyweights will mean little to the atmosphere at Henley because it has a life of its own
Voice over
The rowing standard at Henley is famous throughout the world and people would give their right oar to race on the course, it'll be every but as hard out there this year as any other.
Football…
Our two Central South first division sides have been in the transfer market today.
Oxford United are set to strengthen their squad by signing striker Nicky Cusack from Darlington…
While Swindon Town are selling midfield player Tom Jones to Reading for around one hundred thousand pounds.
British Rail is branching out: into the world of child care.
It's opened a creche at a mainline station.
But the new nursery is not just for staff…it's hoped passengers will also make use of the facilities.
Mark Kiff reports.
OXFORD
Dr KAY TURNER/Nursery Project Manager
JUDY BARROWS/Mother
But this is not the concourse to the train platforms.
This is the entrance to Turbo Ted's Nursery.
British Rail is dipping its toes into child care.
This creche is not only for the use of rail staff, but also passengers.
BR hopes they'll drop their kids off on the way to work.
Female speaker
We feel from our research that it will be as attractive to other employers as Network South East.
The locations would give maximum convenience and flexibility.
Voice over
Network South East has spent a quarter of million pounds converting what used to be staff accommodation, into a kindergarten.
This room used to be the bike sheds.
The customers seem to be satisfied already.
Female speaker
Anyone who wanted to catch the train to London would know their children were being so well cared for.
Voice over
There's enough space for 48 children; the cost; up to £100 a week per child.
And it's all within a toddler's stroll of the station, where passengers think BR's very much on the right track.
Male speaker
I think we would use it, if we were popping into town to do some shopping.
Female speaker
Having brought up 3 young children, I know mothers need time to give them freedom.
Voice over
But what about that age old problem of punctuality which seems to afflict British Rail?
What if a train carrying the parents breaks down?
Female speaker
That won't be a problem.
The staff will stay on until the parents arrive to pick up the children.
Voice over
The children certainly enjoyed themselves although not everyone these days, it seems, wants to be a train driver.
So you're both going to be firemen, not train drivers?
Male speaker
No.
We don't likle trains do we Michael?
Voice over
If all goes well at Oxford, there could be more nurseries dotted around Britain's railways in years to come.
A man who was once petrified of spiders, is undertaking unique research into the habits of one unusual species of tarantula.
He now shares his flat with sixty spiders and, as Erika Barnes reports, some of them are kept in the most unusual of places.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
RAY GABRIEL/Spider Collector
Voice over
Ray Gabriel loves his creature comforts.
This Mexican Red Kneed Tarantula is one of his favourites.
But a few years ago, there's no way Ray and his leggy friends would have been flatmates.
Male speaker
I was so scared of spiders.
The only way to get over it was to look after them.
I was cured of arachnophobia and now I'm an arachnomaniac.
Voice over
Home for 9 very special spiders, are sandwich boxes.
Salubrious surroundings for baby Mexican Red Knees.
They're the subject of a unique British study into their habits and lifestyle.
If all goes well, the results may help these exiles return to their native land.
Male speaker
Surprisingly, there are more Red Knees here than in Mexico.
We may try to re-introduce them.
Voice over
But for other species, home is where the heart is.
Even the Indian Ornamental can blend in with the scenery.
And the Trinidad spider seems happy with life outside of the Carribean.
Male speaker
They're quite entertaining.
They have their own little quirks.
They're only dangerous if you're food.
They're are no recorded deaths from anyone being bitten by a spider.
Voice over
But love them or leave them, it's best they're kept in the hands of the experts.
Another deadline is approaching for Britain's second-oldest brewery.
Morland which faces takeover and closure is confident it can defeat the unwanted bid by Greene King…
But the East Anglian company says that Morland can only put off the takeover, and not stop it.
Simon Garrett has been to Suffolk, home of Greene King, to report on the battle of the brewers 
BURY ST EDMUNDS/Suffolk
SIMON REDMAN/Chairman/Greene King plc
Voice over
The Greene King brewery dominates Bury St Edmunds.
1,500 people work for them; they own 800 pubs.
They brew as much beer in a day, as Morland produce at Abingdon in a week.
The Oxfordshire company's defence to Greene King's hostile bid has combined workers, managers and drinkers.
But the predatory Suffolk firm is adamant there can be only one winner.
Male speaker
Morland's were going to be sold anyway.
They were offered round the industry and there are considerably worse things which could have happened to them than being taken over by Greene King.
Even if the deadline were to fall tomorrow without our succeeding in buying them we can still go on until July the 27th.
Eventually we will take them over.
Voice over
Morland said today:’ The city fully expects us to survive the bid and we are confidant we will still be drinking Old Speckled Hen Beer on Friday.’
If Greene King does fail, they will be severely embarrassed, having started with an initial 43% shareholding.
They say a Greene King victory would mean closure for the Abingdon brewery, but not the end of the Morland name.
Male speaker
Particularly Old Speckled Hen could survive; they've only been brewing it there in its present form for 2 years and it would be easy for us to transfer that production to their specifications using Morland's yeast.
Male speaker
If you don't buy them do you believe somebody else will?
Male speaker
We will buy them, that is inevitable.
Voice over
Now in spite of the heavy rain, thousands of spectators have converged on Henley for the one hundred and fifty-third Royal Regatta.
Harriet Ryley and Mike Rowbottom have taken along their umbrellas for a look around.
And join us for the first day of the Henley Royal Regatta for a parade of feasting, fashion and rowing.
That's if the rain will let us.
That's after the break.
HARRIET RYLEY/MIKE ROWBOTTOM
EDA ROSE/Milliner
Voice over
Welcome to the first day of Henley Royal Regatta on the banks of the Thames.
It hasn't quite been a wash-out, although the umbrellas and macs are out in force.
Soggy underfoot it may be, but it's hard to dampen the spirit of the country's premier rowing event.
And fashio event — for those who are here dressed to impress…
Henley Royal Regatta comes near the top of the English social calender, and that means dressing up.
And even the drizzle and grey skies won't stop some putting on their new outfits, though others succumbed to the weather and brought out their brollies and even wellington boots.
Eda Rose who makes and sells hats to the rich and famous, keeps an eye on what's being worn at Henley:
Female speaker
This year it's a mixture of plain colours and pastel shades.
I've seen several big sombreros which are unusual and rather pretty.
Voice over
And the best dressed teddy bears are definitely in this Henley shop — all in rowing club uniforms.
Some are collector's pieces, and apparently they're especially popular with men customers.
Back by the regatta, the picnic lunches are in full swing — with typical British stiff upper lip, everyone's eating outdoors and ignoring the less than summery weather.
But if you were a cox who'd overeaten and put on too much weight, this is where your crew might have brought you — to Brakspear's brewery on the river bank.
up until just six years ago crews unhappy about the weight of their cox would bring them down into the brewery for a spot of heavy labour — shovelling mash, to get their weight down.
No such worris for the guests in the Stewards' enclosure, where there's an endless flow of champagne and Pimms.
As always women must wear a skirt on or below the knee to get into the enclosure and men have to wear a tie — regatta traditions which are rigidly adhered to.
For those who aren't all that keen on the rowing, they can just sit and watch the colourful parade of spectators go by all day.
That's where all the official entertaining goes on at the regatta — just to give you an idea of the scale of it, they'll be putting away 50,000 pints of Pimm's, 6,000 bottles of champagne and 3,000 pounds of strawbnerries.
But there are other people also entertaining on a grand scale at the regatta, as part of the corporate hospitality that's laid on every year.
TOM COPAS/Riverside Farmer
Voice over
These days the party stretches way beyond the boundaries of the official regatta…all the way down the course in fact.
In previous years the banks have been lined with marquees offering hospitality as riverside farmers cash in on the regatta…even though they have virtually nothing to do with it.
Voice over
Depending on where you go you can be wined, dined, and generally entertained for anything up to to two hundred pounds a head.
(Diners say how they're enjoying themselves) The hospitality business boomed in the 1980s and hit a peak in 1989-90.
Since then it's tailed away.
Hospitality is a way of chatting up business colleagues or thanking staff.
The official regatta has virtually nothing to do with it but it does give farmers with riverside frontage an extra source of income…which has reached six figures, although not this year.
Male speaker
Today people spend their money more evenly and the standard of hospitality has improved This unit has been here for ten years and can take 350 people, it's well established.
Others seem to have been shaken out by the recession.
Regatta officials are not too unhappy about that
Facing closure…the school at the centre of a pornography investigation.
Critically ill…jogger is stabbed three times in unprovoked attack.
And braving the elements…the crowds enjoying the Henley Regatta
Good evening:
WESLEY SMITH
TODDINGTON/Gloucestershire
DERYK MEAD/Director of Social Services/Gloucestershire
Voice over
New Barns school at Toddington in Gloucestershire, which opened in 1965, deals with disturbed children from all over the country.
The vice-chairman of the governors, Peter Righton, has been arrested and questioned after Customs intercepted alleged pornographic material.
Mr Righton shares a home at Evesham with the school's headmaster, Richard Alston.
He has been suspended.
Social workers are inspecting the school on a daily basis, and have uncovered complaints about care and management practices.
A thorough police investigation is being conducted into conduct at the school and former pupils will be interviewed.
Mr Righton is regarded as a leading authority on the care of children.
Following his arrest, a report has been forwarded to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
A meeting of all local authorities with children at the school will decide next week to withdraw all children, in effect closing the school.
A jogger has been stabbed by a group of youths while running through a city centre.
The unprovoked attack has left the man critically ill in hospital.
In a separate incident, a pensioner was knifed in the head as he sat on a street bench.
This report from Mark Kiff.
OXFORD
Det Sgt DAVID PARLE/Thames Valley Police
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Voice over
Two men who smuggled half a million pounds worth of cannabis into Britain in a rubber dinghy have each been sentenced to four years in jail.
A court heard how the plan almost turned to disaster when, half way across the North Sea, the dinghy began filling with water.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
AUGUST 1991
Det Ch Insp DAVID POULTON/Regional Crime Squad
Voice over
At Gloucester crown court for sentencing were Anthony Woolf and William Stein, who both pleaded guilty to importing importing cannabis resin into Britain.
It was last August that drug squad officers raided a barn at Chalford near Stroud.
Inside they discovered 178 kilos of cannabis resin with a street value of half a million pounds.
The barn had been rented by the men, who just days earlier had towed this rubber dinghy to Holland.
There, they'd recieved cannabis from an unamed person.
Stein had then navigated the dinghy 60 miles across the north sea to Felixtowe, while Woolf made his way back to Britain by ferry.
The voyage had been frought with problems; waves swamped the vessel and the navigation system broke.
The 2 had been watched by police and were arrested shortly afterwards at their homes in Gloucester and Ruscombe near Stroud.
Judge David Smith QC heard defence lawyers describe how the whole operation had been a combination of boys own stuff and incredible naivety.
The men had only been out of jail for about two years after being sentenced to 10 years for firearms offences and plotting to kidnap an Eton schoolboy and hold him to ransom, but the judge said he accepted the men had both paid the price for these crimes and sentenced them to 4 years in prison.
He says that transporting cannabis across the north sea in such a small dinghy could have resulted in disaster.
The dinghy, the trailer, and the car used to tow them, were orderd by the judge to be confiscated from the men.
The first plane will leave R-A-F Lyneham tomorrow to fly emergency supplies into Yugoslavia.
RAF LYNEHAM/Wiltshire
The Hercules transport aircraft, which has been on standby for the past two days will fly to the Croatian capital Zagreb.
The Wiltshire base will provide up to four flights a day.
An accidental death verdict has been recorded on a woman who died after she was given the wrong blood during an operation.
She developed complications after the surgery including jaundice, infection, kidney failure and a heart attack.
But a doctor at the inquest said he believed the complications could have happened anyway and the unmatched blood did not lead to her death.
The family is now calling for compensation.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
Voice over
Two brothers charged in connection with the death of a woman have been sent for trial.
Christine Campbell's body was found in a suitcase in the loft of the 
November 1992/SWINDON
All Travellers Quest guest house in Swindon.
Twenty six year old George Stacey is charged with Mrs Campbell's murder.
His brother Martin is charged with concealing a body.
The two appeared before Swindon magistrates and were committed for trial at Bristol Crown Court.
A lorry driver has been electrocuted in a freak accident while making a delivery.
Michael Woods, from Dursley in Gloucestershire was having milk unloaded from his lorry at Dairy Crest Foods at Sturminster in Dorset.
The crane being used touched an eleven thousand volt overhead power cable.
Mr Woods' teenage daughter Michelle, who'd gone with him on the trip, witnessed the accident.
STURMINSTER/Dorset
The Health and Safety Executive is investigating.
A new playroom has opened for children to use while they wait to have artificial limbs fitted.
In the past patients who travel from all over the world have had to sit for hours in hospital waiting rooms, with nothing to amuse them.
KATE GARRAWAY/Oxford
LOREN HENNEY/Patient
CAROLINE HENNEY/Patient's Mother
Dr DOUGAL MORRISON/Nuffield Orthopaedic Hospital
Voice over
With a flourish nine year old Loren Henney bursts into the new playroom…to see if it deserves her seal of approval.
And if anyone knows what makes a good hospital waiting room it is her.
Since she was fourteen months old she has spent hours in them.
Loren was born without a foot.
As she grew she had various artificial limbs fitted, but the process is time consuming and coupled with an impersonal hospital environment it can be very unnerving.
She says I was very shy and scared and I didn't like the fact I had to sit quietly and couldn't play with any of the toys.
The waiting also puts a strain on parents.
She says it is hard when you have to keep the youngsters quiet sometimes for hours.
But this room will change all that.The Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre in Oxford has come up with a combined treatment and playroom.
Complete with toys and magazines it has been decorated by hospital staff.
He says I think it is very important for children and parents to feel relaxed.
Children travel here from as far away as Malta.
In future, their journey's end should be a little less daunting.
The Ministry of Defence has put a rather unusual property on the market.
It's a (90) ninety-acre helicopter repair base which is no longer needed now the Cold War has ended.
It's for sale at around one million pounds.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
WROUGHTON/Wiltshire
LEE PAUL/Ministry of Defence
PETER CHAMBERS/Estate Agent
Voice over
It might not be what the average first-time buyer had in mind, but the latest property to go in the window at Hobbs and Chambers estate agents is sure to catch the eye of passers-by.
The purchaser won't be short of space — the former Royal Naval Air Yard at Wroughton and comes complete with aircraft hangars covering more than two hundred thousand square feet.
The former helicopter repair base is no longer needed by the MoD.
The agents trying to sell the yard admit it's unlike any other property on their books.
But at an asking price of around one million pounds, they're sure its a bargain.
The yard isn't the only redundant MoD property in the area to go on the market.
The former Burderop Hospital site nearby was recently snapped up by the Woolwich Building Society for an undisclosed sum and will eventually become the society's data centre.
Anyone else wanting to cash in on the end of the Cold War is advised to get a move on — there's already been considerable interest in the Wroughton air yard and the agents expect to sell it by the autumn.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, why Americans are flocking to buy a great British boot 
Welcome back.
A down to earth British boot is making giant strides in the American fashion market.
Whether you're a rock fan or a businessman, it seems the footwear to be seen in is a pair of Doc Martens.
IAN MACLAREN/Wollaston
CONNIE McBETH/Shop Owner
STEPHEN GRIGGS/Managing Director
Voice over
Doc Martens were notorious in 1970s as bovver boots…part of the uniform loved by skinheads…and later punks.
But now Doc Martens are THE fashion accessory for everyone from supermodels to schoolkids.
In America sales have doubled…putting the boot into the training shoe companies who're predicting a dramatic downturn in sales.
And fashion conscious youngsters just can't get enough of the clumpy air soled DMs…
This factory at Wollaston in Northamptonshire is working flat out, making Doc Martens exclusively for the export market.
They'll sell two million pairs in America this year…and are now exporting to 22 countries around the world…winning R Griggs and Co a Queens Export award in the process.
Production is now topping 200,000 pairs a year.
Griggs expect their turnover to top 200 million pounds this year…
So what's behind the companies dramatic success story…
But Doc Martens won't be placing too much emphasis on the often fickle fashion market.
They intend to keep a tight grip on the demand for the bread and butter work boots, worn by thousands of postmen and bobbies on the beat.
One footnote…
Doc Martens is about to enter the lucrative clothing accessory market and intends to open its own superstore in London next year.
If you go down to the woods today, prepare for a big surprise.
A Black Hairstreak has been spotted, and it's causing quite a flutter.
KATE GARRAWAY/Bernwood Forest
ANDREW PHILLIPS/Butterfly Conservation
Voice over
We're on the trail of the Black Hairstreak.
A small brownish butterfly with a lifespan of less than a week and a wingspan shorter than your little finger.
It may not sound like much to get excited about but for enthusiasts even the merest chance of a sighting is somehting worth turning out for.
This time their enthusiasm was rewarded.
He says…
It's more of an English tweed suit of a butterfly than a Sultan's robe but it has its own uniqueness and beauty.
It's also very rare, being only found on the clay belt between Oxford and Peterborough.
The group Butterfly Conservation wants to increase its numbers at Bernwood Forest in Oxfordshire.
Volunteers keep records of its changing population.
He says…
I'm an enthusiast andit is great to have the chance and come out and see it.
She says…
They add something to the countryside and they don't sting.
They are nice insects.
The Black Hairstreak was at it's height hundreds of years ago when this was all Royal Forest.Enthusiasts hope with the right care this King of butterflies wll once again rule the woodlands of Oxfordshire.
The actor who played Dirty Den in Eastenders has gone back to the prison where he was once an inmate.
Leslie Grantham was there to open an art exhibition, and he praised the staff for encouraging the artistic talents of the prisoners.
CLARE LAFFERTY Leyhill
LESLIE GRANTHAM Actor
Voice over
The last time Leslie Grantham was at Leyhill prison he was serving the end of an eleven year sentence for murder.
Fifteen years on, the actor most famous for playing Dirty Den was invited here to open an exhibition of Picasso etchings.
It's the first time that a public exhibition has been staged in a prison.
The idea behind it is to bring the community closer to the inmates.
Inmates were hopeful that the exhibition would cultivate a better understanding between the prison and the public.
Male speaker
They'll see that we're just like them.
Only we were unlucky.
Voice over
It was while he was at Leyhill that Leslie got into drama college.
He thanked staff for fostering his talents.
The exhibition runs here for three weeks.
When the etchings are taken down inmates will have another kind of picture to put in their place.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Security ring round London
FTSE down 11
The hundred shares index closed down eleven point two at two eight eight eight point eight 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, fifty five.
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
KEN GOODWIN/Cirencester
JILL FROGGATT/Would-be Foster Parent
Voice over
The orphans of a war in Bosnia.
It was pictures like these which moved a Cirencester family to take action.
When Jill Froggatt heard about about Sarejevo Child Lifeline she wrote to them offering to help.
The organisation wanted families to offer temporary foster homes for Bosnian orphans.
Mrs Froggat jumped at the chance.
She says that she saw an ad in a newspaper.
She sent money.
Mrs Froggatt organised bring and buy sales to raise cash for the organisation, but after she'd sent off a check for more than three hundred pounds she heard nothing more.
She said that she's shocked that an organisation can behave this way.
Mrs Frogatt's two daughters were looking foreward to welcoming their new friends, but it was not to be:
They say they were looking foreward to having two new friends.
Sarajevo Child Lifeline is connected with Brit-Pol, an organisation which made the news last year, when they organised a trip for a group of volunteers from Berkley in Gloucestershire, which failed to collect a coach load of orphans they had planned to bring back from Bosnia.
Meanwhile the Charity Commission says in a statement:
We have had representations about both of these charities, we are conducting a joint investigation with the police.
Their bank accounts have been frozen and the trustees have been forbidden to act during the investigation.
Despite repeated attempts by central Television to speak to Sarejevo Child Lifeline, no one was available for comment.
A bus company has halted evening services to an estate after its drivers were shot at with airguns and catapults.
It says youths have also thrown stones and bottles, and that lives were in danger.
Passengers say they'll be stranded in their homes, but that they don't blame the drivers.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
BILL SANDS/Driver
BILL BISHOP/Bus Manager
Voice over
Bus services are operating normally during the daytime in the Springbank area of Cheltenham in Gloucestershire, but at night the estate becomes a no go area.
In the last two months 20 buses have been damaged by missiles, drivers have been attacked and robbed.
The company says there'll be no bus services after 8 o'clock on Saturday night.
There's a bus through the Springbank area every 5 minutes during the day, and normally every 15 minutes at night, but now that's simply too risky.
Passengers are angry about the cancellations but they don't blame the drivers.
Every bus on the route will be out of service from 8 each evening while the company talks to police and community groups.
A couple who ran a social club for three years are taking legal action after being given just two hours' notice to leave their jobs and home.
They'd put several thousand pounds of their own money into the club, and were recently told to stop working so hard.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
BARRY GAMMAGE/Sacked Steward
DIANE GAMMAGE/Sacked Stewardess
PAUL ARCHER/Thamesdown Law Centre
Voice over
Now in a council bedsit, Barry and Diane Gammage are coming to terms with unemployment for the first time in their working lives.
Until recently they were joint stewards of the Royal British Legion in Swindon, into which they'd poured four and a half thousand pounds of their own money, and just months ago received a letter from the board telling them not so work so hard.
But the club was sold to the brewers Arkells.
One lunchtime Barry and Diane were sacked, and told that they and their three children had to vacate their living quarters there and then.
It was Diane's birthday.
Their two eldest sons returned home from school to find their parents loading a furniture van…but worst affected has been their youngest BJ.
Barry and Diane took their case to the Thamesdown Law Centre.
There they were told that under Transfer of Undertakings regulations, Arkells had no right to dismiss them.
Arkells told us it sympathised with the Gammages but never had any intention of employing them.
It wanted to give the club a different style of management.
Barry and Diane don't expect their jobs or their home back — but they're hoping to be given a tribunal date for later this year.
A ten year old girl who had a heart and lung transplant just four months ago has gone back to school.
Doctors didn't think Kelly Good would be fit enough to join her class mates until next term.
But Kelly, who has cystic fibrosis, has surprised them all, as Clare Lafferty reports.
NEWENT/Gloucestershire
JULY 1991
KELLY GOOD
TANIA WILLIAMS/Kelly's Friend
MICHAEL VILLIS/Kelly's Friend
IAN PRIOR/Kelly's Teacher
Voice over
Today 10 year old, Kelly Good looks like any normal, lively schoolgirl.
But less than 6 months ago, she was fighting for her life.
Kelly was born with cystic fibrosis, an illness that virtually destroys the lungs.
Every day she had to endure the discomfort of physiotherapy and constant coughing.
And she got out of breath so easily, she had to use a wheelchair.
Kelly's only hope of survival was a heart and lung transplant.
She underwent surgery in February.
Doctors said it would take her the best part of a year to recover.
But 4 months on, Kelly has rejoined her classmates.
Kelly's classmates are happy to have their friend back at school.
Despite the success of the operation, Kelly will always have cystic fibrosis, and she'll need medical treatment all her life.
But thanks to the transplant that will now be a relatively normal life.
View from the top: The monstrous folly that's a magnet for tourists.
Girl at the top.
The new head of school who's breaking the mould.
And take it from the top…but this time the council's calling the tune.
Welcome back: For hundreds of years people with more money than sense have been putting up strange buildings on their land that seem to have no point whatsoever.
The last folly was finished in nineteen thirty-six and provoked such a public outcry that it led to the first-ever planning inquiry.
But yesterday's blot on the landscape is today's tourist curiosity, as Simon Garrett reports 
FARINGDON/Oxfordshire
CHRIS FRANCE/Estate Manager
Voice over
When it was built it was described in the letters pages of the Daily Telegraph as’ a monsterous erection,’but the people of Faringdon wouldn't be without their folly now.
It was built by Gerald, the 14th Lord Berners, a noted eccentric bon viveur, artist, novelist and composer.
The prospect of the hill above their homes being dominated by a 100ft tower so appauled local people, the first ever public planning inquiry was convened.
Male speaker
The opposition was led by a retired Admiral who complained that the tower would obscure the view from his house.
When it was pointed out that he would need a telescope to see it from there, he replied that being an ex-naval man, he never looked at anything without the use of a telescope.
Voice over
Heated letters were exchanged in the national and local press.
One man said he'd heard Berners wanted to put a huge siren on the top.
Berners called him an idiot and threatened to sue.
At the inquiry, he agreed the tower would just peep over the tops of the trees.
That's true now, but at the time it was questionable.
Berners had claimed the construction would provide employment in depression hit Faringdon, in the event one extra man joined the estate workers.
A big firework display greeted the completion in flambuoyant Berners style.
Male speaker
He was an artist, composer a wit and a writer; he wrote 5 novels in one year.
But he was an awkward man in conversation, he could only string a couple of pithy sentences together, or a witty epigram.
Voice over
Dominating the town as it does, the tower today has a gothic feel which makes it seem older than it really is.
Oddly the land on which it sits was actually called Folly Hill before the building was added, as if it was fated to be there.
Male speaker
Folly can mean a useless building or it can mean a clump of trees on a hill.
But now everyone in Faringdon has a folly dining room, there's the folly pub and even a folly newspaper, but there's only one folly tower.
Voice over
The tower soon became part of the landscape, so much so, that Berners donned his artist's hat to paint it for the local shell guide.
Despite their objections, Faringdonians have been drawn to their tower ever since.
As ever the builder was one jump ahead, or rather ahead of any one who'd jump.
Male speaker
There used to be a sign on the tower which read’ Anyone committing suicide off the top of this tower does so at their own risk.’
Voice over
Eccentricity is the key and when Berners opened the tower to the public gaity was top of the list of attractions.
He dyed doves various bright colours to fly around and adorn the folly and the town.
Berners passed on some years ago, but some things haven't changed.
A firm of road hauliers which has fourteen trucks stuck in the lorry blockade in France says the dispute is costing it a fortune.
French drivers have brought many main routes to a standstill in a row with their Government over new traffic laws.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
RALPH DAVIES/Haulage Operator
Voice over
The phones at Ralph Davies' haulage office haven't stopped ringing, with drivers stranded in France checking in with their boss.
The news isn't good; most haven't moved an inch.
14 of Ralph's trucks are trapped in jams which stretch for 100 miles or more; victims of a blockade by French lorry drivers.
Luckily, all Ralphs lorries are refrigerated, so their perishable cargoes are't in imminent danger.
But if the blockade continues it's going to start costing big money.
He says that it will cost money, especially if the dispute continues for some time.
The French lorry drivers started their blockade because of new laws being introduced which mean disqualification for any driver accumulating 6 penalty points on his licence.
But although Ralph's business is being hit by the dispute, he has a certain amount of sympathy for his French counterparts.
He says that he can see understand their point of view.
Lorry trailers which would have been hitting the road tomorrow now stand idle, Ralph won't send them out until the blockade is over.
In the meantime, he's back on the phone cheering up one of his stranded drivers with some friendly advice…
He tells his driver he should have gone to Istanbul!
The French government is holding out an olive branch to the drivers by offering to negotiate how the new traffic laws are applied.
But they won't start talks until the blockade is lifted, and that could take some time.
More than eighty staff at a supermarket have been sent home suffering from a mystery illness.
The symptoms include fever and vomiting.
But health experts say the outbreak is not related to food on sale at the store.Richard Barnett reports:
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
GEORGE ROWLINSON/Cheltenham Borough Council
Voice over
Eighty two staff at the Sainsbury's supermarket on Tewkesbury Road in Cheltenham have contracted what's thought to be a virus infection that causes fever, aches and vomiting.They've all been sent home, and staff from other stores have been drafted in to keep the supermarket open.Tests are being carried out at the public health laboratory in the town to identify the illness.But Cheltenham's Assistant Chief Environmental health officer says shoppers at the store shouldn't be worried about the outbreak:
Male speaker
All the medical evidence is that the illness isn't food related, and there's no risk to shoppers.
Voice over
Sainsburys say the company's medical staff are liasing with the local council.No employees will be allowed back to work until the infection has cleared up.
Meanwhile this evening it was business as usual at the store, as families arrived to do their shopping.
A second important deadline has passed in the takeover battle for Oxfordshire brewers, Morland.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
More than ninety teachers' jobs are to go in Gloucestershire as a result of spending cuts.
GLOUCESTER
Poll tax capping has forced the county council to cut the full-time equivalent of ninety two teaching posts from September.
The council has warned that unless it gets more funding from Central Government, further job losses can be expected next year.
A fourth man has died after a road accident in Gloucestershire.
6 JUNE 1992/DUNTISBOURNE ABBOTS/Gloucestershire
Four cars were involved in the accident which happened a month ago on the Gloucester to Cirencester road at Duntisbourne Abbots.
Three people died almost immediately when a mini metro burst into flames.
A fourth man died today at Cheltenham General Hosptial.
Comedy actress Judy Carne has been bailed by Northampton magistrates on charges of smuggling drugs into Britain.
LIBRARY PICTURES/NORTHAMPTON
Carne, who's fifty three and from Church Brampton near Northampton, faces three charges of smuggling cocaine.
Carne was formerly married to Burt Reynolds and became famous for her part in the American Laugh-In T-V series of the sixties.
An MP has joined the call to stop NHS treatment for the removal of tattoos.
David Lidington, the MP for Aylesbury whose constituency includes Stoke Mandeville Hospital, says the money could be better spent on people who are ill and on reducing waiting lists.Keith Hutchence reports.
DAVID LIDINGTON MP/Con Aylesbury
Voice over
The tattoo was a moment's impulse and cost just a few pounds, but now it's taking up the time and resources of the NHS.
A Bill's been introduced into the Commons, which would require that before people are tattooed, they should take out an insurance policy against its removal.
The MPs say a high proportion of people on long-term waiting lists require plastic and cosmetic surgery.
Making insurance compulsory would — they say — not only free Health Service resources, but guarantee freedom of choice.
Baby dies at playschool.
Was another child to blame?
Destination Sarajevo.
Lift off for Operation Cheshire.
And back to the Good life.
Kelly the transplant girl returns to school.
Good Evening:
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
Police say the baby may have fallen head-first onto a tiled floor.
Her mother had checked on her only a few minutes earlier, and found her sleeping soundly.
Tonight, the parents are in deep shock.
This report from Gareth Furby.
OLDBROOK/Milton Keynes
Det Supt JOHN BOUND/Thames Valley Police
KAREN CALDBECK/Playgroup Organiser
JOHN BISHOP/Neighbour
JOE DOUGLAS/Playgroup Parent
Voice over
The police say the mother took her baby daughter and another older child to a playgroup at the Oldbrook Community Centre in Milton Keynes.
While the mother helped out with the playgroup — she left her baby alone in a pushchair in this side room.
The police say when the mother checked the room her baby was sleeping quietly.
But just a few minutes later a playgroup worker found the baby lying on the tiled floor next to the pushchair.
She had severe head injuries and was taken to Milton Keynes hospital but died soon after arrival.
Tonight one theory is the baby was tipped out of the pushchair by an older child, and fell head first onto the tiled floor.
Twenty infants aged between three and five were at the playgroud and the police have confirmed they will all be interviewed, along with four staff members and several other mothers.
But officially as least the police are still keeping an open mind.
He says it could be an accident, but it could also have been caused by another person.
The playgroup has running for about for about nine years.
Today it was closed as news of the death spread among the people of Oldbrook
She says they're all very upset and will help the police but she can't comment beyond that.
He says the news left him dumbfounded.
He says it's awful but they don't yet know the full facts.
An inquest into the death is expected to be opened on Monday.
A murder trial jury has been told that a teenager who was left in charge of a baby girl for a few minutes killed the child by picking her up and smashing her head against a wall.
The teenager has pleaded not guilty to murder.
Tim Hurst was in court.
BRISTOL
NAILSWORTH/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Gary Corbett, who's 19, and from Nailsworth in Gloucestershire, was taken to Bristol Crown Court under escort, where he denied the murder of nine month old Danielle Simpkins, the daughter of his girlfriend at a block of flats at Nailsworth on March 20 last year.
In those few minutes, say the prosecution, back home with the baby, Corbett, in a flash of temper, had grabbed Danielle by the leg and smashed her against the bedroom wall.
Minutes after the prosecution had outlined that evidence to the jury, the court was cleared because of a security alert.
The judge too left the building still in his robes.
By the time the all clear came, the judge ordered an adjournment until tomorrow, and Corbett left the court as he had arrived, by taxi.
The case will resume tomorrow and is expected to last for at least two weeks.
The first British planeload of relief supplies has arrived in Yugoslavia, after leaving RAF Lyneham this morning.
The Hercules transport aircraft is taking food and medicine to the besieged city of Sarajevo.
With United Nations help, it's hoped this mercy mission will be the first of many.
Gargy Patel reports.
RAF LYNEHAM/Wiltshire
Sqdn Ldr CHRIS TINGAY/Captain
ARCHIE HAMILTON MP/Armed Forces Minister
Gp Capt DAVID ADAMS/Station Commander
Voice over
Final preparations for the Hercules crew leaving this morning for Sarajevo.
On board the transport plane, the first British aid to the war torn city.
A cargo of 30,000 pounds of food and medical supplies and an RAF landrover.
On the tarmac at Lyneham, crew members admitted being nervous about the possibility of coming under fire in the Bosnian capital, but there was strong determination to make sure the aid gets through.
Four planes have been on standy here for a number of days.
The base is home to the RAF Hercules transport fleet.
Shortly before take off, members of the crew were met by Armed Forces Minister, Archie Hamilton.
The plane has been fitted with what's described as self defence equipment.
It's undertaken a number of mercy missions such as to the Kurds.
But it would only fly into Sarajevo if the United Nations gave the go ahead.
The first stage of the British operation, codenamed Cheshire, left on schedule and arrived in Zagreb this afternoon.
Under UN command, it will proceed to Sarajevo.
Lyneham will remain on standby for as long as necessary.
It's hoped the airlift will bring relief to the 30,000 people under siege in Sarajevo.
If conditions remain safe, up to 4 Hercules a day will fly in to drop off desperately needed supplies to the city.
Gloucester's historic King's School has just appointed a new head of school.
And for the first time in four and a half centuries…the new head boy is a GIRL!
Jessica Fowle reports.
GLOUCESTER
EMILY HALLIDAY
Voice over
A school which prides itself on its history.
The pupils at the King's School start their day traditionally; filing into the cloisters of Gloucester Cathedral for early morning chapel.
But there's been a major change to this familiar scene.
Emily Halliday was one of the first girls to join the school when it became co-educational.
Now she's been made Head Girl; the first in 450 years.
And no-one was more surprised than Emily herself.
Female speaker
I was over the moon.
It only took me half a day to decide that I wanted the job.
Voice over
And the pupils can agree on one thing at least; they'll welcome the change.
But there are still some people who are finding it hard to adjust.
Female speaker
One ex-member of staff said’ I see the new Head Boy is a girl!’
Voice over
Offically the new job starts in September, but for now she's getting in some valuable practice as acting head, while the current Head Boy takes his exams.
And the teachers who selected her for the post make it very clear that it was Emily's ability not her sex that made her first choice.
But there's one area where she faces no competition.
No one is fighting her for the task of serving school dinners to the juniors.
A new code of conduct for street entertainers has been drawn up by a local authority.
The council wants to avoid complaints from shoppers who find some buskers a headache.
So they're asking musicians to follow a few simple rules, as Ken Goodwin has been finding out.
GLOUCESTER
PETER KENNEDY Busker
GEOFFREY LEAVITT Busker
LESLEY PRITCHARD Gloucester City Council
Voice over
Peter Kennedy is a former music lecturer.
Now, he enjoys busking.
But an idea by Gloucester City Council could mean that this is Peter's swansong.
He objects to the council's new code of conduct for buskers, which sets out rules for street entertainers.
So now he's giving up busking in Gloucester.
He says that it's unfair to inflict rules on the way performers play or behave; it's just more red tape.
Other buskers welcome the idea of a code of conduct, saying that it'll help improve the quality of entertainers on the streets.
He says it may help keep out every Tom, Dick and Harry who want to busk.
Gloucester City Council says the code of conduct isn't meant to discourage busking, only to get the best from street entertainers.
Male speaker
Don't be a nuisance.
Don't play too loud.
Don't play outside a store without asking the manager first.
Don't solicit for money.
And don't cause an obstruction.
Voice over
She says that it would be wrong of the council to judge who is a good or bad busker, what they're doing is setting out some rules so everyone knows where they stand.
So are buskers in Gloucester striking the right note with their audience?
The Council is hoping it's code of conduct will lead to a more harmonious relationship with buskers, but with one street musician at least the code is definitely way out of tune.
Court clears way for ex MEP's trial
FTSE down 17
The hundred shares index closed down seventeen point eight at twenty-four, seventy-six point one.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety-one and up at two marks, ninety.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
There are no performing animals, no red nosed clowns, but it's still packing in the crowds.
The Chinese State Circus is in town, with a show that sends big top tradition tumbling.
RICHARD BARNETT Cheltenham
SHU YAN Chinese State Circus
GRAHAM TOTTLE Promoter
Voice over
Some of the finest acrobats in the world are limbering up for a show in the Big Top in Cheltenham.
These are the aristocrats of the ring…building on a Chinese tradition that dates back more than two thousand years.
Talent scouts scour China for potential circus performers…many of these artists have been leaping through hoops since they were six years old.
Female speaker
Circus is very popular in China.
It's an entertainment in the countryside at harvest time.
Voice over
The Chinese State Circus is on its first National Tour…and around 18000 people are expected to see the show in Cheltenham over the next two weeks:
Male speaker
It's very entertaining.
People say their hands hurt from clapping so much.
Voice over
The grand opening parade gives a foretaste of the spectacle that's to come…and over the next two hours, there's one breathtaking moment after another:
ACTUALITY
There are animals in the show…but they're mythical oriental lions…and they're happy to be taking part.
And they can manage feats real lions would find very tricky.
The greatest show on earth?…quite possibly.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
S
FTSE down 31
The hundred shares index closed down thirty one point one at two eight five seven point seven 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty one and down at two marks, fifty five.
Welcome back…coming up later an old ham and some oriental acrobatics…but now it's time to join Tim Russon for Summer Sport 
TIM RUSSON
RICHARD BEDDALL/All Wheel Drive Club
BRUCE TIGWELL/Britsh Champion
MELANIE SIMMONITE/Women's Champion
BARRY SANDRY/Club Professional
VICKY HANKS
DEBBIE WATT
DAVID HOWELL
GARY HARRIS
BARRIE CORLESS/Coaching Director
Hello there…this week Summer Sport has brought us out to Herefordshire…we're at Mansel Lacy…we're going off road racing…so away we go…
ACTION
Off road racing…is all about mud…forest tracks…driving wheels through the impossible in machines that look improbable…
Twenty five years ago a band of motoring enthusiasts who wanted more than rallying or racing teamed up to start the All Wheel Drive Club…
And this is their birthday party…25 candles on the cake…and 5000 members are here to help blow them out…
Richard Beddall says…it's a great amateur sport which cane be done a shoestring…with old landrovers and jeeps…and it's a safe sport…a lot of other people come in from other sports such as motor racing and motor cycling
The All Wheel Drive Club was started for jeeps and landrovers…now the machines come in all shapes and sizes…there are over a hundred meetings a year…there's 10 rounds of the British Safari Championship…
In safari…its simply the fastest over a cross country course…the champion is Bruce Tigwell…
Bruce Tigwell says…the skill of it he says is being able to read the ground and go over bumps as quickly as you can…there are more skills in this than any other form of motoring…he says it's fun motor sport and very friendly but the competition is still high…you cannot buy the vehicles off the shelf you have to make them…top speed is 115 miles an hour but they rarely get the chance to go that fast
and true to form the champ won this round of racing too…but there's more to this than winning…excitement…adventure…a true test of driving skills
Melanie Simmonite says she started 20 years ago…her husband did it so it was a case of you can't beat them join them…
a driver says he's got not idea how fast he goes…it takes him hundred of hours to get ready and then they come out and smash it up…there must be some logic he says…
another driver says he came off in a field saw stars for a few seconds but he's alright…
another party game for the off roaders is the mud run…the challenge here to get through it…
well from the rough of off road racing we're driving back on to the fairways for the start of our action round up this week…for a success story from the Broome Manor club at swindon…
First there's Gary Harris…four seasons in a row he's been in the English boys team…
British under 16 champion twice now he's off to the European Championships…
David Howell who's 18 is going with him…he's won all four county titles already this season…
Broome Manor also has the Women's champion in 16 year old Vicky Hanks…she's broken three course records this summer…
and then there's Debbie Watt…the girls champion and an English international…
so what's the winning formula…how come Swindon has so many young golfing greats…
Barry Sandry…the professional says the facilities in Thamesdown for golf are first class…they are second to none in the country and they also use the facilities well by coaching youngsters from the age of five upwards…
Vicky Hanks says she started playing golf with her dad six years ago
Debbie Watt says she hopes to turnprofessional and play golf for a living
David Howell says he started playing golf with his mum and dad and brothers…had a couple of lessons and that was it
Gary Harriss says he hopes to be an amateur for another five years play in the walker Cup and then turn pro…
one young golfer who did grow up to greatness is Sandy Lyle…he's in Thame on Sunday to open up the new Oxfordshire Golf Club we'll be meeting up with him on Monday…
tonight we're meeting up with Gloucester rugby club's first full time director of coaching…he's Barrie Corless…a player with Moseley…
Coventry and England…he took Northampton from the bottom of Division Two to within a whisker of Bath in division one…his job now…
Barrie Corless says it seems criminal that a side like Gloucester were facing relegation last season so he will be looking how they can improve…he adds there were problems last year and it wouyld be unrealistic to hope for instant success but hopes to turn things around in the not too distant future
that's the future…in the present…there's the country's top ice skatrers are performing at swindon tomorrow…
the fastest karters are racing at Little Rissington on Sunday
and the top rowers will be pulling for gold at Henley on finals day at the Royal regatta
A piece of ham has been given pride of place in a butcher's window.
But it's not for sale at any price — it's more than a hundred years old, and was snapped up for a thousand pounds at auction.
IAN MACLAREN/Oxford
MICHAEL FELLER/Butcher
Voice over
There's bringing home the bacon…and then there's bringing back the ham.
In this case a 101 year old ham, the most ancient in the world.
It was cured in borax by wholesalers from Chicago in 1892.
Looking rather black and wrinkled, it's now the property of Feller's the Butcher's in Oxford's covered market.
Believe it or not there was lively bidding for this slice of history at Christies…the selling price was 990 pounds.
So is the new owner completely mad…
Male speaker
People have said that already.
But it's the oldest in the world.
It's unique and we want to keep the history going.
Voice over
Feller's believe the ham will become a talking point in the Victorian market.
It has already…
Female speaker
I thought it would be bigger.
It has shrivelled up.
But it's marvellous.
Female speaker
I think it's a bit of a joke.
It looks like dried fish.
Voice over
But the obvious question is: Could you eat it?
Male speaker
Christies said you couldn't.
But I think you could.
Female speaker
How many slices.
Male speaker
About six or eight.
Voice over
But at around 120 pounds a slice…who's counting.
If that's out of your price bracket…there's always pork scratchings at 30 pence a bag.
A coach firm is claiming that it's owed more than two thousand pounds by a charity set up to help Bosnian children.
The company provided a coach to bring children back to this country.
The trip was a failure, and the bill was never paid.
Yesterday, a woman claimed the same charity had conned her out of more than three hundred pounds.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Eastington
September 1992
KEN BOULTON/K
The plan was to rescue a coach load of Bosnian children from the fighting in the former Yugoslavia and bring them to the safety of England.
But the mission failed and the volunteers returned empty-handed.
Nine months on Mr Boulton is still waiting for the two and a half thousand pounds he claims Brit-Pol owes him for the coach.
In his dealings with Brit-Pol Mr Boulton spoke to this woman, Elizabeth Cooper.
Recently there's been no sign of Mrs Cooper at the charity's headquarters in West Sussex.
And no one answers the phone.
Someone else who'd like to speak to Mrs Cooper is Jill Frogatt from Cirencester.
She sent three hundred pounds to the Sarajavo Child Lifeline, an organisation associated with Brit-Pol.
She's heard nothing since.
Mrs Frogatt and Mr Boulton have both handed over their complaints to the Charity Commissioners who are conducting a joint investigation of Brit-Pol with the police.
In the meantime the charity's bank account has been frozen.
A pilot who was taught to fly by the RAF has spent much of the past eighteen months in his garden shed making his own aeroplane.
He's one of a thousand pilots who'll be flying in this weekend for Europe's biggest exhibition of home-made planes.
TIM HURST/Hartpury
JOHN HAYMER/Pilot
PENNY HAYMER/Wife
The plane is based on a wooden frame, exactly as a model replica built by neighbour Bill Vinton from the same plans, and then covered in cloth and painted.
Such detailed engineering took 1,000 hours and left John Haymer's wife an aeroplane widow.
John Haymer's do-it-yourself plane will be one of around 1,000 home-made aircract flying into Wroughton near Swindon this weekend for the largest such rally outside America.
Whatever they may look like, they do all fly, it's the only way to get there.
(HARRIET AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the off-road racers birthday party 
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
The Bishop retired after he was cautioned by the police for the offences.
In an interview to be shown on Central tonight, Neil Todd says he'll find it hard to trust anybody again.The Church says he was offered help, but backed out.
CHRIS MOORE/Reporting
April 1992
NEIL TODD/Former Trainee Monk
Canon ANDY RADFORD/Church of England
Voice over
Neil Todd met the Bishop of Gloucester after the Bishop wrote to him, offering the chance to learn about life in the church.
He was invited to the Bishop's home near Gloucester Cathedral, but that was where things began to go wrong.
Neil says he was subjected to a series of indecent assaults and beatings.
He claims the Bishop justified his actions by talking about the suffering of martyred saints.
He also spoke about beating him for alleged sins.
He says…
He spoke about how I was very shy and embarassed and how I must be a very holy person.
But then he went on to say that this was in fact a sin, because if I wanted to give my all to God then the things that I didn't like doing or showing, I had to do.
He also said that he wasn't going to harm me and he would be there and that there was no sin in any of it.
Neil Todd's parents called in the police after the teenager tried to kill himself.
In March this year, Bishop Peter Ball resigned after being cautioned for gross indecency and is now retired on a church pension.
Neil Todd, who wanted to devote his life to God is unemployed.
Trying to pick up the pieces of his life, he says his experiences have made it difficult for him to trust anybody.
Male speaker
I don't have the same faith now that I use to have…in anything…including myself.
It's now a question of learning to cope, and trying to get over everything.
Voice over
Tonight, the Church of England said Neil Todd had not been abandoned.
Male speaker
He was offered counselling to be paid for by the church.
He termintade that counselling, butr we are willing to talk to him through his partish priest or bishop.
Voice over
Question: Do you feel you have fulfilled your duties towards him?
Reply: I think so.
The Neil Todd interview was recorded for Central's Crimestalker series, and will be shown tonight, at ten forty.
A nurse has been found guilty of assaulting a blind woman of eighty eight.
A court was told that Rebecca Frak punched the old lady in the face, leaving her with a bruised eye.
She'll be sentenced later.
GRAEME BOWD/Swindon
SARAH FRIBBINS/Assault Victim
REBECCA FRAK/Defendant
Voice over
Nurse Frak, who denied the assualt charge, is said to have lost her temper with an elderly patient at the Ashbury House private nursing home in Swindon.
88 year old Sarah Fribbins, who is almost totally blind, was punched in the face.
Too frail to give evidence in court, she described the attack in a statement.
Magistrates were told that Mrs Frak became angry with the old lady as she was changing her nightdress.
Other staff said she seemed annoyed to discover that Mrs Fribbins had wet the bed.
They heard what sounded like a blow.
When a care worker later approached her the 88 year old pleaded:’ Don't hit me.’
After the hearing Mrs Fribbins described what had happened.
Female speaker
I asked her to turn me over.
Then she bashed me, like this.
Voice over
She couldn't explain why the nurse had attacked her.
Female speaker
I don't know why she did it.
I wouldn't hurt anybody and I'm not cheeky.
Voice over
But the nurse left court still insisting that she hadn't struck a blow.
Female speaker
Sarah Fribbins is a confused lady.
Voice over
Mrs Frak was sacked after the incident and was told by magistrates she could now face prison.
She was remanded for probation reports and will be sentenced next month.
A car worker has died in an accident on a production line.
Recent Pictures/SWINDON
The engineer suffered fatal head injuries while working in the welded body section of the Honda plant in Swindon.
It's not clear how the accident happened.
The man, who's in his forties, was working alone at the time.
All production has been stopped indefinitely, and an investigation is underway.
One of the last television appearances of comedian Frankie Howerd is due to be screened this weekend.
Frankie, who was seventy-five, died on Easter Sunday but was an entertainer right to the end.
Shortly before his death he appeared at the Fire Service Training College for the Central programme,’ Frankie's On…
Fire!’ to be shown on Sunday.
Now, in the next in our series’ Inside the Globe’we take a look at what made Frankie so popular.
MORETON-in-MARSH/Gloucestershire
FRANKIE'S ON
JOHN BURKERT/Instructor
KERRY JONES/Fire Service College
TREVOR McCALLUM/Producer
This is all in a day's work at the Fire Service Training College at Moreton-in-Marsh.
Somewhere in there fire fighters learn to tackle some of the most dangerous situations they'd ever be likely to come up against.
It had been Frankie's Howerd's wish to entertain specialist audiences, like the Fire Service, for some years with his own brand of sizzling humour.
Frankie tells the audience how the Producers had wanted him to make an entrance by sliding down a fireman's pole!
When asked to appear in’ Frankie's On’for Central, the comedian answered,’Well it was either that or join the Chippendales.’
The audience at the college loved the show.
Instructor, John Burkert, describes Frankie's aura of comedy.
Frankie also got a grilling from Kerry Jones.
Kerry asks Frankie if he's thought of retiring.
She feels it's sad that Frankie died at a time when he was just becoming popular with a younger audience.
The master of titters, Frankie had always wanted to be noticed, that's why during shows for the troops during World War Two he changed the a in his surname to an e.
He loved stand-up comedy, but over 50 years in showbusiness he also became well-known for his roles in some of the best British comedy films and tv shows.
Frankie's On brought him full circle in a way, taking him back to his music hall roots with its audience involvement.
One of Frankie's greatest fears in his final days was letting people down.
There were two more in the series which could never be made.
But as his fans at the College agree, it was that determination to give 110% of himself to his audience that made Frankie Howerd, one of the greats of British Comedy.
You can see Frankie's On…
Fire! at ten thirty on Sunday night.
Deal agreed to resume Minke whaling
FTSE up 21
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-one points at twenty-four, ninety-seven point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety and down at two marks, eighty-nine.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
TIM RUSSON
STEVE KERTON
JOHN HILL
DENE STALLARD
MARK KIFF/Reporting
PAT McGEOUGH/Chairman
BRIAN HORTON/Manager
Voice over
Hello there…this week we've come to France to the town of Chalon sur Soane for one of the most dramatic one of of the most dangerous of summer sports…that's powerboating…
Why France well this is the closest the formula one circuit comes to our country which is sad because this year like many others Central South racers are leading the world championship…
So let's celebrate their success and join them as dance with water…
John Hill from Cheltenham and Steve Kerton from Gloucestershire are two of the world's top powerboat pilots…
This season they lead the championship they're the ringmasters of a sporting circus which every summer floats around the world…
South Africa…
Hungary…
Italy…the Far East…the latest stop is France the the busy and bustling market town of Chalon Sur Soane…
The posters have been up for weeks…when the powerboat circus comes to town…the streets and squares close down…everyone makes for the river…every bridge…and every balcony becomes a grandstand…a ring side seat for the big race…
Powerboating may not have the international pull or prestige of car racing but it does pack in the crowds…
Steve Kerton says they expect fifty thousand people at the race this weekend…half a million watch the sport in Rotterdam…
Steve Kerton is one of the few professional drivers on the circuit…he just about survives on sponsorship…you see there are no big bucks in this sport…no national glory…take Kerton he's to powerboating what Mansell is to motor racing…well in name only…
we have our ups and downs getting money…its difficult to plan for the future like motor racing when you don't know how much money is coming in
For most drivers formula one powerboating is a hobby…
John Hill from Cheltenham is a signwriter by profession…on water he's three times a world champion…
John Hill says he started racing with a ski boat and then when the engines got bigger he had to have a go at powerboating which he really enjoys…
and what of the danger…the dance with water is a dice with death…
Dene Stallard from Cheltenham is another Formula one racer with scars to show for a high speed crash right here at Chalon…
Dene Stallard says three years ago his boat flipped on the water and he woke up in hospital…
Powerboating is run much on the same line as cars…the pilots have to qualify in practising…
In Chalon thirty boats are here…only twenty two will make the grid…the course is a mile long circuit of the River Soane…looks simple enough…up and down and around but every second every centimetre is a challenge
the water changes all the time…you have to watch the cross wind and be careful under the bridge where the boat may lift…
All three Central South pilots are on the grid for the big race…
Many fancy Hill…the oldest man in the race…the oldest man in the sport…the oldest world championship contender this country has…he's 58…
I enjoy it…it keeps me young…
I don't get tired unlike some of the other drivers and experience counts for a lot in this sport
And experience does tell as the French Grand prix turns into a demolition derby…after two laps world championship leader Kerton retires with a broken bracket…
Dene Stallard drops out too with engine problems…but Hill hangs on…skimming across the water at speeds of around one hundred and forty miles an hour…
Anderson of Sweden and Bocca of Italy fight for the lead…there are several stoppages and restarts…one driver breaksdown…another boat sinks…
Hill gradually moves up the grid…he's second for the last of the starts but his engine isn't quite powerful enough and comes home in fourth spot…
I'll just have to try harder next time…you've got to keep going
next stop for the powerboaters is Hungary…the race for the world championship is floating…flying faster than ever…
as the race for the world championship hots up its time now to catch up with all the rest of the sports news…
Oxford United manager Brian Horton was signing in the rain today.
Not the proposed deal to bring Darlington's Nicki Cusack to the Manor…that's been put on ice…but a new contract which will keep him in charge as long he and the club want.
United have become the first team in the League to break with tradition by getting rid of fixed term contracts for their coaching staff.
Pat McGeough says that with fixed term contracts, people are wondering whether their contract will be renewed at the end of the season.
Brian Horton says the new contracts don't mean that he can't be sacked.
But they've been carefully worked out, so that everyone is happy.
The Didcot-based Williams team are leading the way for this Sunday's French Grand Prix…in the first qualifying session Nigel Mansell was half a second faster than his team mate Riccardo Patrese and almost TWO seconds quicker than Ayrton Senna.
The kart drivers will be going a lot slower than the Formula One boys at Little Rissington in Gloucestershire on Sunday…but arguably the racing could be a lot more exciting.
Cheltenham's Tony Allcock has taken to grass like a duck to water this week…he won his first national title on the green stuff in the Ulster Games singles.
It's been the right weather for ducks at the Henley Royal Regatta…but despite the rain and the lack of Olympic rowers, there's been plenty of top rowing…the regatta continues until Sunday.
And there'll be playing for civic pride in Hereford over the coming week…more than a thousand sports men and women from Cheltenham, Worcester and Hereford are competing in 21 different sports in the annual’ Sport for All’festival.
And next week we'll be back with formula one…he cars this time…on the eve of the British Grand Prix at Silverstone our special guest is the main man…
Nigel Mansell.
A mother is appealing for the safe return of her baby son, who was abducted by his father and taken to Pakistan.
Gaynor Chaudhry believes her estranged husband has now brought their child back to Britain but doesn't know where they are.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
GAYNOR CHAUDHRY/Mother
Det Con CLIVE MORTIMER/Wiltshire CID
Voice over
Saeed ChaudHry disappeared with his father to Pakistan after the break-UP of his parents marriage early this year.
Since then his mother Gaynor has been desperate with worry, she's heard from her husband and believes he's brought Saeed back to England, but she has no idea where.
Female speaker
He did say before he went that I would never see my son again.
I wouldn't like to say he is using Saeed as a weapon against me.
He always referred to Saeed as his son, never ours.
I am certain he's back in Britain because he's contacted some people.
Voice over
Saeed is now 20 months old.
The last time he saw his mother or his sister Emma was in February.
His father Zafar left their home in Drakes way, Swindon for Karachi with him shortly before a county Court hearing which restored him to his mother's custody.
Police say it's abduction.
Male speaker
We're very concerned for the welfare of the child.
He appears to be moving from place to place, and we want to speak to Mr Chaudhry about abduction
Female speaker
My husband hasn't got a fixed address and he is probably hiding.
I love Saeed very much and his sister is missing him.
I just want him back with me
Voice over
Police believe father and son are in the London area and they're keeping a watch on ports in case Mr Chaudrey tries to leave again.
The funeral has taken place of a pilot whose Spitfire crashed onto a runway at an airshow, exploding into flames.
At the service the vicar said that David Moore died as he'd lived, doing what he enjoyed most.
Richard Barnett reports:
HORSLEY/Gloucestershire
GEORGE DEWHURST/Vicar
Voice over
More than 200 mourners packed into the Parish Church of St Martins in Horsley, Gloucestershire to say a last farewell to David Moore.
A pilot for Rolls Royce, he died at the weekend when the Spitfire he was flying crashed onto the runway during an air display in Lancashire.
David Moore had been a pilot for 25 years, flying with the Fleet Air Arm before joining Rolls Royce.
Leading the mourners were his widow Deanna, his 14 year old daughter Melissa and son David, who's 16.
Senior management from Rolls Royce and former colleagues from the Navy and RAF also attended.
Male speaker
We all have to die some time and would like to go doing what we enjoy most.
And that's what happened to David.
Voice over
As the mourners left the Church, there had been plans for a Spitfire to fly over in a final tribute.
But the flypast had to be called off because of the low cloud and rain.
In part two: cutting edge…the powerboat racers set for the world championships.
And Howerd's way…the comedian who kept them laughing 'til the end.
Joyride victim…a stolen car crushed blind pensioner against a wall.
Planning to sue…the man who says bailiffs broke his arm in three places.
And bring him home…a mother pleads for safe return of her abducted son.
