Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
OXFORD
MARY BENNETT/Neighbour
PAULINE WOLLEY/Neighbour
ANDY BARNETT/Neighbour
Supt RALPH PERRY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Eighty two year old, Ivor James, was pinned against a wall under the wheels of a stolen car after he was knocked down…just yards from his home…on his way back from his local shop…
Minutes before three youths had been seen in a car driving at high speed…as they crossed a junction they collided with another car and spun into Mr James.
She says; There was about 18 inches between the car and the wall, his face was covered in blood and he was severely traumatised.
Mr James…who's almost blind…had an emergency operation for two broken legs and internal injuries…
He'd lived in thestreet for thirty two years…and worked as a scout or college servant at Trinity College.
She says; people like him a lot.
Several undergraduates who knew him from his Trinity days often came to see him and wrote to him especially at Christmas.
Residents say this isn't the first time they've had problems with drivers.
He says; About five weeks ago there was a very nasty accident, fortunately nobody was injured, unlike this time.
She says; A defenceless and vulnerable man has been decimated by people who don't know what they are doing and apparently nobody is doing anything to stop them.
For the past few months Police have been mounting a major operation to crackdown on joy riders…its the type of accident they'd always feared.
Two teenegers…one fifteen the other ninteen…are still helping police with their inquiries…they're still hunting for a third man.
SEPTEMBER 1991/GARETH FURBY/Blackbird Leys
Supt RALPH PERRY/Thames Valley Police
Cllr VAL SMITH/Oxford City Council
Voice over
Three or four times a night on an estate in Oxford…so called joy riders would put on displays in high powered stolen cars…three months ago after a number of the Littlemore estate…
Police launched Operation Overdrive…
Ninety four people were arrested some as young as fifteen in the first month…
But the operation, involved keeping thirty officers on standby,, including undercover officers and traffic patrols, was expensive…thirty thousand has been spent in overtime alone…so the operation was scaled down…again the displays started…again the Police moved in…
They have been successful…the crime rate in the city is down by five hundred offences a month…there are only one or two displays now a week…but they do still happen.
In Blackbird Leys…where last year there were two or three displays a night…road calming measures and Police action has reduced them…
But councillors are lokking for a more long term, solution…they're to petion the county council for money for full time youth workers.
Many of those arrested are to appear before magistrates shortly…
With the long summer evenings and school holidays about to start…the Police are pledged to keep up the pressure against the joyriders
A driver who forgot to pay a parking fine is in hospital with his arm broken in three places after bailiffs tried to collect the money.
The bailiffs say the driver became abusive, and they couldn't calm him.
The police are investigating.
Tim Hurst reports.
GLOUCESTER
SAMANTHA HOAD
SHAMI HOAD/Patient
Voice over
Shami Hoad, a heating engineer, from Gloucester is in hospital in the city, his arm broken in three places when bailiffs tried to take his wife's £8,000 car to pay a £45 parking fine.
Samantha Hoad was shown court documents with additional figures amounting to almost £200 when the bailiffs arrived.
The family were living next door when they incurred the parking fine, they believe that's why they received no reminders and no court documents.
Then the bailiffs arrived.
The company that sent in the bailiffs, Bristow and Sutor, say they're conducting an enquiry; Mr Hoad's arm was broken when he tried to prevent the bailiffs taking away a car.
He was very aggressive and abusive.
Police are investigating the incident and Mr Hoad says he's suing the bailiffs for damages.
Finally, a group of residents who left Henley to escape last week's Royal Regatta came swanning back into town today.
Not for them the Pimms and champagne.
They much prefer their annual holiday away from the throngs of spectators on the riverbanks.
HARRIET RYLEY Henley
BARRY DUNCAN Egham Swan Sanctuary
MELANIE BEESON Egham Swan Sanctuary
The families of mature swans and their cygnets are kept together — the younger, single swans come in separate vans.
Every year the birds are taken from the part of the river where the races take place both for their own and the rowers' safety.
For the past five years Egham Swan Sanctuary has collected the swans and taken them away for a kind of annual holiday…
He says they seem to regard it as a holiday and those birds that are over twelve months old have been through this before and seem to look forward to it
This is where the swans have been spending the regatta — at Egham just off the M25 in Surrey — it's just been made the national swan sanctuary and has around 100 birds at any one time.
The Henley influx doubles the numbers, but every care is taken to look after the birds:
She says the birs are very good — as long as we keep them in families and feed all the young that's all the parents mind about.
The sanctuary, which is entirely run by volunteers, also gives the swans a check-up during their time here — the female or pen of this pair was the only one not to pass — she had a fish-hook in her throat and has had to be operated on.
She and her mate will be returned next week.
Back on the banks of the Thames, the parent birds become distressed at the point where they lose sight of their young — which the volunteers rush into the dinghy as soon as they can so the familiy is reunited.
They're then taken upstream to exactly the same stretch of river they were picked up from two weeks ago and released — clearly happy to back in the territory they recognise…until this time next year, when they'll be collected once again for another short break in their unlikely holiday location, just off the M25…
ANDREW TRYTHALL
The Government has announced defence cuts of a billion pounds.
The Transport and General Workers Union claim it'll see the loss of two hundred thousand jobs and many backbench MPs are also concerned about the effects of the cuts.
UN denied access in Iraq
A United Nations military inspection team has left Iraq after they were denied the use of cameras to monitor missile sites.
News at Ten reprieve
News at Ten is to be reprieved until the ITV Council and the Independent Television Commission meet to explore different interpretations of the Broadcasting Act
Lilley speaks on single mums
To allay recent speculation, the Social Security Secretary, Peter Lilley, has insisted that single mothers will not be penalised by the Government.
Woosnam banned from driving
The golfer, Ian Woosnam, has been fined more than two thousand pounds and banned from driving after he was found to be twice over the legal alcohol limit when he crashed his car worth eighty thousand pounds.
FTSE down 19
The hundred shares index closed down nineteen point two at twenty-eight, thirty-eight point five.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-one and up at two marks, fifty-six.
Welcome back: In few minutes…the residents of Henley who leave town every year to escape the Regatta.But first, with the sport, here's Tim .
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
SANDY LYLE
REES JONES/Course Architect
The ambition is to have a major tournament here by 95…and the ryder cup soon after that…
Driving off on the first day was Sandy Lyle…as a winner of the British Open and American Masters he's got to be one of the best judges of courses around
Sandy Lyle says fairness is what makes a good course…it's important to be able to see the dangers from the tee…he says that the new Oxfordshire club has everything to make it a success…a lovely club house…good parking…within easy reach of motorways and is built for big tournaments
The Oxfordshire Club has been described by some experts as unique and a course for the twenty first century…what makes it so special is a mixture of three styles…of classic English with trees…of links with sand dunes…and of American type holes landscaped by lakes…it's been designed by Rees Jones
Rees Jones says people have told him that this is a golf course for intellectuals…which means you have to think everytime you a play a shot and that's what he set out to create
the sad news for golfers is that you've a better chance of watching the sport than playing it at the Oxfordshire club…membership is being limited to 750 and the joining fee is twenty five thousand pounds…
if it's any consolation the new course is reckoned to be for experts only…ask Sandy Lyle…
FX…
Sandy Lyle says that's one in the water
that was the worst shot Sandy Lyle played all day…he managed to hit every green after that…on to the round-up now…starting with the final row-in at Henley's Royal Regatta 
then Redgrave jumped ship and rowed for Leander in the Stewards' cup and won again…his 12th victory at Henley…
amongst the other winners were Oxford Brookes University who won the Temple Cup by three and a quarter lengths…
another winner yesterday was Gary Chapman of Chinnor…he roared home to take the chequered flag in the latest round of the formula one super karting championship at Little Rissington in Gloucestershire…
Gary is now leading the series with three rounds to go…this week he's off to race for the European Championship in Holland…
the prodrive subaru team from Banbury scored their first big international win at the weekend…
Possom Bourne drove them to victory in the Rally Of Indonesia…after four days and 400 kilometres they were six minutes ahead at the end
in the pool there was a win in the Welsh Championships for Karen Rake of the Maxwell Club in Aylesbury…that was the good news…the bad news her time of 34.48 wasn't good enough to qualify for the European Championships
on the bowls green both Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire are out of the race for ther County Championship…
Oxfordshire went down to Middlesex and Gloucestershire lost at home to Somerset…
there's better news for Oxfordshire's young tennis champion Tim Henman he's been given a wild card entry into the Challenger Trophy which starts tomorrow
two more winners to finish off with…longjumper Carl Howard from Oxford took the national under 20 title again…his winning leap 7 point five two metres and…weightlifter Andrew Saxton who was sent home from the Olympics last year after a mix up over drugs was a winner again in the British Senior Championships at Crystal Palace…
Some of the world's rarest trees are being offered for sale to anyone with enough room to grow them.
A new garden centre has opened which specialises in plants which can't be bought anywhere else.
And they come from all corners of the world.
GRAEME BOWD/Westonbirt
TONY RUSSELL/Plant Centre Manager
Voice over
Westonbirt Arboretum has many trees and shrubs which are not found elsewhere in Britain, but now anyone can grow them.
The Forestry Commission has opened a plant centre selling cuttings from its rare flora.
In these greenhouses there are seedlings which you can be fairly sure the neighbours won't have.
Male speaker
This spruce comes from Serbia.
But we think that because of the recent troubles there it may now be extinct in the wild.
Voice over
Among other curiousities is this rare corkscrew maple.
All known treees are descended from a single specimen which was found in a hedge in Gloucestershire.
And this fossil tree from China is the last of family which predates the dinosaurs.
Male speaker
It's the last member of a family of plants which covered the whole of the temporate world.
It's classed as being a conifer but it looks nothing like one.
Voice over
But buyers have to be careful.
This fir tree may look attractive, but it grows to more than 200ft.
That's what worried some customers.
Female speaker
I don't think I'd live long enough to see it mature.
Male speaker
My garden isn't big enough for these trees.
Voice over
For the modest garden perhaps a Japanese maple would suit.
But if you have the space the centre can sell you the largest tree in the world.
The giant Redwood can grow to 300 ft, although that would take 200 years.
In Central News tonight.
Horse attack.
Another knifing…but can they be ever be stopped?
No verdict yet.
Body in the lake murder jury sent to a hotel.
And swanning into town…the other Royal family comes home.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
They're trying to trace two men seen in a car close to where the attack happened.
So far, there've been more a dozen such incidents across the region, but a psychologist who's been studying them is warning that they'll be difficult to stop.
TIM HURST/Natton
RON MORRISON/Breeder
Sgt JULIAN YEO/Gloucestershire Police
It's the first such attack in Gloucestershire, although other forces are investigating similar incidents.
In 1993 in the Thames Valley police area, there've been at least 15 attacks and two of those resulted in the death of the animal.
Police are urging horse owners and stables to be on their guard, and they're trying to trace two men seen parked near Natton in a car.
Police forces around the country have sought advice from forensic scientists in their attempts to find those responsible for such attacks.
MIKE BERRY/Forensic Psychologist
The jury in the trial of two men accused of shooting dead a car dealer and dismembering his body has been sent to a hotel for the night, after failing to reach a verdict.
Stephen Davison disappeared more than a year ago, and the court was told that part of his body was later found in a lake.
GARETH FURBY/Reporting
Voice over
The court heard the police investigation began last Summer when divers recovered part of a body from a lake in Surrey.
There were signs of a bullet wound and also two large moles in the chest area which, the court heard, matched the description of car dealer Stephen Davison who'd earlier been reported missing from his home in Swindon.
The prosecution claims Davison was shot dead by two old rivals at his old drinking haunt, the St Helier Tavern, in Surrey.
But both Anthony Crab and Gary Taylor deny murder.
The judge has asked for a unanimous verdict and the jury will now spend the night in a hotel before returning to court to continue their deliberations.
Organisers of the biggest air rally in Europe say that military red tape could force them to stage the event elsewhere.
The rally is under threat because it's so close to a busy RAF base, and because of the increasing cost of using the site.
But local hoteliers are warning that changing the venue would cost the local economy a million pounds a year.
ROBIN POWELL/Wroughton
PETER UNDERHILL/Popular Flying Association
FRANCIS YOUNG/Swindon Hoteliers Association
Voice over
Wroughton airfield near Swindon was the busiest in the world this weekend, as more than fifteen hundred aircraft flew in for the largest rally of its kind outside the United States.
At one stage, fourteen planes touched down in the space of a minute.
But this year's Popular Flying Association Rally may be the last to be held there.
The volunteers who organise the event say that increasing costs and bureaucracy have forced them to look elswehere.
Local traders would be sad to see the rally leave Wroughton — the event already brings in an estimated one million pounds each year.
The PFA wants to extend the rally from three days to five, making it still more lucrative.
Hoteliers are particularly concerned.
The PFA refused to specify who was to blame for the red tape, though here have been differences in the past with nearby RAF Lyneham over airspace.
The MoD told us the organisers were aware of potential problems when they moved to Wroughton three years ago.
The Science Museum, which owns the airfield, admitted it's had to increase the amount it charges the Association, and said it regretted plans to pull out.
Meanwhile the PFA is considering bids to stage the rally from four different airfields.
As clouds gathered over Wroughton, the last to leave were flying home.
No-one knows if they'll ever be coming back.
Farmers at the Royal Show are demanding tighter government controls on livestock imported from Europe, to stop the spread of killer diseases.
The single European market means health checks are no longer carried out at British ports.
But the Agriculture Minister insists the system is safe.
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
GODFREY CROMWELL/Cattle Farmer
STONELEIGH/Warwickshire
GILLIAN SHEPHERD MP/Agriculture Minister
These cattle are illegal immigrants, injected with foot and mouth vaccine in Czechoslovakia and sent to England with falsified papers.
Vaccinated cattle are forbidden in Britain — the vaccine can hide the disease.
Farmer Godfrey Cromwell believes he fell victim to the relaxation of government health tests in the run-up to the Single European market.
Since January the first, no imported livestock is health-tested at the port.
It's now up to the country of origin to vouch for the health of the animals.
Male speaker
The government went Gung-ho into free trade in Europe and dismantled the proper controls.
They made three mistakes with these cattle — they let them in, they failed to test them, and they encouraged farmers like myself to buy the cattle, and all these moves were errors.
When the mistake was discovered, they tried to put all the blame onto the innocent parties — the importers and the farmers — who have been landed with these cattle.
The animals must now be slaughtered or sent back to Czechoslovakia, which he feels is a completely impractical and rather cynical suggestion.
Voice over
The incident has revived memories of the dark days in the sixties when foot and mouth threatened to wipe out millions of pounds worth of beef and dairy cattle.
British farmers fear it's only a matter of time before the new regulations allow such a disease back into Britain, particularly from Eastern Europe.
At the Royal Show the Agriculture Minister insisted there are adequate measures to prevent the spread of disease.
Female speaker
There are safeguards.
Animals have to have a certificate of health.
They have to notify before the send animals and there are spot checks.
So there are a lot of safeguards.
But if people start sending unhealthy animals, trading will cease.
Voice over
Under the new regime, the Ministry of Agriculture only tests animals when they get to the farm, if they're told about it.
But officials admit some livestock has simply disappear after coming into the country.
as if to underline fears about new diseases from Europe, that symbol of unity the Channel tunnel has been fitted with electronic fox traps to prevent that most dreaded of diseases, rabies.
Hundreds of farmers have joined an experimental scheme to help wildlife and improve the landscape.
They get up to 150 pounds an acre for farming in a more environmentally friendly way.
RICHARD BARNETT/Cambridge
DAVID WHELON/Countryside Commission
JOHN CULLIMORE/Farmer
Voice over
Over the next ten years, the three hundred acres at Newhouse Farm in Cambridge, Gloucestershire will be transformed.
The land is already farmed organically.
But now under the Countryside Stewardship scheme the emphasis will be on benefitting wildlife.
And that means this hay meadow which would normally have been cut a month ago is still standing to let wildflowers seed and fledgling birds fly.
It will now be mown sometime this month.
Sluices are being repaired on the drainage ditches to raise water levels and create wetland…a valuable and increasingly rare habitat for plants and animals.
And new footpaths are being established so people can enjoy walking around the farm.
Nearly five hundred farmers in the West of the region have joined the stewardship scheme, which is run by the Countryside Commission.
Male speaker
Farmers are enthusiastic about the scheme.
But they farm as a living, so they must be paid for looking after wildlife habitats.
Voice over
Newhouse is farmed by John Cullimore.
He's delighted that landowners are being encouraged to improve wildlife habitats:
Male speaker
The scheme is good because it gives payments for things like looking after hedgerows.
Farmers don't have the staff to do keep farms tidy these days.
Voice over
Not only wildlife is benefitting from Countryside Stewardship.
The scheme also insists on lower stocking rates for farm livestock…each of these cattle has two acres of space to roam around…most cattle have less than an acre.
It seems countryside stewardship is one of those rare agricultural initiatives that everyone likes.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the king of swing.
Sandy Lyle at the new club which is the last word in luxury golfing.
Plus, swanning back.
The birds that went south for the regatta.
A telephone hotline, manned twenty four hours a day, has been set up for former pupils of a school where the head has been suspended and a governor arrested by police.
The school, for disturbed children, drew pupils from all over the country, at fees of forty thousand pounds a year each.
Tim Hurst reports.
TODDINGTON/Gloucestershire
FRED DAVIES/Deputy Director/Social Services
Voice over
The hotline has been established for former pupils, families and staff at New Barns school at Toddington in Gloucestershire, which is at the centre of a police investigation after the vice-chairman of the governors, Peter Righton was arrested and questioned about alleged pornography.
The Headmaster, Richard Alston, who shares a house with Mr Righton, has been suspended.
The hotline has been established by social workers in Gloucestershire, who're working with the police.
The school takes a maximum of 32 pupils, between the ages of 6 and 13, at annual fees of £40,000 each.
All but 9 pupils, most from the London area, have already been withdrawn.
The last 9 will be moved by Wednesday.
The telephone hotline, manned 24 hours a day is 0452 741481 — that's 0452 741481
The Sunday Times has called in an Oxford historian to help with its serialisation of the Goebbels diaries.
The paper has been criticised for hiring David Irving — an alleged Nazi sympathiser — to edit the diaries of one of Hitler's chief henchmen.
In an attempt to defuse the controversy, they've asked Third Reich expert Professor Norman Stone to help him.
Robin Powell reports.
NORMAN STONE/Oxford History Professor
DAVID IRVING/Historian
Voice over
Jozeph Goebbels, the man at the centre of one of the biggest controversies in modern historical research.
He was the Nazis' propaganda minister, a crucial figure in Hitler's Third Reich.
For decades his complete diaries have been hidden in K-G-B files in Moscow — now they're about to be serialised in the Sunday Times.
They'll be edited by David Irving, but after new allegations that he's a Nazi sympathiser, the paper's asked the Oxford historian Norman Stone to look at them too.
But he can't take seriously an historian who doubts whether the Holocaust ever happened…
But David Irving isn't at all happy about working with Professor Stone…
And Mr Irving, seen here at a neo-Nazi rally, is sticking to his view that the gas chambers are a myth…
David Irving is clearly likely to give a more sympathetic view of the Nazi regime than most, but Norman Stone has no doubts about the sort of man Goebbels was…
Meanwhile Norman Stone's confident his reputation won't be dented like that of Lord Dacre, the Oxford historian who helped the Sunday Times serialise what he thought were the Hitler diaries but soon turned out to be a hoax.
Professor Stone's views may differ greatly from Mr Irving's, but one thing they ARE agreed on is that these diaries are genuine.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
PICTURES BBC SPORT
Voice over
After missing out on the last 2 grand prix, a win for Mansell in France was a must, but he was beaten off the grid by his team mate, Ricardo Patrese.
They raced away from the drama in which world champion, Senna, crashed into Schumacher's Benetton and crashed out of the running.
Heavy rain stopped everyone after 18 laps, so it was back to go for a second start.
Patrese on pole took the lead again, but Mansell went flying past within seconds and from then on, there was no stopping no catching him.
With the rain driving down, he cruised home.
It was a 1-2-3 for Central South.
Patrese in the other Williams came second and Martin Brundle in the Benetton from Witney, was third.
It was Mansell's 6th win of the season; the 27th of his career and that puts him level with Jackie Stewart as Britain's most successful driver, so victory at Silverstone would give him a record and just about clinch the world crown.
Is Mansell a man under pressure?
Well you can see for yourself on Friday, when we meet up with the main man on the golf course; he's full of fun and full of hope.
Nigel says he deserves to win the world title.
That's Nigel Mansell; the Driving Force.
A special report on Central South this Friday.
we had more Central South winners in Britain's longest motor race of the year…the twenty four hour heat willhire event at the Snetterton track in Norfolk 
Voice over
This is the closest we come in this country to the Le Mans classic.
It's saloon cars, not sports cars.
The speeds may be slower, but the test of strength is just as tough.
Steve Griffin from Swindon was one of the drivers in the winning car.
They took turns at driving.
The event started at 3.00 p.m. on Saturday, raced through the night and finished yesterday afternoon.
Another winner was Oxford jeweller, John Gowing.
His car had a puncture early on, but roared back to win its class.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
MICHAEL MacLAGAN/Emeritus Fellow Trinity
Act
Voice over
The Argentinian football star Ossie Ardilles has admitted he made under the counter cash payments to players while managing Swindon town football club.
Ardilles has been giving evidence in the trial of his predecessor, Lou Macari, who denies conspiring to defraud the Inland Revenue.
Gareth Furby reports.
WINCHESTER
1989
Voice over
Ossie Ardiles, who managed Swindon Town for two years, came to Winchester Crown Court today to give evidence in the case of the man he replaced in 1989.
Lou Macari is accused of conspiring to defraud the taxman out of hundreds of thousands of pounds by paying Swindon Town players under-the-counter cash bonuses.Already a succession of Swindon players, past and present have told the court about tax-free payments, and today was no different.
Goalkeeper Frazer Digby said he was given £1,000 as a loyalty payment, and a £50-a-game clean-sheet award when he didn't let in any goals.
Striker Steve White also told the court that he was given a £5,000 signing-on fee.
But a defence lawyer suggested that at the time this was the normal practise in football, and Steve White agreed.
It had happened up and down the land, and Steve White said even he'd been given £10,000 for an earlier move between Luton and Charlton Athletic.
Ossie Ardiles then took to the witness stand and admitted he had paid Swindon Town players a tax-free bonus after taking over as manager from Lou Macari.
He told the court that after Swindon beat Bolton Wanderers in November 1989 he personally handed out £5,000 to the players and back-up staff.
He also took about £300 himself.
A similar bonus would also have been paid if the team had beaten Leeds United, again in late 1989.
But Ardiles told the court he wasn't at all happy about making the payments.
He said’ I believe at the end of the day I made the wrong decision’.
Ardiles said he began to mistrust Swindon Town's former chairman Brian Hillier, who's on trial with Macari, and former club accountant Vince Farrar.Ardiles said in 1990 he stopped offering the cash bonuses, and players were soon paid a monthly salary direct into their bank accounts.Macari, Hillier, and Farrar deny the charges, and the case continues.
Council workers have staged a protest after being told they must go back to using a car park where one of their colleagues was murdered.
They say the car park still isn't safe.
But council officials say they've done as much as they can to protect their female staff.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
KAY POTTS/Anna McGurk's Mother
HELEN POTTS/Anna McGurk's Sister
ELIZABETH BALL/Gloucester City Council
Voice over
Staff blockaded the entrance to Gloucester City Council's North Warehouse from seven o clock this morning.
They were protesting against the council's decision to stop female employees from using the car park there.
Following the murder of their colleague Anna McGurk at the more remote Castlemeads car park last August, women staff had been allowed to park just outside their office.
But the council now says it's made Castlemeads safe and it's told women they must start using it again.
They say they're still too afraid.
Female speaker
Walking over that causeway is very scary.
Female speaker
There's no emergency phone over there still.
That's why I'm scared.
Voice over
The women have got the backing of Anna McGurk's mother and sister.
Council officials feel they've done all they can to protect their staff.
Women who tried to get into the car park without a pass this morning were allowed through the barrier, but council officials warned them that they could face disciplinary proceedings if they try again tomorrow.
It's a hundred and thirty years since the first of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland was created.
The anniversary's been marked with a Mad Hatter's tea party, held in torrential rain.
The British, it seems, aren't easily put off when it comes to enjoying a picnic.
OXFORD
KAREN GADD/Music at Oxford
SARAH BURNARD/Mad Hatter
EMMA CURRAN/Music at Oxford
Voice over
It was the first weekend of July in 1862 when Lewis Carroll went rowing with young Alice Liddell and her two sisters and the story of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland was born.
This weekend, on the anniversary, the event was recreated complete with Mad Hatter's tea party presided over by the Queen of Hearts herself.
There were strange events and games described in the stories.
They included hitting the hedgehog with a flamingo.
Curiouser and curiouser.
Karen Gadd of Music in Oxford explains that the Tea Party is connected with an operatic production of the story by the Oxford Girls Choir.
The Mad Hatter explains how the opera was specially written for the choir.
Then time for tea and of course jam tarts.
But, the heavens opened as it seems they only can when the British take to the outdoors in mid-summer.
The rains carried on for Music at Oxford's other major event, the Radley Fireworks.
This was supposed to be a celebration of American Independence Day, but no amount of make-believe could disguise the fact that it was a wet weekend in Oxfordshire.
Nevertheless out came some of the most astonishing, though very practical ways to both have your cake and eat it.
Picnickers explain that they are prepared to carry on in spite of the odds.
Emma Curran of Music at Oxford, explains that there are more fireworks concerts on different themes in the weeks to come.
Eventually the rain cleared and British determination paid off.
The fireworks made it all worth waiting for.
Dentists to refuse new NHS patients
Dentists have voted to restrict National Health Service treatment in a row over fees, it could see patients turned away.
Tanks and riot police drafted in to lorry row
In France, tanks and riot police have been drafted in to break up the blockade of lorries, but the dispute continues.
Britain and Italy seek fighter cost cuts
Britain and Italy are seeking cost reductions in the European Fighter Aircraft project following Germany's withdrawal.
FTSE down 28
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-eight point one at twenty-four, sixty-nine point zero.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety-one but down at two marks, eighty-nine.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
One of the biggest winners at the weekend of course was Andre Agassi who took the men's title at Wimbledon…
He's not from our way but John Reynolds of Swindon is…and he's the man who's job it was to string the champion's rackets…here's Erika Barnes to serve 
JOHN REYNOLDS/Stringer
Voice over
The master craftsman behind the new master of Wimbledon.
Swindon's John Reynolds the man who pulled the strings for Andre Agassi.
Throughout the tournament it was John's neat handiwork…that helped the great showman to the title.
Male speaker
Agassi's coach came to me with the rackets.
After the French Open they needed less power for Wimbledon.
Voice over
Agassi it was who strung together a great series of returns to the big serving Ivanisovic.
Reynolds it was who strung together the rackets that made those blistering returns.
I like to feel everything came right.
The coach was right, his mental attitude was right.
If the racket came right I felt it gave him the confidence to go for the shots.
But now, for the man who serves the famous…it's back to serving the public of Swindon…after all John Reynolds has a few more strings to his bow.
The winners keep coming…next up a team of Oxfordshire schoolboys who are hard at work preparing to defend their title as Europe's best young sailors…
Mark Kiff reports 
JESSE STOKES/King Alfred's School Wantage
NEIL McLELLAN/King Alfred's School Wantage
NIGEL VICK/Coach
WILL CLOTHIER/Abingdon School
DAVID BICKERTON/Manager
Voice over
Farmoor Reservoir doesn't provide quite the same conditions as those off the coast of Brittany.
But it's home to the Oxford School's Sailing Association.
And it's good enough to have helped Oxfordshire's young sailors become European Champions.
This week the students who make up the team are spending all their spare time making sure everything's ship shape to defend their title.
Male speaker
I think the competition will be much tougher this year.
Male speaker
There's a lot of expectations on us and a lot of pressure.
We've got some new recruits, a different helmsman, so we'll see how it goes.
Voice over
Normally the boat is crewed by 5 people.
Today there's only 3; the lack of man power forces them to work harder, but it's good practise.
That's been something hard to achieve with A-levels and GCSEs getting in the way.
Male speaker
It has been difficult while they've been doing their exams, so we've not been able to get them together as much as I would have liked.
Voice over
The Eurolycee regatta is open to schools from all the EEC countries.
There are 11 races in 5 days up to 20 miles long.
The Oxfordshire team know it's going to be tough.
Male speaker
It's quite challenging.
I like rough weather.
There's a lot of excitement.
Male speaker
I suspect they're better at this stage than the same time last year.
But I think the French will be practising hard in the correct boats and on the sea.
Voice over
If practice counts for anything, Oxford could again have its name on a European Trophy.
Two hundred young people were set a challenge — put on a full-scale opera, using nothing but rubbish to make the props and scraps of material to create the costumes.
And as if that wasn't difficult enough, they were given just six hours to put together the entire production.
Robin Powell was there to see whether they'd make it.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
MARTIN NELSON/Producer
BECKY GOSS/Performer
DAVID BLIGHT/Chief Designer
Voice over
They call it Scrap and Scratch Opera.
The resources include energy, enthusiasm and varying amounts of talent, but the magic ingredient is rubbish.
The costumes, props and scenery are little more than recycled scrap.
A formidable task?
At least the 6-hour time limit narrows the mind.
The only certain starting point was that the opera would have a Swiss theme, in common with Cheltenham's International Music Festival, of which the project was part.That aside, they made up the script as they went along.
As a result the plot was, well, just a little confusing.
90 minutes to curtain-up and no-one's feeling the pressure more, than the team backstage.
But just in time, it fell into place.
For an afternoon's work, it was hardly going to be Tosca and given the raw materials no one would have minded had they chanted’ What a Load of Rubbish’.
But what had the children got out of it?
Female speaker
We've learned to work with each other and to fit into small costumes!
Voice over
Pavarotti and friends won't be losing too much sleep over this lot.
But for an afternoon's work, not bad at all.
A former England cricketer is making a comeback next month, after breaking his knee twice.
He's convinced he can get back into first class cricket before the end of the season.
Library Pictures/TIM HURST/Reporting
DAVID LAWRENCE/Fast Bowler
David Lawrence will lead his own 11 against a Rest of the World side at Cheltenham on August 3rd.
We've had the dart-playing cat and the beer-drinking rabbit…now here's the pool-playing badger.
Teka has become a regular at her local pub.
When she's not having a drink or tucking into a bag of crisps, the five month old badger cub can usually be found on the snooker table.
CLARE LAFFERTY Chipping Campden
MAGGIE TAYLOR Badger Rescuer
She's become the most popular customer at the Volunteer Inn in Chipping Campden.
When she was found wandering in a nearby allotment eight weeks ago Teka was painfully thin, bald and her paws were bleeding.
She was taken in by Maggie Taylor and now five month old Teka is fighting fit and lapping up all the attention.
Teka has tried the beer here, but her favourite tipple is good old water.
Although she's a very messy drinker.
After a quick rub down Teka helps with the clearing up.
She's yet to grasp the difference between a cigarette dispenser and a gaming machine.
But she seems to understand the basic priciples of pool.
Female speaker
I think she's wonderful.
Up until now the only badger I'd ever seen was dead on the side of the road.
Male speaker
It's a novelty, and I've been with animals all my life.
Voice over
Badgers have got a name for being vicious creatures, but Teka has taken to people so well Maggie thinks she must have been hand reared from birth.
She's tried to tempt her back into the woods, but with little success.
So Teka looks set to become a familiar face at the Volunteer Inn.
And she hopes to be welcomed into other hostelries in the village soon.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Intruders at Palace
Seventeen intruders have scaled the walls of Buckingham Palace to stage an anti-nuclear protest.
Justice review urged
The Royal Commission on Justice has recommended changes to include curtailing a defendant's automatic right to be tried by jury and setting up a new appeals procedure.
Ulster bomb havoc
Less than twenty-four hours after a bomb caused havoc at Newtownards in Northern Ireland, police foiled a major terrorist operation in Armagh following a high-speed car chase.
FTSE up 9
The hundred shares index closed up nine point six at twenty-eight, forty-eight point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-one but up at two marks, fifty-seven.
Welcome back.
Some of the toughest and fittest servicemen from across Europe have been testing their skills against each other.
(WES NEXT)
The contest was a kind of military superstars, with an RAF team carrying Britain's hopes of victory in Challenge '93.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Weston on the Green
Flt Lt KEITH DICKINSON/Parachute Jump Instructor
Lt Col ULRICH QUANTE/German Commandant
Capt LAURENT BOULIER/French Army Team
Sgt PETE WOODWARD/RAF Team
Sgt CHRIS HEADLEY/RAF Team
Voice over
The coming together of nations, the exchange of ideas, the forming of friendships.
Those were some of the high hopes at the start of Challenge 93 as representatives from seven European states parachuted into RAF Weston On The Green in Oxfordshire.
It was to be a five day test of military skill and endurance hosted by the RAF conducted in a spirit of international co-operation.
Their skills would be tested not just in the air in freefall and static line jumping…but also in orienteering, swimming, and shooting
But the teams came to learn that the spirit of international co-operation is one thing, the spirit of competition is another.
Male speaker
There's a lot of personal pride at stake within the parachuting world because we're on home ground.
Male speaker
it's a great way to swap ideas and have a beer at the end of the day
Voice over
This was the third time the RAF had hosted the competition in Britain.
Last year the French won it in Belgium and rivalries remained strong.
Male speaker
we trained to win again this year and that's what we're hoping for
Voice over
Freefall paracuting requires pinpoint accuracy.
The idea is to jump from a height of four and a half thousand feet to a tiny disc in the jump zone.
The closer the landing, the better the score.
The RAF made a promising start and kept up with the French until Sgt Pete Woodward mistimed his landing.
His front foot hit the centre but his back foot landed first ninety centimetres away.
So their best event found them in sixth position.
Lowest points means highest place.
Male speaker
it's a little disappointing because we had been lying insecond place and that would have stood us in good stead for the rest of the competition
Male speaker
It was very upsetting.
I felt I'd let everyone down)
Voice over
But the next day saw them with their heads up.
This time in the Static line jump.
Here the parachutes are of a different design, less easily guided and the team land on or as near they can to a four hundred metre line from two thousand feet.
Male speaker
I wanted to fight back and do well for the team
Voice over
One mishap saw a German come down on two parachutes including his reserve.
It was a tense moment for everyone because he couldn't control where he landed or his speed.
Male speaker
I saw where I was drifting and I was concerned about hitting the hangar but it was all right 
Voice over
But he survived and was given another jump.
He landed right on the line.
But the real drama was building between the British and the French again.
Both scored highly in the first round but the French had done so well in the next round with three landing on the line, that only the RAF stood a chance of catching them.
Male speaker
Now they've done such a good round we're a bit nervous, but I think we'll be OK provided the winds stay the same
Voice over
Everything hung on this jump if the RAF were to stand much chance in the rest of the competition.
As they came down there was a slight mishap as two bumped into each other.
But they still scored two on the line and two just away from it.
Pete Woodward got one of the dead centres and he felt he'd erased the previous day's disaster.
Male speaker
Tha atmospgere in the plane was amazing.
The guys were just totally concentrated.
You could have cut the air with a knife
Voice over
The RAF had recovered their pride on their home territory and won the event.
But they still had a lot of ground to make up.
They were lying in joint third place behind France and Spain.
The next few days would be crucial.
And we'll find out tomorrow if the RAF can make up that lost ground.
The zoologist Desmond Morris is staging an exhibition of his paintings in his home town.
He last showed his work there almost half a century ago — and then he was panned by the critics.
Since then he's achieved a reputation as one of the country's finest surrealist painters.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
DESMOND MORRIS/Zoologist and Painter
He's become better known as a zoologist, but hasn't forgotten it was Swindon that offered him his first exhibition.
Forty-five years later he's returned to his roots, with a retrospective display of his favourite surrealist paintings.
The exhibition coincides with the inaugural meeting tonight of the Friends of Swindon Museum and Art Gallery.
Desmond Morris is the natural choice as Patron.
The Museum has no admission charge and almost closed down last year for lack of funds.
The Friends' new Patron says that for a modern town like Swindon, that would have been a disaster.
The exhibition runs until the middle of August, with Desmond hoping for a better reception than last time, when his work was slated by the critics.
But be warned — he's an unashamed surrealist and doesn't expect people to understand his paintings now any more than they did then.
A new Bishop of Gloucester has been named, four months after his predecessor resigned in disgrace.
Bishop Peter Ball went into retirement after being cautioned by police for indecently assaulting a trainee monk.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
Rt Rev DAVID BENTLEY/Bishop of Gloucester
Male speaker
Things like this are always hurtful but I hope that people will have faith just as they have in the resurrection of Jesus.
I think people realise that their faith can overcome their doubts.
Voice over
The new bishop is a firm believer in the ordination of woman priests, a policy which he knows is opposed by some churchmen in the diocese.
Male speaker
A bishop should be a leader and I will try to work together with the members of the dioceseabout women priests.
I hope they will be able to see my point of view just as I will be open to their views and opinions about this issue.
Voice over
Bishp Bentley is expected to take up his duties in Gloucester later this year and be enthroned before Christmas.
Pedestrians are being encouraged to slap on a new type of parking ticket if they find a car blocking their way.
It's an attempt to stop cars parking on the pavement, which can be awkward and dangerous.
Road safety officers hope the new tickets will persuade drivers to change their habits.
KIM BARNES/Kidlington
VICTOR HAYES/Disabled Pedestrian
IAN HARRIS/Road Safety Officer
He says I have to go twice as far, to go round the car, and it can be quite dangerous as I have to go into the road.
And others face a different kind of struggle if drivers have parked thoughtlessly.
She says it's impossible, I have to go into the road.
Now aggrieved pedestrians and residents should fight back, according to Oxfordshire County Council.
They're being encouraged to slap on this parking ticket which claims pavements are for people
He says drivers should be aware if they get one of these tickets it's because people have been inconvenienced.
But won't it lead to confrontation between drivers and pedestrians?
Not accoding to the county council who say a pilot scheme has been painless.
Thames Valley Police welcome the campaign as more effective than chasing motorists through the courts.
Stickers are available throughout the county to help squeezed out pedestrians assert their rights.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the military superstars.
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GARETH FURBY/Old Bailey
Det Insp FRED WHEELHOUSE/Surrey Police
SUSAN KENT/Victim's Girlfriend
Voice over
the victim's girlfriend Susan Kent broke down in tears as the guilty verdict was announced.
Last summer she alerted police after Stephen Davison went missing.
Just a few days later they recovered part of a body from a lake in surrey.
he moved to Swindon but returned to a pub in Surrey.
There was a fight involving two rival car dealers.
the police say it's one of the most sickening cases they've ever had to deal with…
Det Inspector Fred Wheelhouse has investigated many murders but none as horrific as this.
The court heard many potential eye witnesses in the pub had been imtimated and one man who did give evidence claimed a hit man had been paid twenty thousand pounds to kill him.
Davison's relatives were forced to leave court by the back door…
His girlfriend Susan Kent says she's disgusted, how can people do this to each other?
She says he'll be buried and they'll pick up
As sentence was passed one woman in the public gallery started sobbing hysterically and said you've nicked the wrong man.
But tonight Crabb is starting a life sentence for murder and Taylor was given nine years for perverting the course of justice.
The parents of a girl who was severely handicapped after being starved of oxygen at birth have won a five year battle for compensation.
The health authority agreed to settle the case just a week before it was due to go to court.
JESSICA FOWLE/Swindon
MICHELE BROWN/Eleanor's Mother
GEOFF BROWN/Eleanor's Father
To her parents this is a miracle.
They were told she would never be able to walk.
Eleanor was born at the Princess Margaret Hopital in 1988.
The birth was so difficult and took so long that she was starved of oxygen and had to be delivered by emergency caesarian.
She was left with very severe cerebal palsy.
For the last 5 years Swindon Health Authority has denied responsibility.
But in an announcement made at the High Court in London it's agreed to pay compensation on the basis of 85 percent liability.
This could mean Eleanor gets as much as a million pounds.
But her parents have mixed feelings about the decision.
Female speaker
If they'd settled at the beginning we wouldn't have had to go through this battle.
Thousands of pounds of tax-payers money wouldn't have been wasted just to have them settle a week before trial.
Voice over
The Browns are pleased they'll have the money to pay for all Eleanor's special needs, like school bills of 23,000 pounds a year.
But they wish they'd had it earlier.
Male speaker
It was difficult not knowing if we'd be able to give Eleanor everything we wanted to give her and knowing there were things she needed that we couldn't afford.
Voice over
A final damages figure for Eleanor will be agreed within the next 6 to 9 months but, if not, the case will go back to the High Court for the compensation to be decided.
A lawyer whose client committed murder while on bail says he's opposed to a new law which could lead to more people being remanded in custody.
Solicitor Tim Robinson says magistrates were right to bail Andrew Hagans on a rape charge, even though he killed council worker Anna McGurk just days later.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
TIM ROBINSON/Solicitor
KAY POTTS/Anna McGurk's Mother
Now a Private Members Bill to restrict the granting of bail will become law.
It will give prosecution lawyers a right to appeal against a court decision to grant bail.
While that appeal is heard the defendant will remain in custody.
The solicitor who acted for Andrew Hagans says it's a disgrace.
Anna's parents hope the new law will mean an end to tragedies like their daughter's murder.
The Bill will get Royal Assent later this year when it will officially go onto the statute books.
The recession may be hurting many businesses, but there's one craftsman who can't keep up with demand.
He's turning out fifty walking sticks a week.
The boom has less to do with an ageing population than a growing interest from collectors and American tourists.
Robin Powell reports.
RATLEY Warwickshire
KEITH COWIE Walking Stick Maker
BOB HARVEY James Smith Umbrellas
Voice over
If they ever appointed a patron saint of walking sticks, he'd probably be Keith Cowie from Edgehill.
His home is stacked with literally hundreds and he's made almost all of them.
Gone are the days when everyone who was anyone had one and Keith sometimes doubts he's in the right business.
Keith may be the world's only specialist stick-maker, but he's a strong believer in multi-skilling.
He's responsible for every stage of the process, from lathing to polishing.
It's hard work; 7 days a week with hardly a holiday and a target of 2,500 sticks a year just to pay the bills.
Keith's work isn't cheap, but it's selling well in high streets across the world.
On of his outlets is James Brown Umbrells in the West End.
For anything up to £500, this place can fix you up with a fashion accessory in a class of its own.
So what makes a good walking stick?
Bob Harvey, manager at James Brown's.
Keith Cowie's work fits the bill on all counts.
The mark-ups are rather higher than he'd like, but for as long as the walking stick remains an art form, Keith's in business.
G7 leaders back UN force in Bosnia
Leaders of the G-seven leading industrial nations have backed plans to use United Nations force to transport emergency supplies to Sarajevo.
Fishermen's armada sails to Westminster
Fishermen have sailed along the Thames in convoy to Westminster to protest at plans to cut the time they can spend at sea.
Only one bidder for C5 licence
Thames Television heads the only group to bid for the licence to broadcast the new Channel Five service.
Armoured vans patrol Manchester estate
Armoured vans are patrolling an estate in Manchester following three separate shotgun attacks.
Estate agents concerned about return of stamp duty
Estate agents say they are concerned by the Government's decision to reintroduce stamp duty on new houses from August the nineteenth saying it will harm an already fragile market
BT move to stop obscene calls
BT has announced plans to stop obscene phone calls.
FTSE up 24
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-four point seven at twenty-four, ninety-three point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety-two but down at two marks, eighty-nine.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
People living and working near a food factory are demanding action over an appalling smell emanating from the plant.
They say its so bad it's making them ill.
The company says it hopes to put an end to the smell by the end of the year, but their critics say that's not good enough.
Gargy Patel reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
DIANA FLETCHER/Saleswoman
PHIL PAGE/Cherwell District Council
COMPANY VIDEO
NORMAN WHITE/Esso Garage Owner
CHRIS ALLEN/Bristol Street Motors
Voice over
Billions of gallons of water could be moved through Britain's network of canals in an ambitious scheme to tackle droughts.
A system already being used in part of the region is being hailed as a model for the whole country, as Tim Hurst reports.
GLOUCESTER
ANDREW STUMPF/British Waterways
JUNE 1990
ROGER WYATT/Bristol Water
Voice over
It may not look like it, but the main basin of Gloucester Docks is a drinking water reservoir for the city of Bristol.
50 million gallons a day are pumped into the docks by British Waterways from the nearby River Severn.
From there, the water moves 15 miles down the Gloucester Sharpness canal to serve Bristol.
British Waterways believe they could use other canal networks, via Oxford and Milton Keynes, to move Welsh water to the south east of England, avoiding future drought.
British Waterways would charge for the service, as they do at Gloucester.
Water supplies to Bristol were threatened in 1990 when the Gloucester Sharpness canal sprang a leak and temporary pipelines had to installed.
The canal feeds waterworks at Purton, north of Bristol, which handles 50 million gallons a day, supplies vital to the city.
British Waterways expect to complete a national feasability study within a year.
They say they could be in business within 5 years, moving water from the wet north to the dry south and putting an end to drought.
Otters could soon be making a comeback along the banks of our rivers, if a new project launched by a wildlife trust is successful.
The otter disappeared from much of our region twenty years ago, but it's hoped that by restoring their natural habitat they'll be encouraged to return.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
MINSTER LOVELL/Oxfordshire
JULIAN PETTIFER/President/BBONT
TIM SYKES/Otter Project Officer
Voice over
Otters are normally very shy and elusive creatures, but in captivity, like these two, they can be very tame.
They were once found almost everywhere in Britain, but pollution of our rivers and the destruction of the otter's natural habitat has meant that they've disappeared from many parts.
Now BBONT, the local Wildlife Trust, is trying to bring them back to the area.
Julian Pettifer, naturalist and BBONT's president, officially lauched the project.
Male speaker
The otter is one of our most attractive mammals…the fact that it's disappeared I think suggests that there's something seriously wrong with the river systems.
If they can be encouraged to come back, I think it'sa of great significant and symbolic importance.
It means that we're putting things right when things have gone seriously wrong.
Voice over
Otters need secluded, unpolluted stretches of river with plenty of fish, like this loch in Scotland.
To encourge them back to Oxfordshire, BBONT have launched a 2 year project to find out exactly why they disappeared.
They'll then try to restore their habitat.
They've appointed a full-time officer for the job.
He's confident they can be brought back.
Male speaker
We have records, fairly recently, although rare, of otters in the upper tributaries of the Thames, so we do believe we have a very small resident population.
There's absolutely no reason why, if we provide the correct habitat, they shouldn't move down and we could have otters in the Thames region perhaps within the next 10 years.
Voice over
BBONT is hopeful that together with government measures to encourage enviromentally friendly farming, they will be successful and that this delightful creature may once again be spotted along our rivers.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Simon Garrett reports.
BEGBROKE/Oxfordshire
Rev ERIC CRAIG/Vicar of Begbroke
BARBERA SHARLOTT/Widow
JACQUELINE SHARLOTT/Daughter-in-Law
TRACEY SIMPSON/Grandaughter
PAMELA SIMPSON/Daughter
Voice over
Ron Craig loved flowers.
Since he died in January, his family has been regularly renewing the decorations on his grave.
But recently bulbs have been thrown on a compost heap and wooden crosses made by his young grandchildren have been dumped on his widow's doorstep.
Male speaker
Voice over
Mr Craig's grandchildren are upset.
Female speaker
Voice over
Some of the Sharlott family would like the Reverend Craig removed.
Female speaker
Female speaker
Female speaker
Voice over
A spokesman for the Oxford diocese said:’ We are very sad that people who are grieving have experienced this kind of rejection and we are very sad that it happened.
It is not our place to apologise.
The Churchyard is entirely in the gift of the clergyman.
It is like his own garden.
Male speaker
Female speaker
I shall never go.
Voice over
Haulage companies say the French lorry drivers blockade is costing them thousands of pounds in lost business.
The row has brought many French roads to a standstill — and hit the pockets of British Hauliers caught up in the jams.
Ken Goodwin reports.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
CHARLIE FISHER/Gilder Haulage
DARREN STAYT/Lorry Driver
RALPH DAVIES/Road Haulier
Voice over
Gilder's Haulage company has just spent £130,000 on this new lorry, but now it's on the road to no-where.
The firm transports livestock to Europe, but because of the drivers' blockade, a temporary ban has been placed on the export of livestock into France.
Two of the firms lorries are stranded in France; 11 more are in the yard.
It's costing thousands of pounds.
He says that so far it's cost about £25,000.
This driver has just returned from France, after managing to get through the blockade.
He says that first the farmers set fire to the road, then they had to get through the drivers' blockade.
Another firm hit by the blockade, is Ralph Davies haulage in Cheltenham.
11 lorries are stuck in France.
One of the drivers stranded near Toulouse says the mood of the French drivers is changing.
He says at first they were friendly, now they're not.
He thinks it will be a while before the blockade clears.
He says that it's doing the business no good at all.
They're losing money.
The blockade is over new penalties being introduced in France for dangerous driving.
The French Government had hoped that 9 hours of talks with lorry drivers' Union Leaders would bring the dispute to a halt.
Some of the worse blackspots have now cleared, but others are taking longer.
For businesses affected by the strike, it's proving a long wait.
The plight of young homeless people has been highlighted in a new report.
It calls on all the agencies responsible for their care to join together to tackle the problem — and says the Government must come up with the cash that's needed.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
OXFORD
ANDY WARREN/Homeless
TIM MARTIN/Homeless
JEREMY SPAFFORD/Centrepoint
IAN WHITE/Social Services Director
Voice over
Andy Warren doesn't have a door key, he has to get in another way.
He's one of Oxford's young homeless and he needs somewhere to sleep…so he's squatting.
Male speaker
We use this way in to stop people stealing what gear we have.Andy has been scratching around for a regular roof over his head for a year, ever since he lost his job and his home burned down in a fire.
He shares A squalid abandoned house on the outskirts of the city with whoever else can find their way in.
He's joined a growing band of young homeless in Oxfordshire.
His days are spent with fellow homeless people hanging around the streets of Oxford.
Some are waiting for nightshelters to open.
All are without jobs.
Male speaker
we're not dossers on the street, we're ordinary people.
I've worked for eight years, I've got references.
We're just ordinary people with problems
Male speaker
Work is a sore subject.
As soon as you tel them where you live they don't want to know you
Voice over
Sometimes they spend their time at a day centre where they can wash, and relax.
But now some attempt is being made to help them.
The London based group Centrepoint has come up with a plan to bring together the people needed to get more homes.
They launched it at a debate.
Male speaker
We've gone town by town throughout the county showing what's needed and how it could be doneHaving established how to do it, it now has to be done, and that means support, especially from the county council.
Male speaker
I can now talk to colleagues in other agencies, I can see ministers and tell them what's needed, and I will do that
Voice over
It can't come soon enough for the homeless on the street, They feel the longer they wait the more they'll be forced to beg on the streets, and even turn to crime.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
Sgt JOHN WOOD/Police Diver
Voice over
A motorcyclist died when he hit a wall after being chased by police at more than a hundred miles an hour.
At one point he drove the wrong way through a contra-flow system.
His pillion passenger is in hospital suffering from shock.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
Chief Supt COLIN STABLER/Gloucestershire Police
The motorcycle wasn't registered to Mr Arrol, although police don't believe it was stolen.
The pillion passenger is being treated in the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital for abrasions and shock.
He's been named as Mark Arrol, from Gloucester, the brother of the dead man.
A car salesman is recovering after being held up at gunpoint by a man posing as a customer.
The man stole the vehicle after a test-drive through the countryside.
Now the car firm is offering a reward for information about the robbery.
KIM BARNES/Banbury
GEOFF COOPER/Car Salesman
NICK THOMPSON/Hartwells Manager
But this one ended in terror when the mystery customer produced a hand gun
He says I didn't think he really wanted to shoot me.
He wasn't aggressive.
Looking back I think I should have been more frightened.
The man had spent about thirty minutes behind the wheel of a Land Rover Discovery like this one…they'd followed Geoff's normal route from Banbury to the village of Mollington, onto Cropredy, then back into Banbury.
But then the man wanted to try some town driving…he pulled over on Brantwood Rise, got the gun from his briefcase, and escaped with the vehicle, worth twenty seven thousand pounds…
Police say this is a rare crime…by now the vehicle is probably abroad.
He says it's probably long gone.
He had planned his escape route.
It was probably stolen to order.
At least six people at the showroom saw the man, who's described as white, in his late twenties, around 5 feet 6, slim with a neat beard and dark brown hair.
Now the firm is offering a reward of five thousand pounds for information leading to an arrest and conviction…just thankful Geoff Cooper is safe and well.
A man accused of dumping poisonous waste in a brook has been committed for Crown Court trial.
12 October 1992/CANNOP BROOK/Gloucestershire
It follows an incident last October when poisonous waste was dumped in the River Lyd in the Forest of Dean.
More than eight thousand gallons of contaminated water had to be pumped out of Cannop Brook.
Graham Feakins, from Gloucester, denies the charge.
A chaplain at the top security Long Lartin jail is leaving his job, following demands for his resignation.
Officers at the prison near Evesham accused the Reverend Roy Lodge of running a slack regime, after a woman chaplain was raped while alone with a convicted sex attacker.
A woman officer also recently admitted having a close relationship with a prisoner during rehearsals for a play which Mr. Lodge produced.
But the Governer says his departure is nothing to do with the resignation calls.
LONG LARTIN/Worcestershire
An inquest has opened on a Honda car engineer killed at work.
SWINDON
Fujio Ijuin, who was forty seven, was crushed to death at the firm's plant in Swindon last week.
He'd been working in the welded body section at the time.
The inquest was adjourned until September.
Welcome back.
Now to our second report on the competition testing the skills of Europe's toughest servicemen.
(WES NEXT)
It was a kind of military superstars.
After the first two events the RAF team carrying British hopes were still in third place.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
Flt Lt KEITH DICKINSON/RAF Team
Sgt IAN CHARNOCK/RAF Team
Sgt ALISTAIR WRIGHT/RAF Team
Capt LAURENT BOULIER/French Team
Voice over
Day three of the competition and already the injuries are starting to show.
Flt Lt Keith Dickinson has aggravated a knee problem,
Heavy landings and hard straining to reach the marks in the parachute events are taking their toll.
The RAF parachute instructors are at a disadvantage against most of the other seven nations because they have never been soldiers.
The events of the next few days could expose them cruelly.
Male speaker
We only really suffer with the shooting, whereas the others are soldiers and it's definitely their discipline.
As for the others: we've trained hard for them and we think we have a good chance in the swimming.
Voice over
They have to compete against trained soldiers in orienteering using a map and compass, swimming and shooting.
Fortunately every one of the RAF parachute instructors is also a PT instructor and their fitness is beyond question.
But they're still not their disciplines.
But not even they could have expected the rigours of Wendover Woods next to RAF Halton.
The course should be five and a half miles as the crow flies.
But that's through high trees and up steep hills.
Male speaker
that's the hardest thing I've ever done.
Male speaker
I'm almost dead.
Male speaker
I'll never do it again
Voice over
It also added to the injury list.
Sgt Ian Charnock badly twisted his ankle early on but kept on running.
So did Sgt Chris Headley.
Male speaker
I went over on my ankle and just had to keep hopping.
If I'd stopped it would have stiffened up.
It swelled up when I finished
Voice over
But at the end of Day three the RAF had won again putting them level with the French at the top of the table…
Highest position equals lowest points.
They certainly fancied their chances in the next event: swimming.
Months of training had gone into it.
They had to do a hundred yards in combat kit.
There was no question of the winner this time.
Ian Charnock swam a record time and Ali Wright and Keith Dickinson came second and third behind him.
Male speaker
I feel great, the team's done really well, we're all on a high
Male speaker
If the freefall had gone better on Sunday then we would have been untouchable by this stage, but as it is the French are still ver close and their shooting will be very good.
We're hoping for a good day tomorrow
Voice over
But the French were still running them close.
They were just two points away and the last event was the shooting…the RAF's weakest spot.
Day Five saw the teams on the rifle ranges at Bulford.
The French soldiers were in their element.
Tensions mounted.
Each team had to shoot ten rounds from three positions: lying down, kneeling, and standing.
Everything depended on this, and much to the RAF's surprise anddelight, they beat the French…although the Portuguese won the event.
But It was enough to win them the whole Challenge.
Male speaker
to beat soldiers at their own game is brilliant.
It puts us back on themap.
We didn't do well in our own event.
Voice over
In the end defeat was taken graciously by the French who joined in with a boistrous wind down session the following day.
Male speaker
Competition was very tough and we didn't manage to win but it was a very good week.
Voice over
Now all the effort goes into preparing for the next one…although the RAF's team is calling it a day.
They reckon they've had enough and theywant to leave it to the younger ones.0
Football, and Swindon Town's captain may be joining Tottenham Hotspur.
Colin Calderwood has been with the club since their fourth division days, but has yet to sign a new contract for next season.
Spurs manager Ossie Ardiles, who used to manage Swindon, is reported to be interested in Calderwood, although no fee has been discussed.
Meanwhile, Swindon celebrated promotion to the Premier League today by breaking their own club record transfer fee.
They paid half a million pounds for Norweigan International striker Jan Orga Fiortoft 
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
JAN AAGE FJORTOFT/Swindon Town
JOHN GORMAN/Manager
Jan says he has a good feeling about swindon and is hungry to do well and play in the premier league
The fee of half a million doubles the swindon record and is the first signing by new manager John Gorman…
John Gorman says it's good value for an international striker and he's been given great support by the board to go and out and strengthen the side…he thinks Jan will help them in the premier league…,
Jan will meet his new teamates when they start training tomorrow…his first game for Town will be on the club's pre season tour of Finland
Archaeologists have been recreating the bronze age cremation of a women and child — by burning a dead sheep.
They hope the experiment will help them find out why a mother and baby were cremated and then buried in the centre of a large earth mound 
GUITING POWER/Gloucestershire
Dr ALISTAIR MARSHALL/Archeologist
SIMON MEDHURST/Coal Research Establishment
JACQUELINE McKINLEY/Osteoarcheologist
Four thousand years ago a funeral pyre like this one was built for a woman who was either heavily pregnant or recently delivered of a child.
Whether they died naturally or were ritually murdered they were cremated, and then buried at the centre of a great mound.
Archeologists have excavated and recreated the mound.
Now, with a dead sheep in place of a human body, they're trying to discover what happens within the flames
Male speaker
We've mounted a whole series of experiments related to finding out what happens to pyre goods in the fire when they're placed with the body.
I hope we can do this again.
This is rather unexpected.
The sheer ferocity of the fire is really quite amazing
Voice over
The release of gases, the temperature within the pyre and the changes seen in the soil beneath the fire will all be carefully analysed.
Experts in associated fields have submitted experiments.
Pinpoint monitoring has been provided by British Coal's Coal Research Establishment at Stoke Orchard in Gloucestershire
Male speaker
At the core we've measured temperatures around 960 degrees and it might well go higher.
It burnt much faster than expected.
I thought we might have trouble lighting it, but within ten minutes it's reaching temperatures of six or seven hundred degrees around the periphery
Voice over
The experiment's attracted the country's leading authority on ancient cremation.
Her main task is going to be working out how early bronze age farmers collected together enough of the burnt bone fragments to bury them
Female speaker
It's really quite fascinating seeing how it's all burnt.
The wind took ther flames all down one side which could lead to a collapse.
I wish archeologists would do more of this kind of thing
Voice over
It's the first time archeologists have tried to restage a bronze age cremation.
Dr Marshall says it's been such a success he'd like to see his research go up in flames again
A scientist who got his pilots' licence just last week is off to Indonesia on an extraordinary mission.
Charles Cockell plans to collect moths from his microlight plane.
And he'll be using an invention from the great wartime aircraft designer Barnes Wallis.
GRAEME BOWD/Enstone
CHARLES COCKELL/Expedition Leader
Voice over
People who go to the tropics usually take steps to avoid insects.
Charles Cockell will be trying to attract them.
The Oxford postgraduate student has hit on a novel way of studying moths on his forthcoming trip to Sumatra.
He's designed an airborne moth trap, bolted to the side of his microlight plane.
Male speaker
The air slows down inside it.
The moths go in at 50 mph and hit the net at 5 mph so they don't damage their wings.
Voice over
Charles will be flying just forty feet above the rain forest canopy, at night.
That would test even an experienced pilot.
Charles got his licence just last week.
To keep him out of the trees he's using a simple invention devised by Barnes Wallis for the Dambusters raid.
Two lights are mounted so that when the beams meet he'll be at just the right height.
Male speaker
I'm going to have to be careful because I shall be flying quite low.
I shall have to stay near open areas in case the engine fails.
Moths are sensitive to changes in the environment.
We want to get an idea of what's going on in the rain forest canopy.
Voice over
Charles has been polishing his flying skills at Enstone aerodrome in Oxfordshire.
But he still hasn't tried out his moth trap.
The Civil Aviation authority say it can't be used here.
It's not his first scientific expedition.
He's been to Mongolia to hunt the long-eared hedgehog.
He's also planned a route to the south pole of Mars.
But he insists the Indonesia trip is not just a bit of fun.
Male speaker
There are about 10,000 species of moths in Sumatra.
It's likely that we shall also discover new species.
Voice over
The expedition will also mean a new discovery for local villagers.
It's likely that most of them won't ever have seen a microlight.
Motor racing supporters will be banned from going onto the track at this weekend's British Grand Prix.
July 1992/SILVERSTONE/Northamptonshire
The clampdown at Silverstone comes after fans scaled the barriers and swarmed onto the circuit after last year's race.
Motor racing authorities say fans can't be allowed to put themselves in danger.
This year, three giant television screens have been installed to show all sides of the track.
Britain's biggest flower show opened today, but for some people it's meant a special outing for the last two weeks.
One of the gardens in the grounds of Hampton Court Palace has been laid out by prison inmates, who grew the flowers themselves.
GRAEME BOWD/Hampton Court
PETER WESCOTT/3 Years for Burglary
PETER SANDERSON/15 Years for Armed Robbery
ROGER BEETLESTONE/Assistant Governor
Voice over
Unlike most of the blooms at Hampton Court, these were not grown by professionals.
They come from the gardens of Leyhill prison on Gloucestershire.
For the last fortnight some prisoners have been here in person.
As the show opened they even enjoyed a beer with the first day crowds.
The garden was designed for the Stroud based Meningitus Trust.
Everything here has been donated, including the labour.
The paths were laid by two stonemasons, nearing the end of their sentences.
Both admitted they they didn't know much about gardens.
Male speaker
Male speaker
Voice over
The garden was planned by professional designer Naila Green who came up with a snakes and ladders theme.
The fence might also have been symbolic.
It wouldn't have kept the prisoners in, but they could have gone anyway had they chosen to do so.
The prison governor said projects like this provide an important stepping stone for men shortly to be paroled.
Male speaker
Voice over
The garden was officially opened by one of Britain's best known voices.
Patricia Greene, alias Jill Archer, said it much tidier than the one at Brookfield Farm.
The Hampton Court Palace flower show is open until Sunday.
A family is celebrating more than five hundred years of work at a local docks.
Seventeen members of the Denning family have worked at the docks since the nineteenth century.
Their record of service has won them a British Waterways competition.
KEN GOODWIN Gloucester
MAISE CARNEY Former Docks Worker
ROYCE DENNING Former Docks Plumber
Voice over
Five hundred and sixty six cans of beer — to celebrate five hundred and sixty six years of service.
British waterways launched a competition to find the family which has put in the most years of work in a dock.
The Denning family won.
Thomas Denning started it all.
He's in this faded picture — and began work at Sharpness docks when he was eleven, in 1851.
Since then at least seventeen members of the family have worked at Sharpness.
Maise Carney notched up 44 years office work at the docks.
Her father, Alic Denning worked as a docker for fifty one years.
She says he had a hard life:
She says that it was manual work, and very hard.
He says that the photo reminds him of how Sharpness used to be.
Sharpness docks is now a shadow of it's former self.
In it's hayday it was a bustling port.
The Denning family feel sad that, although Sharpness is still thriving, it'll never be the busy port it once was.
He says the docks are the families life.
Younger members of the Denning family are carrying on the tradition of working at Sharpness docks.
How many more generations continue to do so remains to be seen.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
By election on July 29th
FTSE up 0
The hundred shares index closed up nought point two at two eight four eight point three 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty nine and down at two marks, fifty five.
That's all the main news for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30.
Until then from both of us, goodbye.
An international fraud has been uncovered involving more than a hundred and sixty thousand pounds worth of computer software.
The counterfeit packages have been found on sale as far afield as Ghana and South Africa.
LIZ HANNAM/Oxford
ROY HILL/Oxfordshire Trading Standards
Male speaker
They think they're getting a word processing software package and if there are any bugs then they'll get the back-up.
But in this case they're not.
Voice over
Spotting a fake is virtually impossible.
The advise from Trading Standards is to buy from a reputable dealer.
Male speaker
If in doubt go to the original producers of the software.
In this particular case they're very difficult to identify as a fake.
Voice over
Trading Standards officers raided a factory in North Oxfordshire last month and seized files and company records.
One man was arrested.
They're now trying to track down another hundred and sixty thousand pounds worth of software.
The culprits face up to ten years in jail or an unlimited fine.
A hospital consultant is warning of the dangers of bouncy castles.
He says dozens of children are injured in accidents on the inflatable castles, and he wants firms that hire them out to be licenced.
RICHARD BARNETT/Brockworth
STEPHEN McCABE/Consultant in Accident and Emergency
STEVE MYATT/Licensee
The bouncy castle at Brockworth attracts up to 200 children a day…and there hasn't been a single accident.
The licensee says that's because he's determined to ensure it's safe:
Parents believe bouncy castles are a good idea if they're run properly:
If tighter controls aren't introduced on the hiring of bouncy castles, doctors say all too often the children's smiles will turn to tears of pain.
The winner of the young driver of the year competition will be getting his prize this weekend — a place in the pits at the British Grand Prix.
As part of the build-up to the race, he's been visiting the Jordan Team headquarters at Silverstone.
SIMON GARRETT/Silverstone
NEIL BROWN/Young Driver of the Year
REUBENS BARRICHELLO/Jordan Racing Team
TED KENYON/Competition Organiser
Behind the wheel of a formula one racing car…
Neil Brown…young driver of the year.
He won a competition set up in memory of Catherine Kenyon.
She died when a car driver racing a motorbike smashed into her car.
Her parents launched the competition to train young people about the dangers of motor vehicles.
The winner went through hours of written exams and a tough driving contest on the streets of Milton Keynes to win the title
Male speaker
I've never actually been to a Grand Prix before so I'm really looking forward to it.
Winning the competition has made me realise while driving I have something to live up to.
But safety is something I've already had taught to me.
Voice over
Reubens Barrichello has been driving competitively since he was six.
Now he's tipped as a future world champion.
He believes young drivers should take every chance to learn more about safe driving
Male speaker
Learn as quick as possible how to drive a car on the road.
It's very simple.
Concentrate on your mirrors and keep looking
Voice over
The trust set up by Catherine Kenyon's parents has also helped fund improved treatment for road accident victims with donations of equipment to Stoke Mandeville hospital and Buckinghamshire ambulance service.
This year's competition will have events for cars and motorbikes.
Mr Kenyon says he wants youngsters to understand fast driving can have a proper place
Male speaker
Racing is for the track not for the road.
We hope people will see that there is a difference betwqeen reckless driving on the public highway and this
Voice over
The Kenyons say Neil Brown's victory has given them immense satisfaction.
For them if one young person thinks twice before driving wrecklessly and endangering life…the competition in memory of their daughter will have served its purpose
(WES AD )(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, who will be Europe's military superstars?
Voice over
A pub with a difference has just opened in Herefordshire.
The Glass Pig is run by a charity, and it aims to break down barriers between people with severe learning difficulties and the rest of the community.
No easy task, but it's already proving a great success, as Richard Barnett reports:
TARRINGTON/Herefordshire
MARK LOWE/Manager
JANET DONOHUE/Midsummer Trust
Voice over
It's a busy lunchtime at the Glass Pig in Tarrington near Hereford, as a minibus full of customers turns up.
To these young men, this is their own very special pub because they all have severe learning difficulties.
And the Glass Pig has been set up by the Midsummer Charity Trust, which runs seven residential homes and farms in Herefordshire.
The aim of the pub is to give the residents of the homes and the villagers of Tarrington and surrounding hamlets somewhere to meet and enjoy themselves.
And The Glass Pig is already proving a very popular venue.
Male speaker
The pub has become a real community centre, and attracts locals from the villages.
Voice over
Residents from the homes don't always find themselves welcome in other pubs, but here they're treated as just another customer.
And the locals are making the most of the pubs facilities too.
Male speaker
It's a good idea, because the residents are often asked to leave other pubs.
Voice over
The Glass Pig has only been open a couple of weeks, but it's already busy and helping to break down barriers.
Female speaker
Many of the residents have led sheltered lives and don't normally get a chance to meet other people in the community.
That's what makes the pub valuable.
Voice over
As for the residents, they know just where they like to be and that's down the local pub.
Male speaker
It's his favourite pub.
He loves it.
Voice over
The worst drought in the region for two centuries has claimed another victim…the badger.
The animals, along with foxes and baby hedgehogs, are suffering from dehydration because they simply can't find enough to drink.
Kim Barnes reports.
HADDENHAM Buckinghamshire
LES STOCKER St Tiggywinkle's Hospital
Voice over
This badger's the latest drought victim.
It's put him in intensive care, dependent on an intravenous drip for nourishment.
He's suffering from dehydration because of his fruitless search for water.
Today he's moving onto liquids, but it'll be a while before he reovers from the effects.
The whole animal shrivels and shrinks.
They can't walk straight.
We're getting about twenty in, it's really serious.
Badgers are also suffering from malnutrition because their staple diet, the thirsty earthworm has been forced too far underground for them to reach.
It's affecting other animals too.
It's affecting fox cubs and hedgehogs, the mothers go off for water and leave orphans.
The real answer is out of our hands, but until the rivers fill up we can help.
You can put bowls of water out.
You can leave fruit and vegetables for badgers.
Some animals are flush with water, but have got other things to worry about.
This cygnet has a broken leg.
They're all hoping for better days ahead.
Government scheme to cut drinking and smoking
The Government has announced a health improvement programme aimed at cutting smoking and drinking.
Man accused of Lynn Siddons murder
A man's been remanded in custody accused of the murder of Lynn Siddons, who died fourteen years ago.
Labour Party chief cleared of attack on policeman
The General Secretary of the Labour Party, Larry Whitty, has been cleared of assaulting a police officer.
FTSE down 21
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-one point one at twenty-four, seventy-two point six.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety-two and down at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Plans for the biggest private housing development in Europe finally got the go-ahead this afternoon.
A whole mini-city of ten thousand homes will be built and two thousand jobs created, but people living nearby are far from happy.
Liz Hannam reports.
(Within the next 6 months work will start on the biggest private house building project in Europe.
10,000 homes will be built to the North of Swindon and it'll create two thousand jobs.
There are also plans for schools, shopping complexs and even a University.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
PAUL CALLCUTT/Crest Homes
TONY MAYER/Leader/Thamesdown Council
CHARMIAN SPICKERNELL/CPRE
Voice over
The ideas were originally put forward in the boom years of the late 1980s, but a year ago the consortium behind the development collapsed.
One of the original group, Crest Homes, has now decided to go it alone for the first stage of the project.
Thamesdown Borough Council is confident this won't jeopardise the rest of the plan.
But the proposed development has angered environmentalists who argue there's no need for more housing in Swindon.
The believe planners should have turned down the application.
But the development will be welcomed by the building trade.
This is the only major private building project now being undertaken in Swindon.
Whether they will be able to sell the houses at the end of it, is another matter.
In part two: Don't Panic.The Hitchhiker's Guide to a Safer Holiday.
And dying for a drink.The badger falls victim to the drought.
Welcome back: Thousands of teenagers will be packing their rucksacks to travel around the world this summer, and get away from the stress of exams.
But too often they don't realise the possible dangers…anything from AIDS and alcohol, to broken bones and robbery.
Being aware can make the difference between a happy holiday and a disaster.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
NICK BLUNDEN/Teenage Traveller
Dr AIDAN MACFARLANE/Author
RACHEL COULTER
MAGGIE BOYD
Voice over
Loading up their rucksacks for the trip of a lifetime.
Rachel and Maggie have just finished their A levels.
Now they plan to take a year off and travel round the world, like their friend Nick Blunden, who's come home from his travels, unloading a sackful of memories.
A 6 month journey over 3 continents, starting in the Carribean, across America to Hawaii; down to Australia, then the Far East, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore before coming back.
Along with the souvenirs, he brought home a reminder of a broken arm.
One of many unexpected problems during the holiday.
For teenagers like Nick, preparing for the epic journey seemed simple enough.
Experts say young travellers are especially prone to problems in far off places and in different cultures.
2 Oxford doctors have produced a teenager's guide to globetrotting.
They've already had success in getting across their message, with a previous best seller; The Diary of A Teenage Health Freak.
This time the travel stories came from teenagers themselves.
Amusing tales as well as horror stories.
The idea is for youngsters to start their journey armed with information about sex, drugs, visas, money, jobs, disease, even the environment.
For Rachel and Maggie, it's too good a chance to miss.
As they say, the end of A levels, the beginning of real life.
With the right approach, globetrotting teenagers can have a journey to remember for a lifetime.
Special school scandal.Social workers knew FIVE years ago.
The Church says sorry…but vicar in graveyard row sticks to his guns.
And, I'll be back.
Jogger who was stabbed says it won't stop him running.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
A fresh complaint was made earlier this year, and investigated by police and social workers.
Two months later, the vice chairman of governors was arrested and questioned about pornography.
Tonight, social services said nothing was done the first time because nobody believed the complaints.
Tim Hurst reports.
TODDINGTON/Gloucestershire
FRED DAVIES/Deputy Director/Social Services
Voice over
New Barns School at Toddington in Gloucestershire has closed for the summer holidays 3 weeks early and the last of 22 children withdrawn, following the arrest of the vice-chairman of Governors, Peter Righton, a leading authority on the treatment of disturbed children.
He has been questioned about alleged pornography found at the house he shares in Evesham with the school's Headmaster, Richard Alston, who has also been suspended.
From the house, police took away magazines, videos and letters.
Governors admit they knew of an association between the 2 men, but they say that gave them no cause for concern.
16 local authorities paid an average of £40,000 a year to send children to the school, aged between 6 and 13.
Today the last of those children were withdrawn.
Gloucestershire County Council, has been responsible since last year for inspecting the independent school.
Now social workers are hoping to interview all past and present pupils, some of whom are known to have visited the house in Evesham.
Local authorities, including Buckinghamshire, Hereford and Worcester, Coventry, Mid Glamorgan and several London Boroughs, are co-operating with a continuing police investigation.
The Church of England is expected to discipline a vicar who removed wooden crosses from a grave, despite the distress of the family involved.
Today the church authorities issued a public apology but the Reverend Eric Craig still insists the crosses break Church rules and he won't allow them in his graveyard.
This report from Gareth Furby.
BEGBROKE/Oxfordshire
BARBARA SHARLOTT/Widow
Rev ERIC CRAIG/Vicar
Rev RICHARD THOMAS/Diocese of Oxford
Voice over
One month after they were removed by the vicar, a widow re-lays three wooden crosses on her husband's grave.
Ron Sharlott was sixty seven.
He used to work on a farm and wanted to be buried in a country church.
Begbroke seemed ideal but then the vicar started laying down the law.
The wooden crosses he said broke church regulations.
But today the Church of England apoligised to the family saying’ our concern must always be for people before regulations, especially during times of greiving.’
Spurred by that apology, this afternoon Barbara Sharlott returned with the crosses.
She says it means a great deal.
Ron was a loving husband and grandfather.
But just a few minutes the vicar arrived, and despite the Church's apology insisted the crosses would have to go.
He says the regulations are clear.
The crosses will have to go and the widow knows they break regulations.
It was all too much for the widow.
She says she feels worse now that she did when her husband died.
Tonight the Diocese of Oxford reacted with dismay.
It says wooden crosses as, a temporary mounment are not against Church regulations.
He says he hopes the vicar will think very carefully before he does anything else.
The vicar may now face some form of disciplinary action.
And the Sharlott family is praying that this time he leaves the crosses alone.
The trial of Gary Corbett, who's accused of murdering a nine month old baby girl has been hearing how she suffered a catalogue of appalling injuries before her death.
The jury was told that the baby was covered with forty bruises, nineteen of them on her head.
Experts claim that at least half were inflicted well before the fatal blow.
Simon Garrett reports.
BRISTOL
Voice over
Bristol Crown Court heard expert evidence that the double spinal fracture which left baby Danielle in terrible pain could have been inflicted 24 hours before she died.
It's alleged Gary Corbett held her by the legs and swung her against a wall at the flat in which they all lived at Forest Green in Nailsworth, near Stroud in Gloucestershire.
Witnesses have said that the day before her death, Danielle was quiet and strangely floppy.
Her mother had said she was teething and out of sorts; listless.
Corbett told polic that he never lost his temper with the child and never smacked her.
He claims he was alone with the child changing her nappy when she was sick, stopped breathing and died.
Danielle's mother Erica Simpkins wrote 790 pages of love letters to Corbett while he awaited trial in prison.
The trial continues tomorrow when the defence will begin their evidence.
A former international sportsman who was stabbed while he was out jogging says the attack hasn't put him off running in the future.
The thirty five year old man was set on by four youths after he accidently bumped into them.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
PAUL LANIGHAN
Voice over
T
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GARETH FURBY/Oxford
TERRY LAITHWAITE/Ram-raid Victim
JOHN NAGLE/Ram-raid Victim
Chief Insp COLIN HANDY/Gloucestershire Police
His Oxford business was targetted earlier this week.
It's cost him twenty thousand pounds.
He says it's not just the clothes that go, it's the damage as well.
He's worried they won't be able to get insurance and that could mean closing the business.
Ram-raiding gets round the burglar alarms.
And not many security grills can withstand a direct hit from a speeding car or van.
This business in Henley has been targeted four times.
He says it leaves the shop looking like a bomb has hit.
Now the police have hit back.
After a six month investigation detectives beleive they've smashed the gang behind a series of raids in West London and the Thames Valley area.
But others are still operating in Gloucestershire.
This morning it was the turn of a Cirencester clothes shop.
He says most of the ram raiders come from Bristol or Birmingham and disappear quickly.
By the time the pollice get on the scene they're well gone.
Today three men appeared before magistrates in Berkshire.
They were charged with burglary and the theft of a Ford Sierra Cosworth, and remanded in custody for seven days.
There's new hope for people who lost money in the Maxwell Pension Funds.
The trustees say they are now’ cautiously optimistic’that everyone will be paid in full.
A special unit set up to track down the missing money has now traced around three hundred million pounds — but there could still be a long legal battle to get some of it returned.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
SYLVIA HINTON/Former Maxwell Employee
CYNTHIA HINTON/Former Maxwell Employee
FRANK FIELD MP/Social Services Committee Chairman
BOB KNIGHT/Oxford Pensioners' Leader
Voice over
The Maxwell Pensioners have made many trips to Westminster to press their case.
Now at last the news is good.
A special unit set up by the Government has now traced more than half the cash which was spirited away by the late Robert Maxwell.
There's now a good chance that pensioners will be paid in full.
That means new hope for twins Sylvia and Cynthia Hinton.
They worked for 38 years at the Nuffield Press in Oxford.
So far they've had no pension.
Female speaker
Life without money's nothing if you can't live properly.
We worry about the future.
Female speaker
We've got a bottle of wine in the fridge to open when we get our money.
We'll be opening it soon.
Voice over
In a written Commons reply the social services minister Willam Hague said the fund trustees were now cautiously optimistic.
But much will now depend on the persuasive skills of Sir John Cuckney who's leading the recovery operation.
City institutions who received money from Maxwell may be reluctant to give it back unless it can be clearly sourced to the pension fund.
Tonight the MP who headed the Commons inquiry into the Maxwell affair said conpanies which refused to pay up could pay a high price.
Male speaker
They know that if things are not settled they are going to be dragged through the courts.
That process will be immenseley expensive and their professional reputations could suffer.
Voice over
Tonight the man who's been leading the fight for pensioners in Oxford said there was also much at state for those still working for the former Maxwell companies.
Male speaker
It's important for the younger people who are waiting to see if they will get a pension when they retire.
Voice over
It now looks as though they will.
But the battle is not yet won.
It could be some months yet before the pensioners know how much they'll get, and when they'll get it.
Britain's churches are under siege, according to the company which insures them.
Thieves and vandals are costing churches millions of pounds each year.
The situation is so bad that special seminars are being held to teach clergymen more about security.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
Rev DEREK SAWYER/Vicar
Rev TERRY WILLIAMS/Vicar
JIM SCOTT/Ecclesiastical Insurance
He says that things like candle sticks are stolen, then used as impliments to break windows.
But it's not just city centre churches which are at risk.
Oxenhall Church near Newent is well off the beaten track, but not it appears, to criminals.
A stained glass window was recently kicked in — causing fifteen hundred pounds worth of damage.
He says that the church is now kept locked all day.
It's very sad.
The Ecclesiastical Insurance Company insures almost all of Britain's Anglican churches.
Just last year it handled six million pounds worth of claims from churches hit by crime.
He says criminals now regard churches as easy targets.
The firm is now touring the country teaching vicars the value of increased security.
The idea is not to turn churches into fortresses, but to make sure the door is well and truly closed to criminals.
Welcome back.A scientist who got his pilots' licence just last week is off to Indonesia on an extraordinary mission.
(WES)
Charles Cockell (PRO: COE-KELL) will be using a device invented by Barnes Wallis to collect moths from his microlight plane.
GRAEME BOWD/Enstone
CHARLES COCKELL/Expedition Leader
Voice over
People who go to the tropics usually take steps to avoid insects.
Charles Cockell will be trying to attract them.
The Oxford postgraduate student has hit on a novel way of studying moths on his forthcoming trip to Sumatra.
He's designed an airborne moth trap, bolted to the side of his microlight plane.
Male speaker
The air slows down inside it.
The moths go in at 50 mph and hit the net at 5 mph so they don't damage their wings.
Voice over
Charles will be flying just forty feet above the rain forest canopy, at night.
That would test even an experienced pilot.
Charles got his licence just last week.
To keep him out of the trees he's using a simple invention devised by Barnes Wallis for the Dambusters raid.
Two lights are mounted so that when the beams meet he'll be at just the right height.
Male speaker
I'm going to have to be careful because I shall be flying quite low.
I shall have to stay near open areas in case the engine fails.
Moths are sensitive to changes in the environment.
We want to get an idea of what's going on in the rain forest canopy.
Voice over
Charles has been polishing his flying skills at Enstone aerodrome in Oxfordshire.
But he still hasn't tried out his moth trap.
The Civil Aviation authority say it can't be used here.
It's not his first scientific expedition.
He's been to Mongolia to hunt the long-eared hedgehog.
He's also planned a route to the south pole of Mars.
But he insists the Indonesia trip is not just a bit of fun.
Male speaker
There are about 10,000 species of moths in Sumatra.
It's likely that we shall also discover new species.
Voice over
The expedition will also mean a new discovery for local villagers.
It's likely that most of them won't ever have seen a microlight.
Now with summer well and truly upon us, it's time for the first in a new series looking at some of the region's loveliest gardens.
Tonight we visit a village which is so proud of it's gardens, it's opening them up for the public to enjoy.
ERIKA BARNES North Moreton
RON QUINNEY Church Warden
ROGER ELLIOT Gardener
JENNY WISEMAN Gardener
JANET PRESCOTT Gardener
But in the village gardens the twentieth century seems a million miles away.
Here they're more interested in preserving the past.
The twelve century church is suffering the effects of time.
The St Nicholas window is in need of repair.
So to raise funds, some of the villagers are opening their gardens to the public on Saturday.
Male speaker
Most of the villigers tend their gardens well.
None of them are professional.
It's a lovely view from here.
Some of the property dates back to the fifteenth or sixteenth century and have old world gardens.
Some are more modern — cultivated with roses and sweet peas.
Voice over
The variety and ingenuity of the gardens is impressive.
In one back garden, a grass bank has been turned into a spectacular terrace.
It was an enormous project to undertake.
Male speaker
The shape of the garden was much the same, with a rockery.
Behind the slop was a grass back.
There was no terracing and no wall.
There are a few gaps, with ground cover to stop the soil slipping.
Voice over
Imaculate conifers dominate this garden.
The height hides a view of the nearby power station.
The colours compliment each other throughout the year.
Female speaker
I'm a country girl, born in a village.
It's important to have something to look at.
They're mainly conifers and shrubs which provide cover for birds.
Voice over
The birds are not so fond of this garden.
Here cats are on patrol.
They enjoy the bright colours and sweet smelling flowers.
Janet Prescott wanted to create a garden to compliment her beautiful home.
Female speaker
If I'm not working or away, I'm doing the garden.
I enjoy the sound of water.
That's why there are so many ponds.
I love watching fish, they're such fun.
Voice over
Eleven gardens in North Moreton will open to the public on Saturday.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Sams jailed for life
Michael Sams has been sentenced to life in prison after being found guilty of murdering the teenager, Julie Dart.
TGWU rejects reforms
The Transport and General Workers Union has rejected Labour's plans to reform the party's voting system.
Tourist shot dead in Scotland
A German tourist has been shot dead by a lone gunman in an attempted robbery in Scotland, his wife and daughter are seriously injured.
Benefits spending to soar
New figures show spending on social security in Britain will rise by nearly fourteen billion pounds by the turn of the century even if unemployment falls.
Countess Spencer marries
Countess Raine Spencer, the stepmother of the Princess of Wales and daughter of the author Barbara Cartland, has been married to the French Count, Jean Francois de Chambrun at a register office.
FTSE down 2
The hundred shares index closed down two point four at twenty-eight, forty-five point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-nine and down at two marks, fifty-five.
The electrification of one of British Rail's busiest commuter routes has moved a step closer.
A study's to be carried out to see whether it's feasible for trains to travel along the Great Western line at a hundred and fifty miles an hour.
Commuters say they'll believe it when they see it.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
KNOWLES MITCHELL/British Rail
PHILIP WHITE/Chairman
PETER SLATER/Study Coordinator
MURRAY HUGHES/Editor
Voice over
Today's journey time from Swindon to Paddington's about an hour.
It'd be more like three quarters if the Great Western were electrified, half an hour from Didcot.
BR's made no secret of its ambition to modernise the line.
Now it's to take part in a feasibility study.
Work's already begun on an electrified Paddington to Heathrow express.
Once that's complete, overhead electrics will be extended to Reading as part of a new service called CrossRail.
After that BR hopes to continue electrification to Swindon and beyond.
Great Western commuters are in favour of electric trains, but sceptical as to whether they'll ever come about.
Male speaker
I don't care what the motive power is as long as it gets there on time and you're guaranteed a seat.
Voice over
The recently electrified East Coast route has proved a great success…but could such modern technology be adapted to a railway designed more than a hundred and fifty years ago?
But even if the study concludes that electrification is feasible, it'll all be academic if BR isn't awarded the Great Western franchise once the railway network's privatised.
One local authority's already pledged ten thousand pounds towards the study.
Consultants will be appointed in the autumn.
The families of children with learning difficiulties are getting a raw deal, according to a national children's charity.
The organisation says many have little financial or emotional support and that the government could do much more to help.
KATE GARRAWAY/Cinderford
PHIL HERBERT/Father
MICHAEL TUCKWELL/National Children's Home
Most disabled children need alot of care, often twenty-four hours a day.
And that can leave very little time for parents.
Mr Herbert says he is more fortunate than most parents in the amount of help he receives.
He is backing a new campaign launched by the National Children's Home calling on the government to provide more funds for respite care to give parents an occasional and much needed break.
From our statistical survey we found ninety-five per cent of parents have no respite or break from their children and that is alot of families.
The NCH says parents are saving the state a fortune by caring for disabled children in their homes.
The charity argues that in return those parents deserve far more support than they currently receive.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, netting moths from a microlight
A convoy of vintage Rolls-Royce cars has set out on a nostalgic journey.
The drivers are retracing the route of the Great Western Railway, built more than one hundred and fifty years ago.
Gareth Furby reports.
STEVENTON/Oxfordshire
GEORGE MILLIGAN/Rolls Royce Enthusaist
BRIAN WIGGINS/Enthusiast
ROY NOBLE/Enthusiast
Voice over
More than 40 Rolls Royce cars were driven to Steventon in Oxfordshire today for the start of the nostaglic rally.
Steventon is on the main line, exactly halfway from London to Bristol.
It used to be called the Great Western railway, which was built in the 1830s under the guidance of the engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel.
Over the next 4 days, the Rolls Royces will drive down to Plymouth, following the route of the railway.
Among the sights, the Box Tunnel in the Cotswolds.
At nearly 2 miles long, at the time it was built, it was the longest tunnel in the world.
Many of the drivers are Brunel enthusiasts, but others are going along just for the ride.
He says it will be a reminder of the good old days.
He says it's good fun.
He says they'll all talk about the day's drive, much like they talk about a game of golf.
The organisers say the 4-day trip is good value at £190.
But of course that doesn't include the price of the essential vintage roller.
A collection of classic boats from the golden age of messing about on the river will go up for auction this weekend.
On sale will be everything from MODELS of luxury cruisers…right up to the real thing.
There's also a speedboat used in the film Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, which comes complete with bullet holes.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
HENLEY on THAMES/Oxfordshire
WILLIAM ROSE/Auction Organiser
Voice over
After the glitz and glamour of the Henley Royal Regatta comes the Henley River Boat Auction.
On Saturday, all shapes and sizes of water craft go under the hammer; the common theme; they're all from another age.
Like the Esperanza, a Victorian steam boat, complete with original oak timbers and teak deck.
Just perfect for those summer picnics along the Thames, if you can afford it that is, the guide price is around £35,000.
Or what about the Bosporus; the last traditional boat used to umpire the races at the regatta.
The auction has something for everyone.
This boat was used in an Indiana Jones film and still bears the scars.
If that's a bit out of your reach at £15,000, maybe you could settle for a model of the real thing.
There'll never be anything, though, like the real thing.
The new Batman film opens in Britain tonight, but sadly some of the stars won't be able to attend.
They'll be staying at home enjoying a fish supper — followed by a nice cold swim.
Ken Goodwin reports.
BOURTON-ON-THE-WATER Gloucestershire
BATMAN RETURNS Warner Bros
RICHARD HILL Birdland
Voice over
Meet Elvis the King Penguin, the fishy smelling superstar of Birdland.
He and ten other penguins are staring in the new batman film, which premieres tonight in London.
When hollywood talent spotters decided that the penguins were just right for the job, the birds were flown out to Hollywood — no expense spared.
He says they provided everything they needed, fresh fish, ice, everything.
The birds rubbed shoulders with Danny De Vito — who plays Batmans arch villain the penguin.
So how did the star cope with the birds?
He says that Danny De Vito had to feed the penguins — no they didn't bite him, they don't bite!
The thousands of dollars fee earned by the penguins will now be used to build a big new pool and enclosure.
So while the champagne corks pop at tonights glittering premier at least some of the stars will be taking it easy at home — enjoying a nice fat fish instead.
4
Top civil servants, including judges, are to be awarded a four per cent pay increase in spite of recommendations they should get at least twenty percent.
Patten takes over as Hong Kong Governor
Chris Patten has been sworn-in as the new, and probably final, Governor of Hong Kong.
1
Thirteen hundred jobs are to go at an oil platform construction yard in the Highlands.
UN asks France to delay helicopter squadron
As violence continues in Sarajevo, the United Nations has asked France to delay sending a squadron of helicopters there for safety reasons.
Children witness parents' shootings
Two children have witnessed their father shoot their mother then commit suicide at a house in London.
Injured Daley Thompson retires from international athletics
The athlete, Daley Thompson, has announced his retirement from international athletics after sustaining a leg injury.
FTSE up 25
The hundred shares index closed up twenty-five point three at twenty-four, seventy-nine point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety and up at two marks, eighty-seven.
And better news from Gloucestershire's cricket match against Somerset.
Gloucestershire have struck back to take four quick wickets…
Somerset are now 187 for 5, a tight finish in prospect in that Nat West match.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The Government's being urged to stop developers bulldozing a site where vital intelligence work was carried out during the Second World War.
Codebreakers based at Bletchley Park hastened Hitler's defeat by uncovering most of Germany's military secrets.
But now the huts they worked in are threatened with demolition.
Robin Powell reports.
BLETCHLEY/Milton Keynes
TED ENEVER/Bletchley Park Trust
Sir HARRY HINSLEY/Former Codebreaker
Voice over
1942 and German generals exchange details of Hitler's battle plans.
Unbeknown to them and the Fuehrer himself, surveillance staff at Bletchley Park have just cracked all their codes and are intercepting information that'll help lead the Allies to victory.
In 1992, the wooden huts those codebreakers worked in, on the edge of what's since become Milton Keynes, are threatened with being demolished.
The site jointly owned by the Government and British Telecom, is up for sale and could be redeveloped.
For some, such a fate would be scandalous.
Conveniently located halfway between the ancient universities, Bletchley Park picked the the brightest young minds in the country.
The majority were mathematicians, but perhaps the most important codebreaker was a history graduate.
Now a Fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, Sir Harry Hinsley has fond memories of his time at Bletchley.
Germany's key weapon in the intelligence war was the Enigma Machine, capable of producing a hugely complex code which needed another machine, adjusted to the same settings, to read it.
There were three different types of code.
The military and air codes were de-ciphered early on.
The naval code proved harder to crack; that was Sir Harry's achievement.
He's since written a 4-volume history of wartime intelligence and has little doubt about Bletchley's significance.
After the war, the Government's surveillance headquarters moved to GCHQ at Cheltenham and until the seventies Bletchley Park remained a well-kept secret.
Now there are plans to open it to the public and found a museum there.
The National Heritage Minister, David Mellor, has expressed support for the project, along with surviving codebreakers.
In case the Government ignores its request to donate the Park to the nation, the Bletchley Park Trust is tonight launching an appeal for £7 million to buy and develop it.
If that fails too, the site where arguably the war was won, could be lost for ever.
One of Britain's oldest asylums is for sale.
Its more than a hundred and seventy years old and is now derelict, but conservationists hope it will be renovated by whoever buys it.
It can't be knocked down because of a protection order — and there are even plans to establish a museum of psychiatry on the site.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
TOM HAYES/Gloucester Health Authority
IAN HOLLINGSBEE/Psychiatric Nursing Tutor
Voice over
Once the Horton Road Asylum housed those who were considered mad.
Now empty, decay and neglect are slowly eating away at the building's fabric.
Built in 1823, the crescent shaped hospital is listed as being of architectural interest.
It's been put up for sale by the Gloucester Health Authority, which would like to see it renovated.
He says that it's a fantastic location, ideal for converting into offices.
Ian Hollingsbee worked at the hospital before it closed 4 years ago.
He's an expert on the buildings history and if the building is bought up and say, converted to offices, would like one or 2 rooms put by so he can set up a museum of psychiatry.
He says the asylum has some grim secrets about the early dark days of mental health care.
He says that this was a cell used for patients in the early days of the hospital.
Patients were chained up, and the noise would have been incredible.
In fact there were complaints from upper crust visitors about the din, so the cells fell into disuse.
But the good far outweighed the bad.
Samuel Hitch, a medical superintendant of the asylum, wanted to change the way the mentally ill were treated and founded the Royal college of psychiatrists, which held it's inaugural meeting in the building 150 years ago.
It led to psychiatry being established as a profession in it's own right and the ackowledgement that the mentally ill needed specialist care.
For a building steeped in so much history it's present condition saddens those who would like to see it restored.
Their only hope now is that a buyer can be found who can afford vast sum, it will take to bring the building back to it's former glory.
Cricket…
Gloucestershire are facing the prospect of defeat against Somerset in the second round of the Nat West Trophy.
Gloucestershire were undone by some fine bowling from Somerset's Andrew Caddick who took a career-best six wickets for thirty runs.
Mark Kiff reports.
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
DAVID PARKER/Corbett's Solicitor
Det Sgt COLIN PEAKE/Gloucestershire Police
ERICA SIMPKINS/Danielle's Mother
Voice over
Gary Corbett arrived in handcuffs at Bristol Crown court this morning facing the accusation that he killed a small baby.
The prosecution claimed he held her leg and swung her against a wall.
Just four hours later he was free on the direction of the trial judge.
Friends drove him away to his first night of freedom in twenty months.
When the acquittal had been announced the baby's mother had fled the court in tears.
She left on foot
Female speaker
He's dead meat I'll tell you
Voice over
Danielle Simpkins from Forest Green near Nailsworth in Gloucestershire died from a severe skull fracture.
Medical evidence described other substantial injuries, including a double spinal fracture inflicted at least a day earlier.
Corbett had been alone with her for five minutes when she died, but Mr Justice McKinnon told the jury’ You simply could not be sure that in the short time Danielle was under his control he caused her death.
I have to direct the jury to acquit.’
Male speaker
My client's reaction is one of total relief.
He's been on remand for twenty months and always protested his innocence.
Obviously now he's got his life to put back together which will be very hard after so long.
He couldn't get bail and he's now lost those twenty months
Male speaker
This case raises many of the difficulties and problems facing police when dealing with the death of small children in suspiscious circumstances.
Baby Simpkins undoubtedly died from injuries of a non-accidental nature.
Now the details of the case will be referred to senior officers of the Gloucestershire police force in the light of the trial judge's observations
Voice over
While Corbett was in jail awaiting trial Danielle's mother sent him almost eight hundred pages of love letters.
Tonight near the Forest Green home she once shared with him and the baby she's trying to come to terms with what's happened
Female speaker
Shocked, really shocked.
I just don't know what to think
Voice over
Both Gary Corbett and Erica Simpkins now have to rebuild their lives.
How baby Danielle met her death will probably never be known
Campaigners are meeting tonight to demand that action's taken to make one of the region's most dangerous roads safer.
They say a lethal cocktail of lorries and cars has caused more than fifty fatal accidents in recent years, and that improvements need to be made now.
Erika Barnes reports.
BUCKLAND/Oxfordshire
MIKE SHEIL/A420 Action Group
22 JUNE 1992/LONGCOT/Oxfordshire
Prof STUART RAMSDEN/Accident Witness
JOHN WATTS/A420 Action Group
ROGER WILLIAMS/Traffic Planner/Oxon County Council
Voice over
Villagers of Buckland in Oxfordshire will never forget Katie Sidwell; a victim of the A420.
She was killed in the prime of her life on a road notorious for claiming lives.
Male speaker
In this village, 2 young girls have been killed, our school taxi was hit, another girl was crippled.
Voice over
This story is reflected in other villages along the A420, a winding road which links the 30 miles between Swindon and Oxford.
A combination of blind bends, and high speed frustrations has created a string of accident black spots.
Most recently 3 members of one family died at Longcot near Faringdon.
Residents say they don't want to witness any more carnage on the road.
Male speaker
It suddenly happened out of thin air.
It was horrific.
The worst I've seen.
Voice over
And then there's the aftermath; a young mother killed and her daughter, trapped, calling for mummy.
It probably illustrates it's a lethal cocktail of lorries and cars.
In the past 12 years, there have been 880 accidents on the road.
55 people have died.
The pressure is on for immediate safety improvements.
Male speaker
We would like to see work at the accident blackspots; junctions and blind bends where you can't see.
The growth of grass also makes bends dangerous.
Male speaker
It isn't a County Council responsibility.
It's the Department of Transport, who have commissioned consultants to look at building a dual carriageway.
But it's going to take some time before construction begins.
Voice over
Some junction improvements are due to start shortly.
But the A420 Action group is holding a public meeting in Faringdon tonight to ensure its concerns remain top of the traffic agenda.
If there's no action, more families may be in mourning.
A prison governor is refusing to accept any more remand prisoners because accomodation for unconvicted inmates has reached bursting point.
There are almost twice as many remand prisoners as the prison is used to.
And staff say the situation is desperate.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
JEFF MAYHEW/Gloucester Prison
Voice over
There are tonight 110 remand prisoners at Gloucester prison.
That's around 40 more than the prison can comfortably accommodate.
Staff are already having to put the inmates 3 to a cell.
It's causing problems them considerable problems.
The situation has prompted the prison governor to take the unusual step of refusing to accept any more remand prisoners.
This means that for the forseeable future, prisoners remanded in custody by magistrates, will have to be held in police cells until a jail place becomes available.
The world's biggest wildlife hospital says it's being overwhelmed with animals that have fallen victim to summer traffic.
Staff at St Tiggywinkles say the holiday season is bad news for wildlife because it means more cars in the countryside.
GARETH FURBY/St Tiggywinkles
LES STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles
PAULINE OXMAN/Volunteer
CHARLOTTE GREEN/Animal Care Assistant
SIEW LIN NGUI/Volunteer
Voice over
An encounter with a car left this badger with a broken back leg.
And it'll take six weeks before the plaster can come off this fox.
It all adds up to a summer of hard work for staff at the wildlife hospital near Aylesbury.
He says the summer means there are more people on the roads.
Another badger has suffered a broken jaw.
It's been fixed with wire.
And now eating isn't such a problem.
This long eared bat was buried in a pile of bricks, and has a damaged wing.
She says he's getting better and starting to eat well.
The summer rush means more vetinary supplies are needed.
And no animal is turned away, no matter how large or small.
She says it's when they get released back to the wild that it's best.
But some patients, especially the badgers can be awkward.
She says they can bite.
You have to keep your hands out of the cage.
But there's no summer holiday at the wildlife hospital.
Just long hours and low pay.
The rewards come from watching the patients get well.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the wheels of fortune.
Welcome back…later on…it's revolting but is it art?
The debate over a tankful of locusts. (wes next)…
But now it's time to join Tim Russon for this week's summer sport 
TIM RUSSON
DAVE NEWMAN/Organiser
HANS REY/Stunt Rider
STEVE KERTON
TONY WRIGHT/Gloucestershire
mountain biking is next…its the Malvern Classic at Eastnor Castle this week…this is the biggest and best festival of the lot…and over the years has produced some breathtaking moments…
action…
over 2000 mountain bikers from all over the country will be racing at Eastnor this weekend…
the first test for them the giant slalom…a three quarter of a mile long downhill race…just like ski-ing…and after the downpour this morning it was just as slippy for the bikes…
Dave Newman…says its the premier event in mountain biking and the competition brings people from all walks of life
the fastest time down the hill at Eastnor for those that managed to stay on was about one minute., .16 seconds…the top 16 will be racing off for the champions crown but win or lose…fast or slow…they all seem to enjoy themselves…so what's the fun of it…
vox pops 
The star of the festival is Hans Rey…a stunt rider who can do anything and everything with a mountain bike…he's been flown in for the classic…
Hans Rey…says he started on trials bikes in germany and then started mountain biking in the states…the secret is strength and balance
the elements for the powerboaters this weekend are water and wind…as the British Grand Prix returns after a two year gap…it's being raced in cardiff and favourite to win is Steve Kerton of Gloucestershire…he's lying second in the world championship…he's going for the win but is happy to be back racing in britain
Steve Kerton says it's good to be back racing in this country and he hasn't had a brilliant start but if he keeps picking up points might be in with a chance of winning
Into the roud-up now and it's cricket first…
Gloucestershire skipper Tony Wright has given up the captain's job…the county are bottom of the championship table…haven't won a game and Wright thinks it's time to let someone else have a go
Tony Wright…says it hasn't been a good season they haven't batted well…but someone has got to take the blame and he thinks he should stand down and give someone else a chance
the rain hasn't stopped the tennis today…
Oxfordshiree champion Tim henman has been playing in the quarter finals of the Challenger Trophy against his doubles partner Chris Bailey…
Henman is ranked 12 in this country 617th in the world…
Bailey is Britain's number five and 240th in the world…the difference between them showed today…iit was all over in two sets…
Bailey took it 6-2 6-1…but for henman reaching the last eight is another triumph in his first season on the international circuit
another local boy doing well is Swindon golfer Gary harris he's leading the field for England in the European Championship over in switzerland…his club mate David Howell is just behind him and these two are set to score a great win…
set to break a record are the milers club of Great britain…they're in action at Iffley Road tomorrow…and are aiming to break to world records…both relays in men and women…
and finally the womens cricket world cup gets underway next week we've two local girls i8n the England team and they'll be our guests on monday
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
CLARE LAFFERTY/Colwall
ALLA KRAVCHUK/Soprano
IGOR LEBEDKIN/Pianist
MARGARETE ROLLE/Musicians' Agent
PAUL BROWN/Cirencester Festival
Officials of Cirencester Festival do know Mr Calvert.
He has organised concerts for them in the past.
But no one knew anything about engagements for Igor and Alla.
When they asked Mr Calvert for an explanation he couldn't give one.
Mr Calvert wasn't fit enough to talk to us about the bookings.
But his wife, who's the Mayor of Cirencester, said her husband had been under a lot of pressure recently.
She said he was very sorry for the inconvenience that had been caused.
And pointed out that he was doing all he could to find alternative engagements for the musicians.
There's some good news for Igor and Alla tonight.
The Guildhall in Gloucester has organised a concert for them there on July the twenty seventh.
Protestors have condemned plans for Britain's second biggest reservoir as monstrous.
They say Thames Water hasn't proved the reservoir is needed — the water company says it's essential to meet future demand.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
RAY REYNOLDS/Farmer
WILLIAM McCALL/East Hanney Resident
Dr JOHN SEXTON/Thames Water
LILLI MATSON/CPRE
The 4 square mile reservoir would cover an area south-west of Abingdon in Oxfordshire and would mean Thames Water buying up 4 farms and 16 homes, diverting the road between East Hanney and Steventon, landscaping the 80 foot embankment around the water, and building a tunnel connecting it to the Thames.
Ray Reynolds has lived in the area all his life, both his bungalow home and the 250 acre farm he's built up bit by bit would disappear under the reservoir.
He says it'd be devastating — we built the bungalow just 6 years ago and I've built the farm up over the years and now it's all going to go under water.
Objectors at the first meeting of GARD — group against reservoir development describe the plan as a’ monstrous proposal’.
He says I don't want to live to a massive building site…
I didn't choose to live next to a reservoir…what I want from you is an assurance that your company will compensate everyone affected for all the losses they incur because of the reservoir (everyone cheers).
Thames Water insist with demand for water growing by 40 per cent over the next quarter century, they must build a new reservoir.
There's particular concern over increasing domestic needs in the booming Swindon area.
He says when I go home tonight I want to be able to have water from my taps — and I want my children and my grand-children to have the water they need to live.
Objectors expressed a strong concern Thames Water hadn't proved the demand for such a big reservoir.
She compares the reservoir with the M25 saying that building something so big is likely to create a demand that wasn't there before.
He says the most important thing Thames Water said tonight was they're flexible about the size of th reservoir and are aiming to have the smallest practicable size.
Thames Water has promised to continue discussions with objectors over the next two to three years before applying for planning permission.
Their proposal is then likely to go before a public inquiry.
The world's biggest wildlife hospital says it's being overwhelmed with animals that have fallen victim to summer traffic.
Staff at St Tiggywinkles say the holiday season is bad news for wildlife because it means more cars in the countryside.
GARETH FURBY/St Tiggywinkles
LES STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles
PAULINE OXMAN/Volunteer
CHARLOTTE GREEN/Animal Care Assistant
SIEW LIN NGUI/Volunteer
Voice over
An encounter with a car left this badger with a broken back leg.
And it'll take six weeks before the plaster can come off this fox.
It all adds up to a summer of hard work for staff at the wildlife hospital near Aylesbury.
He says the summer means there are more people on the roads.
Another badger has suffered a broken jaw.
It's been fixed with wire.
And now eating isn't such a problem.
This long eared bat was buried in a pile of bricks, and has a damaged wing.
She says he's getting better and starting to eat well.
The summer rush means more vetinary supplies are needed.
And no animal is turned away, no matter how large or small.
She says it's when they get released back to the wild that it's best.
But some patients, especially the badgers can be awkward.
She says they can bite.
You have to keep your hands out of the cage.
But there's no summer holiday at the wildlife hospital.
Just long hours and low pay.
The rewards come from watching the patients get well.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the wheels of fortune.
Welcome back…later on…it's revolting but is it art?
The debate over a tankful of locusts. (wes next)…
But now it's time to join Tim Russon for this week's summer sport 
TIM RUSSON
DAVE NEWMAN/Organiser
HANS REY/Stunt Rider
STEVE KERTON
TONY WRIGHT/Gloucestershire
mountain biking is next…its the Malvern Classic at Eastnor Castle this week…this is the biggest and best festival of the lot…and over the years has produced some breathtaking moments…
action…
over 2000 mountain bikers from all over the country will be racing at Eastnor this weekend…
the first test for them the giant slalom…a three quarter of a mile long downhill race…just like ski-ing…and after the downpour this morning it was just as slippy for the bikes…
Dave Newman…says its the premier event in mountain biking and the competition brings people from all walks of life
the fastest time down the hill at Eastnor for those that managed to stay on was about one minute., .16 seconds…the top 16 will be racing off for the champions crown but win or lose…fast or slow…they all seem to enjoy themselves…so what's the fun of it…
vox pops 
The star of the festival is Hans Rey…a stunt rider who can do anything and everything with a mountain bike…he's been flown in for the classic…
Hans Rey…says he started on trials bikes in germany and then started mountain biking in the states…the secret is strength and balance
the elements for the powerboaters this weekend are water and wind…as the British Grand Prix returns after a two year gap…it's being raced in cardiff and favourite to win is Steve Kerton of Gloucestershire…he's lying second in the world championship…he's going for the win but is happy to be back racing in britain
Steve Kerton says it's good to be back racing in this country and he hasn't had a brilliant start but if he keeps picking up points might be in with a chance of winning
Into the roud-up now and it's cricket first…
Gloucestershire skipper Tony Wright has given up the captain's job…the county are bottom of the championship table…haven't won a game and Wright thinks it's time to let someone else have a go
Tony Wright…says it hasn't been a good season they haven't batted well…but someone has got to take the blame and he thinks he should stand down and give someone else a chance
the rain hasn't stopped the tennis today…
Oxfordshiree champion Tim henman has been playing in the quarter finals of the Challenger Trophy against his doubles partner Chris Bailey…
Henman is ranked 12 in this country 617th in the world…
Bailey is Britain's number five and 240th in the world…the difference between them showed today…iit was all over in two sets…
Bailey took it 6-2 6-1…but for henman reaching the last eight is another triumph in his first season on the international circuit
another local boy doing well is Swindon golfer Gary harris he's leading the field for England in the European Championship over in switzerland…his club mate David Howell is just behind him and these two are set to score a great win…
set to break a record are the milers club of Great britain…they're in action at Iffley Road tomorrow…and are aiming to break to world records…both relays in men and women…
and finally the womens cricket world cup gets underway next week we've two local girls i8n the England team and they'll be our guests on monday
Some of the oldest river craft on the Thames are being auctioned this weekend, along with lots of boating paraphenalia.
Pictures, oars and models are up for sale, as well as some of the most beautiful boats afloat.
Kim Barnes went along for a preview.
IAN RUTTER/Boat Owner
BILL ROSE/Auction Organiser
He says oh, I don't know!
She says will you miss her?
He says yes, I've had her for thirteen years, but I'm building another one, also with a steam engine.
Victoria a thirty foot steam launch was built in 1906…she's likely to fetch up to 18 thousand pounds in the auction of all sorts of river craft.
There are canoes, launches and punts…stylish but how practical?
He says that's a difficult one.
Not very practical.
Held the week after the Regatta, the auction also brings some of the most elegant ladies to Henley…and models too.
This is Marilyn…and she set sail alongside her more statuesque companions.
Kath meanwhile is one of the glamorous slippers on sale.
He says this is the kind of boat cads would have.
You wouldn't let your daughter out in one.
A tank filled with a thousand locusts and five scorpions is intriguing visitors to a museum.
But it's not part of a natural history display — it's a work of art.
The exhibit's called’ Yellow Peril’, and is supposed to question the way we in the west think about the Chinese.
Some observers aren't so sure.
SIMON GARRETT Oxford
DAVID ELLIOTT Museum Director
Van Gogh went for sunflowers…and Turner liked a nice boat…but these are the favoured subject of Huang Youngping.
They're currently in residence at Oxford's Museum of Modern Art.
Scorpions and locusts in a glass box in a yellow tent, but is it art?
Female speaker
For me coming from Africa where locusts eat our crops all the time I've never seen them like this.
But it'll be inteesting for those folks who haven't seen them’ LIVE’
Female speaker
Is the sound installation with it?
Voice over
No that's the air-conditioning
Male speaker
I like the idea actually I think it's interesting
Voice over
The Chinese artist says the insects symbolise potential conflict between west and east.
The hordes of weak orientals…and the fewer but richer, deadlier westerners.
Topical stuff with Hong Kong in the news
So far of the thousand locusts a couple of hundred have perished or been eaten by the scorpions.
Of the five scorpions just one has died for his art.
The RSPCA and university Zooligists are satisfied the animals living conditions are not cruel.
When the exhibition's over all survivors will get good homes
Male speaker
The scorpions will go back to the owner because they're rented.
The locusts are available to anyone who'd like them, especially schools
Male speaker
I just think Nature is art.
It's more beautiful than anything else
Voice over
Would you hang it on the wall?
Male speaker
I wouldn't be able to but definitely not
Male speaker
I think it would be better without them.
It'd be better with just the yellow tent I think
Voice over
Yellow Peril's defenders insist like all good art it's provocative and has a sting in the tail 
ANDREW TRYTHALL
G7
The Russian President and the G7 leaders have forged what they describe as a long-term partnership.
Clinton threatens Iraq
President Clinton says he cannot rule out the possibility of further action against Iraq following the row over the UN's role as observer.
Prison riot in Scotland
More than seventy prisoners have been rioting in part of the Shotts maximum security prison in Scotland.
FTSE down 2
The hundred shares index closed down two point seven at twenty-eight, forty-three point two.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-eight and up at two marks, fifty-five.
Sefton, the horse who survived an IRA bomb in Hyde Park eleven years ago, has died.
He suffered horrific injuries in the blast, but his courage pulled him through to lead a long and happy life at a retirement home in Buckinghamshire.
ERIKA BARNES/Princes Risborough
July 1982
RENEE BUTLER/Home of Rest for Horses
Flowers for the memory of Sefton.
A horse much loved and much missed by his life long fans.
They say: He was the nicest horse I ever knew.
They've always taken a special interest in Sefton because of the bomb blast.
When I told Miranda, she burst into tears, so I said lets take some flowers.
Just a few weeks ago, Sefton was enjoying his thirtieth birthday party.
Nothing lavish.
Just a extra feed of hay to mark the special day.
Eleven years earlier he was the victim of an IRA car bomb at Hyde Park.
He suffered horrific injuries, and few thought he'd survive.
But as a testimony to his courage and spirit he pulled through.
He was retired from the Household Cavalry two years later and spent the rest of his days at Speen Farm near Princes Risborough.
But recently he became incurably lame…and was moved to the Army veterinary centre at Melton Mowbrey.
Sefton's condition deteriorated and it was agreed he should be put down.
It's been devastating for those who've cared for Sefton.
Female speaker
He was a great personality.
He liked love and attention.
He was a strong character.
He'll be much missed.
Voice over
Sefton won't be forgotten.
The IRA had plotted a miserable and evil death for him.
Instead he became a national hero who enjoyed a long life…and who died with dignity.
A man's been charged with drugs offences after police raids on two caravans.
WHEATLEY/Oxfordshire
Three men and one woman were arrested at a travellers' site at Windmill Lane near Wheatley in Oxfordshire.
Thirty police officers took part in the operation.
Undercover surveillance began last month.
Two rifles were also seized in the raid.
SPRINGBANK/Cheltenham
Night-time bus services are to resume on a council estate where they'd been withdrawn because of gang attacks.
Evening services to the Springbank Estate in Cheltenham stopped last week, after twenty buses were damaged and drivers attacked and robbed.
But new safety measures have now been introduced for drivers and passengers.
SILVERSTONE/Northamptonshire
Roads around Silverstone have been heavily congested in the run up to this weekend's British Grand Prix.
The race is the biggest single spectator event in the country and attracts more than two hundred thousand fans.
Many came for today's first practice session, and major congestion is expected tomorrow and Sunday.
New research could make coal the cheapest means of generating electricity — but the Government's being accused of wasting the work.
The Coal Research Establishment says coal will soon be a cheaper option for power stations than gas.
An MP says that by the time the technology's developed, Britain won't have a coal industry.
KEN GOODWIN/Stoke Orchard
DENNIS SKINNER MP/Lab
STEVE DAWES/Coal Research Establishment
WALT PATTERSON/Energy Analyst
GEOFFREY CLIFTON-BROWN MP/Cirencester
He says that it's sad that the coal industry is being ruined in this country.
The new system pioneered by the Coal Research Establishment would, it's claimed, provide a cheap, clean source of energy.
In a power station it would work like this.
Air is blown through hot ash creating a bubbling liquid effect — called fluidisation.
When finely ground coal dust is injected into the mixture it burns more quickly and with less pollution.
Water can be heated for steam turbines, and, for increased efficiency, the waste gasses can also be used in the same way.
He says that in a few years gas will become expensive, and coal will be waiting in the wings as a cheap form of energy.
The Government wants to privatise British Coal.
Energy analyst Walt Patterson believes this would sound the death knell for research.
He says that it will almost certainly be left to fend for itself, seeking business abroad.
He says that it won't be the end of the coal industry, it'll just become more concentrated.
Those who want to preserve the British coal industry point to the irony of the situation: just as technology is finding ways to make coal a cheaper, cleaner source of energy, British pits are closing down.
Well, while two hundred thousand people are heading for Silverstone, another forty thousand are expected at RAF Brize Norton.
They'll be there to see airc raft from around the world at one of the summer's biggest airshows.
Gareth Furby reports.
RAF BRIZE NORTON Oxfordshire
Wing Cmdr PAUL SHEPHERD Airshow Director
Group Cpt KEITH FILBEY RAF Brize Norton
Wing Cmdr MIKE WILSON Tactical Communications Wing
Voice over
This will be the first airshow at Brize Norton for four years.
The Gulf War and work on a new runway had kept the planes away.
But now they're back.
From the latest fighter bomber, to something a little older.
He says the highlight of the show will be the Red Arrows.
He says the men at the base enjoy it and they're expecting forty to fifty thousand visitors.
The airdisplay will start at noon tommorow, and contine for six hours.
This afternoon there was a preview from from a few old favorites.
There's also a exhibition by the tactical communications wing which has sent three men to yugoslavia to help with the United Nations airlift of emergency aid.
Others are now on standby, ready to leave at thirty six hours notice.
He says nine men are ready to go if required.
The gates will open at eight o clock tomorrow morning and tickets cost six pounds or three pounds for children and old age pensioners.
British frigate joins Euro naval task force
The British frigate, HMS Avenger, is to join a European naval force to enforce sanctions against Serbia.
Major announces possible air role for Britain
The Prime Minister has announced that Britain could provide air cover for the proposed land corridor for relief supplies, but has ruled out deploying any land troops.
Children will die without prompt evacuation
Doctors in Bosnia have said that many of the children injured during the violence in Sarajevo will die unless they are evacuated and treated quickly.
Inflation falls to 3
Inflation has fallen to three point nine per cent.
Lack of confidence in teaching reading
A report claims that two out of three teachers undertaking their first primary school job are not confident in their ability to teach reading.
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven point one at twenty-four, ninety point eight.
The pound is up more than two cents at one dollar, ninety-two but down at two marks, eighty-seven.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Police are warning motorists not to travel on roads around Silverstone this evening where there are already eight mile tail backs as spectators arrive for the British Grand Prix.
More than two hundred thousand people are expected at the track this weekend as Nigel Mansell attempts to become Britain's most successful Formula One driver of all time.
Liz Hannam reports.
SILVERSTONE/Northamptonshire
SALLY CANN/Shop Manager
SUSIE TUSTAIN/Caravan Park Owner
1991
Act Chief Supt TREVOR FINCH/Northamptonshire Police
Voice over
It's the biggest single spectator event in Britain and the build up has already started.
By the time the British Grand Prix begins on Sunday, motor-racing enthusiasts will outnumber villagers by almost 70 to one.
For the enterprising, there are large profits to be made.
It's expected 30,000 people will use this pub over the weekend.
It usually sells 10 barrels of beer a weekend.
This time it's 300.
Those wanting a place to stay for the night will have to pay around £85 a room.
And this shop has ordered over 4,000 motoring magazines.
But they say it's not just about profit.
The logistics are a nightmare.
On Sunday the helicopter strip at the track will be the busiest in Britain.
On the ground things are no easier.
Almost 50 officers are policing the event.
They take their motor-racing seriously here.
When it's finished, this estate will be called Mansell Road.
For those who live at the home of British Motor-racing, it may sometimes be noisy and congested and it may take time to be served in the local shop.
But for one weekend at least, the streets of Silverstone are paved with gold.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
Voice over
It was the second court appearance for 19 year old Stephen Reynolds.
Last week he was charged with aggravated vehicle taking and dangerous driving.
Today he became the first person to be charged under a new law introduced this month of causing death by dangerous driving.
It's the toughest charge under the new law and carrys a maximum penalty of 5 years in jail.
The charges follow an accident in St Mary's Road in Oxford 8 days ago.
82 year old Ivor James was knocked down a few yards from his home.
He later died in hospital.
It's alleged the car was stolen; a 16 year old youth alledged to have been in the car at the time, is on police bail.
Reynolds gave his address in court as St Mary's Road in Oxford.
He faces 3 further charges of driving ehilst disqualified, driving without insurance and an unrelated charge that he robbed a man of £7 in cash in St Mary's Road on June 30th.
He sat quietly during the 20 minute hearing, whilst his solicitor made an application for bail.
That application was refused and Reynolds was remanded in custody for 4 weeks.
He's expected to be committed for trial in 6 weeks time.
A Government plan to turn a disused juvenile prison into a detention centre for immigrants has been strongly criticised.
Asylum Aid, which represents immigrants who're seeking refuge in Britain, says the last thing they need is to spend more time behind bars.
Gareth Furby reports.
KIDLINGTON/Oxfordshire
ALISDAIR MACKENZIE/Asylum Aid
Voice over
Residents are demanding motorway style barriers on a housing estate after a car ploughed into a house, the third such accident at the same spot.
Two women in the car escaped unhurt, but the home owner says he's lucky to be alive.
Tim Hurst reports.
GLOUCESTER
TIM POOLE/Home Owner
Voice over
The car left the road, smashed through an 8ft garden wall and then buried itself in the house, on a busy corner of a housing estate at Matson in Gloucester.
Before the car could be moved, rescue workers had to shore up the building, which was in danger of collapse.
It's the third such accident at the same spot and the owner says he's lucky to be alive.
2 women in the car, believed to be on their way to a wedding, escaped with minor cuts and bruises.
American warplanes have begun leaving their base at RAF Upper Heyford in Oxfordshire.
RAF UPPER HEYFORD/Oxfordshire
EF-One-Eleven radar jamming aircraft took off in formation for a flypast, to mark the start of a deactivation ceremony for the 42nd Squadron.
The planes are returning to the United States, although F-One-Eleven fighter bombers are staying on.
Upper Heyford is expected to close completely late next year.
A takeover bid for an Oxfordshire brewery has failed again.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
BURY ST EDMUNDS/Suffolk
Up to a hundred jobs are to go at the Nationwide Building Society.
NORTHAMPTON
The cuts will be at the society's administrative headquarters in Northampton.
They're part of a re-organisation which has been going on since the Nationwide merged with the Anglia Building Society five years ago.
TIM RUSSON
NIGEL MANSELL
Voice over
Hello there…this weekend the world of motor racing…the richest…the fastest sport on the globe comes here to Silverstone for the British Grand Prix…
Millions of people from Brazil to Barcelona from Sweden to Sydney will be watching…following the drama in one way or another…
Taking centre stage is Nigel Mansell and the Williams team from Oxfordshire…
The world crown could…should be their's this season…so tonight we meet the main man…
Mansell…the driving force…
Nigel says its just the complete thrill of trying to be the best in the world…
Nigel says he's got a reputation of being an outright racer…
Nigel says he's had the world championship snatched away from him and even Nigel Mansell believes he deserves one world championship…
The world of motor racing loves to surround itself in secrecy…what goes in to the automatic gearboxes…suspensions and highly tuned engines is more to do with science than sport…
Its taken the Williams team from Didcot in Oxfordshire three years and goodness knows how many millions to find the right formula…
The only factor they still can't fathom out is the man who drives…who pilots their flying machine…
Nigel Mansell…
As the man from the midlands is just one win away from becoming Britain's most successful racer of all time its worth re-running his racing time…
He sold his home to get on the grid…when no-one it seems except Nigel thought he had any talent…he roared into formula one with the old Lotus team…
He won his first race at Brands Hatch in 85…
The next year he missed…lost the world crown after a spectacular blow out in the Australian grand prix…
Next pit stop was Italy…and the fiery Ferrari…but two years riding with the prancing horse finished in frustation and retirement…
It was only the dream of winning the world championship which brought him back to Williams…
Nigel said it was a genuine chance to win…that's all he was there for
His finest hour last season was Silverstone…winning the British Grand Prix meant everything to mansell…
And this season…
Nigel said the world championship is wide open and he's determined to get his hands on it…
That was the Mansell prediction and this time his crystal ball seems to be tuned in…with six grand prix wins…the world crown should be his…
Nigel says he's trying not think about it and taking every race as it comes…what happened in Monte Carlo and Montreal was a wake up call and now they've got to make sure they just keep going and getting points on the board
So what's this man…this racing machine really about…
He's just become the president of the Dartmouth Golf and Country club in Devon…
He's invested heavily in this new venture…the only time…the only place where Nigel Mansell seems to change gear and slow down is on the golf course…
It's on the fairways you see a different formula…no frowns…just fun
Nigel says the golf course is the only place he can relax and switch off…
He also says that the pressure the expectation on him is greater this year but he's learning to live with it…
Mansell has often courted controversy and complaints but to the fans…to the people he's a folk hero…a friend…the cheers of the crowd are his turbo charge…
Nigel says the support of the fans is worth half a second a lap and he believes that people power helps him to win
The golf course is where Nigel Mansell cools down for the next race…and that next race is Silverstone and the British Grand Prix…forget Monaco and Monza…for our Nigel British is still the best…
Nigel says that if he could only win one more race then it would be the British Grand Prix at Silverstone
So on Sunday at Silverstone…
Britain expects…
Nigel Mansell hopes for the world crown…that's his driving force…
Nigel says that's all he still in the sport for so he's going to push harder than ever
Nigel is favourite with the bookies and the people to win…but here's the latest news from today's practice…
There's no doubting who's the king of Silverstone tonight…
Nigel Mansell put in a scorching lap in the opening qualifying session…the fastest ever at the Northamptonshire track…he was almost two seconds quicker than his team mate Riccardo Patrese…recording an average speed of more than one hundred and forty-eight miles an hour.
In this sort of form, no one can compete with Mansell…not even three times world champion Ayrton Senna…he was the best part of three seconds slower than the Englishman.
The driver everyone is tipping to be a future world champion…
Michael Schumacher…roared in fourth fastest today…confirming that the Witney-based Benetton team is in with a shout for Sunday's race.
Senna's team mate Gerhard Berger brought his McLaren in fifth
And Martin Brundle added to British celebrations coming in sixth to complete a good day for Benetton.
So this is how the starting grid looks this evening for Silverstone 92:
Mansell is in provisional pole position in the Didcot Williams.
Team mate Patrese is alongside him.
Then comes Senna.
And German Wonderkid Schumacher, who's just 23.
On the third row is Berger…
and Martin Brundle, completing the top six.
Of course, there's the final qualifying session tomorrow which will give the other Central South teams of Jordan…
March…
Footwork…and Brabham the chance to get closer to the big guns.
But come Sunday, who'd bet against Nigel Mansell still being King of Formula One with another British Grand Prix victory…that would take him past Jackie Stewart's 27 Grand Prix wins and even closer to that World Championship title he cherishes so much.
Thousands of picnickers have been dining out in style at a giant fireworks concert.
It's part of the tenth anniversary celebrations of one of the country's leading music promoters.
GARETH FURBY Radley
THOMAS SMITH Fireworks Expert
KAREN GADD Music at Oxford
Nowadays it seems there's much more than just food to a perfect picnic.
When space is limited they key thing is to arrive early and stake you claim.
Some people don't want much.
But others are positively extravagant.
He says he's glad theirs is the biggest.
They'll be able to hide under it when it rains.
And when you've claimed that much land, why not go the whole hog and put a roof over it as well.
He says its just what they need.
And those that can afford it have an even bigger tent.
She says its an English summer thing.
The other important ingredient is a huge fireworks display.
And the man behind the scenes says its not always alright on the night.
He says they have to guess the timings to fit with the orchestra.
Sometimes it goes wrong.
But on this evening — to celebrate the tenth anniversay of the organisation Music at Oxford — the rain stayed away.
She says its a perfect evening.
There's a feeling of being English and enjoying yourself.
And the fireworks were spectacular.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Cyclists’ safe and well’
FTSE down 12
The hundred shares index closed down twelve point three at two eight three zero point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty seven and up at two marks, fifty five.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, can England's cricketers win the world cup?
This team might just succeed where the men failed.
And brimming with history…
Mrs Maxwell sells off her hats.
Welcome back.
In a few minutes, Robert Maxwell's widow puts her collection of hats up for auction.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BBC SPORT
The Oxfordshire Williams team were always going to win but with which driver…
Damon Hill the home favourite took the lead from second place on the grid and roared into a commanding lead…
Behind him Senna and Prost were playing a daredevil driving game…the Frenchmen kept trying to get past and the Brazilian kept stopping him…
Prost won out in the end and then went off in persuit of Hill…
It was all over after 41 laps when Hill's engine blew…his hopes and those of all the home fans were up in the smoke…
Prost went on to win…and there were four Central South cars in the top six…the benettons were second and third…and derek warwick was sixth in the footwork…
Down in Cardiff…it was the british powerboat grand prix…formula one on water…the home favourite here was number five Steve Kerton from Gloucestershire…lying second in the world championship he pushed his craft to second in the race and was chasing a victory…when a valve blew…and that was that…there were only fifteen laps to go…
Kerton is now third in the world championship…
Winning on water was Oxford's Alan Webb…
His boat which he calls Flippin Shy Talk won the Hull Gold Cup race on the River Humber…
Alan beat 35 other boats to win in an average speed of 55 miles an hour…
The speeds were a touch slower at Eastnor Park near ledbury where the country's top mountain bikers were riding for the Malvern Classic…winner of the big race was the former cyclo cross champion Steve Douce…
They were racing for records at the Iffley Road track in Oxford…the British Milers Club celebrated their thirtieth birthday by smashing three mile records…the first ever record breaker Sir Roger Bannister was there to watch and what did he see…the men's four by one mile relay squad breaking the UK record…the women's relay team creating a new world record and the junior relay team taking the gold medal by knocking a minute…off the world record…
there's been no records or even wins for the England cricket team this summer…but all that could change over the next few weeks as the Womens Cricket World Cup gets underway…its being played in this country…the official opening is in London tomorrow…and England have a chance of winning…in the team are two Oxfordshire girls 
DEBBIE STOCK/Letcombe Regis
JANET GODMAN/Abingdon
RUTH PRIDEUX/Coach
KAREN SMITHIES/Captain
From tomorrow the women cricketers of the world will be pitched into battle against each other…competing are Australia…
Denmark…
Ireland…
India…and New Zealand…
And hoping to be amongst the runs and wickets are two Central South girls…there's Janet Godman from Abingdon one of the best bats in the country and Debbie Stock from Letcombe Regis an all rounder…
A selection of hats worn by the widow of the disgraced tycoon Robert Maxwell, are to go on sale tomorrow.
Hand-made by top milliners, they represent a colourful souvenir of the sixties.
Betty Maxwell says she's sad to see them go, but, quite simply, she needs the money.
KIM BARNES/London
PAT FROST/Costume Expert
KATHERINE HIGGINS/Christie's
This one was worn to open a playgroup in Bletchley.
They tell the story of a life lived in the public eye, but now 45 are up for sale.
Who's likely to buy them…
She says collectors or for a memento.
They're good hats, they're hand made.
She collaborated with the designers.
Hats like this one were Betty Maxwell's own favourites…she says the Jackie Kennedy style was easiest to keep on.
From white leather to white mink…she wore this to switchBletchley's Christmas lights on.
This was created for the premiere of the film Dr Zhivago…hand-made by the top milliners of the day, many will go for less in the sale than they cost new but Mrs Maxwell says she needs the money…
She says she's been open with us, she is selling them to raise funds.
She's had a lovely fun time wearing them.
Now she would like them to go to costumiers for inspiration.
Betty Maxwell looked after her hats, hand-writing labels and storing them carefully in boxes.
They're being sold in lots of four…one includes this mask worn at a ball at the Royal Academy…following the mysterious death of Robert Maxwell and the scandal that followed, his widow says it is an epoch that is past and no longer part of my life.
A group of mobile cafe owners say they'll fight moves to ban their vehicles from the roadside on a busy dual carriageway.
The Department of Transport claims that the cafes are a safety hazard.
The cafe owners say they've never caused an accident.
KEN GOODWIN/Ross on Wye
NIGEL HAMLET/Mobile Cafe Owner
CHRIS HARRIS/Mobile Cafe Owner
TIM HARBAT/Department Of Transport
He says that they've never caused an accident.
Lorries would park in the layby anyway.
He says that they want to take away his living.
And lorry drivers are right behind them, adding their names to a petition.
He says that there's somewhere to park, and the grub is cheap.
He says that they need the cafes because they're cheap, but they're not a safety hazard.
The Department of Transport is unmoved, insisting that the cafe's must shut up shop by july the 22nd.
He says that they've had reports of cars parked on the carriageway.
The ban is because of public safety.
All the cafe owners we spoke to insisted they've never seen cars parked on the carriageway.
They want to take the matter to a public inquirey, in the hope that one way or another, their bacon will be saved.
The headmaster of a private school for boys, who was jailed for twelve years for sex offences against eight of his pupils, has failed in his challenge against the convictions.
Three judges told Ralph Morris his trial was fair and they refused leave to appeal.
LUDLOW/Shropshire
He was headmaster of Castle Hill School in Ludlow when he was found guilty of the sex offences and jailed at Shrewsbury Crown Court.
The Rover car group has announced a big increase in world-wide sales.
COWLEY/Oxford
Just over two hundred thousand vehicles were sold in the first six months of this year, a rise of thirteen per cent on the year before.
The firm puts the success down to new models which are selling well abroad…
Two huntsmen have begun an appeal against convictions for animal cruelty.
Gordon Middleton and Alan Hill are asking a judge to overturn a ruling by magistrates.
It follows an incident in which a horse became trapped on a gate.
GRAEME BOWD/Aylesbury Crown Court
Voice over
Gordon Middleton, on the right, and Alan Hill, were riding with the Vale of Aylesbury Hunt when a horse failed to clear a gate and became trapped across it.
Mr Middleton is said to have whipped the animal several times to encourage it to climb over.
The horse was owned by Mr Hill.
Last March magistrates at Amersham found both men guilty of cruelty.
They were conditionally discharged but each was ordered to pay costs of 750 pounds.
Today at Aylesbury Crown Court they asked a judge to quash those convictions.
Pictures of the gate were shown to the court and several witnesses have been recalled, among them inspectors from the from the RSPCA which brought the charges.
Judge John Slack was told the hunt had been followed by members of the League Against Cruel Sports.
One of them Michael Huskison, who took photographs of the incident, said he saw the horse whipped at least 15 times.
He suggested that the huntsmen should dismantle the gate to release the animal.
They told him they would do it their way.
Mr Hill, who's joint master of the hunt, and Mr Middleton, have not denied that the animal was struck.
But they say their action was necessary to free it.
The hearing is expected to last for three days.
If the men lose their appeal they could face additional costs of several thousand pounds.
A group of families living beside one of the region's busiest commuter routes are facing a five-mile detour to get home, because they've been marooned by roadworks.They say it's making their lives a misery, and want engineers to make them a special short cut to improve things.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
JOHN WHITE/Resident
KEVIN GARDINER/Resident
JOHN DARBY/Chief Bridge Engineer
High over Oxford, the extent of the roadworks at Botley in Oxford becomes clear.
Male speaker
Welcome to manic Monday.
The A34 is absolutely solid between the two roundabouts on both lanes.
Voice over
It's not what neighbours of the A34 want to hear.
The roadworks are making their lives a misery.
It's all because this bridge is being replaced.
Part of the road has been coned off.
And an important slip road has been closed.
So people living on a kind of island along the Southern by pass, have to make a five mile detour by road to get back to their homes from Oxford.
The can't get onto the southbound carriageway…so they have to go north to Peartree before turning round and coming back.
There's no other access.
Male speaker
It's affecting lives tremendously.
People are having to do long journeys.
It's putting a lot of stress on people.
Male speaker
My grandmother is semi disabled.
She has to take a taxi everywhere.
The extra journey will cost her 25-pounds a shot, which a pensioner can't afford.
She's housebound now.
Voice over
The residents want the road engineers to create a special short cut to avoid making the diversion.
It would mean cutting off an exclusive stretch of the A34 which they could use both ways.
But they say it wouldn't be safe.
Male speaker
Every alternative has been considered.
They all increase the safety risk and delays on the road to the thousands of users every day.
Voice over
Whilst it might be plain sailing for motorists, the residents say unless action is taken, there's no end in sight to their misery.
In Central News tonight.
A man is raped.
Victim comes forward after four days.
Death of a badger.
Savage dogs used to kill a protected species for sport.
And, save our sarnies.
The truckers' big breakfast gets the big elbow.
RUNS=0:40 
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Police say the victim has serious injuries.
and they're appealing for information.
A rape counsellor is calling for a change in the law, which doesn't regard such attacks as being as serious as those on women.
KAREN THOMPSON/Northampton
Det Sgt MARK LACEY/Northamptonshire Police
HENRY LEAK/Male Rape Counsellor
A forty six year old man was walking home after visiting friends.
He was suddenly grabbed from behind by two men.
They pulled him into some trees and he was raped by one of them.
The victim was so distressed that Police were only alerted when he was treated in Northampton General hospital four days later for his injuries.
Staff there pursuaded him to report what had happened.
Detectives involved in the inquiry say it was nasty and unprovoked.
But an expert who counsels male rape victims says a change in the law is needed.
Police are urging people playing bowls last tuesday at Kingsthorpe recreation ground to get in touch if they have any information.
The number at Campbell Square Police Station in Northampton is 0604 700 700.
A badger protection group says it fears that savage dogs are being set upon badgers in a remote area.
A dead badger was found at the site over the wekend.
It had died after being badly bitten by at least two dogs.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Calvert
DEE AUSTIN CROWE/Bucks Badger Group
Det Insp JOHN HAYWARD/Thames Valley Police
They believe it was deliberateley set upon by lurcher dogs.
Female speaker
The bite marks are very deep and indicate that a large powqerful dog like a lurcher made them
Voice over
Dee Austin Crowe works with the Bucks Badger Group.
She doesn't want to be pictured because it might interfere with her observation work.
She was called to investigate ater casual strollers found the badger.
Trip wire was found on several of its approaches to its set.
They are used to disturb vegetation and alert badger baiters waiting with their dogs.
Female speaker
There were probably people here with lurchers.
It's very overgrown and the animal probably didn'y have any idea they were here
Voice over
The Bucks Badger Group has kept a regular watch on the site and the sets for six years.
They were originally formed after reports of harrassing by terriers.
It's a remote area not easily patrolled and signs forbidding dogs have been regularly ripped off or defaced.
Thames Valley Police say they're aware of the problem, but solving it isn't easy.
Male speaker
We take these matters seriously.
The badger is a protected species covered by legislation.
We will enforce the law when we hear about it
Voice over
But they admit they need all the help they can get from the public.
And that goes for the Bucks Badger group as well.
A woman whose husband was killed in a motorway pile-up in thick fog is claiming compensation from two other motorists involved.
Graham Branch was one of ten people who died in the crash two years ago.
13 March 1991/ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
BYRON CARRON/Mrs Branch's Solicitor
Voice over
The pile-up on the M4 near Swindon involved more than 50 vehicles.
It left 10 dead and 31 injured.
Two years later Sally Branch, a mother-of-3 whose husband Graham was killed when his van was crushed towards the back of the wreckage, has issued a writ against 2 of the other motorists.
Her solicitor says it's the most appalling accident he's ever had to deal with.
One of the two motorists Mrs Branch is sueing is Justin Biddle, whose van was the first vehicle to crash.
He'd apparently hit the central barrier and lost control, and has already been fined 250 pounds for driving without due care and attention.
The other driver named — Leslie Flowerday — was driving the van which crashed into the back of Graham Branch.
He's never been charged, and in any civil action Mrs Branch's solicitor will have to prove that Mr Flowerday wasn't taking reasonable care.
But he's optimistic about the outcome.
Because of the amount of damages the Branches are hoping for, the case will go to the High Court.
But it's unlikely to be heard until some time next year.
WESLEY SMITH/
Good Evening.
A man has been raped by two other men as he was walking home through a town centre.
The assault only came to light four days later, when he went to hospital for treatment.
KAREN THOMPSON/Northampton
Det Sgt MARK LACEY/Northamptonshire Police
HENRY LEAK/Male Rape Counsellor
A forty six year old man was walking home after visiting friends.
He was suddenly grabbed from behind by two men.
They pulled him into some trees and he was raped by one of them.
The victim was so distressed that Police were only alerted when he was treated in Northampton General hospital four days later for his injuries.
Staff there pursuaded him to report what had happened.
Detectives involved in the inquiry say it was nasty and unprovoked.
He says it was a nasty attack and the attackers were violent.
He was not severely beaten but was terrified.
But an expert who counsels male rape victims says a change in the law is needed.
He says male rape doesn't exist as a legal entity in this country, the law needs changing to alter people's perceptions It's the same as any other serious sexual crime
Police are urging people playing bowls last tuesday at Kingsthorpe recreation ground to get in touch if they have any information.
A badger protection group says it fears that savage dogs are being set upon the animals in a remote area.
Its worst fears were realised when the carcass of a badger was found in a nature reserve south of Buckingham.
It's believed it was deliberately set upon by lurcher dogs.
Trip wire was found on several of the approaches to its set.
It's used to disturb vegetation and alert badger baiters waiting with their dogs.
A woman whose husband was killed in a motorway pile-up in thick fog is taking legal action against two other motorists involved in the crash.
Graham Branch was one of ten people who died.
13 March 1991/ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
BYRON CARRON/Mrs Branch's Solicitor
One of those Mrs Branch is sueing is Justin Biddle, whose van was the first vehicle to crash.
He's already been fined 250 pounds for driving without due care and attention.
The other mototrist named — Leslie Flowerday — was driving a van which crashed into the back of Graham Branch.
He's never been charged.
The case is expected to go the High Court some time next year.
A group of mobile cafe owners say they'll fight moves to ban their vehicles from the roadside on a busy dual carriageway.
It's claimed they're hazardous.
KEN GOODWIN/Ross-on-Wye
NIGEL HAMLET/Mobile Cafe Owner
TIM HARBAT/Department Of Transport
He says that they want to take away his living.
And lorry drivers are right behind them, adding their names to a petition.
The Department of Transport is unmoved, insisting that the cafe's must shut up shop by July the 22nd.
He says that they've had reports of cars parked on the carriageway.
The ban is in the interests of public safety.
All the cafe owners we spoke to insisted they've never seen cars parked on the carriageway.
They want to take the matter to a public inquiry, in the hope that one way or another, their bacon will be saved.
A selection of hats worn by the widow of the disgraced tycoon Robert Maxwell, are to go on sale tomorrow.
Betty Maxwell says she needs the money.
KIM BARNES/London
KATHERINE HIGGINS/Christie's
This one was worn to open a playgroup in Bletchley.
They tell the story of a life lived in the public eye, but now 45 are up for sale.
This was created for the premiere of the film Dr Zhivago…hand-made by the top milliners of the day, many will go for less in the sale than they cost new but Mrs Maxwell says she needs the money…
She says she's been open with us, she is selling them to raise funds.
They're being sold in lots of four…one includes this mask worn at a ball at the Royal Academy…following the mysterious death of Robert Maxwell and the scandal that followed, his widow says it is an epoch that is past and no longer part of my life.
Five men have gone on trial accused of staging an illegal cock-fight.
The court heard both birds were seriously injured in the fight, which was held in a lay-by.
The men deny the charge.
Gareth Furby reports.
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
April 12/CARTERTON/Oxfordshire
Voice over
Derek Anderson and Frank Loveridge are on trial at Witney magistrates, along with Michael King and Theodore Loveridge.
They all plead not guilty along with a fifth man, Kenneth Osborne.
It's alleged the cockfight took place in April at a lay-by at Carterton.
Vetinary surgeon Michael Dyas told the court the cocks had multiple injuries.
Photgraphs were produced in court and these pictures were also taken soon after the arrests.
RAF Corporal John Williams and his wife Selina told the court they were driving past the layby and saw men were crouching behind two wooden boards, which made a v-shape on the ground.
They also saw one man throw a cock into the air.
But in an interview with police one of the defendants claimed the men were just crouching down by the boards because they were trying to shelter from a strong wind.
Another said they were building a pen for their chickens.
Defendant Derek Anderson told police the cocks were just fighting amongst themselves, the men were only trying to stop them.
But PC Stephen Butts told the court when he arrived the men ran off, and he later found one injured cock in a caravan and another in a landrover.
The case will continue tomorrow.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
The whole of Britain…seems to have caught it…the symptoms…you hear a racing car at full throttle in the ears…you go misty eyed at the sight of union jacks waving in the wind and then you start talking…rambling about red five…its a new disease…they're calling it Mansell Mania…
Two hundred thousand folk caught it at Silverstone yesterday…it's being spread on radio and television even comes through the letterbox with the morning papers…
Mansell Mania…won't harm you in fact in these days of depression and recession…a record breaking world champion is a bit of a tonic…its good to have a Brit on top…
We all know the facts and figures by now…if you don't then you must have been on a different planet this weekend…
Even then you should have caught a glimpse of Nigel in orbit as he roared to victory in the British Grand Prix…
Seven wins this season…a record breaking twenty eight grand prix victories…the world crown has to be his…
A sporting fairy tale…but hold on…will Nigel and the Williams team from Oxfordshire live happily ever after…believe it or not before the bubbly has gone flat the sporting world is alive with speculation about the future of Mansell…
Why…well pit talk has it that the reigning world champion Ayrton Senna might just be signing for the team next season…if he comes will Nigel go…what's his future…this is what he told Central South…
Nigel says if he can get the right package and continue to develop the team then he's happy to sign for another two or three years…if he doesn't get the deal he wants then he's got no reason to carry on…
So that's the deal…and as the newly crowned king of formula one Nigel Mansell rules…
OK
we're going to keep the action at full throttle and go powerboating to Fairford in Gloucestershire…for the biggest watersport weekend of the year 
TREVOR HAMILTON-GIBBS
EMMA HARRIS
Voice over
well not everyone was racing around at the weekend…thousands were sitting out in the sun yesterday at Moreton in Marsh to enjoy a game of sunday cricket…it was Gloucestershire against Northamptonshire 
Voice over
A new world record has been set in the Central South region.
It took more than a thousand participants to make it happen, beating the previous record by thirty-five.
But so far those involved are saying nothing.
Mike Rowbottom was there.
DIDCOT Oxfordshire
Voice over
A teddy bear isn't just a childhood plaything, it's a lifetime committment.
Even big tough men have teddies hidden away somewhere, and some were brought into the open at the Didcot Railway Centre Teddy Bears Picnic.
They were going for a world record…and they got it.
Big ones, small ones, old and new.
One thousand one hundred and ten teddies crammed into the old railyard, beating the previous record by thirty five.
They came from everywhere and anywhere.
The teddy bear knows no class system…and acknowledges no international borders.
Male speaker
There are many teddy bears in Japan, they are an international toy
Male speaker
This teddy is as old as I am
Voice over
Some spoilsports didn't turn up with a teddy, but others more than made up for them.
Female speaker
I've got eleven here and some more at home
Voice over
The great thing about teddies is that you can love them…or leave them but you can never ignore them forever
John Paul II undergoes tests in Rome
FTSE down 12
The hundred shares index closed down twelve point five at two four seven eight point three 
The pound is up at one dollar ninety two, and down at two marks, eighty five.
(ad lib)
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Pictures BBC SPORT
CORINNA PHILLIPS/Silverstone Race Circuit
JACKIE STEWART/Former World Champion
Ch Supt TREVOR FINCH/Northamptonshire Police
She says it could have been tragic.
Northamptonshire Police, who had more than 250 officers on duty admitted they were caught out.
He says we hadn't anticipated the problem.
The invasion has renewed calls for fencing to be installed but Jackie Stewart, who saw his own name earsed from the record books by Mansell's win, said it it isn't practical.
An RAF base and a military hospital are preparing for the possible arrival of a flight carrying children wounded in the fighting in Sarajevo.
The Government has offered to provide transport and care for sixty children in need of treatment.
If the flights can be arranged, they will almost certainly come to the region.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
Flt Lt TED QUERZANI/RAF Lyneham
Voice over
Few people have not been moved afterseeing pictures of injured and sick children from Sarajevo.
Their plight is desperate, But now Britain has stated it will take sixty of them if they can be brought out.
If it can be managed they'll almost certainly wind up at RAF Lyneham, and then taken to RAF Wroughton.
Earlier today Prime Minister John Major announced his willingness to help.
RAF Lyneham is geared for action and has had machinery in place since dealing with the return of the hostages last year…particularly Terry Waite.
They already have a Hercules plane running mercy missions to Sarajevo.
The hospital was the first stop for wounded from the Gulf and they are well equipped to deal with the influx if it comes.
But nothing has been decided and there will have to be a successful ceasefire before anything positive can be done…although there are hopes to bring out to hundred children in the next two weeks.
A man has gone on trial accused of murdering a father of four inside a crown court building.
He's alleged to have stabbed him to death following a lengthy legal dispute over access to children.
Erika Barnes reports.
BRISTOL
3 DECEMBER 1991
Voice over
One of the country's top police officers has condemned the British legal system as a game, which fails in its duty to victims and society.
He says it leaves prosecutors no alternative but to resort to methods such as plea bargaining, where defendents plead guilty in exchange for shorter sentences.
Gargy Patel reports.
15 JUNE 1989/TURWESTON/Buckinghamshire
CHARLES POLLARD/Chief Constable/Thames Valley
STEPHEN SHUTE/Tutor in Law/Oxford University
Voice over
Three years ago, the Ward family were held at gunpoint and threatened by a gang of raiders at their home in Turweston.
The gang abducted the eighteen year old daughter, and forced her at gunpoint to open up the bank in Bloxham where she worked.
Matthew Chieke was one of those charged with the bank raid, but that case never came to court.
Prosecutors agreed not to go ahead with the case, in return for Chieke pleading guilty to separate, less serious matters, for which he is now serving 12 years in prison.
A classic case of plea bargaining.
But for one of Britain's top policemen, it's a graphic example of how the whole legal system is failing to do it's job.
Mr. Pollard says a complete overhaul of the system is needed, to establish guilt and innocence and find the truth.
Legal experts agree.
But they say methods such as plea bargaining help to stop the courts becoming congested.
They're a necessary evil.
The practice of plea bargaining is common in America.
But critics here want more safeguards built in to British courts, so that justice is done.
A Royal Commission on Criminal Justice is due to recommend changes next year.
Critics like Charles Pollard want long term, lasting solutions.
Workmen renovating a pub have made a gruesome discovery…a grave containing a horse's head.
Nearby was an oldmanuscript describing how forty horses heads were once buried under the bar.
It's thought the ritual burial was to ward off evil spirits.
RICHARD BARNETT Staunton-on-Wye
BRIAN ROOKE Landlord's Brother
ROY PALMER Folklore Expert
JAMES ROOKE Landlord
Inside a purpose built coffin Brian found the ancient skull of a horse.
But why was it placed there, and how old was it.
Lying alongside it was an old bottle containing a faded manuscript.
It read: When this House was rebuilt in 1879 from underneath this floor was taken 40 horses heads placed there about the year 1800.
Male speaker
He expected to find a drain.
It was quite a shock to find a skull.
Voice over
Roy Palmer is an expert on the folklore of Herefordshire…he's written a book on the subject.
He says horses were once very potent symbols:
Male speaker
The horse was a symbol of good magic and fertility.
He once found three horses heads in a coffin in the roof of a church.
Voice over
The landlord of the Portway Hotel is still mulling over the meaning of the find:
Male speaker
Once he knew there were good reasons for the ritual, he was happy.
He'll probably put the skull on show.
Voice over
Although the supposed bringer of good luck is likely to be put on display, there are no plans to rename the pub The Old Nag's Head.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
60 dead in Japanese earthquake
FTSE up 6
The hundred shares index closed up six point two at two eight three seven point one 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty nine and up at two marks, fifty six.
Archaeologists have been recreating the bronze age cremation of a women and child — by burning a dead sheep.
They hope the experiment will help them find out why a mother and baby were cremated and then buried in the centre of a large earth mound 
SIMON GARRETT/Guiting Power
Dr ALISTAIR MARSHALL/Archeologist
SIMON MEDHURST/Coal Research Establishment
JACQUELINE McKINLEY/Osteoarcheologist
Four thousand years ago a funeral pyre like this one was built for a woman who was either heavily pregnant or who who had recently had of a child.
Whether they died naturally or were ritually murdered they were cremated, and then buried at the centre of a great mound.
Archeologists have excavated and recreated the mound.
Now, with a dead sheep in place of a human body, they're trying to discover what happens within the flames
Male speaker
We've mounted a whole series of experiments related to finding out what happens to pyre goods in the fire when they're placed with the body.
I hope we can do this again.
This is rather unexpected.
The sheer ferocity of the fire is really quite amazing
Voice over
The release of gases, the temperature within the pyre and the changes seen in the soil beneath the fire will all be carefully analysed.
Experts in associated fields have submitted experiments.
Pinpoint monitoring has been provided by British Coal's Coal Research Establishment at Stoke Orchard in Gloucestershire
Male speaker
At the core we've measured temperatures around 960 degrees and it might well go higher.
It burnt much faster than expected.
I thought we might have trouble lighting it, but within ten minutes it's reaching temperatures of six or seven hundred degrees around the periphery
Voice over
The experiment's attracted the country's leading authority on ancient cremation.
Her main task is going to be working out how early bronze age farmers collected together enough of the burnt bone fragments to bury them
Female speaker
It's really quite fascinating seeing how it's all burnt.
The wind took ther flames all down one side which could lead to a collapse.
I wish archeologists would do more of this kind of thing
Voice over
It's the first time archeologists have tried to restage a bronze age cremation.
Dr Marshall says it's been such a success he'd like to see his research go up in flames again
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, a desert island disaster.
Voice over
Welcome back.
A woman who replied to an advertisment offering life on a desert island has returned home after just three months.
(WES NEXT)
She says the trip was badly organised, and that her companion wanted their friendship to be more than platonic.
KEN GOODWIN/Newport
CASTAWAY/United British Artists Cannon
BELINDA VAUGHAN/Former Castaway
GERALD KINGSLAND/Adventurer
His latest expedition started in the now familiar way: an advertisment in an newspaper.
Belinda Vaughan volunteered after her mother, who was to go, dropped out.
The twenty one year old lighting engineer thought it would be the chance of a lifetime, but says her friends were wary.
She says they told her to watch out.
But she made it clear their relationship was to be platonic.
The plan was to fly to the Cook islands, and spend at least three months alone on a desert island.
But Belinda says they ended up in the far from deserted capital of Rarotonga.
And her diary reveals claims that her request for a purely platonic friendship had been loosely interpreted by Gerald.
She says that he got drunk, called her names and moaned because she wouldn't share a double bed.
Gerald Kingsland, now in New Zealand, denies the claims.
He says no, he's not a dirty old man.
He likes female company.
Mr Kingsland is now looking for another companion.
He says that he wants a woman who won't mind a romantic involvement.
He says he would like to marry.
He wants a mature partner.
His idea is to build a catamaran and sail with his new companion back to Britain.
But the omens are not good.
When he demonstrated the type of wood he will use to build the vessel…it sank.
Back in Britain, Belinda says she wants to travel again, but will be steering well clear of desert islands…
A yacht that won the world's toughest race will defend its title when the competition is held again in three years time.
It was crewed by amateur sailors and one of them says adjusting to ordinary life has been difficult.
TIM HURST/Reporting
CHAY BLYTH/Ocean Challenge
LIZ MACDONALD/Gloucester
Six weeks Nuclear Electric, with its amateur crew, won the race by just one hour and ten minutes after racing 28,000 miles around the world, against nine other yachts.
At a ceremony in London, organiser Chay Blyth has announced Ocean Challenger 1996.
Those who took part in the last Challenge are now trying to adjust to life, and jobs, back on dry land.
The 1996 Challenge is again open to amateurs, with or without sailing experience — but at a cost of almost £19,000 apiece.
Villagers living near a gun school say their lives are being destroyed by the noise of thousands of shots at the biggest clay pigeon contest in England.
Protesters claim stray shot from the school has even showered walkers on an adjoining footpath 
SIMON GARRETT/Hope-Under-Dinmore
ALAN FOULDS/Neighbour
GILL FOULDS/Neighbour
NEVILLE SYMONDS/Managing Director
TONY GERAGHTY/Action Group
Some of the country's best shots are in Herefordshire for the British Open Sporting Championship.
Over six days there'll be up to 150,000 shots…scattering more than four tons of lead pellets.
Some of the shoot's nearest neighbours say their lives are being ruined
Male speaker
It completely disrupts any attempt at normal life.
You can't have normal family relationships with this going on.
Any work in the house or garden is completely spoilt when the shooting is on
Female speaker
The worst day we were out here working on the garden and it made me think this must be what it was like in the trenches
Voice over
Managers say they've spent a fortune on sound proofing
Male speaker
There are several stand soundproofed and one dug into the ground we've done everything in our power
Voice over
There are local people who support the school…many of whom shoot on the site.
But there is an action group of people opposed to it who say it should never have been given planning permission.
They also say walkers on an adjoining footpath have been showered with stray pellets
Male speaker
It's happened to me as recently as May 3rd.
The dangers are self-evident I think
Male speaker
It would take an incredible wind to do that, we do our best to keep it right and if anyone tells us immediately when such a thing happens we will try to put it right
Voice over
The school provides work for 25 people in a country area short of jobs.
Despite that the action group says they're determined to silence the guns
Swindon Town say they're disappointed after a Football League Tribunal valued their former player manager Glen Hoddle at only seventy five thousand pounds, when they'd hoped for a million.
Hoddle, who's now at Chelsea, says there are no hard feelings between him and Swindon and he looks forward to playing against them next season.
ROBIN POWELL/London
31 May 1993
RAY HARDMAN/Swindon Town Chairman
GLENN HODDLE/Chelsea Manager
Voice over
Glen Hoddle, the man who walked out on Swindon Town, walked into this afternoon's transfer tribunal fearing his playing career was over.
Swindon wanted a seven figure sum for the man who steered them to promotion at the end of last season…the highlight being his opening goal in the play off final at Wembley.
Chelsea, the club he joined four days later, are already paying Swindon 120,000 pounds in compensation for Hoddle the manager, but they'd offered nothing for Hoddle the player, threatening to withdraw his playing contract rather than part with any more money.
After more than an hour of deliberation at a North London hotel the tribunal ruled that Chelsea would have to pay Swindon 75,000 pounds and an extra 2,000 for every appearance Hoddle makes up to a maximum of fifty.
Swindon's Chairman Ray Hardman says they're very disappointed.
Afterwards, Hoddle was relieved at not having to hang his boots up.
He says you have to be realistic and who's going to pay a million pounds for a player who's thirty in october.
How were relations now betwen Hoddle and Swindon?
Hoddle says I shook hands at the end and I'll see you on New Year's Day.
Swindon's first match in the new F-A Carling Premiership is just one month away.
Already forced to find a replacement for Hoddle at sweeper they're now anxiously negotiating new contracts with star players Martin Ling and Colin Calderwood.
Both have attracted interest from bigger clubs and both are expected to announce their intention by the end of the week.
One other football story…the Oxford United striker, John Durnin, is leaving the club.
He's scored forty seven goals for Oxford, but has now joined first division rivals Portsmouth.
A fee of two hundred thousand pounds has been agreed by the clubs for the Liverpool born player.
Durnin, who's twenty seven, has had a chequered career at the Manor and was sent off twice last season.
Pirate video copies of this year's most talked about movie are set to flood the region.
The film’ Jurassic Park’premieres this week, and trading standards officers say they're already on the look-out for counterfeit copies.
JURASSIC PARK/Courtesy of UIP Universal
MARIA COYLE/Reporting
ANTHEA DAVIES/Oxfordshire Trading Standards
ASHLEY KENT/Video Store Manager
Voice over
Steven Spielberg's much hyped dinosaur movie dubbed’ Jaws with Claws’is expected to be a huge box office hit when it goes on general release this week.
But dinosaur mania currently sweeping Britain is viewed by some as a an opportunity to cash in on illicitly produced video recordings of the film.
They could be either recorded from the big screen by a cinema goer or illegally reproduced by someone with access to the film.Intv.
These are seized counterfeit copies of current popular films.
Apart from the inferior quality of the recording, other tell tale signs include the lack of an age classification label and no hologram on the back cover.
Intv.
Video hire stores say if the movie is a money spinner in the cinema the general video release could well be delayed making the sale of pirate tapes particularly lucrative.
Intv.
Despite the penalties the recession and the increasingly sophisticated technology used by counterfeiters mean unlike the dinosaur this is a problem which won't go away but threatens to grow over the coming months.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Castle Eaton
ELIZABETH LYDAN/Burglary Victim
Det Con NICK FLOWERS/Wiltshire Police
Female speaker
I literally don't have any jewellery left.
Those Bloody idiots
Voice over
Mrs Lydan's husband Bill died last year but she'd kept dozens of stones, and pieces of jewellery which he's given her over the years.
Each one had been accompanied by a love letter and she'd kept them all.
But burglars forced a kitchen window while she was out and stripped the house of everything valuable.
They did no damage but only left unmatched earrings in her bedroom.
One pair of Ruby earrings are especially important.
Female speaker
I had a pair of ruby earrings which I was wearing when Bill died.
I wear them every Sunday because they bring him back to me.
They are special and I want them back
Voice over
Seventy-two-year old Mrs Lydan met her group captain husband when they were in the RAF.
They travelled the world together.
They retired to Castle Eaton Near Swindon.
She has every card and note he ever wrote.
The haul also included some sliver plate candlesticks with one of the tops left behind.
A silver plate terrine was left behind.
The haul is estimated to be worth thirty thousand pounds, but the money means little to her.
Female speaker
It's nbot the money, we come with nothing and we go with nothing.
All we've got is memories and love, and that's all that matters
Voice over
The burglars left no trace.
There are no fingerpints and nothing was disturbed.
Police are convinced professional burglars did it.
Male speaker
We need all the help we can get from the public.
I admit the chances are quite slim of finding the burglars
Voice over
Mrs Lydan has only been left with her memories since her husband died.
Now even they have been stolen.
She's hoping the thieves will show some charity and return them.
A couple who were kidnapped and pushed off a cliff in a burning car have asked a court to give them the pick-up truck in which they were abducted.
They say its legally theirs, but the woman who tried to kill them claims she's the owner.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
IVOR STOKLE/Victim
PAULINE LEYSHON/Victim
It was used in October 1991 to drive them, bound hand and foot, to Barrow Wake near Gloucester where they were pushed off the edge in a burning car.
Since then the pickup has been in a police pound near Cheltenham.
It's worth up to £4,000, but would-be murderer Sheila Stroud was allowed out of Holloway Prison, where she's serving 18 years, and driven to Cheltenham to dispute Mr Stokle's claim.
The couple are still undergoing intensive treatment for injuries caused by the attempt on their lives.
Pauline Leyshon has been told her latest skin graft operation is imminent.
Magistrates at Cheltenham decided that ownership of the pickup was too complex for them to resolve.
Ivor Stokle will now sue for possession in the county court.
071393bulletin
A cricketer who's ninety not out is being urged by team-mates to consider retirement…he's been playing the game since nineteen-ten.
But Cyril Hollinshead, still bowling for his favourite club, says he'll think it over.
Tim Hurst reports.
HUNTLEY/Gloucestershire
CYRIL HOLLINSHEAD/Cricketer
MARTIN BABER/Gipsies Captain
Voice over
Cyril Hollinshead has never been renowned for his batting — but he has taken almost 700 wickets for Gloucestershire Gipsies, the club he's played for since 1938.
That though, is recent history for Britain's oldest active cricketer, he began playing at the age of 8 in 1910.
At 90 not out, he still pads up ready to bat at the end of the order, but in a four hour match seldom gets to the crease.
At Huntley village ground in Gloucestershire, the Gipsies are playing their annual fixture against the county's clergy.
Cyril is still in the pavilion when his captain declares, to be followed by tea, and mixed feelings among Cyril's friends.
Cyril himself, heading for a personal century, is considering a declaration, unsure if 1992 will be his last year.
After tea, with rain threatening, Cyril Hollinshead opens the bowling for the Gipsies,, unlikely though to beat his best ever figures of 10 wickets for 20 runs…that was in 1922.
In fact, his figures today, 16 for 0 before rain, not age, stopped play.
The man who discovered America has been commemorated by a new…and highly unusual rose.
It's five hundred years since Christopher Columbus set sail for the New World, but the new ROSE is another achievement not to be sniffed at…because it has stripes.
Debbie Kelly reports.
NUNEHAM COURTENAY Oxfordshire
MARK MATTOCK Mattock's Roses
Voice over
There may not be a star but there's definately a stripe in the latest addition to the anniversary of Christopher Columbus's voyage to the Anericas…
The flower named after the explorer was unveiled at the British Rose Festival at Hampton Court where the Queen was among the visitors…the striped bloom isn't unique…but it is unusual…but how they get it remains a well kept secret.
He says;
Each year they grow a quarter of a million roses at Nuneham Courtnay…and try out 350 new seedlings…five new varieties were introduced this year.
There's always innovations in the rose world…the latest is putting them in hanging baskets…who knows what Christopher Columbus would have thought of that.
Government to split BR in sell-off
FTSE up 5
The hundred shares index closed up five point seven at twenty-four, eighty-four exactly.
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety-one and up at two marks, eighty-four.
(ad lib)
Five men accused of staging a cock-fight have been cleared of all charges.
The prosecution alleged the cock-fight was held at a roadside lay-by.
But after a two day trial magistrates found all the men not guilty.
Gareth Furby reports.
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
Ch Insp DOUGLAS DAVIDSON/RSPCA
Voice over
The prosecution alleged these two birds were injured in a cockfight held last April at a layby at Carterton in Oxfordshire.
But Derek Anderson, and Frank Loveridge along with Michael King, Theodore Loveridge, and Kenneth Osborne were cleared this afternoon by magistres at Witney.
RAF corporal John Williams and his wife Selina had told the court they'd seen cocks fighting…as they drove past the layby.
A group of men, they said, were crouching down by two wooden boards.
And PC Stephen Butts told the court he thought this was a makeshift compound for a cockfight.
But the defendants claimed they were just using the boards to shelter behind on a windy day, while they had a cup of tea.
The cocks had been fighting, but between themselves.
No one had put them together, and several attempts had been made to seperate them.
He says the RSPCA has been following the case closely but it has to accept the court decision.
But The RSPCA still beleives cockfighting is a problem in the region and its appealing to anyone with any evidence to get in contact.
Scientists from the JET nuclear fusion project have marched to Downing Street to protest about their pay.
They want the Prime Minister to back their claim for equal treatment with their European colleagues.
Chris Moore reports.
11 NOVEMBER 1991/CULHAM/Oxfordshire
12 JUNE 1992
WESTMINSTER
FRED HURD/Delegation Leader
Voice over
The moment last year when the JET scientists made the big breakthrough…producing energy from nuclear fusion…the joining of atomic particles.
The scientists come from all over the E-C, but behind the team spirit, there's always been anger that in many cases the British are paid only half that of their Continental colleagues.
The Europeans are paid by the EC, the British by the Atomic Energy Authority.
They've already staged four one day strikes and this lunchtime they took their campaign to Downing Street.
The Prime Minister seldom responds in person to these petitions.
Instead, this one will go the Department of Trade, for them to respond.
A thirteen year old boy has fallen through the window of his school bus as it went round a corner.
His mother says it's not the first time a window has fallen out of a school coach, and she's calling for action to make the buses safe.
But the coach operator blames unruly behaviour by school children.
Mark Kiff reports.
SUTTON COURTNEY/Oxfordshire
DANIEL METCALFE
KEITH GOSBEE/Cousin
JANE METCALFE/Mother
DAVID WATSON/Bus and Coach Council
CHRIS OWEN/Head Teacher
Voice over
Two Chinese teachers have just graduated from an international centre in Hebrew They say both China and Israel have ancient traditions, and it's about time they got to know more about each other.
Gargy Patel reports.
YARNTON/Oxfordshire
XIANGJU DU/Chinese Student
SONG GONG/Chinese Student
Voice over
A year ago Xianju knew hardly anything about Israel or the Jewish faith.
As a teacher in Beijing, she was being asked questions by her students which she simply couldn't answer.
Now she's a passable scholar of Hebrew, and she hopes to take back her knowledge to China.
For Xianju and her colleague Song Gong, coming to learn at the internationally reknowned Hebrew studies centre in Yarnton, has been invaluable.
Both Song and Xianju decided that to extend their knowledge, they'd have to set foot outside China for the first time.
Their home city of Beijing has more than fifty Universities, and yet they couldn't get the information they wanted.
As a teacher in the Philosophy of Science, Song constantly came across Jewish names like Einstein and Freud.
But he knew little about them.
Next year the course is expanding to take on thirty students, including six from China, one from Kenya and one from Egypt.
There's also been keen interest from Eastern Europe.
For the Hebrew studies centre, this exchange of knowledge is also a pathway to better understanding between nations.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
A nationwide search is under way after a fourteen-year-old who's been arrested thirty-five times ran away afer a court appearance.
He was being taken to a special boarding school when he gave teachers escorting him the slip.
(HARRIET NEXT)
HARRIET RYLEY
POLICE VIDEO
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Det Sgt TONY EVERITT/Thames Valley Police
He's been called the boy they can't lock up.
Despite being arrested thirty-five times — once after allegedly taking part in this high-speed chase across three counties — he's always had to be released from police cells after being granted bail.
Now the police are looking for him again — he's thought to be heading back to Milton Keynes after running away on a visit to court in London.
The boy told his family last week he was unhappy at the special school he's supposed to be studying at and planned to escape.
Now he has done, giving his teachers the slip at Liverpool Street Station.
His father says the school was too good for him…
Milton Keynes Police also want persistent young law-breakers put in secure accommodation.
They're tired of having to deal time and again with criminals who are too young to go to prison…
But Buckinghamshire Social Services hinted today that when the fourteen-year-old is found he won't be put in secure accommodation.
In a statement it said: Not only must there be a history of absconding for individuals to qualify — there must also be significant grounds to believe they will either harm themselves or other people if they do abscond.
An RAF crew have been telling of the dangers they faced from stray mortar fire and bullets, as they delivered aid to the beleagured city of Sarajevo.
The crew have just returned to England after making twenty one flights into war torn Bosnia.
They say they'd be willing to go back to help rescue the injured victims of the fighting.
Erika Barnes reports.
2 JULY 1992/RAF LYNEHAM/Wiltshire
Sq Ldr CHRIS TINGAY/Hercules Captain
LES PURVIS/Master Air Loadmaster
Flt Lt DAVE SCORER/Hercules Navigator
Voice over
The first RAF Hercules to leave for war torn Sarajevo.
And the first crew back at base at RAF Lyneham to share their experiences of another mercy mission.
In nine days they flew twenty-one relief flights…from a base in Zagreb…to the devastated Saravejo.
With warring factions firing across and around the airport, the dangers were all too real.
Male speaker
The biggest problem was the ground threat.
Technically it was quite simple.
But there was ground fire, although they weren't firing at us.
But we had to take precautions.On the ground we took one or two ricochets which made marks on the skin of the aircraft, but nothing was punctured.
Voice over
It was a calculated risk.
On board were vital food and medical supplies.
They had to be unloaded and distributed as fast and safely as possible.
Male speaker
Initally all the cargo had to be manhandled off.
But once the forklifts arrived we could get the load off very quickly.Initally taking forty five minutes.
Then when it was slicker, taking ten minutes.
Voice over
After the battering, the plane is undergoing minor repairs at RAF Lyneham Another aircraft has taken its place.
Despite the dangers the first crew want to return…this time to help the child victims of the conflict.
Male speaker
If we were asked to do it we would…we'd go tomorrow.
Each time we came in there was mortar fire and plumes of smoke.
It's a mess.
Voice over
There's is a vital lifeline…but they hope that more stray bullets won't mean it's the end of the line.
Three peace campaigners who broke into an American airbase and painted anti-war slogans on a B Fifty Two bomber have been ordered to pay sixteen hundred pounds in fines and costs.
Magistrates found them guilty of criminal damage, but the protesters maintain that their actions in trying to stop a war machine were justified.
Gargy Patel reports.
CIRENCESTER Gloucestershire
LIBRARY PICTURES FAIRFORD Gloucestershire
STEPHEN HANCOCK Peace Campaigner
Voice over
The peace campaigners were on trial for cutting a fence and painting a B52 bomber at RAF Fairford.Protesters supporting them were outside the court in Cirencester.
The defendants were said to have spent two hours on the base and taken photographs of themselves painting the aircraft.
Giving evidence the three defendants admitted spraying paint on a bomber.
They said they wanted to confront the crews with what the plane does.
Blackpool beach condemned
FTSE down 4
The hundred shares index closed down four point eight at two eight three two point three 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, fifty seven.
Britain's largest cider maker has announced it's beating the recession with profits up fifteen percent to nearly twenty million pounds.
Cider is bucking the national trend…beer sales fell by ten percent over the same period.
The company says it's all down to convincing young people that cider is a fashionable tipple.
RICHARD BARNETT/Hereford
TV Commercial
NEIL KERR/Bulmers Cider
HAMPTON BISHOP/Herefordshire
It's a hard sell to convince young people who are the big spenders that cider is the most fashionable drink:
At the Plough Inn in Hereford, everyone professed to enjoying a pint of the local product:
Meanwhile the cider maker is preparing for future growth in demand…it's just finished planting a million young apple trees.
Bulmers and the thousands of farmers who supply them with fruit are hoping that although the apples will continue to obey the law of gravity, profits and sales will keep going in the opposite direction.
Back to that news that five people have been killed and another five seriously injured in a motorway pile-up.
The accident happened when a lorry jack-knifed and rolled on top of a car.
KEN GOODWIN/M-50
Insp EDDIE HARDMAN/West Mercia Police
Male speaker
Traffic was very slow at the time.
3 cars and 3 heavy goods vehicles collided.
There are five dead and several others taken to hospital.
The main problem's been getting into one of the vehicles where four of the dead were trapped
Voice over
(WES AD )(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, getting out of the rat race 
Voice over
Welcome back.
An executive from an international chemical company has given up the rat race to run a plant nursery.
David Robb is busy restoring some 1920's greenhouses on a country estate, and says he's never been happier:
RICHARD BARNETT/Misarden
DAVID ROBB/Nurseryman
HARRY WITHERS/Estate Manager
Voice over
David Robb used to spend his time dashing around the country organizing the delivery of chemicals for a multinational corporation.
But now he faces a new challenge…making a living out of a block of five large greenhouses.
They were originally built to a Victorian design in the 1920s at Misarden Park near Cirencester, and now they urgently need restoring.
David's latest executive decision is to get the roof vents working again.
He's already brought one of the glasshouses back into production…and hopes to have restored the others within three years.
David has opened a nursery at Misarden, specialising in old fashioned herbaceous plants and shrubs.
And he has no regrets about leaving the chemical industry:
Male speaker
He was fed up with the politics of big business.
Now he succeeds or fails with his business by his own efforts.
Voice over
In its heyday in the 1920s and 30s the nursery used to supply the seventeenth century Misarden house with fruit and vegetables.
And in the vineries built against a south facing wall are peach trees…the last remnants of an era when every large house expected to grow its own peaches, grapes and figs.
All that remains of other plants are the old metal labels naming the varieties:
Male speaker
The nursery used to supply fruit including nectarines and any other plants needed by the house.
It's good to see the greenhouses being restored.
Voice over
David is determined to breathe life back into an estate nursery that was once one of the finest in Gloucestershire.
But now instead of providing cut flowers for the gentry at the big house, David is supplying plants for anyone who wants to beautify their gardens.
And he has a helper.
A sitting tenant who came with the greenhouses…and is doing his bit to keep down the slugs.
An inquest has been told that a plane crashed because it had a flat battery.
Three rugby fans who were flying back from a match in Dublin were killed in the accident.
The coroner recorded verdicts of accidental death.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
21 March 1993/SEVENHAMPTON/Wiltshire
The pilot, 33-year-old Timothy Gower from Kent, and his two passengers Robert Williams from Berkshire and Martin Collinge from London, both aged 30, died instantly.
They were all rugby fans, on their way back to Biggin Hill after watching the England-Ireland match in Dublin the day before.
Just half a mile from where the plane crashed, members of the public were attending a lambing opening day.
One couple who'd been there told the inquest they saw the plane flying low, coughing and spluttering.
On their way out they found it nose down in the field.
An investigation into the crash found no evidence of engine failure — the problem was loss of power.
Air crash investigators told the inquest that the battery recovered from the wreckage was flat.
The alternator, which should have been recharging it during the flight, for some reason wasn't.
The warning light came on, and it's thought that was the point at which the pilot radioed for help.
But Air Traffic control at nearby RAF Lyneham lost radio contact almost straight away.
The investigation team said Mr Gower was probably attempting an emergency landing when the plane hit a tree and nose-dived to the ground.
The pathologist at Princess Margaret Hospital who carried out the post mortems said all three men would have died instantaneously, describing the crash as’ non-surviveable’.
The coroner recorded verdicts of accidental death on each of them.
People in a village that hasn't got its own graveyard are divided over plans to create one.
Objectors say ground water supplies could be contaminated if bodies are buried in the site that's been chosen.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
BERINSFIELD/Oxfordshire
DORCHESTER on THAMES/Oxfordshire
Cllr KEN HALL/Supporter
GEORGE HENDERSON/Objector
JULIE McALPINE/Objector
Dr JOHN HAINES/NRA
The high water-table in the area means it would be difficult to find a suitable site for a burial ground because of the risk of water contamination.
Until 1976 the people of Berinsfield buried their dead in nearby Dorchester-on-Thames — but when the village became a separate parish, that arrangement came to an end.
That means villagers are left with a choice of cremation or burial in Wallingford 4 miles away.
He says people have been to myself and I know they've been to the doctor, crying in the surgery over there not being a burial ground, because obviously when one's loved ones die they wish to have them buried here.
The local parish council has been debating a possible site since nineteen sixty-four.
But some residents think the field they've chosen is inappropriate:
He says in the centre of the site there's a land-drain put in by a previous farmer which drains into a stream which runs into the River Thame.
She says we realise Berinsfield needs a burial site and that's not our concern — we're just concerned about the positioning of the site.
The National Rivers Authority has only given its approval for half the planned graveyard.
He says there is part of that site where investigations do indicate the water table is high — only perhaps half a metre below the surface and in that area we wouldn't regard burial as acceptable because of the potential risk of contaminating the ground water.
A decision on whether to grant planning permission for the burial ground will be taken at a meeting of South Oxfordshire District Council on July the 21st.
A farmer is facing charges of cruelty and neglect involving hundreds of animals after an investigation by the RSPCA.
Many of the animals have been removed to other farms.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
He's described as a farmer and livestock agent.
The charges relate to 3 sites in Gloucestershire, inlcuding a farm at Crickley Hill near Gloucester, and Cornerways farm at Staverton, between Gloucester and Cheltenham.
23 of the charges allege that Mr Oliffe caused unnecessary suffering to farm animals, another 11 allege that he starved animals and failed to provide adequate facilities and accommodation.
A hunt has been launched for a German lorry driver who's gone missing after arriving in England with a load of melons.
Wilfred Geisler, who's thirty four 
CHELTENHAM
An inquest has been told that a plane crashed because it had a flat battery.
Three rugby fans who were flying back from a match in Dublin were killed in the accident.
The coroner recorded verdicts of accidental death.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
21 March 1993/SEVENHAMPTON/Wiltshire
The pilot, 33-year-old Timothy Gower from Kent, and his two passengers Robert Williams from Berkshire and Martin Collinge from London, both aged 30, died instantly.
They were all rugby fans, on their way back to Biggin Hill after watching the England-Ireland match in Dublin the day before.
Just half a mile from where the plane crashed, members of the public were attending a lambing opening day.
One couple who'd been there told the inquest they saw the plane flying low, coughing and spluttering.
On their way out they found it nose down in the field.
An investigation into the crash found no evidence of engine failure — the problem was loss of power.
Air crash investigators told the inquest that the battery recovered from the wreckage was flat.
The alternator, which should have been recharging it during the flight, for some reason wasn't.
The warning light came on, and it's thought that was the point at which the pilot radioed for help.
But Air Traffic control at nearby RAF Lyneham lost radio contact almost straight away.
The investigation team said Mr Gower was probably attempting an emergency landing when the plane hit a tree and nose-dived to the ground.
The pathologist at Princess Margaret Hospital who carried out the post mortems said all three men would have died instantaneously, describing the crash as’ non-surviveable’.
The coroner recorded verdicts of accidental death on each of them.
People in a village that hasn't got its own graveyard are divided over plans to create one.
Objectors say ground water supplies could be contaminated if bodies are buried in the site that's been chosen.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
BERINSFIELD/Oxfordshire
DORCHESTER on THAMES/Oxfordshire
Cllr KEN HALL/Supporter
GEORGE HENDERSON/Objector
JULIE McALPINE/Objector
Dr JOHN HAINES/NRA
The high water-table in the area means it would be difficult to find a suitable site for a burial ground because of the risk of water contamination.
Until 1976 the people of Berinsfield buried their dead in nearby Dorchester-on-Thames — but when the village became a separate parish, that arrangement came to an end.
That means villagers are left with a choice of cremation or burial in Wallingford 4 miles away.
He says people have been to myself and I know they've been to the doctor, crying in the surgery over there not being a burial ground, because obviously when one's loved ones die they wish to have them buried here.
The local parish council has been debating a possible site since nineteen sixty-four.
But some residents think the field they've chosen is inappropriate:
He says in the centre of the site there's a land-drain put in by a previous farmer which drains into a stream which runs into the River Thame.
She says we realise Berinsfield needs a burial site and that's not our concern — we're just concerned about the positioning of the site.
The National Rivers Authority has only given its approval for half the planned graveyard.
He says there is part of that site where investigations do indicate the water table is high — only perhaps half a metre below the surface and in that area we wouldn't regard burial as acceptable because of the potential risk of contaminating the ground water.
A decision on whether to grant planning permission for the burial ground will be taken at a meeting of South Oxfordshire District Council on July the 21st.
A farmer is facing charges of cruelty and neglect involving hundreds of animals after an investigation by the RSPCA.
Many of the animals have been removed to other farms.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
He's described as a farmer and livestock agent.
The charges relate to 3 sites in Gloucestershire, inlcuding a farm at Crickley Hill near Gloucester, and Cornerways farm at Staverton, between Gloucester and Cheltenham.
23 of the charges allege that Mr Oliffe caused unnecessary suffering to farm animals, another 11 allege that he starved animals and failed to provide adequate facilities and accommodation.
A hunt has been launched for a German lorry driver who's gone missing after arriving in England with a load of melons.
Wilfred Geisler, who's thirty four 
CHELTENHAM
Ex-servicemen who've been injured on duty have been meeting their old adversaries on the sporting field.
Disabled people from twenty one countries are taking part in the first wheelchair games of its kind.
GARETH FURBY/Stoke Mandeville
GEOFF WINCHCOMBE/Team Manager
URIS STEFANOWICZ/Competitor
IAN HAYDEN/Competitor
MHMOOD KHOSRAVIVAFA/Iranian Team Leader
ROY EVERSON/Competitor
Voice over
Some are casulties of war, others the victims of terrorist attack.
Old enemies now competing together at the first ever international games for disabled ex-servicemen.
The British team is led by Geoff Winchcombe from Swindon.
He says they're all getting on so well they can't understand why the politicians started the wars in the first place.
Uri Stefanovicz was a paratrooper with the Red Army in Afganistan, until a car bomb nearly killed him.
He says he's very happy to be taking part.
Today he took on Ian Hayden, a former British soldier, disabled when he was just eighteen.
He says he used to play sport before.
Now it's all coming back.
The British contigent don't like talking about how they were injured.
But its understood some were hurt in training, others targeted by the IRA.
But the Iranian Basketball team are all casaulaties of war.
He says they wer injured in the Iran-Iraq war.
Today Roy Everson who was disabled when he was just twenty one carried the British flag into the bowling finals.
He says it's not everyone who gets a chance to represent their country.
To him it's as important as the Olympics.
The games run until Friday…and the organisers hope it'll now become a regular fixture in the sporting calender.
Next week, the Royal Air Force will be celebrating its seventy-fifth birthday.
Four hundred aircraft will be flying in for the International Air Tattoo at R-A-F Fairford, the biggest airshow in the world.
We'll be sending our cameras along, and tonight we're offering YOU the chance to win special tickets to be there as well.
Air shows now are quite common.
But between the First and Second World Wars, the R-A-F staged just one major air show a year.
Where were they held?
May, this year, was the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Dambusters' Raid.
The Lancasters had to drop the bouncing bomb from precisely sixty feet to hit their target.
Who led the Dambusters into action?
The R-A-F received its first jet fighter in January (1944) Nineteen-Forty-Four.
And that plane went on to set a world air speed record of six hundred and six and a quarter miles per hour.
What was it called?
And finally bang up to date with the Red Arrows: they will be just one of fifteen air display teams performing at Fairford.
Which plane do they fly?
There are those questions again.
The winners will receive family tickets, which will admit two adults and two children to R-A-F Fairford on either Saturday or Sunday next week.
Please send your answers on a postcard to:
AIR TATTOO COMPETITION
CENTRAL NEWS SOUTH
ABINGDON
OX141SA
That's AIR TATTOO COMPETITION CENTRAL NEWS SOUTH ABINGDON OX14 1SA
The cards must get to us by Tuesday next week, and the winners will be the first ten correct replies out of the bag.
And we'll be giving you another chance to hear all those questions at the end of our programme on Friday.
Voice over
A garage owner is starting a money-spinning new export trade…selling second-hand Lada cars to Jamaica.
The vehicles…so often the butt of jokes…are going for two or three times their value in Britain.
And the more rust and dents they've got the better.
SIMON GARRETT/Birdwood
LAWRENCE TAYLOR/St Michael's Garage
LIVINGSTON GARVEY/Jamaican Car Salesman
Jamaica-bound…the first consignment of second-hand Ladas destined for an island paradise.
Seven years old…second time round the clock…charecterful…but it'll fetch as much as a new one would in Britain.
Ladas are prized in Jamaica because they're cheap.
They used to swap aluminium ore for shiploads of them imported from the Soviet Union.
Now the tax on importing used cars has been slashed.
No more jokes…the Jamaicans can't get enough of them
Male speaker
They are cheap and everything.
Cheap to run, cheap on the road.
Voice over
It's a used car salesman's dream…the more dents and rust…the bigger the eventual profit
Male speaker
If they go in that condition the tax charged will be cheaper than if they're in first class condition.
There's just no catch 1715 No
Voice over
Question: How do you get three Ladas into a forty foot container?
Answer: Take the lights, bumpers…and part of the exhaust off.
This time it's the Lada dealer who's laughing
Male speaker
I welcome all the criticism and the jokes.
It draws attention to the product.
They're reliable and strong and will suit the Jamaican roads
Voice over
The trade in spare parts is also very lucrative.
Even second hand springs and shock absorbers are at a premium.
The entrepreneurs believe putting their faith in old Ladas will put them on the road to riches
Male speaker
We have to carry these three first and then see what it's like.
It's going to make me my fortune
Voice over
If the great Lada exodus really is as successful as the men behind it hope…it could be a case of rust to riches 
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
The accident happened in a section of roadworks between junctions One and Two of the eastbound M-Fifty in Worcestershire, when a lorry jack-knifed and rolled on top of a car.
Two other lorries and two more cars were involved.
(WES NEXT)
WESLEY SMITH
The anti-hunting lobby secured a major victory today when Hereford and Worcester county council voted to ban hunting from much of its land.
It will mean thousands of acres of farmland will be out of bounds to hunts from this autumn.
Another county council could introduce a similar ban before the hunting season begins.
TIM HURST/Herefordshire
Cllr PETER MACDONALD/Labour
Cllr JAMES HEREFORD/Conservative
NIGEL WAKLEY/Ledbury Hunt
The decision will drastically cut the amount of countryside available for fox hunting and it's angered hunts, and huntsmen and women.
Dozens of huntsmen and farmers turned up to lobby today's meeting of Gloucestershire County Council, also due to consider a ban on fox hunting on all council land.
But that debate and subsequent decision has been put off until October, when supporters of ban expect to win.
