Meanwhile two members of a hunt have won an appeal against their convictions for whipping a horse trapped on a five-bar gate.
A judge allowed the appeal after a vet told the court that whipping could have encouraged the horse to free itself.
And the judge went on to criticise the RSPCA for the way it gathers evidence.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Aylesbury
GORDON MIDDLETON/Hunt Follower
BRIAN TOON/Masters Of Foxhounds Association
Ch Insp DOUG DAVIDSON/RSPCA
RICHARD MEADE/Horse Expert
Male speaker
I'm very pleased with the result
Voice over
Mr Hill, a joint master of the Aylesbury Vale Hunt, had held the reins of his wife's horse Max after it had landed on a five barred gate during a hunt.
Mr Middleton came from behind and repeatedly whipped it to get it over the gate.
They were seen by undercover spies from the League Against Cruel Sports.
They took pictures and reported it to the RSPCA.
Mr Hill and Mr Middleton were conditionally discharged by magistrates at Amersham.
Male speaker
The RSPCA unfortunately is opposed to hunting.
We think it's sad they brought this case after the police declined to prosecute, and based it on evidence provided by an anti-hunt political pressure group
Voice over
And The judge was also critical.
His Honour John Slack in allowing the appeal told the RSPCA that it needed to clean up its act if it was to secure future prosecutions.
He'd earlier referred to discrepancies in gathering evidence which, while they had no bearing on this case, might affect future prosecutions
Male speaker
Sometimes people are unco-operative, although not necessarily in this case.
There are two or three things said by the judge which we'll be examining
Voice over
The hunt brought some heavy guns to bear on the appeal including leading vet Professor Alistair Steel Bodger and former international three-day-eventer Richard Meade.
Both Prof Steel Bodger and Richard Meade told the court the most important thing was to get the horse off the gate as quickly as possible to avoid serious injury.
The whip was a means of stimulating and communicating with it
Male speaker
The use of the whip is a legitimate method of communicating with the horse.
If you thrash a horse it will hurt but if you touch it with a whip it's a tactile thing which is far less than a horse nudging another one
Voice over
The RSPCA and the League Against Cruel Sports say they accept the court decision, and have to accept that cruelty was not involved.
The Duchess of York has launched a new nationwide charity scheme to encourage mentally disabled artists.
The Macintyre charity is based at Milton Keynes, but it's gone to London to open the first craft gallery of its kind in the country, as Tim Russon reports 
LIZ CLIFTON/Organiser
JOHN THORNE/Macintyre
MARK ARHENS
FIONA WOOLLEY
Voice over
It's not every new art gallery that gets a royal send off, but then again not many are as special as this one.
There are lots of charity shops in the High Street, but this is the first time such a venture has been launched in the art world of London.
Macintyre from Milton Keynes has decided to rub shoulders to challenge the professionals at showing off and hopefully selling off high class quality work.
Everything in its new gallery has been made carved painted by mentally disabled people.
Liz Clifton the gallery organiser says the work is very skilled and they've looked all over the country to find things.
The aims of Macintyre's new gallery are to raise money of course for the mentally disabled and perhaps more importantly to inspire to shine light on hidden and unknown talent.
John Thorne of Macintyre says the organisation has always tried to show that disabled people may not be capable of some everyday things, but they can usually show their skills and creativity in other ways.
He says the gallery proves how good they are.
As patron of the Macintyre organisation the Duchess of York has worked closely with the mentally disabled for some years, but even she was surprised; delighted with what she saw on the opening night.
The Duchess says she's very pleased with the work and delighted they've got a chance to put their skills on show.
She says she's always known how special they can be, given the chance and she hopes more disabled people will be encouraged to have a go.
Pride of place at the new gallery goes to a tapestry woven by Macintyre residents at Great Holm in Milton Keynes.
It took a team of 6 one year and 3 days to finish this masterpiece.
Mark Arhens says it was hard work.
Fiona Woolley says she's relieved, but pleased.
Opening night at the Macintyre gallery brought a full house and the first buyer, the Duchess of York, couldn't; wouldn't be parted from her favourite picture.
The veteran Liverpool singer Gerry Marsden…from Gerry and The Pacemakers…is performing in Oxford tonight.
The man who brought us hits Like Ferry Cross the Mersey and You'll Never Walk Alone is on a nationwide tour, but stopped off just long enough to talk to Mike Rowbottom.
OXFORD
GERRY MARSDEN
Voice over
Gerry Marsden, still making the pace after nearly thirty years.
Another day, another theatre, but the enthusiasm is just as strong as it was when he started as a raw Liverpudlian with his group the Pacemakers.
Gerry will be playing to hundreds of loyal fans at the Apollo theatre in Oxford tonight.
Gerry and the Pacemakers were the first Liverpool beat group to reach number one.
They all started in the same place as the Beatles…the Cavern Club in Liverpool.
and they shared the same manager.
He reformed the Pacemakers in the seventies after a resurgence of interest in his music…he's been on the road ever since.
Gerry Marsden is a piece of pop history.
His hits make a roll of honour which stretches beyond just the charts.
His version of You'll never Walk alone has been immortlaised at Liverpool Football Club and raised hundreds of thousands after the Bradford fire.
The same went for his classic song Ferry Cross the Mersey after Hillsbrough.
Still liking it, still doing it, Gerry Marsden keeps rocking and rolling at the Apollo tonight.
Surgeons remove benign tumour from the Pope
FTSE up 2
The hundred shares index closed up two point four at two four eight six point four 
The pound is up at one dollar ninety two, and down at two marks eighty four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A disabled woman is leading a protest against this weekend's ITV Telethon.
She's angry at the way it portrays handicapped people, and has helped organise a blockade of a television studio.
But the Telethon organisers say her view is only a minority one.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
OXFORD
SHARON MACE/Oxfordshire Council/for Disabled People
DAVE FULLER/Telethon Producer/Central TV
ROGER PHIPPS/Restore Ltd
Voice over
Sharon Mace, from Chinnor in Oxfordshire, has spinal atrophy.
It's a genetic condition which means she's been physically disabled from birth.
A staunch fighter for the rights of disabled people; she's angry at the way ITV's Telethon portrays them.
Female speaker
We're not objecting to the concept of fundraising.
We all know we need money.
We're objecting to the fact they have 28 hours of airspace that they're devoting to people in need and yet they're not allowing the people who are in need to say what their needs are.
Voice over
The organisers of Telethon say they do consult disabled people about the event and feel such an opinion is a minority one.
Male speaker
The primary role of the Telethon is to raise money, not just for disabled people, but for all sorts of other groups.
A large number of disabled people take part in the Telethon and are grateful for the help they get from the telethon.
No it doesn't solve all their problems, but it does provide some extras and for the vast majority of disabled people, it's much appreciated.
Voice over
Restore Ltd is a charity in Oxford providing disabled people with training and work experience.
It received £70,000 from the last Telethon which will go towards a new building on this site.
It's organiser says he can't understand the criticism.
Male speaker
I certainly haven't seen anything that offends me and when Telethon people have been down here, they've been good.
The guys here would be the first to refuse to participate if they didn't like the way they were portrayed.
Voice over
Sharon's helped organise a national protest of more than 2,000 disabled people outside London Weekend Television on Saturday.
But despite this, Telethon is expected to raise millions of pounds for thousands of people who are in some way in need.
In part two: If anybody can…we can.
The cidermakers drink to record profits.
And back in the frame…
The Duchess of York and her favourite charity.
Welcome back: Britain's biggest cider maker has announced its beating the recession with a record profit of over seventeen million pounds.
Bulmers is doing so well that it's going to need an extra two hundred tons of apples a day from local growers…
Richard Barnett reports:
HEREFORD
GRAY OLIVER/Bulmers Director
TERRY WATTS/Orcharding Director
DORMINGTON/Herefordshire
PETER DAVIES/Fruit Farmer
Voice over
Bulmers' £17.1 million profit is nearly 20% up on the previous year.
The company says its recession beating formula of heavy advertising and the regular launch of new brands of cider has been helped by the hot weather increasing the nation's thirst.
Male speaker
The figures are good news and show how successful the company has been in a competitive market.
Voice over
Bulmers now controls 50% of the whole UK market turning out 38 million gallons of cider a year.
This brand new £3 million canning line has just come on stream.
It's working flat out to meet growing demand for cider, filling 60,000 cans every hour.
As the cider market expands, so does the need for growers in Herefordshire, Worcestershire and Gloucestershire to produce more apples.
Male speaker
Bulmers will want to take all the apples local growers can produce.
Voice over
Peter Davies' family have supplied cider apples to Bulmers for a century from their farm at Dormington.
He says local growers will welcome the call for more fruit.
Male speaker
It's tremendous news for local growers.
The boom in cider sales means they are now supplying apples to Bulmers and to other makers in Somerset.
Voice over
Growers are expecting a bumper apple harvest this year, so they'll be able to supply the extra 200 tons of apples a day Bulmers want.
It's a fruitful relationship that's proving a recession beater.
M-Fifty murder:Was vital evidence ignored by police?
Deathtraps: Coroner's warning over second hand electrical goods.
And the ITV Telethon: A good turn, or an insult?
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Eddie Browning has always said he was innocent.
Now the Police Complaints Authority says many calls from the public about the killing may not have been documented or followed up.
Keith Wilkinson reports.
KARAMJIT SINGH/Police Complaints Authority
Householders are being warned to take special care when buying second hand electrical goods after a housewife was electrocuted by a washing machine.
An inquest has revealed she was killed by a faulty, twenty year old machine just a day after she'd bought it from a relative.
Nick Clark reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
SARAH CARTER/Trading Standards
Voice over
The facts of the tragic purchase that killed Wendy Handy in May emerged this afternoon at coroner's court in Swindon.
She had bought a twin tub washing machine for just ten pounds, the next day she was dead.
The machine, which had been built in the late nineteen sixties, had been delivered to Mrs Handy's home on May the fourteenth after she had bought it through a relative.
The court heard evidence from a Nicholas Moody who said the next day Mrs Handy told him the machine had stopped working.
He noticed the floor of the kitchen was soaking wet.
At that point Wendy Handy's seven year old daughter asked for a drink.
Mrs Handy walked barefoot across the floor to turn on the water tap at the kitchen sink which was made of stainless teel.
Suddenly she collapsed and pronounced dead on arrival at Swindon's Princess Margaret Hospital.
She'd been killed by an electric shock.
An electrical engineer told the court water had leaked into the washing machine's motor, short-circuiting it, and the earthwire in the plug had come away, like this one.
The whole machine was acting like a live electric wire.
When Mrs Handy went to the sink she must have touched the machine and up to two hundred and forty volts passed through her body.
The coroner recorded a verdict of death by misadventure.
Trading Standards officers say the case tragically illustrates the dangers of buying second hand electrical goods.
They say they come across thousands of examples of potentially lethal appliances.
Officials say more caution when buying could not only save a lot of trouble but just perhaps your life as well.
The former chairman of Swindon Town football club has begun his defence against charges of cheating the inland revenue out of thousands of pounds.
Brian Hillier is jointly charged along with the former manager and former club accountant.
Mark Kiff reports.
Voice over
Parcelforce, the loss-making parcels division of the Royal Mail is to be privatised.
Based at Milton Keynes, it's the country's largest distribution company, but the move has been condemned as undermining more than a hundred years of service to the public.
Gargy Patel reports.
PARCELFORCE/J Walter Thompson
BICESTER/Oxfordshire
MICHAEL HESELTINE MP/Trade Secretary
DOUG HENDERSON MP/Lab Trade Spokesman
Voice over
Parcelforce has made a loss over the last two years, despite strong efforts to turn the business around.
It employs six thousand people nationwide, two hundred at the headquarters in Milton Keynes, others at Parcelforce depots like Bicester in Oxfordshire.
The Government says there's no reason why it should remain in public hands.
Mr. Heseltine stressed the sale wouldn't affect the Royal Mail or Post Office Counters.
New investment for Parcelforce would be left to the new owners.
Plans for an incinerator to burn the carcasses of BSE-infected cattle have been approved by the government.
It overturns an earlier decision by a government inspector, and has angered the local MP who had opposed the building.
Clare Lafferty reports.
JULY 1990/CINDERFORD/Gloucestershire
PAUL MARLAND MP/Con West Gloucestershire
GUY TAMPLIN/Businessman
A woman whose husband was killed by a drunken driver is helping police launch a new campaign against the crime.
She also wants the law changed so drink-drivers who kill go to jail for much longer.
GARETH FURBY/Chieveley Services
KATHY ADAMS/Widow
AUDREY PROBART/Mother
DAWNY PEARCE/Widow
TIM DAVIDSON/Assistant Chief Constable
Kathy Adams from Witney in Oxfordshire helped police launch the new campaign.
Her husband was knocked of his bike and killed by a drunken driver, who was later sentenced to twenty one months in prison.
But Mrs Adams thinks the jail terms should be much longer.
And she's already collected seventeen thousand signatures on a petition for a change in the law.
She says her children still expecxt their dad to come home.
She wants the sentences increased so it never happens again.
Other victims of drink driving have backed the new campaign.
She says her only daughter was killed.
The driver was only fined.
She says her husband was killed.
The police are taking their latest message directly to the driver, with a series of displays at motorway services.
The campaign's called four steps to jail.
Drink too much this summer, fail a breath test, and the courts have the power to impose a prison sentece.
He says its devestating for the driver.
They also lose their job.
Last year three and a half thousand people were prosecuted for drink driving in the Thames Valley area.
The police hope the new campaign will pursaude motorists to think again.
It'll run for two weeks.
Education Secretary John Patten, the MP for Oxford West and Abingdon has gone into hospital.
Library Pictures
Mr Patten is suffering from viral gastro-enteritis, and has been admitted to the King Edward the Seventh Hospital in London for tests.
He's expected to be off work for a few days but will be recalled for important Commons votes, including the Maastricht Treaty social chapter next Thursday.
Two traffic wardens have been knocked down by a car after questioning the driver about a photocopied tax disc.
The incident happened at Silbury Boulevard in Milton Keynes.
The car reversed into one warden, and then drove at the other, who had to jump onto the bonnet to avoid being hurt.
A woman is now being questioned by police.
Eight young couples are living in new homes thanks to a village's own housing scheme.
Community leaders decided to build homes for rent to help young people brought up in the village stay in the area.
They say they're only doing what the local council would do if it was allowed.
GRAEME BOWD/Enstone
SARAH BUFTON/Tenant
JOHN COLLINSON/Housing Association Chairman
Voice over
Sean Bott and Mandy Reynolds have lived in Enstone all their lives.
They didn't want to leave but the prospect of having their own home seemed remote, until now.
Sean and Mandy are among 8 couples to be given a house in Clay Hill Close, a new development by the Enstone Community Housing Association.
The houses cost just £52 a week to rent.
But they're only for local people.
The idea is stop young couples from moving away.
Sean and Mandy would like to buy, but most houses in Enstone cost at least £80,000, well outside their price range.
They say renting is a good alternative.
Male speaker
Council houses have all been bought up.
If you want to stay in the village on a low income there is nowhere to rent or buy.
Voice over
Sarah Bufton has 2 young children, 3 year old Jason and 4 month old James.
Since their wedding 5 years ago she and husband Mark had lived in a caravan at nearby Fulbrook.
Female speaker
It was a nightmare.
It was damp and there were rats outside.
Voice over
Jason couldn't go out to play.
They'd been waiting for a council house for 5 years.
Female speaker
I used to ring them up every day but there was nowhere at all.
Voice over
The cost of building the houses was raised mostly by grants and a donation from the National Westminster Bank staff college, Enstone's largest employer.
Government policy effectively prevents councils from building more homes for rent.
But the housing association says they're desperately needed.
Male speaker
People go elsewhere to look for houses.
The young are being drained out of the village.
Voice over
They plan to build another 40 houses over the next 10 years.
Unlike council tenants, families here will never be able to buy their homes.
But they will be able to raise their children in the village they call home.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, unravelling the secret of the White Horse 
Unemployment falls again
The number of people out of work has fallen for the fifth consecutive month.
An armed gang has stolen jewels worth more than five million pounds from London's Hatton Garden.
Killer apologises
Joseph Elliot, who's admitted stabbing a music teacher to death, has appeared on television to apologise for his actions.
The victim's widow is considering a private prosecution after Elliot was acquitted of murder.
Police uncover alleged DSS fraud
Police have arrested five people and seized forged social security benefit books with a face value of thirty-six million pounds.
IRA bombs railway station
The IRA have again bombed Belfast's central railway station, causing extensive damage, but no injuries.
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down point six at twenty-eight, thirty-one point seven.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty-nine and down at two marks, fifty-seven.
Welcome back.
Archeologists are attempting to unravel the secret of the White Horse of Uffington.
(WES NEXT)
They're investigating an ancient burial ground — it could help explain why the horse was first cut into the hillside.
SIMON GARRETT/Uffington
DAVID MILES/Oxford Archeological Unit
Voice over
It's the only genuine ancient white horse…all others are pale imitations.
It's lain across the hill near Uffington for at least two thousand years.
Layers of chalk centuries deep.
It now seems the land around may be peppered with the graves of the dead of 25 centuries.
The horse set to protect fallen men from Saxon, Roman and prehistoric times.
Victorian archeologists found 40 bodies of varying antiquity in a small area.
They were unable to answer the question why they were interred here.
Male speaker
I think it's because you're close to heaven up here.
It's the nicest site around and from the surrounding countryside you'd have seen the white mounds of the burial sites standing out against the sky, right against the heavens
Voice over
Legend has it St. George rode the white horse to this spot where he slew the dragon.
The monster's blood burnt away the grass on Dragon's hill.
The symbolism was potent enough for a hundred generations to keep the chalk clear
Male speaker
The George and the dragon myth is much older than christianity.
They adopted the pagan idea.
On Roman tombstones and in the Iron age in the Celtic period we find a mounted night killing serpents.
The idea is the victory of life over death.
Maybe the horse was put here as a symbol of life and resurrection against the background of these cemetaries
Voice over
The mysteries of Uffington are not lost on the latest generation
Male speaker
I never thought there was going to be a dead body here.
Voice over
Does it look like a horse?
Male speaker
No because its legs are half off
Female speaker
I like the bones best because they're interesting and I never thought people were buried up here.
I just thought it was a normal hill
Voice over
Why do you think the body was there in the first place?
Male speaker
Someone buried it there
Voice over
That much is certain.
But the experts need to know more precisely when and by whom the bodies of Uffington were buried.
Only then will they be able to tell with any certainty the tale of the White Horse
A boat which was once the pride and joy of Lawrence of Arabia is to sail again.
The craft was used to service and repair seaplanes in the nineteen thirties, but fell into disrepair.
Now it's been restored, at a cost of thirty thousand pounds.
KATE GARRAWAY/Sevenhampton
PHILLIP CLABBURN/Boat Restorer
Male speaker
It was going to be used as a gardening shed for tomatoes but for me it has been the history and finding out about its past that has been the fun.
Voice over
Working with one set of tattered plans there have been a few problems along the way.
Male speaker
The hardest thing was to discover what grey it should be painted so in the end we just guessed…not an easy thing to do with black and white photographs!
Voice over
Lawrence wrote the service manuals for the craft.
Phillip believes the boat is worth the three years and thirty thousand pounds it has cost to restore it.
He believes Lawrence would have approved too.
If you're in the market for a second hand car, perhaps this is for you.
It's forty years old and will set you back five and a half thousand pounds — but for that you can be sure no-one will dare cut you up on the motorway.
ABI DONALD/Ross-on-Wye
COLIN BARNARD/Owner
JOHN HOLLINSHEAD/Garage Owner
Male speaker
It's been in the garage for a while and the family like it.
Voice over
It's six cylinder engine has a top speed of seventy five miles an hour in forward and reverse.
It's apparently fit for the road and being a former military vehicle it doesn't need an MOT…
He says Fill her up…and it takes petrol…diesel engines hadn't quite been perfected.
It's been sitting on the forecourt of a garage just outside Ross on Wye for the past few weeks, and is gaining a considerable amount of interest from passers by…but as yet no one is very serious about buying it.
He says: we're looking for a millionaire to buy it for his wife as the ideal shopping car.
You wouldn't have much trouble parking it.
But if the scout car isn't quite the run around for you, you could always go for the little car with big ideas.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
RICHARD BARNETT/M50
KEITH CUNNINGHAM/Hospital Manager
BARRIE EDWARDS/Widower
23 APRIL 1993
Chief Insp BILL PURSLOW/West Mercia Police
Voice over
The five women died on the east bound carriageway of the M-50 just inside the Herefordshire Worcestershire Border yesterday afternoon.
The four nurses were in a Ford Fiesta which was crushed under a lorry after it jacknifed.
Police have named them as Pauline Edwards from Leigh Sinton, near Worcester, married with two children…
Sheila Corbett who lived in Worcester, and was married with three children…
Corrie Howard, who was single, from Great Witley in north Worcestershire…and Liz Crooks who was married with three children and lived at Longley Green in Worcestershire.
They all worked at the BUPA South Bank Hospital in Worcester, and were returning after a day's training at a hospital in Cardiff when the crash happened.
Pauline Edwards had worked as a nurse at the hospital since it opened seven years ago.
Her widower spoke of her dedication:
Yesterday's crash was the second involving a lorry approaching roadworks on the same stretch of the M-50.
Three months ago a worker died and another was badly injured when a lorry ploughed into them on the hard shoulder.
Today police issued a warning to motorists:
Investigations are continuing into the exact cuasee of a crash that turned three husbands into widowers and robbed eight children of their mothers.
An MP is calling on a hospital to reorganise its emergency department after he faced a four-hour wait with his injured son.
He says delays in treatment are causing frustration and a queuing system should be introduced.
But the consultant in charge says he can't run casualty like a supermarket.
KIM BARNES/Gloucester
DAVID FRENCH/MP's Son
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
STEPHEN McCABE/Consultant
He says they told us to wait for two hours which we did then they told us to wait another hour and a half.
What do you think of that?
Not very good!
Now David's father says there was a lack of organisation at the hospital which needs to be addressed.
He wants to see a new queuing system introduced…
It's a simple principle, you give everybody a number and the numbers as they move on are shown on a display board.
If they adopted that system which costs nothing you would avoid patients' frustration and give the health service a better name.
But the consultant in charge of accident and emergency says a ticket system similar to a supermarket wouldn't work in a hospital…
We're not serving cheese across the counter here.If you had a ticket that said you were 5th in the queue you would be falsely reassured if the people ahead of you were seriously ill or dying.
And he points out that on the day in question, there were several serious emergencies, including the case of an eight year old boy who died.
At the moment the hospital is preparing a new casualty procedure in which nurses will make an immediate priority assessment as cases arrive.
In the meantime it seems patience remains a virtue.
A police motorcycle instructor has been killed on a training exercise.
It happened on the A417 (four one seven) at Hope under Dinmore in Herefordshire.
Three instructors from Thames Valley Police were travelling towards Bodenham.
It appears they took action to avoid a lorry.
One rider crashed into a tree and died.
The funeral has taken place for murdered garage worker Richard Miles.
March 1993/STONEHOUSE/Gloucestershire
Mr Miles, who was twenty nine, was found stabbed to death in the garden of his home near Stonehouse in Gloucestershire in March.
FRAMPTON on SEVERN/Gloucestershire
He worked at a car body repair shop in Frampton on Severn.
His killer is still at large, despite the offer of a ten thousand pound reward.
Cricket now, and in the final day of the County championship matches,
Tea ladies, chairmen and wife-swapping could soon be a thing of the past.
That, at least, is the aim of the editors of a brand new Oxford dictionary.
The idea is to eliminate words and definitions that suggest discrimination, on grounds of sex, colour and even height.
But, as Robin Powell reports, some experts are wary of taking political correctness too far.
SARA TULLOCH Editor
Voice over
If you thought ram-raids had nothing at all in common with bungee jumping, you were wrong.
They're both new additions to the Oxford Modern English Dictionary.
Language, you see, is always changing and from acupressure to zouk, this book's all you need to keep your '90s lingo up to date.
Language is bound to reflect events of the day.
Friendly fire is included; that's the euphemism which aroused such anger at the Gulf War inquest in Oxford this spring.
But hotting isn't; apparently it's considered joyriders' slang that's not yet used by the general public.
2 of the region's MPs make contributions.
Douglas Hurd's active citizen and John Patten's lager louts are both given an airing.
But interestingly there's no mention of Majorism or the citizens' charter.
Knowledge, of course, is power and if you want to diss; that's insult someone without their knowing it, this book's full of suggestions.
It'll also tell you that if in return they call you a dweeb or a flake, they're probably not being very polite either.
But are the revisionists going too far?
The new dictionary lays great store by so-called political correctness, especially where women are concerned.
A woman who chairs a meeting is either a chairwoman or a chair, never a chairman.
And if proposals under discussion are approved, future dictionaries will call wife-swappers’ consensual non-monogamists,’girls’pre-women’and lesbians’gynocentric beings.’
But Sara Tulloch's wary of turning perfectly good English into, to use another new term, technobabble.
Never mind the sequels, there's nothing like the original and the proudest treasure in the archives of the Oxford University Press remains this early edition of Samuel Johnson's very first English dictionary.
It's tempting to wonder what he'd make of wordsmiths all around re-writing his work; mellowed out or gobsmacked?
Take your pick.
Pope passed tranquil night
FTSE down 3
The hundred shares index closed down three points at two four eight three point four 
The pound is up at one dollar ninety three, and up at two marks, eighty five.
Back to cricket and some final scores have just come in, Essex have beaten Gloucestershire and Worcestershire have won by five wickets against Nottinghamshire.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A national debate in the General Synod about the ordination of women is the work of the devil, according to a Church of England vicar.
He says that women are being conned into believing they will someday be ordained.
His remarks have outraged women in the church.
Tim Hurst reports.
ST BRIAVELS/Gloucestershire
Father JOHN HEIDT/Up Hatherley/Parish Church
Rev VIVIENNE FAULL/Gloucester Cathedral
JOHN GUMMER MP/General Synod
Voice over
There are more than 1,000 women deacons in the Church of England, awaiting a vote on women's ordination by the General Synod.
The vote will follow a debate on the issue which has lastest 20 years, but the debate itself is the work of the devil, according to a vicar from Cheltenham.
Father Heidt feels women like Gloucester Cathedral Chaplain, Vivienne Faull, are being conned by the debate into believing they may some day be ordained.
A leading lay member of the General Synod, Agriculture Minister, John Gummer is also opposed to the ordination of women.
A decision on the ordination of women priests will be taken by the General Synod in November.
One hundred and ninety thousand people are injured in accidents at work every year — a figure that appalls health and safety campaigners.
Sir Jimmy Savile has worked for years with victims of spinal injuries, and now he's spearheading a campaign to cut the number of accidents at work — accidents which could, in many cases, have been easily avoided.
Simon Garrett reports .
STOKE MANDEVILLE/Buckinghamshire
MARTIN MINTON/Work Accident Victim
Sir JIMMY SAVILE
HEALTH AND SAFETY VIDEO
KEN CHECKLEY/Work Accident Victim
Martin Minton gets married on Saturday.
He's 26 years old and because of an accident at work he'll never walk again.
Male speaker
I had an 80ft oak tree land on my back.
It broke my ribs, collapsed a lung and broke my spinal cord.
It should hit home to people to take precautions.
You must use the proper equipment, get the proper training to do jobs.
Voice over
Stoke Mandeville's Spinal Injuries Unit was chosen as the site to launch a Europe wide campaign against industrial accidents.
Staff there see a constant stream of people suffering injuries which just need not have happened.
Male speaker
A pair of gloves can stop you having your fingers chopped off.
A hard hat can protect you from having a metal spike go through your skull and into your brain.
The trick is how can you make it attractive to people so they say,’ That's a good idea.’
Voice over
One man who's spent 30 years in a wheelchair after 14 tons of metal dropped on his back, is certain most accidents wouldn't happen if workers themselves took responsibility for their own safety.
Male speaker
99% of accidents at work could be avoided with a little thought.
People must think hard about the job they're doing; how they can make it safer.
Voice over
The problem with accident prevention is that it doesn't occur to anyone until it's too late.
Working with accident victims however, does make people think.
Male speaker
You know you see people on television coming down stairs facing you full on.
I come down stairs sideways, so my whole foot's on the stair so there's less chance of me falling down.
Voice over
Workplace Health and Safety week takes place across Europe in November.
By that time, another 70,000 of us will have had accidents at work we could have avoided.
A group of prisoners are out of jail for a few days…but the authorities know exactly where they are.
They're helping hundreds of children with special needs…and hopefully learning something about themselves in return.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
STOKE MANDEVILLE/Buckinghamshire
GLEN/Prisoner
PHILLIP/Prisoner
RICHARD WEETMAN/Organiser
STEVE/Prisoner
Voice over
Getting prisoners to realise there are people worse off than themselves, is the main idea behind a 3-day event at Stoke Mandeville. 30 of them have been helping mentally handicapped people of all ages simply to enjoy themselves.
Male speaker
They enjoy themselves and it makes you realise that while we're in prison so are they, in their own bodies
Voice over
The 30 prisoners are from the Chilterns group of jails which includes Aylesbury, Grendon, Bullingdon and Huntercomb.
They're out on license while they help the 250 people with special needs.
Male speaker
I get enjoyment from helping them.
They treat this like a sort of Olympics
Voice over
It's the first time so many have gathered for such a prolonged period.
The activities take place under the guidance of prison PE instructors who supervise the prisoners and hundreds of volunteers.
Male speaker
I think it does everyone a lot of good.
It makes prisoners realise they can do something, and we're all in the same society
Voice over
They're helping them with Field events; pony rides, archery and swimming.
And they're on hand to lend a hand in the air pistol shooting gallery.
All the prisoners are given temporary parole and most use it to the full.
Male speaker
I get a lot of enjoyment from doing it, this is the biggest we've been involved in and we're all having a good time.
Voice over
The prison service doesn't pretend to change every inmate's attitude, but they're hoping it will make them think.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
CHURCHDOWN/Gloucestershire
MARITA BROWN/Kidnap Victim
Voice over
17 year old Marita Brown was 5 months pregnant, when in the early hours of January the 24th this year, her former boyfriend, Thomas Rennie came to her home after she'd ended their relationship.
He held a loaded air pistol to her stepfather's neck and threatened to blow his head off.
Then he went upstairs to Marita's bedroom and ordered her and her stepfather into a car.
Rennie sat in the back of the car holding the pistol to Marita's head and told her stepfather, Richard Loren to drive into the centre of Gloucester.
Female speaker
She was terrified when he got angry.
She thought he might shoot her or her stepfather.
Voice over
Rennie later got out of the car with Marita and took her to a house on London Road in Gloucester where the couple had previously lived together.
The house was surrounded by police and after Rennie had freed Marita, police went in and arrested him.
At Gloucester Crown Court, Rennie admitted 2 charges of kidnap and one of carrying a firearm.
The defence described Rennie as’ a kid who didn't know how to deal with his broken heart.’
He was remanded in custody for enquiries to be made if he could be sent to a probation hostel.
Meanwhile Marita is still bitter about what Rennie did to her.
Female speaker
She dislikes him very much.
She doesn't think he should be allowed out.
But she hopes she'll be able to lead a normal life with her baby in the future.
Voice over
The court case over, Marita is now rebuilding a life for herself and her baby.
A dossier containing details of more than a hundred prisoners who may have been wrongfully convicted has been presented to the Home Office.
It includes Eddie Browning, who was jailed for the murder of Marie Wilkes, and Michael Shirley who's on hunger strike protesting his innocence…
Nick Clark reports.
LONDON
HARRY FLETCHER/Probation Officers' Association
DAVE SHIRLEY/Michael Shirley's Father
Voice over
A case to answer, a dossier containing a hundred and eleven alleged miscarriages of justice, presented today to the home office by campaigners including the pressure groups LIBERTY and Conviction, and the National Association of Probation officers.
Male speaker
We're very concerned that justice should be done.
Voice over
Among the cases, Michael Shirley, who denies murdering barmaid Linda Cook.
In May he took his protest to the rooftop of Long Lartin prison in Worcesterhsire.
Today he begins the third week of a hunger strike.
His father says Shirley's prepared to go all the way.
Male speaker
He's prepared to die.
Male speaker
Every plank o fthe shirley evidence seems to fall down.
Voice over
There are a total of twenty six inmates imprisoned at long Lartin prison who are featured in the dossier.
These include eight convicted murderers.
Also listed in the the case of Eddie Browning, the Welshman jailed for the murder of Marie wilkes from Worcester.
Yetserday it was rvealed that an investigation into West mercia police will look into claims that fifteen hundred leads on the murder were not followed up properly.
A former chairman of Swindon Town Football Club has admitted in court that he lied to both the Inland Revenue and the Football League.
Brian Hillier said he kept quiet about cash payments to players in the interests of his club.
He denies conspiracy to cheat the taxman.
From Winchester Crown Court, Gareth Furby reports.
Voice over
A furniture shop which has been in business for more than a century is closing down.
GLOUCESTER
Ten staff at Staites in Gloucester will lose their jobs.
The manager blames the pedestrianisation of the city centre and increased competition from out of town furniture stores for the closure.
The shop is also shutting its two other stores Style Furnishings in Cheltenham and Furniture Flair in Kidderminster.
Two robbers threated a jeweller with a pick-axe and a knife in Northampton.
The shop assistant at Michael Jones jewellers handed over a tray of watches.
The thieves escaped in a white Sierra Cosworth which was later found abandoned in Ecton Lane.
In Central News tonight.
Why did our son die?
Family of police chase victim make a formal complaint.
Move on.
New Age travellers expelled after clash with police.
And monster queues for a monster movie.
Jurassic Park comes to town.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
His parents say the police should never have chased him.
They admit he'd been in trouble before but say he didn't deserve to die this way.
The police say they can't comment at this stage.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
MARK ARROL/Ian's Brother
GWEN ARROL/Ian's Mother
JOCK ARROL/Ian's Father
7 July/Chief Supt COLIN STABLER/Gloucestershire Police
Ian was driving a six hundred CC motorbike, with his brother Mark as pillion passenger.
Mark realised they were being followed by the police.
They drove several miles at speeds of up to a hundred and twenty miles an hour.
He says that the police were right behind them — he begged his brother to stop.
Near the bottom of Birdlip hill, things stared to go wrong.
He says they crashed into a wall.
Ian died instantly, Mark escaped with cuts and bruises.
His mother and father say they know their son was a bit of a wheeler and dealer, and was not always on the right side of the law, but they say he didn't deserve to die in this way.
She says that when there's a chase and it's obvious the person isn't going to stop, the police should back off.
He says that the police could back off a bit, then maybe it wouldn't end in death.
The police won't comment because the matter has been refered to the police complaints authority.
But speaking the day after the accident a spokesman explained why they followed the motorbike.
He says you have to remember this was a thirty four year old man, not a frightened forteen year old.
He was also a disqualified driver.
At Ian's funeral friends from all over the country turned up.
His parents say that it's a tribute to their son's popularity.
His mother hopes her complaint to the polcie will prevent anything similar happening to other families.
An investigation has begun into an accident which killed a police motorcycle instructor.
PC Peter Betts was on a training run when he crashed into a hedge as he tried to avoid a head-on collision with a lorry.
Two other police riders escaped serious injury.
GRAEME BOWD/Bodenham
Chief Supt PETER VINER/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
PC Betts was one of three officers riding in single file on the A417 near Bodenham in Herefordshire.
As they came round a bend they met a lorry overtaking a tractor.
Two of the riders left the road to avoid a head on collision.
One man escaped with minor injuries.
49 year old PC Betts pictured here on a school visit was killed instantly.
He had three children of his own.
Mr Betts was a senior instructor at the Thames Valley Police driving school based at Banbury.
Today the flag was at half mast.
Male speaker
Clearly he was not at fault.
Everyone is very sad about what has happened.
Voice over
Police motorcyclists have to undergo an intensive training course.
As in this case they often travel outside their own force area.
Riders have to learn to handle their machines in all conditions and high speed driving is part of the training.
It's known whether this could have been a factor here in the accident.
The tractor was being driven by a 16 year old boy.
Police say he was not at fault.
The driver of the lorry has been questioned and police have appealed for further witnesses.
New Age travellers who attacked police after being turned away from a festival have been moved on.
The travellers threw missiles, and abandoned some of their vehicles on the road when they couldn't get in to the three-day event.
But despite renewed protests from local people, who want the festival stopped, it's still going ahead.
TONY MAYCOCK/Reporting
MARTIN RICHARDS/Warwickshire Police
LINDA POLLOCK/Local Resident
MELVIN BENN/Festival Organiser
The convoy of nearly two hundred new age travellers was broken up by police early this morning.
The travellers were trying to get into a rock festival at Long Marston airfield near Stratford on Avon planned for this weekend.Roads around the site were blocked by the travellers as they confronted the police for most of the night.
He says’ We saw violence and physical and verbal abuse against officers and the organisers themsleves showed great restraint in the way they delt with the problem which was not really of their making.
But if we had not had this event we wouldn't have had those problems.Its the issue of New Age Travellers and illegal parties that produce what you saw last night.’
The problems with the New Age Travellers also helped confirm the fears of nearby villagers who have been trying to get the festival stopped for the past year.
This afternoon they called on environmental officers to check sound levels.
She says’ I don't object to the festival.
I object to the intrusion into my life.
I have lived here for twenty years.
When we moved here I was surround by sheep now I find I am surrounded by a sunday market, a bulldog bash, drag racing and now a pop festival.’
He says’ I think that for everyone who is objecting to the festival locally there are a lot more who are happy to see it go on and see the space used properly and there are twenty five thousand people here from all over the country that are loving the three days.’
The festival will feature more than twenty bands and if it all does get too much for you.
There's always the Bungy jump.
She screams
Dozens of street musicians have been competing for the title of Britain's best busker.
Anyone can enter as long as they have a proper act to perform and the ability to pull a crowd…whatever the weather.
KATE GARRAWAY Cheltenham
CHARLOTTE RIMMER Competition Organiser
From the sensational to the soulful to the simply good fun.
These buskers offer it all.
More used to being asked to move along quietly today they were being encouraged to stay put and perform as loudly as they liked.
Dozens of street musicians have been gathering in Cheltenham as part of the fringe festival.
Their ambition to become the greatest busker of them all.
She says we are looking for people who can pull a crowd as well as have a bit of fun.
For some this they hope is the first step on the road to a more stable musicl career to others it is just a bit of fun.
Male speaker
I have never busked before in my life.
This is just a whim but it is great fun.
Male speaker
I am fifteen I have just come down here in my lunch hour at school but I am having a good time.
Voice over
Even passersby found themselves roped in on the act.
I think this is great for Cheltenham.
It is very continental and it gives a great feel to the place.
I think it is great.
There is alot of talent in this town and it is good for people to hear it.
The winner of the title of best busker receives the prize of two hundred pounds and for the loosers, well there's always the near by bar to drown their sorrows.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Flood waters keep rising
FTSE up 1
The hundred shares index closed up one point three at twenty eight thirty three exactly 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty seven and down at two marks, fifty five.
Welcome back…
(ANNE) In a few minutes…the battle of the buskers.A host of street performers are vying for the title of Best of British…
(WES) But first…in spite of the weather…here's Tim Russon with summer sport 
TIM RUSSON
GARY CHAPMAN
STEVE CHAPMAN
NELSON ROWE
LORRAINE SHAW
then you start here…in the world of karting…each and every sunday in the summer these little machines will be buzzing and blasting around one of the tracks in the country…
Central South has two of the best circuits and most of the best drivers…our guide to the track is Gary Chapman from Chinnor…he races for the Shenington Club in Oxfordshire…has won three British Championships and is currently leading the race for this year's crown…
Gary Chapman says that lots of drivers start here in karting…its a good training ground for motor sport
Team manager for the Chapman team is dad Steve…he was once a driver himself…used to race against a lad called Mansell…
Steve Chapman says that he comes from the Shennington club and Nigel was a member there…he jokes that mansell was a big an idiot as all of them…breaking in the wrong place and that sort of thing
karting is split up into different classes…age and engine size decides all that but it is a sport that anyone can have a go at…
Steve Chapman says they run courses for beginners and he would advise youngsters to learn properly…they can go on and progress or just stay at whatever level they want…a lot depends on budget…
Gary Chapman says that at some tracks they can hit 120 miles an hour…as far as cost goes you can spend fifty thousand…or just five hundred…
The Chapman team are on a winning run this season…do they have dreams of great things…of formula one…
Gary Chapman says…they're happy in karting…it's a good sport…the racing is always very close and it's better than any other form of motor sport which is boring
One of the best young drivers is fourteen year old Nelson Rowe…he's another from the Shenington club…how did he start
Nelson Rowe says he was given his dad's old kart for christmas when he was five and he's gone on from there…it's brilliant good fun and quite dangerous with lots of crashes
The youngest driver on the grid at the moment is just 12.,…he's Daniel Barrett…and guess what he wants to be when he grows up…
Daniel Barrett says he wants to be a formula one driver
life in the fast lane…has its problems though…and our round-up starts in the pits with the Williams team from Didcot…they're going to appeal against a proposed ban on the technology that's helped them dominate the sport over the past couple of years…
hoping to dominate…the world of athletics this weekend is Gloucester hammer thrower Lorraine Shaw…she's UK champion…the first from the city's club ever to win a senior outdoor title…this weekend Lorraine takes on the best in the world as she competes in the AAA championships in Birmingham…the amazing thing is that up until this year she was a discus thrower…
Lorraine Shaw says…she wwent to a course at Cheltenham and the coach told her that she could be throwing as far as 60 metres in two years…now her ambition is to break the commonwealth record and eventually the world record
another Gloucestershire champion in action this weekend is Tony Allcock…it's not power and strength he needs to win but poise and style…
Tony is favourite to win the Scottish masters Competition which started at Westburn Park today…first prize is worth just over two and a half thousand pounds…
one of the favourites to win the British Hangliding Championships is Pete Harvey from Milton Keynes…he helped Britain to third in the world cup which has just finished in California…now he's taking off for Spain…that'ss where they're holding the British competition…why its hot sunny and its' not raining…
whatever the weather there'll be water flying at fairford this weekend as the Cotswold club stages the National Championships…qualifying starts tomorrow…the finals are on sunday…action all the way…
and we'll be out on the water on monday as banbury gets ready to launch its own water sports week…
The Royal Air Force celebrates its seventy-fifth anniversary next week at the International Air Tattoo at R-A-F Fairford, the biggest airshow in the world.
And tonight there's another chance to take part in our special Fairford '93 quiz.
You could win tickets for the biggest weekend in the air show calender.
Air shows now are quite common.
But between the First and Second World Wars, the R-A-F staged just one major air show a year.
Where were they held?
May, this year, was the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Dambusters' Raid.
The Lancasters had to drop the bouncing bomb from precisely sixty feet to hit their target.
Who led the Dambusters into action?
The R-A-F received its first jet fighter in January (1944) Nineteen-Forty-Four.
And that plane went on to set a world air speed record of six hundred and six and a quarter miles per hour.
What was it called?
And finally bang up to date with the Red Arrows: they will be just one of fifteen air display teams performing at Fairford.
Which plane do they fly?
There are those questions again.
The winners will receive family tickets, which will admit two adults and two children to R-A-F Fairford on either Saturday or Sunday next week.
Please send your answers on a postcard to:
AIR TATTOO COMPETITION
CENTRAL NEWS SOUTH
ABINGDON
OX141SA
That's AIR TATTOO COMPETITION CENTRAL NEWS SOUTH ABINGDON OX14 1SA
The cards must get to us by Tuesday next week, and the winners will be the first ten correct replies out of the bag.
A manager at the government communications headquarters faces disciplinary action after official records were destroyed.
CHELTENHAM
The catering manager at GCHQ in Cheltenham is one of fifteen officers from the Civil Service catering organisation facing action.
The investigation involves losses estimated at between five hundred thousand and a million pounds.
Office staff at Gloucester Prison have joined a one-day national strike against the privatisation of jails.
GLOUCESTER
About twenty staff took part in the action.
Any vital duties were carried out by prison officers.
The strike comes after the Home Office put thousands of prison jobs out to tender.
Hundreds of people are queueing at cinemas across the region to see Hollywood's new dinosaur blockbuster Jurassic Park.
It looks set to be a monster success, even though some youngsters at last night's premiere said it was too scary.
But could this fantasy of genetic engineering ever become reality?
We took a scientist along to find out.
MARIA COYLE/Oxford
MIKE RODGERS/Cinema Manager
JURASSIC PARK/Courtesy of UIP Universal
DAVID HARTSHORNE/Cellmark Diagnostics
Dr BRYAN SYKES/Institute of Molecular Medicine
PHILIP POWELL/University Museum
Voice over
Despite the rain the queue went on and on and on.Over eight hundred people turned out in Oxford to see the blockbuster everyone's talking about.
The cinema even had a special computer installed to cope with the demand for bookings.
Concern's been expressed by some parents about the violent nature of the film which is PG rated, allowing children of all ages to see it.
Stephen Spielberg says anxious parents should view it first.
The dinosaurs in the fictitious theme park do manage to dismember some of their human visitors.
But could it really happen?
Could the creatures which dominated the earth for 150 million years roam again.
Watching last night's premiere was scientist DAvid Hartshorne from Cellmark Diagnostics in Abdingdon the firm which pioneered genetic fingerprinting.
The discovery of dinosaur DNA hasn't happened yet but it could.
At the Institute of Molecular Medicine in Oxford where researchers probe the DNA on Anglo Saxon bones Dr Brian Sykes believes a Jurassic theme park is strictly fantasy.
But it's hoped the film will help to convince youngsters that natural history isn't a dinobore.
The plastic monsters look like ruling the planet for some time to come with the mammoth film and merchandise promotion that's going on, selling everything from dinosaur lip balm to brontosaurus burgers.
More than forty Russian orphans who came to Britain almost a year ago are preparing to go home.
They've been the guests of a charity in Worcestershire, and Central News has been following their progress…for a special programme to be shown this weekend.
ELIZABETH O'REILLY/Reporting
JUDY WENBAN SMITH/Child Psychologist
The orphans arrived last October unable to speak English and unsure of what was in store.
A charity in Malvern funded their visit and slowly they fit in with school life — St Bede's in Staffordshire took six Russian children.
He says Leningrad is in Russia
She says the Brownie Guide law.
Central News followed their activities over Christmas- our cameras and microphones eavesdropping on a party conversation.
But questions remain over the long term benefits of the orphans' visits.
She says it is unfortunate that there is a contrast between England and Russia.
The harsh reality is in Russia and the fairyland is in England.
Suddenly they will be back in Russia- booted out.
These issues plus a nearly fatal crisis involving one of the orphans are all explored in a special programme called Children of the Winter.
It's on at 3.20 on Sunday afternoon.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, wheels of fortune.
The young drivers trying the Mansell route to the top.
Plus, Fairford 93…win tickets for the air tattoo.
And right on song…the battle to find the best of British buskers.
A manager at the government communications headquarters faces disciplinary action after official records were destroyed.
CHELTENHAM
The catering manager at GCHQ in Cheltenham is one of fifteen officers from the Civil Service catering organisation facing action.
The investigation involves losses estimated at between five hundred thousand and a million pounds.
Office staff at Gloucester Prison have joined a one-day national strike against the privatisation of jails.
GLOUCESTER
About twenty staff took part in the action.
Any vital duties were carried out by prison officers.
The strike comes after the Home Office put thousands of prison jobs out to tender.
Hundreds of people are queueing at cinemas across the region to see Hollywood's new dinosaur blockbuster Jurassic Park.
It looks set to be a monster success, even though some youngsters at last night's premiere said it was too scary.
But could this fantasy of genetic engineering ever become reality?
We took a scientist along to find out.
MARIA COYLE/Oxford
MIKE RODGERS/Cinema Manager
JURASSIC PARK/Courtesy of UIP Universal
DAVID HARTSHORNE/Cellmark Diagnostics
Dr BRYAN SYKES/Institute of Molecular Medicine
PHILIP POWELL/University Museum
Voice over
Despite the rain the queue went on and on and on.Over eight hundred people turned out in Oxford to see the blockbuster everyone's talking about.
The cinema even had a special computer installed to cope with the demand for bookings.
Concern's been expressed by some parents about the violent nature of the film which is PG rated, allowing children of all ages to see it.
Stephen Spielberg says anxious parents should view it first.
The dinosaurs in the fictitious theme park do manage to dismember some of their human visitors.
But could it really happen?
Could the creatures which dominated the earth for 150 million years roam again.
Watching last night's premiere was scientist DAvid Hartshorne from Cellmark Diagnostics in Abdingdon the firm which pioneered genetic fingerprinting.
The discovery of dinosaur DNA hasn't happened yet but it could.
At the Institute of Molecular Medicine in Oxford where researchers probe the DNA on Anglo Saxon bones Dr Brian Sykes believes a Jurassic theme park is strictly fantasy.
But it's hoped the film will help to convince youngsters that natural history isn't a dinobore.
The plastic monsters look like ruling the planet for some time to come with the mammoth film and merchandise promotion that's going on, selling everything from dinosaur lip balm to brontosaurus burgers.
More than forty Russian orphans who came to Britain almost a year ago are preparing to go home.
They've been the guests of a charity in Worcestershire, and Central News has been following their progress…for a special programme to be shown this weekend.
ELIZABETH O'REILLY/Reporting
JUDY WENBAN SMITH/Child Psychologist
The orphans arrived last October unable to speak English and unsure of what was in store.
A charity in Malvern funded their visit and slowly they fit in with school life- St Bede's in Staffordshire took six Russian children.
He says Leningrad is in Russia
She says the Brownie Guide law.
Central News followed their activities over Christmas- our cameras and microphones eavesdropping on a party conversation.
But questions remain over the long term benefits of the orphans' visits.
She says it is unfortunate that there is a contrast between England and Russia.
The harsh reality is in Russia and the fairyland is in England.
Suddenly they will be back in Russia- booted out.
These issues plus a nearly fatal crisis involving one of the orphans are all explored in a special programme called Children of the Winter.
It's on at 3.20 on Sunday afternoon.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, wheels of fortune.
The young drivers trying the Mansell route to the top.
Plus, Fairford 93…win tickets for the air tattoo.
And right on song…the battle to find the best of British buskers.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
BRISTOL
CHRISTINE LAWER/Victim's Common Law Wife
1985/BIRMINGHAM
Voice over
Paul Rachael stabbed Brian Goldsworthy 11 times in the neck and head with a kitchen knife.
It happened in December inside the Swindon Crown Court Complex, where a custody case over 2 of the victim's 4 children was about to resume.
Mr Goldsworthy and Mr Rachael's girlfriend Linda, had been arguing over access for 6 years.
She didn't stay in court to hear the verdict.
But the victim's family were angry at the result.
Female speaker
He should have been done for murder.
I don't see how he should have got off with 7 years.
That's nothing to him.
He'll be out in a few years time.
It's not going to bring Brian back.
Female speaker
How did he cope during the custody cases?
Female speaker
Alright, he just wanted to see his children.
Female speaker
What do you think of Mr Rachael now?
Female speaker
I hate him.
If I could get hold of him, I'd kill him.
I hate him and her.
Voice over
The Judge said Rachael couldn't cope with the prospect of the family being broken up.
He was clearly suffering from reactive depression.
But a killing such as this would not be tolerated.
Rachael was jailed for 7 years.
The case has raised questions about courtroom security.
Rachael had hidden a large kitchen knife in his jeans pocket and smuggled it in unchecked.
In 1985, at a court in Birmingham, a similar stabbing happened and procedures were stepped up.
But the Lord Chancellor's Office who oversee Swindon Crown Court, would only say that security had been reviewed, but that they wouldn't reveal details.
The access battle which was due to be resolved that violent day in December, was settled in court, but by the blade rather than by the Judge.
Mrs Rachael will keep custody of the children.
Two armed robbers have been filmed by a security video raiding a building society.
The police also have photographs of the men committing a similar offence a week ago.
They now hope the robbers can be identified.
Nick Clark reports.
SECURITY VIDEO
OXFORD
Det Insp DAVID BUCKENHAM/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Just before noon today two men sauntered into the Bradford and Bingley building society in Summertown, the first pulled a gun and demanded cash.
The gun is pointed to the cashier's head as she opens the safe, and hands over the money.
The armed robbery is complete.
A week ago the robbers were captured on film during another raid.
This time it was the Leeds building society, again in Oxford, again it was an armed raid.
Police are hoping the men will be identified from these pictures, they say it's imperative they are caught.
Male speaker
It's vital these men are caught
Voice over
Police are appealing for anyone who may have seen the men to come forward.
And anyone who has any information should phone St Aldates police station on 0865 266172.
A woman is claiming four policemen broke her arm and two ribs while arresting her for a crime she didn't commit.
She's made an official complaint — just one of a record number received by Thames Valley Police this year.
Simon Garrett reports 
WORMINGHALL/Oxfordshire
HELEN BUCK/Complainant
Voice over
Helen Buck was asked by a friend to fetch a prescription from the chemist.
Once inside the shop, she was grabbed by 4 police officers who believed the prescription stolen.
Female speaker
One of them was knelt on my head, one was kneeling on my legs and one was knelt on the small of my back while the 4th one was putting the handcuffs on.
I'm shouting at the 4th one not to do them so tight because I couldn't move my fingers and they just told me to shut my mouth and go quietly.
They pulled me up off the floor with my hands up behind my back and they were walking me out of the chemist with my arms up and my head pushed down and one of them was kicking me in the back of my legs to get me over to the car.
Voice over
Mrs Buck's taken out an official complaint against the officers who arrested her at the chemist in Oxford.
3 months after the incident, she's still having physiotherapy for a blood clot in her wrist.
Hers is one of 419 complaints lodged against Thames Valley officers so far this year, up from 300 in the same period last year.
Thames Valley Police say they can't comment on the figures until they've been discussed by the relevant committee next week.
They confirm Mrs Bucks' complaint is being investigated under the supervision of the Police complaints authority.
A court has been told that a teenager who attacked a wheelchair-bound pensioner in his own home was high on the drug Ecstasy.
Seventeen year old Joseph O'Neil from Marsden in Oxford led the attack on sixty four year old Ralph Baughan at his home at Summertown in January.
Mr Baughan was pushed out of his chair and battered with a piece of wood.
JANUARY 1992/OXFORD
O’ Neil was sent to a Young Offenders' Institute for four years after admitting aggravated burglary and grievous bodily harm.
His accomplice
Kevin Kennedy, who's twenty two, was jailed for four and a half years.
Dozens of lives could be saved every year if GPs gave penicillin to people with the brain disease meningitis.
New research shows that if penicillin is given early enough to patients with the deadly bacterial form of the disease, they have a much better chance of survival.
Ken Goodwin reports.
LYNNE TIMPANY/Mother
Dr KEITH CARTRIGHT/Public Health Laboratories
FRAN GRAHAM/Meningitis Trust
Voice over
When Michael Timpany developed the symptoms of meningococcal meningitis his worried mother immediately called her GP.
He gave Michael an injection of penicillin — prompt action which could well have helped save his life.
She says that the hospital were pleased that the GP acted so quickly.
Researchers at Gloucesters public health laboratories have been carrying out a long term study into more than three hundred cases of meningitis.
They've found that the death rate among patients treated early with penicillin was nearly half that of those who were not.
He says that the message to doctors is: if there's any suggestion of meningococcal meningitis use penicillin — it's better to be safe than sorry.
The national meningitis trust was set up in Stroud after an epidemic of the disease in the mid nineteen eighties.
Staff there welcome the researchers findings.
She says that it's good to have confirmation that penicillin does work against this form of the disease.
The department of health has been recommending early penicillin treatment in meningitis cases since nineteen eighty eight, but there's never been any evidence that it works, until now.
Now with living proof of patients like Michael, and researchers evidence it's hoped that any doubts doctors may have had about penicillin will dissapear.
An RAF base which was due to close down will now be taken over by the Army.
Two regiments will move into RAF Abingdon next year.
But the Ministry of Defence says seventy-six civilian workers will still be made redundant.
Gareth Furby reports.
RAF ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Group Cpt PETER HENDERSON/RAF Abingdon
TERRY WILLIAMS/Sub-Postmaster
MARGARET DENNY/Landlady
TERRY COX/White Horse Council
Voice over
After a 60 year history, RAF Abingdon is closing at the end of this month.
And this afternoon literally everything connected with the base was on the move.
The land and the buildings were due to be sold off privately.
But now the Army is taking over.
Two transport and supply regiments from the Third Armoured division are returning from Germany, as part of the rundown of NATO forces there.
He says he's glad that the base is retaining its defence role.
It's expected more than 1,000 soldiers will move in next year.
For the base sub-postmaster Terry Williams, the decision is a lifeline.
He says business should be back to its best.
And the local village pub is also looking forward to welcoming the new customers.
Although the pub decor might need a few alterations.
She says the picutres of planes will have to come down and tanks and guns will go up.
The district council had campaigned for RAF houses to be opened to the homeless.
Now there's just delight that the army will be moving in.
He says the economic benefits will be very good.
The Army is expected to officially take over the base later this year.
And the first regiment will move in next March.
TIM RUSSON
DAVE NEWMAN/Organiser
JEZ AVERY
PHILIP AUGUST/Club Secretary
TONY WRIGHT/Captain
Voice over
Some of the great names in British rock music are staging a one-off concert tomorrow in aid of Leukaemia research.
Stars from bands like Deep Purple and Roxy Music will join Gary Moore and Sam Brown in an attempt to raise thirty thousand pounds.
Simon Garrett reports 
SAM BROWN
GARY MOORE
IAN PAICE Deep Purple
Voice over
Sam Brown headlines tomorrow night's conert at Oxford's Appolo theatre.
a year ago her mother Vicki died from liver cancer.
Sam feels she would approve of her participation
Female speaker
She'd have been down here telling dirty jokes to all the musicians.
Voice over
Gary Moore is a rock legend.
A guitarist's guitarist.
But even for him there's a thrill playing with bands who've been on top for quarter of a century
Male speaker
You realise they've all been at it a lot longer than I have.
Voice over
Deep Purple have had albums in the charts every year since nineteen seventy.
Drummer Ian Paice has been ever present.
He's performing tomorrow to help one of his own heroes
Male speaker
Mr Lineker's lad's not been well, and being something of a soccer fan I wanted to do my bit
Male speaker
It's a once in a lifetime thing.
It's the only time those people will be on stage together at the same time
Bosnia truce agreed at London talks
Voice over
A ceasefire agreement for Bosnia has been signed by all the sides at talks in London.
The truce will start on Sunday and last for two weeks.
Hurd escapes Sarajevo shelling
Shells have exploded in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo near the building where the Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd was meeting the Bosnian president.
Crewman dies in ferry fire
A sailor has been killed in a fire which crippled a Channel Ferry carrying more than a thousand people.
FTSE down 51
The hundred shares index closed down fifty one point five at twenty four thirty one point five.
The pound is up at one dollar ninety five, and down at two marks, eighty five.
That's just about it except to remind you that this weekend it's the ITV Telethon.
I'll be over at the Gloucester Docks to do my bit…
The whole event lasts twenty eight hours…starting at seven thirty on Saturday evening.
So if you're in the west of the region do drop into the docks otherwise you can keep in touch with events by watching your TV.
Voice over
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
An Oxford don says a return to Victorian manners would lead to a better, more considerate society.
In a new book, he claims the Victorians would be horrified by modern behaviour such as eating and smoking on the streets.
So, for how to behave, it seems we need to look to the past.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
ANDREW St GEORGE/Author
He says good manners are self-respect and respect for others, and not doing anything to offend other people.
But life's harder on the street…the Oxford don says the Victorians would have been horrified by what goes on.
Eating in public, which the Victorians were very down on…
Smoking…
People getting in the way…
It's the crowding in the streets.
This new book shows how good manners held nineteenth century society together…but with all we know about what was really going on, can the Victorians really have got it right…
He says we know that the Victorians went to the gentleman's club in the day and the brothel at night, before going home, but we could take on some of their values.
Meanwhile those who should know say our manners aren't as bad as we fear…we worry too much about which knife to use, whilst being irritating in other ways.
He says the worst is when you say good evening, sir, and they walk past you as if they don't exist.
He says I don't think we should go back to Victorian manners but people should be more considerate.
(message on radio) She says like not interrupting?
He says yes, but I won't tell him you said that!
A unique service is being offered to people who are finding it hard to look after the graves of their loved ones.
The Forget-Me-Not company will polish headstones, keep graves weeded and make sure there's always a supply of fresh flowers.
For many customers, especially the elderly, it's bringing peace of mind.
CLARE LAFFERTY Leckhampton
REX HARDEN Forget-Me-Not
MARJORIE WILLIS Widow
They got the idea when Rex, who'd just been made redundant, was talking to a friend of his who was also out of work.
Every cemetry has its tatty, overgrown graves.
Often it's because the relatives of the deceased have moved away from the area.
Or, they simply find the physical work too taxing.
Rex is now negotiating to undertake maintenance work on peace time service graves in the the county.
He hopes to give relatives peace of mind while their loved ones rest in peace.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
UN reaches agreement with Iraq
FTSE up 9
The hundred shares index closed up nine point nine at twenty-eight, forty-two point nine.
9.9 at 2842.9 The pound is up at $1.49 one dollar, forty-nine and up at DM12*55) two marks, fifty-five.
Time allowed = 07:07
Welcome back: In a few minutes, the Oxford Don who says we need a lesson in manners from the Victorians.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim Russon.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
JOHN GORMAN
LUC NIJHOLT
At 31 Luc Niholt comes to Swindon with more than a decade's experience in the Dutch Premier League…a spell in Switzerland…and three years at Motherwell where he won a Scottish Cup winners medal.
But as he was signing on the dotted line…
Colin Calderwood was closeted with officals from Spurs…preparing to make a move to London for 750 thousand pounds
Male speaker
He's virtually agreed terms with Spurs.
It's a real wrench and a disappointment.
We've tried everything we can.
We've offered him the best contract we could give him
Voice over
Calderwood's departure hard on the heels of Glen Hoddle's move to Chelsea will leave problems at the back and in midfield for Swindon.
But John Gorman's taking positive action…first with the signing of Norwegian centre forward Jan Orge Fiortoft, and now the dutchman.
Niholt says he'll feel at home with Swindon.
Male speaker
I've seen Swindon on the television in Holland.
They pass well.
They're my sort of team.
They play in the dutch style
Male speaker
He's not just a one position man.
He plays along the back line and in midfield.
It's nice in case of injuries to have someone that versatile, very helpful
Voice over
The manager says he's prepared to dip into the transfer market again to plug the gap Calderwood will leave.
Meanwhile he's pleased with his new signing…they talk the same language he says…
Scottish.
ad lib…back to the summer sport now…and the weekend round-up 
BRENDA CAMPBELL/British Horse Society
Brenda Campbell says to ride a 100 miles on a horse is quite something in itself but to ride it at a fast pace and be able to get off is semothing else and it's the best thing you can do with a horse
it was strength more than endurance that took Gloucester's Lorraine Shaw in to the final of the hammer competition at the three A's championship at the weekend…she finished third with a throw of 51.76…
records were broken at the National Powerboat championships at fairford in Gloucestershire…winner was midlander Mark Rolls…
and finally spare a thought for the Oxford boat crew they sank while competing in Turkey…choppy conditions on the Bosphorus were to blaim
Now as the city of Manchester goes all out to win the race to host the Olympic games…our own town of Banbury has beaten them to a gold medal…the local boatbuilding firm of Laser will be racing at the next Olympics and to celebrate they're having a water sports week 
GRAHAME HANDLEY/Cherwell District Council
RICHARD SIMMONDS/Laser
Grahame Handley says the town has a resevoir…the Oxford canal runs through it and there are lots of sports facilities…this week is all about promoting them
why this week…well in exactly three years time the Olympic flame will be lit in Atlanta for the next games…and one of the new sports will be laser sailing…and all the boats are being built by the company in Banbury
Richard Simmonds of laser says that success doesn't happen overnight…they've been in Banbury since the early seventies and have built 150,000 boats…he says it's about time that people in banbury had the chance to sail on their doorstep and there are lots of local clubs that offer people the chance
Graham Hanley says they've managed to beat Manchester to the Olympics without all the publicity and it all helps to put Banbury on the map
Police say gangs of ram-raiders are targetting vunerable country pubs.
Two pubs were attacked within minutes by a gang armed with a pick-axe.
They escaped along the M-4 at speeds of up to a hundred and thirty miles an hour.
GARETH FURBY/Wootton Bassett
BOB KAVARA/Pub Manager
SUSAN GILES/Landlady
Acting Chief Insp MIKE CRIPPS/Swindon Police
This is the latest addition to the ram-raiders armoury.
It was used by a gang…who smashed their way into two pubs early this morning.
Just after one am they targetted the Prince of Wales in Wooton Bassett, near Swindon.
The axe was used to break into three gaming machines.
He says he's got four children.
He was worried about them and by the time he came down the gang had gone.
The police arrived within a few minutes.
But the gang had already moved on to another pub just a mile or so down the road.
She says they heard a series of loud bangs.
The dog chased them off.
The pick axe was left embedded in a fruit machine.
And the police chased the gang along the M4, at speeds of up to a hundred and thirty miles an hour.
Their stolen high-performace car was later found abandoned in Bristol.
In the past ram-raiding gangs have picked on high-street shops.
But the police fear they may now be moving onto new, softer targets
He says they are now going for pubs.
It's a new thing and of concern.
The police are now advising publicans in rural areas to consider extra security measures.
But they also warn ram-raiding gangs, especially when equipped with weapons like this, are dangerous and unpredicatable and should not be approached.
Council tax payers could face a bill for tens of thousands of pounds for policing a music festival.
Security guards twice clashed with revellers at the event.
Local people, who never wanted the event to be held are angry that they could end up paying for the three-day police operation.
HUGH OWENS/Reporting
PAUL GOODY/Villager
LINDA POLLOCK/Villager
MELVIN BANN/Festival Organiser
This morning twenty five thousand festival-goers began making their way back to their respective homes at the end of all points of the compass.
Most thought the event had gone well, and that the fifty pound entrance fee had been well-spent.
’ It was worth fifty quid because of the atmosphere and the friendship and things like that.’
’ Yes, it was alright, yes.’
’ Yes it was quite interesting.’
But some local residents disagreed.
As we prepared to interview a council official about the decision to allow the festival to go ahead on an airfield near Stratford-upon-Avon, an angry resident appeared and launched a verbal onslaught.
’ You can hear the noise from this airfield five miles away.
My daughter lives over on the main Oxford road.
You can hear it down in the village.’
Other locals were also unhappy.
This man lives nearly two miles away.
’ For four days we've had music you could almost dance to in our own front rooms — if you like that sort of music.’
’ The thump was dreadful.
And we were due to go out to work on Sunday.
I hope we did as good a job as we were supposed to.
But one never knows.’
Security at the site was heavy in an attempt to keep trouble at bay.
We had first hand experience.
No-body had told them we were expected.
This is how they operate.
From the organisers point of view the festival had been a success.
And they'll come back next year.
’ It was a huge success, I couldn't be happier with it.
Next year we'll certainly be back and we've certainly got a lot more plans to make it better.’
Warwickshire police refused to discuss their policing operation today.
But there's speculation that the total costs will run into tens of thousands.
One county councillor, Fraser Pithy, wants a clause written into any future agreement making the organisers liable.
Meanwhile residents brace themselves for another concert in two weeks time.
Small businesses which have been losing trade to a new supermarket say they're dreading the opening of a second one nearby, this autumn.
Their anger has been fuelled by plans to build a THIRD giant store on their doorstep, which they say would threaten the very fabric of their town.
TIM HURST/Stroud
TREVOR SEARBY/Trader
MIKE MUSTON/Stroud District Council
RUTH PARKHOUSE/British Retailers' Consortium
Traders have hit back with a T shirt campaign, warning town shoppers and town planners alike of what they see as a threat to the very fabric of the town centre.
They do have some support and sympathy from the district council.
Supermarkets themselves say they're catering for increasing customer demand, customers too seem to reinforce that attitude.
Planners in Stroud have so far rejected six schemes for a third superstore — but with the right scheme on the right site, they'll have to say yes.
(GARGY ADLIB)(HARRIET) Still to come on Central News, a Dutch treat for Swindon fans.
A new signing for the new season.
And a grave business.
Taking the worry out of caring for the departed.
In Central News tonight.
Killed by a stranger: Student admits stabbing tutor.
We want our money back.
Anger over the show that flopped.
And mind your manners.
Why the Victorians wouldn't approve.
Good Evening:
HARRIET RYLEY
A student has admitted killing an Open University lecturer while he was high on drugs.
Dr Elizabeth Howe was preparing to take a summer school when she was attacked in her room by Robin Pask.
GARGY PATEL
Pask had never met Dr Howe before he killed her and has admitted manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility.
But the prosecution says it was murder, and the crime WAS planned.
GRAEME BOWD/Leeds Crown Court
Voice over
A married man with three children Robin Pask worked as a laboratory technician and was studying part time for a degree.
But the jury at Leeds Crown Court heardthere was also a dark side to his nature.
He enjoyed pornographic filsm and magazines and he took drugs.
Last summer Pask went to the University of York to take a course.
It was there he launched a frenzied attack on a womanlecturer after a chance encounter in a corridor.
Dr Elizabeth Howe was taking an Open University Summer School she lived in Oxford.
Prosecution Counsel Steven Williamson described the horrific atrtack which took place in Mrs Howe's room on campus.
Earlier in the day Pask had bought a kitchen knife similar to this one Mr Williamson said that knife was used to inflict dreaful injuries.
Several hours later Pask was found wandering in the University grounds wearing a floral skirt and bathing costume taken from his victim's room.
When questioned by police he confessed to the killing and said he'd been drinking and taking amphetamines.
He said he'd been feeling depressed.
’ perhaps all that anger and hate directed against myself came out’he said.
I knew what I did was totally wrong.
I can't explain it.
I killed her for absolutely nothing.
I am not a butcher.
I don't go around killing women.’
In court his wife Christine admitted a lesbian relationship and said her husband had once caught her with another woman.
She said in the month before the killing he'd become depressed putting on four stone in weight and losing interest in life.
Dr Howe had written a book on drama.
She was married to a BBC exective and they had two small children.
Pask has pleaded not guilty to murder on the grounds of diminshed responsibilty.
But that plea has not been accepted by the crown.
The trial is expected to last ten days.
The jury has been told that both prosecution and defence will be calling expert witnesses to establish his state of mind at the time of the killing.
Traders at a country fayre are threatening to sue the event's organiser and sponsors after losing thousands of pounds in business.
They claim they were misled about the number of people who'd be attending the show — the first to be held.
The organiser can't be traced to answer the criticisms.
ERIKA BARNES/Stoke Mandeville
JONATHON ASTON/Trader
SEAN STEEL/Trader
LINDSAY OSBOURNE/Clerk
Dr PETER GROVES/Trader
Voice over
For these traders, the show was over before it began.
They'd come to the Chiltern Show at Stoke Mandeville on the understanding that more than 90-thousand people were expected to turn up.
They paid large sums to secure their pitches.
In the event the crowds didn't show.
Male speaker
I feel gutted.
I ordered more stock.
I would have sold more at a car boot sale.
Male speaker
I probably spent 4-thousand pounds.
I'd be lucky if I've taken 500-pounds.
Voice over
By day two of the three day show, the traders realised business wasn't going to pick up.
They confronted a representative of the show's organiser.
A tape recording, taken by someone at that meeting suggests that an agreement was made to compensate the disillusioned traders.
Male speaker
I'm offering you half of your money back and a thirty percent discount for next year, in return for your support.
Because I'm making you a fantastic offer.
Are you will to support us.
Voice over
The traders say the money was to be paid by one o'clock on Sunday.
It never appeared.
But the event clerk denied a rebate had been promised.
Female speaker
That's not quite true.
The traders were asked to give their grievences.
They concluded that they'd accept fifty percent back.
That's between the traders and the ownership of the company.
Voice over
But some stall holders still aren't happy.
They claim they've been taken for a ride.
Male speaker
A prime defendent for an action for misrepresentation must be the company, Chiltern Show Society limited.
They are the company we are suing.
Voice over
The landowner and organiser Alistair Macleod has not been available to discuss the complaints.
When traders tracked him down to his hotel room, he wouldn't answer the door.
Today he's nowhere to be found.
It's not just the traders who claim they've lost out.
The public too.
Those who did turn up paid nine pounds each to get in: Only to find many of the stalls were cutting their losses…packing up…and going home.
Badgers which have been the victims of cruel baiters are being introduced back into the wild.
A wildlife sanctuary is releasing eight of the animals into a special protected set.
Ken Goodwin reports.
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
TIM GOULD/Vale Wildlife Sanctuary
DONCASTER/Yorkshire
DEREK WHITCHER/South Yorks Badger Group
Voice over
These 2 badgers were rescued from baiters who were about to let their dogs kill the animals.
Badger baiting is illegal; yet despite tougher laws to protect badger sets scenes like this are not uncommon.
The rescued badgers have been recuperating at the vale wildlife sanctuary near Evesham, along with 6 others which were the victims of road accidents.
Now they're ready to go back to the wild, to a special purpose built set in Yorkshire which will be protected.
Most will be transported in the huts in which they sleep; though this one needs a bit of gentle coaxing.
The badgers are loaded into vans for the 4 hour drive to Yorkshire.
Once they've arrived at the secret location near Doncaster, they're placed into the care of the local badger protection group.
Badgers are quite rare in the Doncaster area, where digging and baiting is said to be rife.
Now conservationists want to rebuild the population.
Once the badgers have adapted to their new homes the fences will be removed and they'll be free to come and go as they please.
Watchful conservationists will make sure that baiters who've decimated the local badger population won't get their hands on these as well.
Fire crews from all over the world have been taking part in a car cutting contest.
It was a competition to test the skills they've learned in dealing with real road accidents.
Debbie Kelly reports.
MORETON-IN-MARSH/Gloucestershire
GORDON SWEETNAM/Calgary Fire Dept
CAROL EXTON/’ Victim’
MALCOLM EASTWOOD/Chief Fire Officer/Gloucestershire
Voice over
A road accident.
2 people are trapped.
Fire crew have to free them as quickly as possible without injuring them further.
It's a task fire officers tackle regularly, but this time it's been simulated as part of a competition, where crews from all over the world to compete against the clock and each other.
The crews had 20 minutes to free the 2 casualties.
Many like this team from Calgary in Canada, only managed to free one in the time.
Male speaker
The way the vehicle was hit, there was one person in the back so we had to do a 3-door conversion and made a 2-door car into a 3, so it took longer.
We probably could have got the driver out quicker, but the door was impinging on him so we could not use cutting equipment.
Voice over
For the volunteers who were trapped, it was a bit unnerving.
Female speaker
It was very frightening, even though you know it is not real.
I felt happier about the British teams because they gave the impression that they were more concerned about the victim than the vehicle.
Voice over
The aim of the competition was to exchange expertise and techniques from across the world developed in the different countries.
Male speaker
I think that the North American way is more agressive.
We attack the vehicle, whereas the British are more concerned with the total patient care before the extrication.
In North America we have paramedics to do that so we really go after the vehicle.
Male speaker
Competitions like this are assisting in the development of equipment and the interaction between teams in the arena and afterwards is absolutely superb.
Voice over
The ideas exchanged during the competition will be put into practise by crews when next they deal with a real accident.
In part two: Reaching new heights…mountain bikers find it tough at the top.
Quick on the draw…
Lone Star proves he's the fatest gunslinger in town.
And beans mean cash…a boss gets a taste of the Telethon treatment.
Hello.
ERIKA BARNES
PAUL HINTON
DAN COOK
DAVID NEWMAN/Race Director
SIAN ROBERTS
Voice over
They should have called it the charge of the bike brigade.
Hundreds of mountain bikers made Eastnor Castle in Herefordshire their home over the weekend.
They came…they saw…but not all of them conquered.
The Malvern Hills Classic meeting…now in its fourth year…isn't all about risking life and limb though.
It's a family event…with competitors from under twelve to over fifty.
But for the sport's elite there's no doubting it's tough at the top.
He says last year he suffered two slipped discs.
The top men race over thirty miles…the women twenty.
The course takes them through some of Herefordshire's most beautiful countryside.
He says it's not the toughest course but it's very hard and bumpy.
Around fifteen thousand spectators came to watch the thrills and spills…for the organisers it proved another successful Classic.
He says we've had great weather…great crowds and great races.
The races proved as gruelling as the competitors feared; the heat taking its toll.
She says the heat made it very tough but it was good fun.
Next year the Malvern Hills Classic promises to be bigger…better…and who knows, even bumpier.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
STOKE MANDEVILLE/Buckinghamshire
ANDREW McHARDY/Patient's Sister
Dr JOHN SILVER/Consultant/Spinal Injuires Unit
KEN CUNNINGHAM/General Manager
Voice over
One of the most advanced car production facilities in the world has been opened by Trade Secretary Michael Heseltine.
The new assembly plant at Rover's Cowley works in Oxford cost two hundred million pounds to build and will safeguard five thousand jobs.
Nick Clark reports.
MICHAEL HESELTINE MP/Trade Secretary
TIM BURGESS/Production worker
MIKE STEVENS/Manufacturing Manager
JOHN TOWERS/Group Managing Director
Voice over
It's taken 3 years to build.
A facility that's said to represent all the best in car manufacturing worldwide.
That's welcome news for the President of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine.
He heard how Cowley production could soon double to more than 100,000 cars a year.
Male speaker
It's very exciting, especially as the workforce have been involved.
Voice over
The plant is producing the top-of-the range Rover eight hundred, but later this year the production lines will be joined by a new Rover car, codenamed the SYNCHRO.
The idea is simple, raw materials go in one end and the completed car leaves the other.
At optimum efficiency the process will take 2 days.
The changes mean production per worker will be increased from 33 cars to 42; well above the European average of 31.
Male speaker
It's all much better now than it was.
Male speaker
It's all about involving the staff.
Voice over
Along the way, state of the art technology helps assemble the vehicles.
The process is monitored by computer.
It's all a welcome boost for Cowley after all the redundancies, the 3,000 jobs here now are safe, say Rover, who announced that contracts worth £236 million have been sealed.
Male speaker
This is the way forward.
Voice over
At the end of the week, production will finally cease in the Rover north works.
The Maestro and Montego will continue to be built at the south works, but negotiations are underway to sell the Maestro production line to Bulgaria.
Eventually the north and south works will be redeveloped as a business park, creating up to 5,000 new jobs.
As well as creating one of Europe's most compact and flexible car factories, the changes will also alter the Oxford landscape, the bridge over the ring road which ferries car bodies to the assembly plant will no longer be required and will disappear.
Police hunting a man who raped a woman at Swindon college have widened their search because they believe he may have moved out of town.
A total of 
SWINDON
Hercules crews from RAF Lyneham in Wiltshire have been forced to stop flying supplies into Sarajevo because of the intensity of the fighting.
The airmen are now standing by in Zagreb awaiting further instructions.
The United Nations has suspended mercy flights because of shelling around Sarajevo aiport.
So far the Lyneham pilots have flown nearly six hundred thousand tonnes of food into Sarajevo.
A former manager of Swindon Town, Lou Macari, has admitted breaking football league rules by signing unofficial contracts with top players.
But he has told a court he only did it because house prices were so high and new players needed a lump sum payment to help them move.
Gareth Furby reports from Winchester Crown Court.
Voice over
A petrol station assistant and her friend have been held up at knifepoint.
DURSLEY/Gloucestershire
A workman died when an eight-foot deep trench he was digging collapsed.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
The accident happened at the Princess Margaret Hospital in Swindon.
The workman died at the scene despite efforts to revive him.
He's been named as thirty-five-year-old John FitzGerald from Swindon.
An inquest will open today.
The Health and Safety Executive has already launched an inquiry.
Disappointment at Cheltenham, where rain stopped play in today's County Championship…and where yesterday wicket-keeper Jack Russell heard he'd lost his place in the England side for the Headingly Test.
But there was some consolation…
He fought back with one for the record books…or should I say, one hundred.
Voice over
A century; and this time well and truly out.
Gloucestershire's Jack Russell's 100th catch in Sunday cricket, courtesy of Yorkshire's Chris Pickles.
Russell may be out of the England side, but he's not down; hitting a cracking 6 high into the crowd in the last over of the match.
The next ball found the boundary again; 4 more on the score.
Then the winning shot, plumb through to cow corner for 4 more.
41 off 21 balls spoke volumes for the disappointed Russell.
And victory for Gloucestershire over Yorkshire by 3 wickets.
High winds and high drama off the west coast put the lasers and the darts to the test…sailing craft that is…designed by a boat firm in Banbury…and taken to the limit in their very own National Championships.
Voice over
The Laser single-handers are enough to send you in a spin.
Round and round for hours and hours.
When it's all hands to the deck in these craft, 2 often isn't enough!
The Welsh winds blew hot and cold during the National championships at the weekend taking competitors from 17 countries through hell and high water.
It's appeal is it's adaptability.
And soon it could be in a class of its own.
Laser sailing's on course for Olympic recognition.
In Devon it was the Darts day.
The Dart 18; a catamaran which is taking off quite literally, since it's launch a few years ago.
National Championship hopefuls have to master their craft in high winds and steep swell.
Not so much sailing; more like flying on the wind with maybe with a prayer.
Josey Wales, the One Arm Bandit and Lone Star have been in town for a final show-down.
Their aim — to beat the clock and each other in a competition to find the fastest draw in the country.
Debbie Kelly reports.
UFFINGTON/Oxfordshire
FRANCIS HAYDEN/Uffington Country/
BERYL RYMER/Charity Bell
PETE RYMER/One Arm Bandit
JOHN GILES/Lone Star
Voice over
They draw, aim and fire in a fraction of a second.
Sharp shooters such as Lone Star, Josey Wales and Dead are in town to find the fastest draw.
It's a long way from the wild west; more of a vale where the only horse around is the white one carved on a hill nearby, but Uffington has become the annual venue for the national gun slinging championships.
Female speaker
Every year one or 2 more people come along to see if they can take on last year's winner.
Voice over
The guns, which fire blanks, are exact replicas of those fired in the Wild West.
Competitors face each other, wait for a light draw and fire.
A computer registers the time of the first shot.
Female speaker
Usually when the second light comes on, you have to fire with your gun straight.
I sometimes do a bucket shot, which means I don't get my gun out and I shoot my leg off.
Male speaker
People practise in front of mirrors with each other.
Some have their own lights for practising and stand out in their gardens to practise with an empty gun, not with shells otherwise half the police force in the district would come around wondering what is going on.
Voice over
After an hour of fast shooting, Lone Star from Gloucester became Britain's Number One.
Male speaker
Inside you are going like the clappers because you are nervous and the tension is building up.
If you notice some of the cowboys are shaking, they can't help it, it's just the tension and the adrenalin gets going.
Once you get cool, you're in.
Voice over
Lone Star will be top draw at the clubs this year.
For the losers it's back to the mirror to prepare for next year.
Finally, our very last word on the ITV Telethon.
Central South would like to say a big thankyou to the thousands of people across the region who helped raise money.
Robin Powell pays tribute to those who ran, jumped, and dunked themselves in beans for charity.
Voice over
Asked to give a little; they gave a lot.
From Gloucester in the west to Aylesbury in the east, Central South viewers raised tens of thousands out of a nationwide total of more than £15 million.
Major puts faith in Mellor
The Prime Minister has shown his support for the Heritage Minister, David Mellor, in spite of recent reports about his private life.
Mr Mellor will continue to be responsible for bringing in new laws on privacy and press intrusion if necessary.
Alliance and Leicester likely to raise interest rates
The Alliance and Leicester Building Society, the fourth largest in Britain, is likely to raise its interest rates for mortgage lenders later this week.
EC calls to isolate Yugoslavia
The European Community is asking for what remains of Yugoslavia to be isolated from world organisations, like the United Nations, as violence continues in Sarajevo in spite of a ceasefire call.
Battered wife appeals against murder conviction
A woman who was repeatedly beaten and humiliated by her husband has gone to the Appeal Court to have her conviction for his murder overturned.
FTSE down 28
Billions of pounds were wiped off share prices amid fears over the state of the global economy.
The hundred shares index rallied to close down twenty-eight point two at twenty-four, o three point seven.
The pound is down more than three cents at one dollar, ninety-one and down at two marks, eighty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Now to the second in our Summer Gardens series.
We've been looking at horticulture on a grand scale.
(HARRIET NEXT)
Imagine gardens and grounds so huge one man has to spend half the year just trimming the grass verges.
BLENHEIM PALACE/Oxfordshire
The DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH
TREVOR WOODS/Gardens Manager
Blenheim Palace — an extravagent gift from Queen Anne to John Churchill, first Duke of Marlborough, as a reward for his services to the country in the war against the French.
There was a military precision about the grounds and gardens — this avenue, once lined with Dutch Elm lies to the north of the house…where a statue of the first duke overlooks his home — to the south, there was once what was called the military parterre garden — a formal gardens made up of box hedges and gravel walks — now long gone.
The open green space which replaced it is typical of the style of Lancelot’ Capability’Brown — the landscape gardener who dominated garden design in the eighteenth century.
The idea behind his work was to completely recreate a landscape, but leave behind something which looked completely natural.
He planted trees in carefully placed clumps and had two huge lakes created near the palace.
11.57/3 Now some of the trees he planted are coming to the end of their natural life and the present Duke of Marlborough has begun a restoration programme to replace them and keep the landscape gardens they were originally laid-out.
This is how the gardens to the east of the palace looked before the present duke's grandfather created the Italian gardens, and at the opposite end of the palace — this was the scene before today's water terraces were built.
Well to-do visitors would have taken it as their right to be given a tour of the house and gardens as they travelled the country in past centuries — today visitors from all over the world come to Blenheim — their entrance fees paying for its up-keep.
A small army of gardeners works round the clock to keep everything in shape:
There was once a rockery-keeper living in this cottage on the estate — it was his full-time job to take care of the rockery which was above the cascade created by Capability Brown, which does still exist.
There's still plenty of hard work to be done keeping the Victorian rose garden in shape — it's taken a battering by recent heavy rain, but will be in full bloom again soon.
It's two thousand rose plants have all been replaced over the last six years.
The present duke has made some additions — as part of the pleaseure gardens, he's added a maze, the second longest in the world — planted five years ago, it's yet to grow to its full height of 5 or 6 feet.
There's also the herb garden, newly opened it's to sell herb plants and seeds — and behind it something rather more exotic is growing — in the butterfly house…which houses 20 kinds of butterflies and moths in a temperature of eighty degrees.
It's full of exotic flowers to attract and feed them.
But these changes aside, the rest of Blenheim is still very much as Capabilty Brown designed it — and there can be little doubting that he'd be delighted to see his work still very much alive and admired today.
Two million people have been to see the film Jurassic Park since it was released in British cinemas just five days ago.
The hit movie has made dinosaurs big business — one company is struggling to meet demand for models selling at more than seventy pounds a time.
JURASSIC PARK/Courtesy of UIP Universal
SIMON GARRETT/Cheltenham
GRAHAM TURNOCK/Enigma Studios
HEIDI DAWSON/Enigma Studios
Even if you haven't seen Mr Spielberg's latest offering yet, it's probably remarkably familiar already.
These are the film's latest offspring.
Not made at Universal studios in Hollywood but Enigma studios of Cheltenham.
The model makers made their name with Staffordshire terriers on motorbikes.
They moved onto dinosaurs when the film was in the air, and now they can't make enough to meet demand
Male speaker
Our customers told us beforehand anything to do with dinosaurs we could sell.
So there was no financial risk
Voice over
Even at 70 to ninety pounds a time the models are a monster success.
More people have been taken on and they're working a sixty hour week to keep up.
Staff are so busy making the dinosaurs they they haven't even had time to work out how many they've sold
Female speaker
They've been going brilliantly.
We don't know how long it will last but we're convinced it won't just be a flash in the pan
Male speaker
We've even had customers ring up on a Wednesday after a delivery on Tuesday and say they're sold out.
They don't even have time to price them up before they're gone
Voice over
When the dinosaurs died out it was very sudden.
Something changed and they were finished.
Markets are much the same…the trick is to spot when people want a change or risk business extinction
The organiser of a country show which failed to pull in the crowds says he'll be holding a full enquiry into what went wrong.
But he's still refusing to meet stallholders who've lost money.
Some of them fear he's now deliberately avoiding them.
GARETH FURBY/Stoke Mandeville
JOHN CLEGG/Exhibitor
Voice over
Today the site of the ill-fated Chiltern show is deserted.
And the organiser's portacabin is empty.
Yesterday traders tracked down show chairman Alistair McCloud to his hotel room in Aylesbury, but he refused to answer the door.
Today he'd left that hotel.
Staff at his Glasgow office said he wasn't there.
And his spokesman in London said he wasn't prepared to talk.
She says doesn't know where he is.
He's got things to do and people to see.
The first-ever Chiltern Show was supposed to attract ninety thousand visitors.
But the crowds didn't show, and traders and exhibitors lost out.
He says along with friends he's owed one thousand pounds in prize money.
This afternoon show organiser Alistair McCleod issued a statment promising a full enquiry.
He says when it's complete he'll contact traders and address their greivances.
But the statement doesn't satisfy John Clegg.
He says it's rubbish.
The whole thing was overpriced.
Mr McCleods staff expect him back at his Glasgow office tomorrow afternoon.
But many traders have already vowed…if there is ever another Chiltern Show…they won't be taking part.
A decision to cut a town's tourist budget by more than half has angered shopkeepers and hoteliers.
They say a reduction in the number of visitors could put many traders out of business.
But the local council says it's being forced to cut back to meet Government spending limits.
RICHARD BARNETT/Malvern
NIGEL THOMAS/Malvern Hotels and Restaurants
KALI-ANNE FRASER/Shop Manager
KEVIN DOUGLAS/District Secretary
Male speaker
Many hotels and shops are on the borderline…this could put them out of business.
Voice over
One of the most vociferous campaigners against the reduction in tourism spending is Kari-Anne Fraser, who runs a Beatrix Potter shop in the town:
Female speaker
Any reduction in spending will close shops and put people out of work.
Voice over
But the council says it has no option over reducing spending to meet Government targets.
Over the next year it has to save more than a million pounds to avoid being chargecapped:
Male speaker
The council is still spending a fair amount of its budget on tourism.
It won't have the drastic effect people are predicting
Voice over
The council is hoping that local firms will help to fund tourism promotion in the future.
But many people fear that the sun is about to set on Malvern's tourist based prosperity.
The first two cases in a crackdown on Sunday traders have gone before magistrates.
Councillors decided to press ahead with the prosecutions despite the Government's recent announcement that it's to review the Sunday Trading laws.
MARIA COYLE/Oxford
Cllr PATRICK STANNARD/Oxford City Council
An entire river looks set to be designated as a sight of special scientific interest.
Nature conservationists hope the decision will help them fight plans for a new city bypass 
SIMON GARRETT/Aymestrey
JOHN BOX/English Nature
LUGG MEADOWS/Hereford
SUE HOLLAND/Herefordshire Nature Trust
The River Lugg is a home to otters, crayfish and many rare wild flowers.
It's been chosen as the latest sight of special scientific interest.
Inspectors will walk the river's length discussing the new protected area's boundaries with landowners.
Forming a protective partnership.
It's a rare distinction for a whole river to be chosen
Male speaker
It rises in Radnorshire in Wales flowing down to the Wye.
It goes through limstone and sandstone.
The bottom can be shingles or cobbles.
It has fast and slow flowing sections and forms a natural habitat for a variety of wildf
Voice over
These meadowlands have lain uncultivated for centuries.
No fertilizers or pesticides have ever been used here.
Lugg Meadows alongside the river in Hereford is already an SSSI, but is under threat from plans for the city's eastern bypass.
Campaigners say the new announcement could strengthen their arms
Female speaker
The Lugg Meadows have a reprieve.
Although the Inspector went against a bypass the Secretary of State wants to re-examine.
The river and the meadows are really one ecological unit though so the announcement of SSSI status has to be good
Voice over
The SSSI status doesn't automatically protect the Meadows from development.
But it will, if confirmed, undoubtedly give campaigners extra leverage
(Harriet ad lib)(Anne next) Still to come on Central News.
A great British garden.
The painstaking work that keeps Blenheim beautiful.
And back to their roots: A little piece of Poland in Swindon.
One of the largest Polish communities in Britain has been enjoying a style of dancing seldom seen outside its homeland.
Thousands of Poles settled here after the last war, but they've worked hard over the years to keep in touch with their cultural roots.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
RICHARD SCHMIDT/Choreographer
KRYSTYNA MOLYN/Polish Community Centre
Though it's now based in Montreal, the ensemble is dedicated to keeping alive the traditional dancing of its native country.
Female speaker
The music has a spirit all of its own.
Male speaker
Each region has its own style of dancing, so each dance is different.
Voice over
The dancers are the guests of the Polish Community Centre.
There are two and a half thousand Poles in Swindon.
When the Government closed two settlement camps near Cirencester in the early sixties, it was here they came looking for jobs.
As well as the Catholic chapel, the community centre boasts a shop specialising in Polish delicacies.
There's also a library stocking Polish books.
The Canadian visit's all part of a concerted effort by the centre's administrators to keep its members immersed in their own culture.
Swindon and London are the only British dates on the tour — next stop France.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Thai drugs women pardoned
Patricia Cahill and Karyn Smith, who were jailed for drugs smuggling, have been given a royal pardon by the King of Thailand.
Doctor tells of death threat
The Italian doctor who claims to have successfully given fertility treatment to a 58-year-old English woman has cancelled a trip to London because he received a death threat.
UFF admits Belfast Bombings
The outlawed Loyalist terror group the Ulster Freedom Fighters has admitted carrying out three bomb attacks on members of the SDLP.
Flowers for murdered child
Friends and neighbours of the murdered eight-year old Sean Williams have been putting flowers outside the block of flats where he was found.
PM warns on social chapter
John Major has launched another attack on the Social Chapter of the Maastricht Treaty, dismissing it as a socialist's charter.
FTSE down 19 at 2823
The hundred shares index closed down nineteen at twenty-eight, twenty-three point ninety 19 at 2823.90.
The pound is up at $1.50 one dollar fifty, and up at DM12*57) two marks, fifty-seven.
Time allowed = 05:51
In Central News tonight.
Fast track to disaster: High Speed Train hit by vandals
Anger on the beat: police say report threatens careers
And cut price holidays…council slashes tourism budget.
Good Evening 
ANNE DAWSON
Vandals who put a gas cylinder on a railway line have been accused of putting the lives of two hundred people at risk.
An express train ploughed into it at (70) seventy miles an hour.
HARRIET RYLEY
A second cylinder was removed from the track before a train could hit it.
Police say the vandals' actions could have had horrific results and they want the culprits caught before they strike again.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
SWINDON
Supt TONY THOMPSON/British Transport Police
ROSS MACKIE/British Rail
British Rail Video
It was struck by a crowded express train from Paddington travelling at a hundred miles an hour along the Great Western line near Swindon.
The police have described it as a miraculous escape.
Sortly after, a second cylinder was found on the London-bound track and removed.
The de-railment of another train, in an unconnected incident, meant long delays.
The impact itself caused severe damage to the front of and underneath the engine, but British Rail said it was a tribute to its design that there weren't any injuries.
The cylinders were left on the line betweenWroughton and Wootton Bassett, immediately opposite a council-run gypsy site.
There are similar cylinders on the site, and the police have been interviewing people living there all day.
Nobody we spoke to was prepared to comment.
Anyone with information is asked to contact British Transport Police.
Ironically, the incident comes in the wake of a new British Rail safety campaign urging young people to stay away from railway lines.
If children play on or next to the track, this video warns, they're putting their own lives at risk.
By obstructing it, BR said tonight, they're endangering the lives of a hundred and seventy thousand passengers who travel on the Great Western every day.
The man accused of murdering an Open University lecturer was taken ill and has been absent for most of the second day of his trial.
Doctor Elizabeth Howe, from Oxford, was stabbed to death last July while attending a summer school at York University.
The alarm was raised when she failed to turn up for a meeting with students.
Leeds Crown Court was hearing a statement about the reaction of a porter who found her body when Robin Pask asked to see a doctor.
As he was leaving the courtroom he collapsed.
Pask has denied murder.
It's expected he'll be at the hearing tomorrow.
Three people have been released on police bail following an attempt to smuggle drugs into a prison.
MILTON KEYNES
The drugs were discovered after two men and a woman were arrested outside Woodhill Prison in Milton Keynes.
A house was searched later and four thousand pounds worth of Ecstasy were discovered.
The three have been released pending forensic examinations of the drugs.
Policemen and women from all over Britain have gathered to protest over the controversial Sheehy report.
At a rally in London, they expressed their anger at the proposed changes in the way they work.
They say the report has already damaged morale and could ruin their careers.
GRAEME BOWD Reporting
PC DOMINIC HEATH Thames Valley Police
PC JUSTIN HAMMOND Thames Valley Police
Sgt PETER DAVIES Thames Valley Police
Chief Insp GEOFF SMITH Head of Training
PC BILL CAIRNEY Police Diver
Voice over
The Sheehey plan has brought widespread condemnation from junior and senior officers alike.
Today men from the Thames Valley force took the afternoon off to join a national protest in London.
The most radical shakeup for years would affect every aspect of the police service from pay and conditions to career prospects and pensions.
Two young constables who joined the force just over a year ago expressed concern at a plan to judge police performance on the number of arrests.
They say that would put an end to common sense discretion.
Male speaker
If we get paid per arrest then to get a decent wage we will have to do it.
Male speaker
Discretion is a big part of the job.
That would go totally out of the window.
Voice over
A course in communication skills at the force's training college in Berkshire.
In recent years the standard of new recruits has risen.
But there are fears that this could change.
The reforms would mean lower pay for newly qualified officers.
Male speaker
If we're only offering £10,500 a year to join the police force, for people to put their lives on the line, it not the sort of money that would attract the right people.
Voice over
Worries too for senior officers.
The college's head of training plans to retire after 30 years service.
He'll be 49.
The Sheehy plan could mean he would have to stay to 60 to get a full pension.
Male speaker
I find that unacceptable.
Many officers are despondent about the proposals in the Sheehey report.
Voice over
The reforms could also mean that the most experienced specialist officers, such as police divers, would have to go back on the beat.
A complicated points system could stop men in this type of role getting the top rates of pay.
Male speaker
No-one likes moving from the job they like doing.
If you are earning more money and you havn't got enough points, they could move you from a specialist department to a police station.
Voice over
The Home Secretary has not yet made a decision on what recommendations if any will be adopted.
Thousands of officers in London today were pressing him to ignore the report altogether.
Mellor condemns reports on wife's eyesight
The MP, David Mellor, has condemned press reports on the condition of his wife's eyesight saying such items are not in the public interest.
Conservatives probe claims of smear on Ashdown
The Conservative Party is probing claims, made by the editor of the Sun newspaper, that a Cabinet Minister attempted to smear the name of the SLD leader, Paddy Ashdown during the general election campaign.
Halford retires dropping sex discrimination case
Alison Halford has dropped her sex discrimination case against Merseyside Police and announced that she is to retire on medical grounds with a lump sum payment and pension.
Positive moves in Middle East peace talks
After talks in Cairo, the Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak, has said that he and the Israeli Premier, Yitzhak Rabin, are in a position to push forward the peace process in the Middle East.
FTSE up 11
The hundred shares index closed up eleven point nine at twenty-four, fifteen point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety-one and down at two marks, eighty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
School children from all over the country have been at the home of British motor racing putting their own hand-built machines through their paces.
They're all part of a project to encourage interest in technology in the classroom.
Simon Garrett reports.
SILVERSTONE/Northamptonshire
RACHEL HANMER/Bishop Perowne School
JAMES HUNTING/Bishop Perowne School
DON LINDSAY/Director Rover Cars
ALEX DAVIDSON/Bishop Perowne School
Voice over
Not many 15 year olds get to drive in Nigel Mansell's tyre treads at Silverstone.
However, these youngsters are striving not for speed, but technical excellence.
They've been sponsored by Rover dealers round the country to build the kit karts and introduce their own technical modifications.
Among the national finalists pupils from Bishop Perowne High School in Worcester.
Female speaker
I just like making things.
I'd like to go into engineering.
Male speaker
At first I hadn't got a clue what to do.
You have to learn as you're going along.
I've learnt a lot.
Voice over
Rover set up their Career Challenge as a way of interesting young people in engineering and the car industry.
The scheme frequently ties in with work experience either at a dealership or at Rover.
Male speaker
The basic project is to put a charging system onto the kart and the standard's brilliant.
Electronics, engineering their inovation is very impressive
Voice over
At some schools the project counts towards GCSE work.
In all cases it gives the teenagers taking part a chance to see if engineering and the motor industry are for them.
They've had to find practical solutions to practical problems.
Male speaker
My main part has been to design an adjustable bracket to attach to the alternator and tension the pulley.
We had to do plenty of research looking at cars and in books.
Male speaker
I had to learn how to cast and wire up a battery.
It's been good fun.
My favourite part's actually driving the kart round.
Voice over
Which is of course how it should be, but with top speeds of 35mph, Mr Mansell's got nothing to worry about just yet.
Cricket…
Gloucestershire fast bowler Courtney Walsh has taken his fiftieth wicket of the season.
The comic operas of Gilbert and Sullivan are featured in a new set of postage stamps.
They've been issued to celebrate the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the birth of the composer Sir Arthur Sullivan.
They were launched by the D'Oyley Carte Opera Company who're performing in Oxford this week.
Debbie Kelly reports.
OXFORD
JEFF NAGLE/Royal Mail Oxford
CAROL LESLEY-GREEN/DAVID FIELDSEND
Voice over
150 years after the birth of Sir Arthur Sullivan, the D'Oyley Carte Opera Company keeps his music alive.
Stars from The Mikado and the Yeoman of the Guard, the 2 light operas the company are performing in Oxford this week, took time away from rehearsals to launch the new Royal Mail stamps which depict 5 Gilbert and Sullivan favourites.
Male speaker
People will have been queueing up this morning to buy these stamps.
They really are tremendous.
They are used as gifts, collectors items.
They are part of history.
There will be a lot of opera buffs interested in these particular stamps as well as the normal collectors.
Voice over
It's 4 years since the D'Oyley Carte Opera Company found a new home in Birmingham, but many of the stage clothes date back to 40s; some even to the last century.
Female speaker
The actual yeoman costumes date back to the 1940s.
Male speaker
They weigh a stone and a half so they are very heavy to carry around for 3 and a half years.
Voice over
This year's is the longest tour for the company; 126 performances of the Mikado and 88 of Yeoman of the Guard.
Those waiting for the other light operas depicted on the new stamps, will have to wait a little longer to see them staged.
A collection of Diana Dors' personal memorabilia has been sold at auction.
It's the first time the diaries, film scripts and private photographs of the 1950's star who was born in Swindon have been seen by the public.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
PETER BEAL/Sotherby's
MAY 1984
RAYMOND SANDERSON/Collection Owner
Voice over
Diana Dors was born Diana Mary Fruck in Swindon in 1931.
She came from an ordinary background…her father was a railway clerk.
But through her looks and forceful personality she quickly became Britain's best known actress of the 50's.
The press called her Britain's answer to Marilyn Monroe.
Her life story is contained here…eight suitcases of personal memorabilia sold today at Sotherby's.
The collection came from the estate of Diana and her late husband Alan Lake.
Among the collection are hundreds of photographs documenting her career…
her first film at the age of fourteen, when she still lived in Swindon.
Private photos never seen before by the public.
Stories of her private life often made the headlines…they were all kept in carefully assembled scrapbooks.
In her later years a thyroid condition destroyed the figure that made her famous.
But her popularity remained intact.
Diana Dors died of cancer in 1984, aged 53.
Her husband, Alan Lake, never got over it, and five months later, he killed himself.
A diary which records her last days was among the collection sold today.
It was bought by a life long fan from Tyne and Wear for two thousand eight hundred pounds.
Diana Dors was never really thought of as a great actress…indeed she once described her film career as’ a lot of make believe held up by 37 inch bra cups’.
But she was always adored by the British public, especially the people of Swindon, where a statue stands as a permanent memorial.
A rescue plan's been drawn up to save England's hedgerows, The government is offering farmers grants totalling three and a half million pounds to restore damaged hedges and plant new ones.
Mark Kiff reports.
NASH/Buckinghamshire
DAVID MACLEAN MP/Environment Minister
Sir JOHN JOHNSON/Countryside Commission
CHRIS PHILLIPS/Farmer
HENRY BONNER/Farmer
Voice over
The only time you normally see so many people entering a wheat field is to look for corn circles.
But this is no hunt for an extra-terrestrial creation in deepest Buckinghamsahire.
This is the launch of the government's latest attempt to conserve the endangered countryside.
Farmers are being offered up to £300 in grants to save 100 metres of hedgerow.
He says we ask farmers to produce food which we pay for.
And we also expect them to look after the countryside and that's something we must pay for.
Britain's hedgerows have been vanishing at the rate of 1,800 miles a year.
Once they dominated the countryside, but intensive farming led to many being ripped up and the sheer cost of maintaining them has seen many fall into neglect.
He says that hopefully this scheme will help conserve hedgerows for everyone's enjoyment.
But what of the farmers expected to carry out the work in a time of recession.
He says a financial incentive is just what farmers need to encourage the conservation of hedgerows.
He says it's a good idea, but is worried the money being offered won't be enough to do the job.
If the scheme does get the enthusiastic backing of farmers, the government hopes that up to ten percent of the countryside's most damaged hedgerows could be saved.
Twenty-five years ago the Royal Air Force took delivery of its first Hercules Aircraft, and since then it's proved its worth time and time again.
The Hercules carried out vital wartime duties in the Falklands and the Gulf.
And in peacetime, the aircraft has brought aid to areas of famine, and joined in other humanitarian missions — the latest to wartorn Sarajevo.
In the first of a three part series, Erika Barnes looks back at the life of the plane affectionately known as Fat Albert.
Flt Lt BRIAN SKILLICORN/Hercules Pilot
PAUL BEAVER/Jane's Defence
Gp Cpt DAVE PARSONS/Former Hercules Pilot
Flt Lt CHRIS KEMP/Former Hercules Pilot
Sq Ldr JOHN CAIRNS/RAF Gibralter
Voice over
Wherever help is needed, the Hercules is always there.
The RAF's robust and reliable workhorse. 25 years of service to Queen and Country.
It's known affectionately to those who fly it as Fat Albert.
Male speaker
It's a nice aircraft.
It's known as Fat Albert after a comic strip character.
It's dirty, noisy.
It carries freight and passengers.
It all adds to the character of the aircraft.
Voice over
The Hercules came over from Lockheed in America, to replace the Hastings which was tired and outdated after seeing action during the war.
Male speaker
The RAF was looking for something to work in the arctic, the desert.
Only the Lockheed Hercules would fit the bill.
Hercules conjures up the image of a weight lifter.
It sums up how it carries large loads.
Voice over
And so in 1967 the first Hercules arrived at its new home.
Male speaker
Lyneham, Wiltshire.
A new aircraft for RAF Support Command Squadron 36, the Hercules.
66 of these impressive air transporters are on order.
Their mission to take troops and weapons to any theatre of war in the quickest time possible.
Voice over
Group Captain Dave Parsons had experience of the new plane before it crossed the Atlantic.
He flew C-130s in America, where an accident prompted a rethink over the design of a forward cargo door.
Male speaker
This particular one let go, blew out over Tennessee.
It caused major damage.
The engine was written off, peeled away the fuselage.
Unfortunately one person was killed.
The damage meant a nine month repair job.
The strength of the airplane saved us.
Voice over
Since the early days, the Hercules safety record has been exemplory.
Like this Spanish C130 showed at Lyneham during the Gulf war, even with 3 engines, it can land safe and sound.
It's an aircraft which has been rarely out of the headlines in it's 25 years with the RAF.
Male speaker
We were hijacked in Nicaragua and managed to get away from that.
Then there was the famine relief work, the Ethiopean situation, the Kurdish situation.
The evacuation of Sigon.
The Hercules is wherever it's needed.
Voice over
There's also a less glamorous, but necessary role for the RAF Hercules; to supply far flung British outposts.
The base at Gibralter welcomes on average a flight each week.
The Hercules is as dependable as the rock itself.
Male speaker
We're a forward capacity base with other peoples aircraft.
We need to exist, a rapid lifeline to Britain and the Hercules is that beast.
Voice over
Vital at times of peace and also at times of war.
Tomorrow, the Hercules first in and last out when duty calls.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
MALVERN/Worcestershire
23 MAY 1992/CASTLEMORTON/Worcestershire
PETER SILVER/Solicitor
Voice over
The New Age Travellers mounted the protest outside Malvern Magistrates Court.
They were calling for the right to hold free festivals and raves like the week long event at Castlemorton Common at the end of May.
Their group, Spiral Tribe provides music at the raves.
Meanwhile inside the court, 9 travellers were charged under the 18th century law of causing a public nuisance.
It was alleged they had helped to organise the Castlemorton free festival.
The case was adjourned so they could be committed to Crown court for trial.
Solicitor, Peter Silver represents some of the travellers.
Male speaker
They will plead not guilty.The use of an eighteenth century law looks like scraping the barrel.
Voice over
13 other travellers were dealt with by the court for a variety of motoring offences arising out of the Castlemorton event.
Women council workers will NOT now have to return to using a car park where one of their colleagues was murdered.
Councillors had told them they could no longer use a less isolated car park next to the council offices, but now look certain to reverse their decision tomorrow.
Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
Cllr KEVIN STEPHENS/Gloucester City Council
LYNNE PHILLIPS/NALGO
Voice over
Every morning for the last two weeks staff from Gloucester City Council have picketted outside their North Warehouse office.
They've been protesting against the council's decision to stop the car park there from being women only.
That privilege was given to the women a year ago after one of their colleagues Anna McGurk was murdered in the more remote Castlemeads car park.
A fortnight ago the council decided that security at Castlemeads had been improved to such a degree that the women could start parking there again.
The women though say they still don't feel safe.
After a fourten day deadlock, the council now looks set to reverse it's decision.
At a meeting tomorrow a proposal will be put forward that the car park revert back to female use for the time being.
The women are claiming a victory.
Staff will lobby the councillorsfore tomorrow's meeting and present them with a two thousand signature petition.
Flash floods caused thousands of pounds worth of damage to houses after last night's storms.
In one area houses were flooded for the second time in six weeks, and residents are demanding the council take action to provide adequate drainage.
Liz Hannam reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
MARGARET JEBBIT/Flood Victim
GIORGIOS XIOUPOUPPAS/Flood Victim
RON BARNETT/Cherwell District Council
CHIPPING NORTON/Oxfordshire
Voice over
It's the 5th time in 4 years that Margaret Jebbit has had to clean up her kitchen after flooding.
Last night in Banbury almost one and three quarter inches of rain fell in 2 hours.
Emergency crews were called to pump water from 7 houses.
The worst affected area was Middleton Road where residents blame the Cherwell District Council for not providing adequate drainage.
Female speaker
My flat was under an inch of water and I had to move things upstairs.
It happens frequently and it's very disturbing.
Male speaker
My basement was like a swimming pool.
The council should do something.
Voice over
The Council denies it's being negligent.
Together with Thames Water, it's just finished a £350,000 drainage project for the Middleton Road area.
It's launched an investigation into what went wrong last night.
Male speaker
We are very closely monitoring the performance of the work.
If future work is needed we will be making representations to Thames Water.
Voice over
In addition to the flooding, the storms brought other problems.
This house, one of the highest in Chipping Norton, was struck by lightening and had a 6ft hole ripped out of its roof.
A jury's been told that the former manager and chairman of Swindon Town cheated the taxman in an effort to improve the club's playing staff.
The claim was made by the prosecution in its summing up at the trial of Lou Macari and Brian Hillier, who deny conspiring to defraud the Inland Revenue.
Gareth Furby reports.
GARETH FURBY/Reporting
Voice over
The vast majority of parents are more frightened that their children will be abducted than anything else, according to a report out today.
But while the dangers are real, there's also a risk that children are being over-protected.
Now the child safety group behind the survey is urging parents and children to follow realistic guidelines.
KIM BARNES/Kingham
CHRISTOPHER WATTS/Victim
SANDRA WATTS/Christopher's Mother
MICHELE ELLIOT/Kidscape
Insp BILL HOLMAN/Thames Valley Police
A year ago a man tried to abduct him while he was doing his early morning paper round.
He says I got grabbed from behind.
I struggled and punched him in the stomach.
I hit him again and then he ran off.
She says before you were aware of it but until it happens, it really gives you such a jolt.
In a new survey from the child safety group Kidscape 98 per cent of city parents…96 per cent in rural areas…say fear of their children being abducted is their overriding worry.
Nationally seven children are abducted and killed by people they don't know each year…a tragedy for each family but clearly not an everyday threat…
Kidscape say it's a fine line…
She says we don't want to destroy children's innocence on the other hand we want to alert them to the dangers.
But if an adult walked up to me and said come and have a cup of coffee my reaction would be I don't know you.
That's the same reaction we want to instil in children.
But with the summer holidays…and freedom…around the corner the dangers need to be balanced.Crime prevention officers working with children say there are obvious guidelines…
He says children have to tell their parents where they're going, who they're with, dependent on the age of the child, but not to lose sight of the fact that the majority of children are safe on the streets.
Christopher Watts doesn't take the same risks any more.
He says I don't go out on my own, I don't leave the village as much.
I used to go out on bike rides up to the lake but I don't any more.
If the safety message gets across…his little sister Hannah will grow up without the fear of what happened to her brother.
(Harriet ad lib)(Anne next) Still to come on Central News.
Flying into Fairford.
Display teams gather for the world's biggest airshow.
And Betty's big day.
What the Queen said to the foster-mum.
Welcome back.
The world's biggest airshow is just two days away — the International Air Tattoo at RAF Fairford.
(HARRIET NEXT)
Aerobatic display teams from fourteen different countries will be flying in, but none will have travelled further than the Falcons from Chile.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
Col LUIS BOLTON/Chilean Air Force
Wg Cdr IAN ROBERTSON/RAF Lyneham
They're one of 14 national display teams limbering up for this weekend's International Air Tattoo at RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire.
Chile is Britain's oldest ally in the Southern Hemisphere…and the Falcons were determined not to miss out on the celebrations to mark the 75th birthday of the Royal Air Force.
Some birthday treat it is too.
They've learned a manoeuvre or two from the Red Arrows, but the Chileans' repertoire includes more than a few party-pieces of their own.
They're based for the next few weeks at RAF Lyneham, which is proud to be playing host to one of the most spectacular display teams in the world.
So much for the hype…here's a taster of what the Falcons have in store for the Air Tattoo.
A word of advice if you're hoping to catch a glimpse of the Chileans at Fairford — get there early.
The Falcons have been cast in the role of curtain-raisers and will open the show on both days.
Now to the results of our competition to win family tickets to the International Air Tattoo.
We had an enormous response to the quiz we set you, but before we announce the winners, here are the answers to our four questions.
May, this year was the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Dambusters' Raid.
We asked who led the Lancasters into action when they dropped their bouncing bombs.
It was of course Wing Commander Guy Gibson.
The R-A-F received its first jet fighter in January (1944) Nineteen-Forty-Four.
What was the name of the plane that went on to set a world air speed record of six hundred and six and a quarter miles per hour.
The correct answer was the Gloster Meteor.
And finally the Red Arrows, one of fifteen air display teams performing at Fairford.We asked which plane do they fly?
The answer was the Hawk.
Here are those answers again: Question one: Hendon two: Guy Gibson three: the Meteor and four: the Hawk.
We had more than 500 correct entries.
We picked ten out of the bag, and here they are:
Mr L.A. Fowler from Credenhill in Hereford
Miss N.K.Jones, of Bourton in Swindon
Dr G.Ludbrook from Bibury in Gloucestershire
Mr S. Mayland of Aylesbury in Buckinghamshire
Mr G Flowerday from Ross on Wye in Herefordshire
Mrs D.W.Simmonds from Iffley in Oxford
Mr B.E.Ward from Springbank in Cheltenham
Mr I Pollit from Faringdon in Oxfordshire
Mr R.F.Hickman from Stroud Road, Gloucester and Mr Thomas Mutch of Didcot in Oxfordshire
The winners each receive a family ticket to the air tattoo at RAF Fairford on either Saturday or Sunday.
Prison officers at a new jail say it's becoming a dumping ground for unruly inmates.
The claim comes after prisoners started a series of fires at the jail on the day of its official opening.
KAREN THOMPSON/Bullingdon Prison
RON ADAMS/Prison Officers' Association
JOHN THOMAS-FERRAND/Governor
DEREK LEWIS/Prison Service Director General
In the last twenty four hours there's been a series of fires started by a handful of men in this block, though no cells have been damaged.
The Prison Officers Association says staff morale has plumetted because they're having to deal with more difficult inmates without having enough for them to do.
The Association wants a six month freeze on troublesome inmates being sent to Bullingdon and an injection of one hundred thousand pounds to provide new leisure facilities.
Bullingdon's governor says there's no way every aspect of behaviour can be controlled because there'll always be those who want to hit back at the system.
Bullingdon opened sixteen months ago, holds more than five hundred and fifty inmates and has abudget of eleven million pounds.
The Director General of the Prison Service was guest of honour at the official opening.
He admired the work going on but said there'd be no extra money.
And he refuted claims that Bullingdon is becoming a dumping ground for troublemakers.
The prison managers say if inmates use their own intiative there's no need to be bored and cause trouble.
They're pleased with the training and education programmes already up and running, and say that given time to develop them further, things will settle down.
Pornographic video tapes, worth more than four and a half thousand pounds, have been seized in raids on two shops.
Trading standards officers say some of the tapes carry false eighteen classifications.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
ANTHEA DAVIES/Trading Standards Officer
It followed a tip off from a member of the public about the explicit sexual nature of material available for sale or hire.
Many of the tapes have no legal classification but some are marked with false labels.
Trading standards are liasing with colleagues in Liverpool where similar material has been found.
The British Board of film classification is currently looking at the films.
Officers say prosecutions are likely and anyone found guilty under the Video Recordings Act faces fines of up to twenty thousand pounds per tape.
Checks are made regularly on outlets selling pornographic material.
Trading standards warn that the law will be vigorously enforced to keep illegal and obscene material out of circulation.
Joyriders have threatened to stab a farmer's son who ran to help them when they crashed on a country lane.
They said they had a knife and would attack him if he didn't hand over his own vehicle.
Police say it's another case of rural areas being plagued by gangs of city criminals.
TIM HURST/Dursley
THOMAS REA/Farmer's Son
The pick-up truck was found abandoned during the night in Bristol, its radio stolen.
Gloucestershire police say southern parts of the county are being plagued by gangs from Bistol who use high powered cars to commit crime.
Sooner or later someone is going to be killed in such an accident.
In Central News tonight.
Not a penny: a judge rejects a paralysed woman's claim for damages.
When faith can cost a life: the car crash victim who refused to be given blood.
And every parent's greatest fear: could my child be abducted?.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
A solicitor who became paralysed after a routine jaw operation has lost her fight for compensation.
A High Court judge has ruled that her injuries weren't the result of negligence.
HARRIET RYLEY
The hospital has always maintained that her paralysis was caused by a rare condition which had nothing to do with the operation.
But Michelle Howard and her family say they're devastated by the outcome.
ROBIN POWELL/High Court
SWINDON
MICHELLE HOWARD/Plaintiff
NICK HOWARD/Michelle's Father
ELIZABETH HOWARD/Michelle's Mother
She became paralysed at sixteen, the day after undergoing a routine operation on her jaw at Poole General Hospital.
Michelle — who's since qualified as a lawyer and specialises in medical accident cases for Townsends Solicitors in Swindon — sued Wessex Regional Health Authority.
But now Mr Justice Morland has ruled that the authority wasn't liable for her injuries.
The Howards had hoped for more than a million pounds in compensation…the cost of caring for Michelle, and paying for the court case, has stretched their finances to the limit.
But the family has no regrets about taking the case so far.
Right now, the Howards are just grateful for some time to themselves.
The health authority declined to be interviewed, but in a written statement it said Michelle Howard's paralysis was caused by a rare condition known as a fibro cartilagenous embolism, which developed without any negligence by hospital staff.
The authority also expressed its deeepest sympathy for Miss Howard and its admiration for her courage.
An inquest has been told that a Jehovah's Witness injured in a road accident died after relatives told doctors not to give him blood.
But the family are standing by their decision.
They blame his death on a faulty motorway crash barrier.
GARETH FURBY/Oxford
JOHN SIMMS/Family Solicitor
The driver Robert Bain was trapped for three hours.
But at Oxford's John Radcliffe Hospital his family asked doctors not to give him blood, insisting it was against his religious beliefs.
The car passenger Mark Southall is another Jehovah's Witness and also refused blood.
He survived, but lost a leg.
Pathologist Dr Ann Campbell told the inquest Mr Bain had suffered multiple leg injuries.
She said it was highly possible that had he received a blood transfusion his life might have been saved.
But she could not be certain.
And the family blames a faulty motorway crash barrier.
PC Keith Upton, an accident investigator, told the inquest, the barrier broke at a welded joint and the car spun into the jagged edge.
Sections of the barrier were brought to the inquest and forensic scientist David Price said it hadn't been welded together properly.
It should have coped easily with the impact.
The family is now thinking about sueing.
He says they may take action against the company that made the barrier, or if they can't be traced, the Department of Transport.
The coroner said it wasn't clear whether a blood transfusion would have saved Mr Bain.
But the family solicitor said if the whole the happened again, as Jehovah's Witnesses the decision would be the same, blood would be refused.
The coroner recorded a verdict of accidental death.
A man who shot dead two swans is facing a prison sentence.
Magistrates adjourned the case against Alfred Dines after telling him they were thinking of imposing a three month jail term.
All wild swans fall under the legal protection of the Queen, and Buckingham Palace is being kept informed.
TIM HURST/Dursley
Insp DAVID JOHNSON-HILL/RSPCA
RUTH FLAGG/Neighbour
The mating pair of mute swans had lived on the canal for some years, but were found dead by neighbours.
They'd been shot 21 times.
Ballistics experts proved the pellets had been from two air rifles found in Dines' car.
Until then he'd denied being the gunman, but today pleaded guilty to the shootting.
All wild swans are traditionally Royal birds, under a law dated 1592, and Buckingham palace has been kept informed of the case.
The magistrates said they wanted to jail Dines for 3 months but first they had to call for reports.
Dines, who's serving a sentence for robbery, was taken back to jail to await sentence next month.
The swans had been found on the canal by neighbours the morning after they'd been killed.
A £2,000 reward had been raised by local people after the killings for information leading to those responsible.
World Cup Cricket came to the region today, with the unlikeliest of cricketing nations taking part.
Ireland and Denmark's women met in Oxford hoping to recover some sporting pride after yesterday's heavy defeats at the hands of more experienced opponents.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
MORRIS HONEY/Head Groundsman
JANNI JENSSON/Denmark Captain
LENE SLEBSAGER/Denmark
BRENDAN O'BRIEN/Ireland Coach
It's a short, back and sides for the wicket at the Christ Church Ground in Oxford.
The father and daughter team are working flat out, to ensure it's in good trim for the city's first ever World Cup encounter.
Male speaker
I would think they'd like it two to three days old with a reasonable bounce.
The thunderstorms haven't helped, but we're hoping it's reasonably dry.
Voice over
It's not often you'll hear a batting order read, Christiansen, Mikkelsen, Nielson and Jensen…it's not often you'll hear them talk cricket in Danish…
Female speaker
We don't play on grass much.
We play on mats.
We've been practising on this wicket.
It's quite good.
Voice over
With only 150 women cricketers in total in Denmark, they're very much the underdogs.
Yesterday they were slaughtered by England…but they're learning more about the game…with every game.
Female speaker
This time we are trying hard to improve batting and bowling.
We're improving a lot.
Voice over
The Irish are seeing something of a cricketing revival…it's the fastest growing sport in their home country, and they feel confident about taking on the World's best.
Male speaker
To play in the World Cup is a wonderful honour.
We're one up on the men's team.
Playing England and Australia will raise standards.
Voice over
The Danes might find it difficult to swing the ball…but they certainly know how to swing.
Here to enjoy as well as entertain.
On the pitch it's an even contest.
The Danes are fit and raring to go.
The Irish are patient enough to wait for a lucky break.
These international visitors don't want to shock, only to impress…and give the Oxford crowd something of a fairy tale ending.
After all that's what the Danes are famous for…well probably.
and the latest news from the Christ Church Ground…
Denmark, who're chasing Ireland's total of (233) two hundred and thirty-three, are now (156-8) one hundred and fifty-six for eight with six overs left…
A seventy two year old grandmother who's fostered more than a hundred children went to Buckingham Palace today to receive her MBE.
But when Betty Bonham was asked by the Queen just how MANY children she'd fostered…she couldn't remember.
CHRIS MOORE Bodicote
BETTY BONHAM MBE Foster Mum
Voice over
When you've spent a lifetime looking after OTHER people, it's nice to be pampered for a change.
Today, it was Betty Bonham's turn.
A chauffeur driven limosine was waiting at her home near Banbury to whisk Betty, her new outfit, and just a few of her many nearest and dearest to the Palace for the big day.
She was in august company…including TV's Leslie Crowther…still recovering from his near-fatal road accident but there to receive his CBE.
Betty couldn't quite believe it all.
Female speaker
I never thought this would happen, but now it has, and it's a very proud day for me.
Voice over
Question: What did the Queen say to you?
Female speaker
She asked me how many children's I'd fostered, but I said I couldn't remember.
Voice over
Then, medal safely tucked away, it was time for an impromptu picnic out of the boot of the limosine, and do a little celebrity spotting.
No doubt the real celebrations will follow back at home.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Muslims victory in Sarajevo
FTSE down 9
The hundred shares index closed down nine point eight at twenty-eight, fourteen point one.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-one and up at two marks, fifty-seven.
Police say a stolen lorry which had four foot long spikes welded to the back was probably going to be used in a ram raid.
They believe the thieves were preparing to steal a cash point machine.
Erika Barnes reports.
Act Ch Insp BOB SAWYER/Wiltshire Police
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Voice over
Revamped and ready for a ram raid.
The tailgate of this lorry was cut away and two 4ft long barbed prongs welded on to it.
Male speaker
We're bound to consider that it was to be used in a ram raid offence.
The prongs would have been used to ram against a brick wall, maybe to try to remove or damage a cashpoint machine or similar cash dispensing machine.
Voice over
The lorry was stolen from SW Transport in Swindon.
It was found abandoned a short distance away with the engine still running.
Criminals are becoming all the more enterprising in their efforts.
Of course there's the familiar smash and grab technique used by these ram raiders to steal from stores.
But now it appears thieves are being increasingly interested in taking on the hole in the wall and that means bigger and heavier vehicles to do it.
The stolen lorry is now back on the road making money instead of being used to steal it.
More shoppers and retailers are being conned by an increase in the counterfeit clothing racket.
In just one raid alone, trading standards officers siezed fifteen thousand pounds worth of fake designer clothing.
But they say it's only the tip of the iceberg.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
PAUL GALLAND/Trading Standards
Voice over
This clothes mountain is just part of a haul of counterfeit T-shirts and sweatshirts seized by trading standards officers in Gloucestershire.
The trendy logos mean they can sell in shops for up to £50 apiece; but looks can be deceptive.
The workmanship on these fake shirts is shoddy; the material inferior.
It's definitely a case of buyer beware.
He says that the only way you can tell they're fake, is to look at the stitching on the labels.
Fake clothing like this used to be associated with dodgy del boy types who work out of suitcases at street markets.
But not anymore.
Increasingly, skilled counterfeiting has led to some high street stores selling goods they believed were the real thing, only to find they'd been had.
Earlier this month the partners of this shop in Cheltenham were fined £600 each for selling fake top brand name t-shirts.
He says he has some sympathy with retailers, but at the end of the day it's up to them to check on the authenticity of the goods they're selling.
This may seem like a large haul, but trading standards officers insist it's just the tip of the iceberg.
Counterfeiting is a multi million pound industry and all the signs are that it's growing at an alarming rate.
Welcome back.
David Lawrence, the Gloucestershire and England cricketer, is supporting a new help line for families affected by the mental disability, Autism.
David, who's still recovering from a knee injury, says his brief experience of disability has helped him appreciate what others go through.
Gareth Furby reports.
MICHAEL FEILDEN Father
SYLVIA FEILDEN Mother
DAVID’ SYD’LAWRENCE Cricketer
Voice over
At first Anthony's parents thought he was deaf.
They only realised he was autistic after reading a newspaper article on the symptoms.
He says he was always doing something.
She says he throws things without thinking about the damage it does.
Today the National Autistic Society opened a new office for the Southern region with help from England and Gloucestershire cricketer Syd Lawrence.
He's still recovering from the knee injury which put him in hospital last February.
And he says that experience has helped him understand other's disabilities.
He says he spent two weeks in hospital when he was helpless and that brought it all home to him.
The National Autistic Society will now operate a phone line for families in the region affected by autism.
For parents who've already been helped by the society it's proved to be lifeline.
She says when other people see a badly behaved child they jump to the wrong conclusions.
It's nice to know that you're not the only family.
More than eighty thousand people in Britain are autistic.
There's still no known cause or the cure.
But the Autistic society hopes its new service will help more children live as full a life as possible.
Watchdog supports press against Mellor
The Press Complaints Authority has backed the press in its recent coverage of Heritage Minister David Mellor's private life, saying it is in the public interest.
USA warns Iraq over ceasefire terms
America says it is not ruling out military action against Iraq following its defiance of Gulf War ceasefire terms.
Reconstruction for clues in Wimbledon murder
The police have staged a reconstruction of events leading up to the murder of parttime model Rachel Nickell on Wimbledon Common.
FTSE down 27
The hundred shares index closed down twenty-seven point seven at twenty-three, eighty-seven point nine.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety, but down at two marks, eighty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Now to the second part of our series on the Hercules transport aircraft.
Fat Albert, as it's affectionally called, has been in RAF service for twenty five years.
During that time it's proved itself an able ambassador for Britain, at peace and at war.
Its strength and adaptability made it ideally suited for the demands of the Gulf and Falklands conflicts, and more recently in divided Bosnia.
Erika Barnes reports…
PAUL BEAVER/Jane's Defence
Flt Lt BRIAN SKILLICORN/Hercules Pilot
Sgt DICK WESTON/Loadmaster
Voice over
First in and last out is often the boast of Hercules crews.
It's far from agile, but certainly adaptable.
And reaches places many other planes can't reach!
On skis, means it can reach hostile locations in the arctic.
On deck, means it could even land on an aircraft carrier.
The Americans proved that despite its size, around 100ft long and 130ft wide, it can land almost anywhere.
Male speaker
The Hercules is an outstanding aircraft.
It's gone further and done more than 12 labours of the mythical Hercules.
With the help of a tanker It can get to the Falklands and back and a stretch version, means it can carry larger loads and go further.
Voice over
The Falklands war saw the Hercules aircraft come into its own.
It's ability to carry huge loads over vast distances meant the British forces had the back up they needed in battle.
Refuelling from a Hercules tanker in mid air was a vital operation.
It kept the lifeline open to a remote island thousands of miles from home.
Male speaker
There's a story of a Hercules which left Ascension Island to go to the Falklands.
But it had to fly back because of bad weather.
It was refuelled around 20 times.
But got back with tired crews and tired passenger.
Voice over
The demands of the Gulf war were very different.
The desert created new challenges.
Sometimes landing on strips made of sand, transporting troops and supplies ready for the liberation of Kuwait.
Not so much a staring role; more part of the support cast.
Male speaker
Going to the Gulf was more routine flying.
Only time we did any manoeuvring was into Kuwait, around the desert environment.
Not manoeuvring against attacking aircraft.
Voice over
More recently the Hercules has again headed for a battle zone.
Leaving its Lyneham home, with British troops bound for the United Nations in Bosnia.
And once again, it was a first for the Hercules.
Male speaker
We carried a medical team with vehicles and back up for the medical team.
The fact we were first in meant quite a lot.
I'm quite proud.
Voice over
But possibly the most satisfying task for the Hercules and its crew is to carry aid to the needy.
Tomorrow the journey continues; as the aircraft unloads hope for the hungry.
A small team of workers have been busily harvesting bullrushes along the banks of the River Thames.
Wading knee-high in the water, they cut and collect the plants to make seats for traditional English chairs.
Gargy Patel reports on an age-old skill that's still very much in demand.
RADLEY/Oxfordshire
TONY HANDLEY/Rush Weaver
RICHARD HANDLEY/Rush Cutter
BEN/Rush Harvester
ARDINGTON/Oxfordshire
Voice over
Gathering in the harvest.
Treading water instead of treading soil and cutting by hand to collect bullrushes from the sides of the River Thames.
For this small team of cutters it's a long hard job.
It can take a whole day to produce one boatload of rushes.
The crop supplies a small, but thriving industry producing traditional English furniture.
Bullrushes have been cropped since Egyptian times.
Nowadays it's a rare sight.
These are the last professional rush cutters left in this country.
It's a skill passed on through the generations.
The tools they use aren't made anymore.
They rely on buying their sickles from antique shops and jumble sales.
Working on the river has it's own hazards.
If you drop the sickle in the water for example, it's almost impossible to find again.
And being able to swim is vital.
For Tony's son Richard and the other youngsters, rush cutting is part of family life.
Back on dry land, the rushes are dried out before they're used in the workshop near Wantage.
Restoring old chairs and weaving new old style traditional chairs is an art in itself.
Tony began 20 years ago, after giving up his job as a scientist.
With skill and concentration, it can still take up to 3 hours to seat one chair.
All the chairs are designed to last around 20 years.
The annual supply of rushes is stored in a nearby barn.
Each year, the harvest from the river yields 10 tonnes from 2 weeks of cutting.
Over the years, there's been a steady demand for rush furniture.
Tony's handywork can be seen in houses big and small.
Bullrushes are still plentiful along this stretch of the Thames.
The teams cut carefully to ensure the rushes continue to thrive.
They've long been a part of the river's past.
The rush harvesters also hope they'll be a part of the river's future.
Ecstasy seizure…drugs gang jailed for total of fourteen years.
School abuse claims…helpline produces vital new evidence.
And threatening to sue…daughter demands action over mother's hospital death.
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Det Sgt JOHN MEREDITH/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
SHEILA BROCKLEBANK/Reporting
JULIAN ROSSITER/The Cook Report0
TONY WOOLMAN/Director/Libra Project
MALCOLM JACK/Home Office Minister
Voice over
The use of the designer drug ecstasy exploded in the 90s with the rave.
Alcohol is not likely to be available.
Their intention is not to drink, but to dance for hours on end.
Ecstasy allows them to do that.
The drug, commonly known as E, produces a massive boost of energy and gives the taker a sense of well being and contentment.
Some say ecstasy is not physically dangerous.
But at least 8 people have died after taking the drug.
Dealers often mix ecstasy with other substances which can be lethal.
Julian Rossiter says he nearly died from ecstasy.
The National Drug Intelligence Unit has reported a massive increase in the use of Ecstasy.
An estimated 5,000 people now take it regularly.
That compares with an estimated 200,000 cocaine users and seizures by the police went up last year by 3,500%.
The government today launched a drug prevention campaign.
The police say the majority of people dealing in ecstasy are smart, entrepreneurial types selling to young naive people and they're charging massive prices for what may be ecstasy, but could be something far more dangerous.
A police investigation at a school for disturbed children has been stepped up after claims of abuse going back more than twenty years.
Computers are being used to sift information from across the country in an enquiry that involves past and present pupils and staff.
Tim Hurst reports.
TODDINGTON/Gloucestershire
GEORGINA ROBINSON/Team Leader/Social Services
FRED DAVIES/Deputy Director/Social Services
Voice over
Following the arrest of a governor of New Barns school at Toddington in Gloucestershire, in connected with imported magazines, social workers established a 24 hour helpline for former pupils.
What they've been told has led to the establishment of a major police investigation, assisted by three full time social workers, going back over 20 years.
Peter Righton, vice chairman of governors at New Barn school, has been questioned about alleged pornography.
He shares a house at Evesham in Worcestershire with the shool's headmaster, Richard Alston, who himself has been suspended.
Social workers are now receiving information about the school stretching back to 1970, well before either man was involved with the private institution.
The police Holmes computor system, set up for major crime investigations, is being used to collate information from across Britain.
The helpline for former pupils, staff and parents is producing vital new information.
The helpline number, manned 24 hours, is 0452 741481.
The daughter of a pensior who was found dead after complaining about a broken pelvis is threatening to sue the hospital where her mother was being treated.
An inquest has been told that staff failed to realise the scale of the injuries and later found the woman dead in her bed.
Liz Hannam reports.
CHOLSEY/Oxfordshire
ANNETTE STONE/Daughter
DAVID KEY/Fairmile Hospital
Voice over
Audrey Johansen, who was sixty one, had slipped while on her way the toilet in the middle of the night at the Fairmile Psychiatric Hospital at Cholsey in Oxfordshire.
She went back to bed but when she woke the next morning she was in terrible pain and called a nurse for help.
But a doctor didn't arrive for another hour and a half, by which time Mrs Johansen had died from a heart attack brought on by the fracture.
Her daughter ses she suffered a similar fracture three years ago which also wasn't spotted.
She believes her mother's cries for help weren't taken seriously because she was a psychiatric patient.
But managers at the Fairmile say there was nothing more they could do.
ll its staff are well trained and fractures are very difficult for a nurse to diagnose.
At today's inquest held in Oxford coroner Nicholas Gardiner said:’ Arrangements were made to call the doctor but sadly even while she and the sister were discussing the patient Mrs Johansen was in the process of dieing.
’ He recorded a verdict of accidental death.
This week all the swans of the River Thames are being counted.
The so-called’ swan-upping’ceremony dates back to the fourteenth century…but nowadays its as much a fun day out as a way of keeping the swans healthy.
STEPHANIE REEVE/Wallingford
CHRIS PERRINS/Vet
Voice over
Every swan on the River Thames has to be counted.
But the event needn't be all hard work — in fact it's now become something of a social event.
All the swans are owned, either by the Queen, or by one of two livery companies in London.
Each summer, they find about thirty five new breeding pairs.
When they do, they have to decide who owns them, then clip their bills.
It's in the swans' interests to belong to someone, because it means they're being looked after.
Male speaker
It's a good thing we check them — we can find any injured birds and help them.
It means more of them survive.
Voice over
It takes a week to check each bird on the river and judging by the six hundred year old tradition of toasting each swan, it must be thirsty work.
Hundreds of classic car owners have been putting their vehicles to the test on the race track.
It's the one chance that members of the Ninety-Six club have each year to drive their classic cars the way they were intended…hard and fast.
KATE GARRAWAY Silverstone
ROGER EARL Club 96 Member
DICK SKIPWORTH Club 96 Member
JACK BRABHAM World Champion Driver
DAVID BRABHAM 1993 Le Mans Winner
So tempting infact that four hundred enthusiasts are prepared to pay a small fortune for the cahnce to try it.
They are all members of the ninety six club.
A group formed to give ordinary motorists the opportunity to race their own cars safely.
Male speaker
Club 96 is for people who are united by their love of cars and they can all get together and have a chance to race on a real circuit.
It is alot of fun.
Male speaker
When I used to follow racing in the fifies, I couldn't afford to go racing.
Now I can afford to but I'm too old to do it professionally!
So this seemed like a good compromise.
Female speaker
Is there any truth to the rumour that the members have all been banned from the roads for speeding.
Male speaker
Well we are a bit of a lively bunch but I haven't been banned yet…touch wood!
Voice over
For World Champion driver Jack Brabham and his Le Mans winning son David, Club 96 must seem like a stroll in the Park, but they were still keen to see the cars put through their paces.
Male speaker
I get the chance to see people I used to race with.It is a fun day out.
Male speaker
It is great for people who work nine to five but have a beautiful car in the garage.
On days like today they get the chance to race it.
Voice over
Club 96 launches the International Historic car Festival a weekend of racing at Professional level.
But for these amateurs nothing beats the thrill of that final staight…even if not all make the whole distance.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Man in court on murder charge
FTSE up 6
The hundred shares index closed up six points at twenty eight twenty point one 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, fifty eight.
That's all for now, but before we go a reminder that tomorrow I'll be at the International Air Tattoo at RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire.
We'll be looking at all the stars of the show, like the mighty Tupolef Bear from Russia, a lasting symbol of the cold war.
There's the airshow scholarships helping disabled people like Brian Hucker learn how to fly.
And we see the RAF prepare for a flypast to celebrate their seventy fifth anniversary.
An inquest has heard that former Oxford United footballer Tommy Caton died from a massive heart attack brought on by chronic alcohol abuse.
Thirty year old Caton was forced to retire because of injury.
His drink problem caused the break up of his marriage.
He was found dead at his flat at Bampton in Oxfordshire in April.
The coroner recorded a verdict of death due to natural causes.
A large quantity of poison has been stolen.
The rat poison and insecticide was taken from a van at Farm lane in Crawley near Witney.
Police are concerned that the poison may be dumped and children may get hold of it.
They're asking people to look out for the substances which were in a large grey plastic box.
A group which is raising money for an operation on a Bosnian girl has lost contact with her family.
Five year old Azra Kruskic was due to fly to Britain this month.
But she's disappeared from her refugee camp, and it's thought she could be in Germany.
GARETH FURBY/Oxford
DOROTHY RICHARDS/Help Azra Appeal
There's disappointment tonight for the organisers of The Help Azra appeal.
They've raised more than a thousand pounds to fly the five year old to Britain for surgery.
She suffers from a bad foot and can hardly walk.
And the appeal organisers say doctors at Oxford's Nuffield Orthapedic Centre were ready to operate.
But now their contacts at her refugee camp say Azra and her mother have disappeared and are thought to be heading for Germany.
An aid workers says her mother may have been scared or even lost patience.
She says its very frustrating.
Azra needs the operation.
Dorothy Richards from the Help Azra appeal say they're very worried and disappointed.
A lot of people had helped to raise money.
Tonight efforts are now being made to contact the little girl's grandparents.
They appeal organisers want to know where in Germany she's been taken and whether or not she'll get the operation she needs in a German hospital.
The family of a murder victim have accepted a donation to a trust fund in their son's name from detectives who worked on the case.
The money was found in a drain during the police investigation, but had nothing to do with the murder.
TIM HURST/Cheltenham
JOHN PUGH/Father
NEVIS PUGH/Mother
Det Ch Insp BILL GASKINS/Gloucestershire CID
The detective who found the money believed at first the notes must be forgeries.
Fellow students at Cheltenham and Gloucester College of Higher Education, where the dead man was studying, and who attended a memorial service in his honour, have also contributed to the Murray Pugh memorial fund.
In the meantime a 22 year old Cheltenham man is awaiting trial for his murder.
(GARGY ad lib)(Anne next) Still to come on Central News.
The fight to save a three-legged deer.
How Treacle survived a sticky situation.
Plus, get your foot down…a chance for car lovers to taste REAL speed.
Welcome back: A young wild deer is recovering at an animal rescue centre after having a leg amputated.
The fawn was badly injured trying to jump over a wire fence, and had to be operated on to save her life.
RICHARD BARNETT/Beckford
CAROLINE GOULD/Vale Wildlife Rescue
Female speaker
It's a serious operation but she's recovering well.
She couldn't cope in the wild with three legs though so she'll stay at the centre.
Voice over
The centre has taken in nearly 2000 wild animals and birds this year, including a number of foxes and badgers.
Some are recovering from being injured in road accidents, and will be released back into the wild when they can fend for themselves.
But many other animals and birds are found by members of the public and brought in unnecessarily.
Female speaker
People shouldn't bring in young animals or raise badgers and foxes as pets.
They should be left in the wild.
Voice over
The Vale Rescue Centre prides itself on releasing nine out of every ten animals back into the wild.
As for Treacle…she'll play a role as company for other nervous deer that come in for care and treatment.
She'll help others to stand on their own feet.
In Central News tonight: Trial halted.
Student who killed lecturer is unfit to appear.
Sentence halved.
Seven years for courthouse killing was excessive.
And where is she?
Bosnian girl bound for Britain has disappeared.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
GARGY PATEL
But it now seems possible that Pask will never come back to court.
He's said to be acutely depressed, and is also thought to have a stomach ulcer.
He's denied murdering Elizabeth Howe, but has admitted manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility.
ABI DONALD/Reporting
Dr MARION SWAN/Consultant Psychiatrist
Det Supt IAN PEACOCK/Yorkshire Police
Female speaker
He's had difficulty coping with the trial, he's been very distressed by it and that has led to him breaking down completely.
Voice over
Pask, who's a laboratory technician from Horwich in greater manchester, denies murdering Doctor Howe but has pleaded guilty to manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibilty.
The prosecution regected that plea.
The court had been told that Pask stabbed Doctor Howe to death just hours after she arrived at York University to teach a summer school.
He had forced his way into her room and cut her throat with a 12 inch knife.
He then dressed in her clothes and paraded around the campus for hours until he was arrested.
Male speaker
The doctors have certified that Pask is unfit to continue with his trial.
The prosecution have proved the killing of Dr Howe the doctors have certified him unfit, and an order has been made for his detention in hospital, he'll be assessed by doctors and when he's fit to resume he'll return to trial.
Voice over
Doctor Howe worked for the Open University and was based at their centre at Boars Hill on the outskirts of Oxford.
She lived with her husband and children in Oxford's Edith Road, and was a published expert on English literature.
Her first and only book, The First English Actresses, is now in it's second edition.
Earlier this year she won an award for an outstanding contribution to theatre writing.Her husband Jeremy has paid a moving tribute to his wife, in a statement he said, She was to quote Wordsworth,’ My heart's best treasure’
Now it's uncertain as to when or if Robin Pask will stand trial, The judge Mr Justice Swinton-Thomas ordered that Pask be admitted to a hospital under the mental health Act, but Leeds Crown Court heard that he was obsessed with thoughts of suicide and may never be well enough to return to the dock.
A man who stabbed to death his lover's ex-husband in a court waiting room has had his sentence halved.
The Appeal Court ruled that Paul Rachael's (7) seven-year jail term was excessive.
He may be freed later this year.
July 1992/ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
CHRISTINE LAWER/Victim's Common Law Wife
OBA NSUGBE/Paul Rachael's Solicitor
At the Court of Appeal today, Rachael's solicitor explained that he'd been frightened of losing the children, and that for several weeks before the killing he'd been taking medication for depression.
LOrd Justice Kennedy said the courts had tounderline the sanctitry of human life.
But at the time of Mr Goldsworthy's killing, Rachael's responsibility was substantially impaired.
The 7-year sentence originally imposed was adjudged to be excessive and reduced to three and a half.
Allowing for the time he's already spent in cutody, that means Rachael could be freed this autumn.
The ruling has come as a bitter blow Brain Goldsworthy's common law wife.
But Rachael's solicitor said the ruling was a fair one.
Whenever he's freed, his solicitor added that Paul Rachael remains full of remorse for what happened.
Arsonists have caused damage estimated at (60,000) sixty thousand pounds in a series of attacks.
They destroyed four cars, including a classic Rover that the owner was planning to restore.
Police say the fires could easily have spread to nearby houses.
RICHARD BARNETT/Tewkesbury
Det Con DAVID COLCLOUGH/Gloucestershire Police
ROGER WOODFIN/Cars Owner
Male speaker
Only property was damaged, but the fires could have spread to houses nearby and endangered life.
Voice over
Antique dealer Roger Woodfin said the vintage Rover was of great sentimental value:
Male speaker
He did his courting in the Rover.
He can't understand why anyone would want to set fire to the garage and cars.
Voice over
The damage has been put at more than 60,000 pounds.
And police are appealing for witnesses who may have seen anyone acting suspiciously.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
OXFORD
FIONA HAWKRIDGE/Home Owner
PAUL BOWN/Chairman Connell Estate Agents
PARK END/Forest Of Dean
JOHN KENDRICK/Land Agent
PETER MILLER/RICS
Voice over
It went on the market in June…three weeks later the Hawkridge family had a buyer for their three bedroomed home
She says; We were really suprised considering the way the market is at the moment It was very pleasing.
The Hawkridge's sold through the estate agents Connell…who have 174 branches, many in the Central South region…last June they completed slaes on just over fifteen hundred properties…this year it was over eighteen hundred…a twenty per cent increase…
The company says the market is tiough…but their figures prove with the right approach houses do sell.
He says; The first time buyers recognise the opportunities in the market place.
Properties they say a few years ago are down by 25 to 30%, that with lower mortgage rates gives them a tremendous boost.
This five bedroomed victorian house…complete with trout stream anmd stable…has been on the market for three and a half years…the price has been reduced by thirty thousand pounds.
He says; When it comes down to it people may be able to afford a mortgage but when they need ancillary finance many of the banks and buildings societies are not interested.
According to the Royal Institute of Surveyors…this case is not unusual…
It says nationally the worst is over but the improvement in the market is almost undetectable…it wants the Government to rethink its plans to reintroduce stamp duty on all property next month.
He says; We put to the Government a proposal to raise the stamp duty threshold from thirty thousand to sixty thousand pounds and impose a higher stamp duty rate on property over one hundred thousand pounds.
Connell agents claim their sales figures will continue to improve stamp duty or no stamp duty…the owner of Forest Vale hopes they're right…
An animal lover, who tried to stop a gang hanging a cat from a tree, was punched and kicked before he could rescue it.
The cat suffered appalling injuries during the attack…its legs are partly paralysed.
Erika Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
KEN BACKHOUSE/Rescuer
TONI HOBBS/Cat Owner
JOANNE SUTER/Veterinary Nurse
Voice over
Millie the cat is back in safe hands.
Reunited with its owner after a night of horrific cruelty.
Still shocked and barely able to move; it's lucky to be alive.
Lucky because Ken Backhouse was walking by at the time.
He'd seen 3 drunken men on this bridge in Swindon.
Not only were they attacking the cat, but they were prepared to fight with anyone who got in their way.
Male speaker
I saw the cat hanging from a tree and a man beating it with a stick.
I pushed them out of the way and took the cat off the tree.
I laid it on the floor and I was hit in the back.
One kicked me on the leg.
I picked it up and ran away.
It was in a bad state.
Very dazed and making awful noises.
Voice over
The cat, which is only 4 months old has been at a Veterinary Hospital since the attack.
Its owner, Toni Hobbs only realised what had happened when she saw its picture on Central News.
Female speaker
It's awful.
How could someone do something like that.
It wouldn't hurt anyone.
It's horrible.
Female speaker
He's in awful shock.
We're very worried about his right hind leg and left fore leg.
Hopefully he'll recover well and be back to normal.
Voice over
Millie will need tender loving care and a lot of medical treatment before going home.
It'll also need a new name.
Toni thought her cat was a girl, but the Vet her told her otherwise.
His rescuer named him Scruff because of the state he was in.
But his owner thinks Lucky will fit the bill.
People who live on a housing estate once labelled the worst in Europe are fighting to keep the headquarters of their community development project.
The estate is being renovated — and residents fear the project is now doomed.
Ken Goodwin reports.
INNSWORTH/Gloucestershire
MARTIN BARTRAM/Tewkesbury Borough Council
Voice over
The community development project on the Innsworth Grove estate is presently housed in a disused flat.
The estate, which was once labelled the worst in Europe because of it's rundown condition, is being renovated in a £6 million partnership with the council and private developers.
But it doesn't include premises for the project, which will dissapear once the flat it's housed in is renovated.
That's angered people who use it.
They say the project helps single mums, children, and people with problems.
This afternoon people from the estate took their protest to Tewkesbury Borough Councillors.
The council will now hold further discussions on the matter before making a decision.
Although it seems unlikely the residents will be allowed to keep the flat other accomodation may be found.
He ays that a three bedroom flat is not ideal for the project, as up to ninety children often gather there.
The residents say that if their community development project disappears, it'll be a step backwards, leading to an increase in the sort of social problems which once made the estate notorious.
The ancient custom of swan-upping has been taking place on the River Thames.
In times gone by the idea was to identify which swans belonged to the Crown and which ones didn't.
Nowadays it's more an excuse for a hearty lunch and a day on the river, as Robin Powell discovered.
Capt JOHN TURK Queen's Swan Keeper
PIA LIEVESLEY Zoologist
Voice over
Swan-upping; a Thames tradition that dates back to the Middle Ages.
It started when the Crown, which up till then considered swans as Royal property, agreed to share them with 2 City of London livery companies; the Vintners and the Dyers.
But why, 7 centuries on; long after swan lost its appeal as a delicacy, are people still negotiating with the Queen's Keeper of Swans over who owns what?
This year's Swan-Upping Voyage started in London on Monday and finishes in Benson tomorrow.
Today's stretch was from Sonning to Whitchurch, with stops at Caversham and Mapledurham Locks.
It's called swan-upping because’ Swan Up!’is what you shout when you see one.
That's the cue for the Queen's crew in red, the Vintners in white and Dyers in blue to converge on the swan and its cygnets.
The parent is captured and its offspring are given the same marks; one nick on each side of the upper beak for the Vintners; one on one side for the Dyers; none at all for the Royal cygnets.
Traditionally, you should row towards the swan, but swan-upping can be hard work and many prefer to be towed.
Before you know it, it's time for lunch and there's nowhere more appropriate to stop for that, than The Swan at Whitchurch.
For some it's the highlight of the whole event.
But there is a more serious side to it all.
This research team from Oxford University is monitoring the effects on the river's swan population of the ban on lead fishing weights 5 years ago.
Thankfully the news is good.
But no time for swanning around at the pub.
Next stop Goring, with plenty more unsuspecting cygnets to find along the way.
Downing Street says Mellor won't quit
Downing Street has stated that the MP David Mellor will not quit, in spite of grumblings from backbenchers.
New Shadow Cabinet team
Labour has announced its new Shadow Cabinet team, it will include more women.
Blackburn violence costs
The violence in Blackburn, in which riot police were attacked, has resulted in a million pounds worth of damage.
Hurd warns of action against Iraq
The Foreign Secretary has warned of further military action after Iraq said it would not be bullied by the West into adhereing to the Gulf War ceasefire plan.
The family of a victim of the Lockerbie disaster has been awarded five million pounds in damages.
FTSE up 11
The hundred shares index closed up eleven point six at twenty-three, ninety-nine point five.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety-one, and up at two marks, eighty-four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The Hercules aircraft has been the workhorse of the RAF for twenty five years.
It played a vital role in the Falklands, and in the Gulf.
But it's also proved its worth in peacetime.
In the final part of our series on the plane known as Fat Albert, Erika Barnes looks at how the Hercules has brought help to civilians in times of crisis.
Flt Lt MAX BURTON/Hercules Pilot
PAUL BEAVER/Jane's Defence
Flt Lt RICHARD BAILEY/Hercules Pilot
Voice over
During its 25 years with the RAF, the Hercules has fulfilled all the transport demands that were ever placed on it.
But none can be as fulfilling as its humanitarian role.
After the Gulf war, thousands of Kurdish refugees fled to the mountains.
They were starving and desperate.
It was left to the Hercules to unload help to the hungry.
Male speaker
The terrain was very mountainous.
There were no suitable areas to drop.
We were 2,000ft above the ground and it was very dodgy.
You have a feeling for these people.
We could get low to inspect and saw the plight they were in.
Voice over
The dropping procedure is well rehearsed.
Back at base, crews make practise drops at locations all over this country.
Male speaker
You fly to the drop zone, the loadmaster removes the restraints, navigator says action stations, then the red light, then the green light and the load is dispatched.
Voice over
For famine hit areas of Africa, the Hercules also brought aid.
Low level drops proving a vital part of the aircraft's repertoire.
Male speaker
There's no doubt the RAF have a reputation for getting the job done with the Hercules.
For example, in Nepal and Ethiopia the drop at low level.
The Hercules has been there with the RAF and got on with the job.
Male speaker
To fly it's quite simple.
The main differences are is that it's very heavy, slow and sluggish.
But it's lovely and very popular.
Voice over
But after 25 years loyal service with the RAF, the time has come to look at a more modern replacement.
Although it seems it's a hard act to follow.
Male speaker
If you talk to the RAF pilots, engineers, air crews, ground crews, they'll say they want another Hercules.
With engine modifications, more fuel efficiency, a new flight deck.
Basically, another Hercules please.
Voice over
It's clear there's still life in the RAF's workhorse yet.
Male speaker
It's a lovely aircraft.
Noisey, antiquated, but a very good performer.
Male speaker
It's extremely rugged, dependable and a joy to fly.
Male speaker
I regard it as the best kept secret.
Very good fun.
Voice over
A farmer looking to diversify has turned to a favourite crop of his French counterparts.
He's planted fields full of sunflowers — the oil from the seeds will be made into margarine.
Richard Barnett reports.
SAPPERTON/Gloucestershire
PHILIP FRANKLIN/Farmer
ROBIN NIXON/Photographer
Voice over
It's the most spectacular flower show in Gloucestershire.
100 acres of sunflowers spread across Cotswold fields that would traditionally be golden with corn.
And it's the latest example of farming diversification which is being encouraged by the European Community.
Sunflowers have already caught on in France and now a handful of farmers are trying their luck with the new crop here.
Philip Franklin is one of the pioneers.
He says he was keen to try a new crop, and dwarf sunflowers ripen in time to harvest in late summer.
The flowers will be harvested in September for their seeds which will be crushed for oil.
Every acre of sunflowers produces about half a ton of oil which will be turned into low fat margarine.
Meanwhile, local amateur photographers are having a field day trying to capture the agricultural cloth of gold on film.
He says hoardes of people have been taking photos of the sunflowers.
He says he's only seen sunflowers in the United States so he went home and got his camera to take some pictures.
As an agricultural crop, sunflowers are extremely environmentally friendly.
These plants haven't been sprayed with a single chemical.
And that's good news for the butterflies and bees who are delighting in the sunny side of farming 1990s style.
Cricket…and in the final day of the County Championship match at Cheltenham 
More than a hundred people have been caught speeding through a contraflow on the M-four in just two days.
The speed limit is fifty miles an hour, but some drivers have been caught doing more than eighty.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
M4/Swindon/Wiltshire
Sgt IAN COPUS/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
If you're travelling along the M4 in Wiltshire, watch your speed.
There's a contraflow between junctions 15 and 16 near Swindon.
Westbound traffic shares the eastbound carriageway.
A 50 mph speed limit has been imposed and it's being rigorously enforced.
Male speaker
we're determined to have strict programme…we've a number of methods…one is a time distance calculator…by using fixed marks on the road, we can calculate their exact speed.
We're also using marked and unmarked police cars
Voice over
More than 100 people have already been caught speeding in just 2 days.
And speeds of up to 80 mph have been recorded.
Male speaker
speeding is dangerous for teh fact that it's a very confined area…even at fifty miles an hour…that's a conbined impact speed of a hundred miles an hour…we're also thinking of the workmen, who are sometimes working where there's no central barrier
Voice over
The roadworks are expected to take between 2 and 3 weeks to complete.
During that time, police say they expect to issue hundreds of summonses.
A restaurant which put kangeroo meat on the menu has been attacked.
MORETON-in-MARSH/Gloucestershire
The Saint James' Fine Food Restaurant at Moreton-in-Marsh in Gloucestershire has been offering kangeroo steaks to its customers for ten months.
But bricks have been thrown through the restaurant's windows.
One carried a message warning the restaurant to stop serving meat.
A python has been handed in to police in Cheltenham.:
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
A petition calling for the legalisation of cannabis will appear in a national newspaper tomorrow.
The signatures include those of academics, lawyers and doctors.
But police drugs squad officers have been quick to reject the idea as dangerous and unnecessary.
Simon Garrett reports 
DR ANTHONY STORR/Consultant Psychiatrist
Det Ch Insp DAVE BELCHER/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
About five million people in Britain have tried cannabis; more than go to church, art galleries or football matches.
So say the dozens of famous men and women who've signed the advertisement due to appear in tomorrow's Times.
It commemmorates the 25th anniversary of the publication of a similar appeal for a change in the law which achieved nothing.
Foremost among those wanting legalisation, are medical people.
Last year Thames Valley police cautioned or prosecuted sixteen hundred and seventy-three people possessing controlled drugs.
Fourteen hundred and ten were for cannabis.
The man in charge of the force's drug squad says cannabis leads on to harder drugs
Tomorrow's newspaper advertisement has been organised by the drug help agency…release.
As in nineteen sixty-seven it will call the law against marijuana immoral and unworkable.
Included in the signatories are veteran broadcaster Ludovic Kennedy, actress Julie Christie, writers Alan Bleasdale and Richard Adams, Tony Banks MP and singers George Melly and Tom Robinson.
Opponants say legalisation would be the thin end of the wedge.
Supporters claim it could have social benefit
However it's likely as in nineteen sixty-seven not to convince the law makers
Well, if there's one aircraft which can still evoke memories of those Cold War days this is it.
It's the mighty Tupolev Tu-95…nicknamed the Bear.
It was the Soviet Union's main nuclear bomber for forty years.
When east-west tension was at its height, RAF pilots were called on daily to intercept the Bear over the North Sea.
Some of those pilots were there to see it when it arrived at Fairford earlier this week.
After forty years prowling the perimeters of western defences this is the first Bear bomber to enter NATO airspace by invitation.
Several times a week throughout the cold war British pilots scrambled to intercept them over the North Sea.
Male speaker
We would wave and maybe waggle wings but they knew we were there.
It was part of the profile.
They were testing our responses and they'd have been disappointed if we hadn't been there.
We were never expecting to start or be involved in World War Three but there was excitement there always.
Male speaker
Sometimes it became quite comical.
They had a guy at the back with an old-fashioned camera set up to take your picture and we'd pop under to the other side of the aircraft.
He'd come round and get set up again, and we'd pop round to the other side again, constantly going back and forwards.
Male speaker
There was one instance when the tanker had left and we were low on fuel that we radioed in to say we were coming home.
As we were about to leave there came a’ Goodbye’over the radio.
It was the Russians they'd been listening to the whole lot.
Voice over
Accompanying the Bear to Fairford is the man who for years controlled the giant aircraft.
Masterminding the Soviet's long-range probing of western defences.
Male speaker
I would like to put emphasis on the following fact: When I am on concrete it doesn't matter who the runway belongs to.
Male speaker
During my whole flight career, and that was long enough, I never experienced any hostile actions from the RAF.
The only thing, today, is that they escorted us without any weapons.
Voice over
The Bear's agressive capability belongs to the past.
It arrived in Fairford not carrying soviet nuclear weapons, but boasting a hastily painted Russian flag.
An old warhorse for a new air force.
By the time the last display is over on Sunday the RAF hope to have raised more than a quarter of a million pounds for their benevolent fund.
And with thousands of Second World War veterans now in their seventies, the demands on the fund have never been greater.
But the International Air Tattoo doesn't just help those who've served with the RAF — for the past ten years it's been helping disabled people learn to fly.
Brian Hucker was a fully qualified sky-diving instructor with over 2000 jumps under his belt until a parachuting accident four years ago.
Now gardening at his home in Oxfordshire is a passion but he still loves to take to the skies.
A scheme set up by the Benevolent Fund gave him the chance to learn to fly.
He says he would never have been able to have afforded it himself, so it opened up another world.
This year he spent seven weeks in America on a flying scholarship for the disabled.
He says total freedom and independence.
I can compete with able-bodied people.
Fantastic!
He learnt on a Cherokee like this, but he's five hours short of his pilots licence so is hoping to finish his training in this country.
The plane is fitted with a rig over the rudder pedal for disabled pilots.
But this one is different from the American version, so Brian taxi-ed round the apron at Fairford to get the feel of it.
He says it was very different.
The controls were on the left instead of in the middle.
It will take some getting used to.
She says did you enjoy your taxi ride?
He says yes, I would have liked to have done more!
Brian will receive his scholarship certificate at the Tattoo on Sunday, hoping it's the start of new adventures in the skies.
With a nose like this it could only be one plane.
This is Snoopy, a much modified Hercules, dedicated almost entirely to finding out more about our weather.
From nose-tip to tail the plane is packed with scientific instruments making it one of the world's most sophisticated flying laboratories.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
ANNE DAWSON
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
Major PETER TIPPY/Czech Air Force
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Taszar
Hungarian Defence Force Video
Lt Col SANDOR DOMA/Pilot
Maj JOZSEF KROMI/Pilot
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
September 1988
Grp Capt RAY DIXON/Former Phantom Pilot
Wing Co STEVE SMYTH/Tornado Navigator
Sqdn Ldr DAVE WOOD/Tornado Pilot
Gen IGOR KALUGIN/Russian Air Force
Maj Gen ANATOLY SOLOVIOV/Russian Air Force
KIM BARNES/Piddington
BRIAN HUCKER/Trainee Pilot
KEN DEWEY/Met Research Flight
Welcome back to RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire where preparations are almost complete for the World's biggest Airshow.
This year's International Air Tattoo coincides with the 75th anniversary of the RAF, and to mark the occasion the organisers are determined its going to be the most spectacular yet.
By the time darkness falls this evening more than 500 planes will be gathered here from around the world, including 14 national display teams.
For the quarter of a million people expected here over the weekend, it should be quite a show.
Fairford is a feast of aviation.
Four hundred aircraft from fifty airforces, fourteen aerobatic teams, some planes which have never been seen in Britain before.
As one might expect the RAF is well represented in its 75th anniversary year.
But for the real enthusaists it's the Russians and their East European neighbours which have aroused the most interest.
Aircrew cameraderie has been much in evidence, the atomosphere relaxed.
The Czechs were even stocking up with beer for the mess back home.
Their team flies the fearsome MIG 29, now almost a regular performer at the major European airshows.
Stunts like this require a lot of skill.
But the modest Czechs say the Russian pilots are even better.
Male speaker
The Russian factory pilots fly 200 hours a year.
That is much more than us.
Voice over
Watching all the displays, a team of safety experts.
Their job is to make sure that no-one flies beyond their own limits and those of the aircraft.
In the past some manouevres have been banned, but with today's professionalism and their well rehearsed routines that's unlikely to happen this year.
And it won't just be the pilots who are out to make the best landings.
Five years ago the idea of planes like these being present at an RAF show would have been unthinkable.
But the end of the cold war has led to more and more eastern european aircraft taking part in international displays.
These are Mig-21 fighters from the Hungarian Magyar Kapos Dog Fight Team.
Earlier this week we joined them in Hungary as they rehearsed their display for the Fairford show.
Hungarian fighter pilots don't fly as much as they'd like.
They're restricted And twenty four hours before flying to Fairford they'd used up all their practice time.
The last time they flew together was seven days previously.
But the Kapos Hussars must stay familiar with their deadly aerial ballet.
So they practise on the ground.
The three-man team fly MIG 21 fighters and are the world's only combat display outfit.
The appearance at Fairford is the first time they've appeared in the west and it's a matter of immense pride to them.
Male speaker
We need to show the people of Hungary that we are here, we need their support for the air force and the pilots.
Voice over
Hungary's capital Budapest symbolises the dramatic changes in the country since the communist collapse.
A bustling bright city, it could be anywhere in central Europe.
Colourful commercial signs decorate the streets and rooftops, there's an air of endeavour and prosperity.
But it doesn't stretch to the Hungarian Defence Force.
The end of the Warsaw pact meant no support from the old Soviet Union and a decline in their role and importance.
Their barracks are a stark contrast to the brightness elsewhere.
They feel vulnerable with the unstable former Yugoslavia only minutes away.
The combat team is based here at Taszar in Southern Hungary.
They have twenty six mig 21s and 15 Su 22, some of them constantly armed and ready for action.
The Croatian border is only five minutes away by jet and they've already had their defences tested.
Yet pilots complain about being under-financed with ageing aircraft.
Male speaker
We need twice as much money as we're getting at the moment.
Voice over
Evidence of decay is everywhere from crumbling missile bunkers near Budapest to bald tyres on the transport planes, to weeds growing around the proud old MIGs at Taszar.
When the MIGS flew into Fairford yesterday they were accompanied by a general to show how important the display is to them.
Fairford for the Hungarians is a bid to regain respect and influence.
The world-famous tenor Jose Carreras has opened a new music festival to great acclaim from an audience of more than two and half thousand.
The recital was in the grounds of an historic castle, in keeping with the growing fashion for outdoor opera.
SUDELEY CASTLE/Winchcombe
GREG LYNN/Organiser
Even the best performers sometimes get a tickle in their throats — Jose Carreras warming up for the first night of the Sudeley Summer Festival.
He'd flown into Staverton in Glocestershire with his fifteen year-old daughter specially for the concert.
It took a crew of sixty a week to set up the stage and seating in front of the ruined tithe barn in the grounds of Sudeley Castle for the four day festival.
The audience was invited to turn up early and picnic in the grounds, serenaded by a wind quartet, before the real attraction for the evening.
She says it's lovely — it sounds great and the whole setting is wonderful.
She says the setting is lovely, but when we saw hime at the Albert Hall he was superb — he's not as good this evening.
She says he's brilliant, just the best — and good-looking, yes!
For the organisers, it was the fruition of a year's planning.
He says he thinks indoor opera performances at a hundred and sixty pounds a ticket will still be popular, but now outdoor opera in beautiful settings with opera stars and clasical musicians are also becoming very popular.
Tickets for the evening were sixty-five pounds but there was still a queue for the ladies…
Some momentary interruptions earlier by nearby geese failed to distract Jose Carreras, who carried on to give four encores, before the audience would let him go.
That's all the news from us.
I'll be back with our late bulletin after News at Ten, but for the rest of the programme, it's over to Anne Dawson, at the International Air Tattoo at RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire.
Thankyou Harriet.
Well as you can see, RAF Fairford is quite a sight.
There are five hundred planes on the tarmac, all ready for the big take-off.
After the break, the world's finest pilots.
A record number of display teams are set to take part.
And the star of the show…the Russian Bear comes in from the cold.
In Central News tonight:
Securicor murder: A guard is killed by a stolen van.
Fraud inquiry.
Accomodation agents vanish owing thousands.
And all the fun of Fairford…flying high at the Air Tattoo.
Good Evening:
HARRIET RYLEY
ERIKA BARNES
Police say they're treating Mr Lett's death as murder, and his employer, Securicor is offering a (£25,000) twenty five thousand pound reward for help in catching the killers.
ABI DONALD/Milton Keynes
Det Supt JOHN BOUND/Thames Valley Police
Det Insp EDDIE GARLAND/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Ron Letts was killed for a load of alimunium worth less than 200 pounds.
He was on duty at Harmon Contracts at Wolverton in Milton Keynes.
when two men tried to leave the factory in this van which they'd stolen from the compound.
They ran over Mr Letts and left him lying in the road with serious internal injuries.
He was taken to Milton keynes general hospital where he died this morning.
Police are appalled by the tragic waste.
Male speaker
the motive was to steal scrap metal from the company the amount of metal would have been less than a couple of hundred pounds so quite a minor incident in itself.
Reporter asks Arte you hope3ful He says always hopeful and with the help from the public and the criminla fraternity we think we'll get a result.
Voice over
Mr Bound is particularly hopeful that criminals in the area will come forward with information as he thinks they too will be appalled at the crime.
The thieves abandoned the van and it'sa load at the scene and escaped in a Saab car.
Police believe people driving along the busy Old Wolverton Road on Wednesday night may have seen something, and last night they carried out random checks on cars in the area.
An incident room has been set up at Milton keynes and police are working on information that Mr Letts managed to tell them before he died.
The van is now being examinied by forensic experts.
Male speaker
It's a forensic examination which will link this vehilce with the scene in general.
Voice over
Securicor has described Mr letts death as a tragic waste of life which they whole heartedly condemn.
They're offering a reward of 25 thousand pounds.
Ron Letts came from Northampton.
He was married with two sons.
An accommodation agency has closed down owing thousands of pounds in rent to landlords.
Some tenants fear they could have to pay again, or face eviction.
Police are investigating possible fraud.
GARETH FURBY/Northampton
ROY WRIGHT/Tenant
BRIAN LEWIN/Northants Trading Standards
Roy Wright moved to Northampton to start a new life after the collapse of his marriage.
He spent his five hundred pounds life savings on a deposit and advance rent on a bungalow.
But now the accommodation agency which took his money has deserted its offices.
It hasn't passed on a penny to the landlord…and his tenancy agreement may not now be worth the paper it's written on
Male speaker
I don't know where I stand.
The landlord wants a months deposit and another month's rent in advance which I already paid to the agency.
I don't know what to do I'm in limbo now
Voice over
The police are now investigating and already trading standards officers have been contacted by half a dozen tenants and landlords who believe they've lost out
Male speaker
People have paid deposits of $500…they've been paying weekly payments of $125 so it could be quite considerable but it could run to thousands of pounds
Voice over
Roy Wright's now taking legal advice.
His landlord wants him to pay a further $170 to make up for the deposit that's gone missing.
But this tenant says he can't pay.
He's literally down to his last few pounds
Sport now…and as England's cricketers' hopes of saving the ashes go up in smoke…we'll catch up with the women who're hoping to restore some national pride.
But first…someone who's making a bit of a noise about his bid for World glory.
PAUL FRY/World Longtrack Finalist
PETER MILES/Event Organiser
Paul Fry enjoys the green green grass of home.
But soon he'll be trying out the shale and sand of Germany.
He's through to his first World Longtrack final…where he'll be lining up against the best speedway and grasstrack riders.
Male speaker
Voice over
Here at his home track in Herefordshire he can ride the hills and slide the turns.
On Sunday he'll be facing some of the best of British bikers…in the Ledbury Grasstrack meeting.
50 races…solos and sidecars…should make for a thrilling showdown.
Voice over
Lets slow down the pace now…as the England World Cup cricket campaign moves to Reading.
Tomorrow, Oxfordshire's, Debbie Stock and Janet Goodman hope to make the side against Ireland who're on a roll after beating Denmark in Oxford earlier this week.
The women say anyone disillusioned with the mens game, should come and see what they've got to offer.
Female speaker
Voice over
It's mix and match at Chipping Norton, where they're staging their first ever mixed fours.
Top Bowls player, Gill Smith from Cheltenham will be star attraction for the — On the Greens Open.
And it's all change at the County Ground.
Swindon Town are spending half a million pounds on replacing captain Colin Caulderwood…with 22 year old Adrian Whitbread from Orient.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
BRENDA DAVIS/Earlys Social Club
BRIAN CONSTABLE/McLeans Coaches
MARK WILLIAMS/Coach and Bus Week
Voice over
30 staff and friends from Earlys Blankets in Witney had been looking forward to a 3-day holiday at EuroDisney.
They'd paid up to £75 a head for coach travel, hotel accommodation and tickets to Europe's most popular theme park.
But today the Earlys Social Club was spreading the news the trip was off, after the company it had booked with went bust.
Its secretary claims that Land Travel was trying to sell her extras, including excursions to Paris, as late as last week.
The Earlys trip was one of many jobs Land Travel had contracted out to Macleans, the Witney coach firm.
MacLeans says it's owed £20,000 and this morning's visit to Land Travel's Bath headquarters left its Managing Director pessimistic about ever getting the money back.
Today's developments came as no surprise to journalists at Coach and Bus Week.
They've written several articles in recent months warning of Land Travel's plight.
Mark Williams advises holiday-makers to deal only with the Association of British Travel Agents — Land Travel isn't a member.
But staff at Earlys say they'll never go on a package holiday again.
There's been no official comment from Land Travel.
Its chairman and company secretary are being questioned by police investigating allegations of fraud.
Witnesses who gave evidence that helped convict two joyriders have criticised the sentences they received.
One of the two teenagers was put on probation for a year, the other received a supervision order.
They were arrested after police were tipped off by local residents, who say they've since been threatened and intimidated.
Nick Clark reports.
ARTHUR ALLEN/Witness
Ch Insp JOHN REEVE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Arthur Allen lives on the Rosehill estate in Oxford.
He was one of the witnesses who identified two joyriders to the police last summer, after a display on the estate.
Fourteen-year-old Craig Ralphs and eighteen year old Glenn Cameron were subsequently arrested and charged with reckless driving and taking cars without consent.
The witnesses told the court since going to the police they've been intimidated by certain people on the estate.
A friend of Arthur Allen, who didn't want to appear before the camera, has been particularly targeted.
Male speaker
His car has gone, his dog has been stabbed, all sorts of things.
Voice over
This is the dog Mr Allen was refering to, we filmed her shortly after she'd been seriously injured in the knife attack.
She had just had puppies.
So despite the threats why did Mr Allen give evidence?
Male speaker
Because I was sick of it, the noise, the danger.
Voice over
The two joyriders were eventually convicted at Oxford Crown Court.
Today they were sentenced.
Passing sentence Recorder Mary-Jane Mowatt said Cameron and Ralphs had put the lives of others at risk.
She said the public may conclude the offenders deserve to be locked up but she considered it inappropiate because of their age.
Cameron was given a year's probation and Ralphs a year's supervision order.
Those who gave evidence say the sentence is insufficient, they say it just gives licence to youngsters to break the law.
Male speaker
Appalled, they should have got put away.
Voice over
Meanwhile the police have commended the witnesses for coming forward.
Male speaker
We thank them for helping us.
Voice over
Police say it's the sort of public spirit required to help to stop the joyriding menace which is still very much in evidence this summer.
High levels of ammonia pollution have been discovered in the River Severn.
More than fifteen times the normal amount of ammonia was detected in parts of the river — conserationists say it could harm fish and other wildlife if it isn't tackled.
Ken Goodwin reports.
ROY GAGE/Glos Wildlife Trust
Voice over
The Gloucestershire Wildlife Trust sampled water in various parts of the river and discovered that in one area; Gloucester, the amount of ammonia was more than fifteen times the normal level.
Sewage, farmyard waste and fertilizer leaching into the river could also be to blame.
He says that the river has been getting cleaner over the years so this is a setback.
It needs to be sorted out before wildlife is badly affected.
But the river Severn at Gloucester is by no means the worst area of pollution.
That's reserved for Avonmouth.
He says Avonmouth is disusting; cyanide, heavy metals and raw sewage all find their way into the river.
The National Rivers Authority it isn't aware of a particular porblem at Gloucester.
It hasn't seen the survey results yet, but would like to examine the findings.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
WITNEY/Oxfordshire
BRENDA DAVIS/Earlys Social Club
BRIAN CONSTABLE/McLeans Coaches
MARK WILLIAMS/Coach and Bus Week
Voice over
30 staff and friends from Earlys Blankets in Witney had been looking forward to a 3-day holiday at EuroDisney.
They'd paid up to £75 a head for coach travel, hotel accommodation and tickets to Europe's most popular theme park.
But today the Earlys Social Club was spreading the news the trip was off, after the company it had booked with went bust.
Its secretary claims that Land Travel was trying to sell her extras, including excursions to Paris, as late as last week.
The Earlys trip was one of many jobs Land Travel had contracted out to Macleans, the Witney coach firm.
MacLeans says it's owed £20,000 and this morning's visit to Land Travel's Bath headquarters left its Managing Director pessimistic about ever getting the money back.
Today's developments came as no surprise to journalists at Coach and Bus Week.
They've written several articles in recent months warning of Land Travel's plight.
Mark Williams advises holiday-makers to deal only with the Association of British Travel Agents — Land Travel isn't a member.
But staff at Earlys say they'll never go on a package holiday again.
There's been no official comment from Land Travel.
Its chairman and company secretary are being questioned by police investigating allegations of fraud.
Witnesses who gave evidence that helped convict two joyriders have criticised the sentences they received.
One of the two teenagers was put on probation for a year, the other received a supervision order.
They were arrested after police were tipped off by local residents, who say they've since been threatened and intimidated.
Nick Clark reports.
ARTHUR ALLEN/Witness
Ch Insp JOHN REEVE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Arthur Allen lives on the Rosehill estate in Oxford.
He was one of the witnesses who identified two joyriders to the police last summer, after a display on the estate.
Fourteen-year-old Craig Ralphs and eighteen year old Glenn Cameron were subsequently arrested and charged with reckless driving and taking cars without consent.
The witnesses told the court since going to the police they've been intimidated by certain people on the estate.
A friend of Arthur Allen, who didn't want to appear before the camera, has been particularly targeted.
Male speaker
His car has gone, his dog has been stabbed, all sorts of things.
Voice over
This is the dog Mr Allen was refering to, we filmed her shortly after she'd been seriously injured in the knife attack.
She had just had puppies.
So despite the threats why did Mr Allen give evidence?
Male speaker
Because I was sick of it, the noise, the danger.
Voice over
The two joyriders were eventually convicted at Oxford Crown Court.
Today they were sentenced.
Passing sentence Recorder Mary-Jane Mowatt said Cameron and Ralphs had put the lives of others at risk.
She said the public may conclude the offenders deserve to be locked up but she considered it inappropiate because of their age.
Cameron was given a year's probation and Ralphs a year's supervision order.
Those who gave evidence say the sentence is insufficient, they say it just gives licence to youngsters to break the law.
Male speaker
Appalled, they should have got put away.
Voice over
Meanwhile the police have commended the witnesses for coming forward.
Male speaker
We thank them for helping us.
Voice over
Police say it's the sort of public spirit required to help to stop the joyriding menace which is still very much in evidence this summer.
High levels of ammonia pollution have been discovered in the River Severn.
More than fifteen times the normal amount of ammonia was detected in parts of the river — conserationists say it could harm fish and other wildlife if it isn't tackled.
Ken Goodwin reports.
ROY GAGE/Glos Wildlife Trust
Voice over
The Gloucestershire Wildlife Trust sampled water in various parts of the river and discovered that in one area; Gloucester, the amount of ammonia was more than fifteen times the normal level.
Sewage, farmyard waste and fertilizer leaching into the river could also be to blame.
He says that the river has been getting cleaner over the years so this is a setback.
It needs to be sorted out before wildlife is badly affected.
But the river Severn at Gloucester is by no means the worst area of pollution.
That's reserved for Avonmouth.
He says Avonmouth is disusting; cyanide, heavy metals and raw sewage all find their way into the river.
The National Rivers Authority it isn't aware of a particular porblem at Gloucester.
It hasn't seen the survey results yet, but would like to examine the findings.
One of Britain's oldest breweries has won a two month battle against a hostile takeover bid.
Morelands' shareholders have rejected the offer from Suffolk brewers Greene King — and that means the jobs of seventy brewery workers have been saved.
Simon Garrett reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JASPER CLUTTERBUCK/Chief Executive/Morland
1 JULY 1992/SIMON REDMAN/Greene King
IAN BERRY/Industry Analyst
Voice over
Not Champagne, but Morland's Original was being used to toast the brewer's successful bid defence.
Greene King planned to close the brewery.
So for at least seventy of the two hundred workers, today's announcement means their jobs are saved.
Male speaker
It's a great day for Morlands and a great day for CAMRA
Male speaker
Terrific, tremendous
Male speaker
Marvellous, over the moon, I've got me job
Voice over
Greene King started in May with forty-three per cent of Morland shares.
Today they'd only increased that to forty-six per cent.
Morland bosses say they've pulled off the escape of the decade
Male speaker
Even our staff backed us up.
Eighty of our two hundred and twenty staff bought shares
Voice over
They even had an old speckled hen on hand to celebrate…
Morland can now go ahead with expansion plans, buying seventy pubs and signing new distribution deals for their beer.
For would-be predators Greene King; it's an embarrassing reversal after claiming a foregone conclusion.
Male speaker
I've said all along.
We will eventually get the company whatever it takes
Voice over
That date could not now arrive for at least a year.
But experts believe Greene King will come back
Male speaker
It's probable they will come back, but if they do they'll have to bid an awful lot more a second time
Voice over
However after today's result Morland staff say no-one will ever see them as an easy target.
A new centre's opened providing same day treatment for people with cataracts.
It will allow doctors to perform twice as many operations as they have done in the past.
Clare Lafferty reports.
JOE DUNN/Cataract Patient
Mr MARTIN JOYCE/Opthalmic Surgeon
TIM RUSSON
JULIE BRADBURY
RICHARD PHELPS
GRAHAM BROOKHOUSE
JAIME KING
YINKA IDOWU
MARCIA MARRIOTT/Coach
MARK KIFF/Reporting
JACKIE STEWART/Former World Champion
Voice over
A race held across land, on water and through the air came up with an unlikely winner, when a steamroller took on a hot air balloon and a narrow boat to see which was the fastest.
Richard Barnett was at the finishing line.
UPTON UPON SEVERN Worcestershire
CHRIS VILES Balloonist
DAVID SMITH Driver
TERRY NORMYLE Boatman
Voice over
Tension was mounting as preparations got underway for the first ever race between a balloon, a steamroller…and a narrowboat.As entrants arrived for the annual steam rally at Upton, the contestants in the battle of the giants were all expressing optimism.Balloonist Chris Viles reckoned he was in with a good chance:
But with the honour of hundreds of steam enthusiasts to worry about, David Smith was confident his 1924 Aveling and Porter steamroller would streak to victory:
Meanwhile on the Severn, the skipper of the narrowboat Emma Louise was hoping for success too:
With the balloon tethered to prevent it going up instead of along, there was some confusion over when the race had actually started.A problem compounded by the fact that the Emma Louise was out of sight on the river, so a check would be made separately on her speed.
But then they were off…with the twelve ton roller accellerating fast to nearly six miles an hour across the field…
Balloons can travel at well over six miles an hour…but not today…the roller was well ahead…
On the river the Emma Louise was making good speed…but at five mph, she came a worthy second…
So a delighted Dave Smith steamrollered to victory:
The steam rally at Upton runs over the weekend, and forty thousand visitors are expected to come and see the vintage traction engines, old time fairground and other attractions.And they'll also be able to admire the fastest steamroller in the west.
2
The Land Travel holiday tour group has collapsed leaving two and a half thousand people stranded…
US warns of imminent strike against Iraq
The US Secretary of State, James Baker, has warned of an imminent military strike against Iraq.
Labour announces new shadow cabinet roles
Labour has announced that Gordon Brown will become Shadow Chancellor, Margaret Beckett, Shadow Leader of the House and Tony Blair, Shadow Home Secretary.
FTSE down 22
The hundred shares index closed up down twenty-two point three at twenty-three, seventy-seven point two.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-nine and up at two marks, eighty-five.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
John Patten -- the Education Secretary and MP for Oxford West and Abingdon -- is recovering at home after a week in hospital for tests on a viral infection.
Mr Patten left his hospital bed for last week's crucial Commons' votes, but he is not expected to return to the Department of Education, until the end of next month.
Police have released a series of security photos of a man they believe has carried out more than twenty armed raids.
In the latest incident he got away with three thousand pounds from a building society after threatening staff with a knife or a gun.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
Det Chief Insp TERRY MOORE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Police released this series of photographs taken by a security camera at the Leeds Building Society on Westgate Street in Gloucester.
It shows the man who held up cashiers with a knife or a gun last Thursday, and got away with three thousand pounds.
The armed raid in Gloucester was the second in the county.
In March its believed the same man threatened staff with a knife at the Bristol and West Building Society in Cheltenham.
He escaped with 3,000 pounds.
He's been nicknamed the M25 robber because he's also thought to be responsible for up to 20 armed raids near the M25 around London.
Male speaker
The security photos are some of the best he's ever seen.
He hopes they'll help to catch the robber.
It's not known if the weapon he uses is real, but he could be dangerous.
Voice over
Detectives say the suspect is aged around 25 to 30 and 5 foot 8 inches tall.
They say anyone who thinks they recognise him should contact police immediately.
Young people are being offered courses in baby-sitting, to learn how to cope in an emergwncy.
Many parents are only too eager to hand their child over to a babysitter and enjoy a well-earned night out.
But the British Red Cross is warning that without the right training, they could be putting your child at risk.
MARIA COYLE/Witney
LIZ HALLETT/Course Promoter
DI REVELL/British Red Cross
ALI SMITH/Parent
Voice over
Sixteen year old Liz Hallett saw the babysitting training courses advertised on TV.
She decided to promote the idea in her school as part of her business studies GCSE.
It's just one example of where the British Red Cross training can be integrated into the national curriculum teaching everything from first aid to hazards in the home.
Liz Hallett says a person from the Red Cross came to see us.
We talked about the course, how we could set it up and who would need to be involved.
These boys and girls at Wood Green school in Witney stayed behind after school once a week for the eighteen hour course.
The British REd Cross are selling training packs for would be babysitters to accompagny the course.
The packs include essential advice such as always making sure you know where the baby is sleeping, where the phone is and how to contact parents in an emergency.
Di Revelle from the Red Cross says I'd like to see it introduced in schools and taken up by the community.
It prepares children for their baby sitting role.
She says I didn't realise you had to plan an escape route for a fire.
He says the course has helped me get to grips with the kids otherwise they'd run wild.
There's currently no minimum age limit for babysitters and the government doesn't plan to introduce the training as part of the natioanl curriculum.
But babysitters who've completed the course can show a certificate of competence to the child's parents to reassure them.
Parent Ali Smith says it's reassuring to know that you're leaving the children with someone who knows what to do in a crisis.
I think it's an excellent idea.
The British Red Cross hope their course will help plug a potentially dangerous loophole in the law governing the standard of care offered by babysitters, giving the parent a well earned night out with peace of mind.
(WES ad lib)(Anne next) Still to come on Central News.
The OTHER milk race.
A marathon man in training to be cream of the crop.
Plus, from the Red Baron to the Red Arrows…seventy five years of the RAF.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, back to Fairford for the oldest AND some of the most up-to-date flying machines on display at the weekend.
But first, with the sport, including news of the milk race, here's Erika.
ERIKA BARNES
Yes, the Milk race, but not the round-Britain cycle race.
This is across Buckinghamshire on two legs!
Meet the milkman who runs a hundred and fifty miles a week delivering pintas…and who's representing the country in the ultra marathon!
GREG DELL/Ultra Marathon Runner
Male speaker
It's always milkman this, and cream of that.
Or they call me Ernie.
They tease me in the pub…it's always milkman this, milkman that.
Voice over
Greg, from Aylesbury is an ultra marathon runner…the British Champion over one hundred kilometres…or 62 miles.
Next stop, the European Championships.
It's a long, long road to success.
But the early morning milkround means he can cover over a hundred miles a week in training…which makes the actual competition more bearable.
Male speaker
I'm out delivering milk for four to five hours.
It helps me go for so long.
It's just like another milkround.
Voice over
The day doesn't end with the empties.
The real work is only just beginning.
Another few hours of training.
It's boring…it's lonely…but it's amazing how the time just flies…
Male speaker
When you run for six to seven hours, you'll be surprised.
You look at your watch and the hours disappear.
You talk to others and think.
It goes quickly and then you realise you can't remember what you've been thinking about.
Voice over
Greg doesn't pace himself in miles an hour…more…pints an hour…that's the lonely life of the long distance milkman.
Two members of an all-girl singing group have been killed in a motorway crash, just days before their television debut.
Their car crashed into the back of an army lorry and burst into flames.
The group had just recorded their part in a new Central series which starts on Wednesday.
KAREN THOMPSON/Reporting
Sgt ROGER GILES/Wiltshire Police
GILL STRIBLING-WRIGHT/Producer
Rose Patterson who was 28 and from Luton and 26 year old Dee Miller from Romford in Essex were part of the four girl Bristol based group called the DIVAS.
Both women were killed on the M4 near Swindon in the early hours of saturday morning on their way back from a show.
Their hired Vauxhall Astra which was travelling thirty miles an hour crashed into the back of an army convoy and caught fire.
Soldiers and police tried to help but couldn't save the singers.
Sgt Roger Giles from Wiltshire Police says the car burst imto flames.
The women were trapped and it was impossible to get them out.
In two days time the DIVAS will be seen performing their close harmony act in new ITV series for rising stars called’ Pot of Gold’.
Producer Gill Stribling Wright says they were talented.
They were a wonderful group who impressed from the time they came in.
They sang like a dream.
Now everyone is very stunned.
Rose had previously worked with the programme's host Des O'Connor and also with comic Mike Reid.
While Dee had toured with Suzy Quatro.
The Divas manager Alan Cutler says Dee and Rose had been on the verge of a wonderful career.
He adds the other band members Lorayne Robinson and Ruby Washington will carry on with the group for the sake of their friends who died.
The family of a man who was shot dead during a row over a boundary fence have started legal action against two people who were cleared of the killing.
It's three years to the day since Tony Alliss died from gunshot wounds.
His family says justice still hasn't been done.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Kings Stanley
JOYCE ALLISS/Wife
BOB ALLISS/Brother
Tony Alliss was killed during an argument over a boundary fence near to his home in Kings Stanley near Stroud.
His neighbours, Terence Maule and his son Graig were charged with murdering Mr Alliss.
But at their trial two years ago, they were cleared, after the judge ruled that there was no case to answer.
The Alliss' have never accepted that outcome, and now they're taking civil action to claim damages against the Maules.
The family are claiming they should be compensated for the income they lost as a result of Tony's death.
They say it's a matter of principle.
Terence Maule declined to talk to us about the matter other than to say he was aware the Allisses were taking action.
A woman has been attacked and raped by two men as she walked home from a pub.
The twenty three year old was dragged from a busy street into an alleyway where the assault took place.
MIKE BLAIR/Northampton
Det Sgt MARK LACEY/Northamptonshire Police
Police say it was an appalling crime.
The young woman had been out drinking with friends.
At about eleven o' clock last night she decided to walk the short distance home.
Her route took her along Wellingborough road, one of Northamptons busiest streets.
As she passed the junction with Abington avenue the two men attacked dragging her into this alleyway where one of them raped her.
He says the victim was walking to her home just a few minutes away along a very busy street.
Normally you'd not expect a problem in those circumstances.
This time there was and it's vital the people responsible are caught.
Both men are white and in their mid twenties.
Both had blonde hair and were wearing jeans.
One had on a black top, the other a white top with a red waistcoat style jacket.
It's thought they may have been drinking in this pub on Wellingborough road earlier in the evening.
Detectives want to speak to anyone who thinks they may have seen them.
Police say the victim is extremely distressed.
Specially trained counsellors are being called in to try help her.
Police in Thailand are searching for the driver of a bus which crashed, killing a student from Oxfordshire.
Rachel Mortimer, who was (24) twenty four and from Great Bourton near Banbury, was on holiday with her sister and boyfriend when the coach careered off the road during a rainstorm.
Her sister Rosemary was seriously injured.
The driver of the bus ran off after the accident.The Foreign Office is trying to find out more about what happened.
A derelict pub has been severely damaged by fire.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
It broke out at The Railway in Stert Street in Abingdon.
The pub hasn't been in use for several years.
Around (30) thirty fire fighters were needed to bring the fire under control.
The cause is being investigated.
