The trial of a man accused of stabbing another man to death in the doorway of his home has been put back until later in the week.
August 1992/NORTHAMPTON
Andrew Livermore, who's twenty-eight and unemployed, is charged with murdering Digby Sanderson at his home in Evesham Court, Northampton, almost a year ago.
Livermore, who also comes from the town, is expected to plead not guilty.
In Central News tonight: Air display crash: Are Russian pilots experienced enough?
Find his killer: Widow of murdered guard appeals for help.
And mind that child…now it's exams in babysitting.
RUNS=0:40 
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The inquiry will examine whether pilot error or mechanical breakdown was to blame, but one expert says Russian aerobatics pilots are not as experienced as their Western counterparts.
Meanwhile people living near the tattoo site say they're worried that one day there'll be a major disaster.
Viewer's Video/KIM BARNES/RAF Fairford
PAUL BEAVER/Jane's Sentinel
Last Thursday
Wing Cdr TONY WEBB/International Air Tattoo
BRUCE ARKELL/Farmer
Both pilots managed to eject, suffering back injuries and a fractured jaw.
Although they're both experienced test pilots, it's thought they might not have the same aerobatics experience as Western teams, like the Red Arrows.
He says the problem with some teams, like the Eastern Europeans, is that they want to be part of the display flying circus, but they haven't got the financial means.
So maybe they only spend ten hours, instead of three hundred hours spent by the Red Arrows.
The RAF has convened a board of inquiry into the crash…which, in an unprecedented move, will include two Russians.
It's known that the Migs approached each other coming out of a loop at a combined speed of about 300 miles per hour, in an area to the north east of the main spectator section at Fairford.
Within six seconds of the collision, one fell to earth among other aircraft, just below the point of impact.
The other came down a short distance the other side of the village of Whelford
Organisers held full safety checks on the Migs' routine were held last week.
He says we have strict rules and regulations and the flying safety committee make sure they're administered.
The aircraft at the time were within the regulations which is reinforced by the fact that they crashed well away from the public area.
But in Whelford there's concern amongst villagers.
The wreckage landed in a field belonging to farmer Bruce Arkell.
Now he wants aerobatic flying near the village to be stopped.
He says we see them going up in the air, they do these tight manoevres.
Any failure of the controls, they're going to drop out of the sky indeed we saw that on Saturday…
Today the planes are flying home…their pilots shaken by the first accident at Fairford in 23 years.
All sides will be keen to see just what the Board of Inquiry discovers…and anxious to prevent it happening again.
The widow of a security guard who was knocked down and killed during a robbery has appealed for help to track down his killers.
Ron Letts died in hospital from internal injuries after being hit by a stolen van.
GARETH FURBY/Milton Keynes
MARY LETTS/Widow
Det Supt JOHN BOUND/Milton Keynes Police
Voice over
Today Mary Letts hid her grief and appeared at a news conference in the hope it'll help police catch her husband's killer.
Ron Letts, who was 50, and had only worked as a security guard for two years, was run down outside a wharehouse near Milton Keynes.
He'd tried to stop a truck which was loaded with stolen aluminium scrap worth just a hundred pounds.
She says he was very good at his job.
He enjoyed it.
Today police released more family pictures.
For most of his life Ron Letts ran a bakers round from a mobile shop, but two years ago he started work as a security guard, because the round wasn't making enough money.
She says she knew it might be dangerous and risky, but never like this.
The police believe the killers may be just petty criminals, who are now terrified, after a simple job stealing scrap metal, went horribly wrong.
He says they must be scared.
They didn't mean to kill but that was the outcome.
Today Mrs Letts was accompanied by her two sons Martin and Stuart.
She wants the killer caught for their sake.
She says the boys are angry.
She wants them to see the killer caught and tried.
Securicor has now put up a reward of twenty five thousand pounds…
The police hope such a large sum will tempt members of the criminal faternity to point the finger.
So far they've only recived one such call, and it was of little use.
But dfetective hope today's appeal from Mrs Letts will convince others to come forward.
We start the rest of the sports news with controversy for the TWR Jaguar racing team.
Former Oxford Cheetah skipper, Hans Nielson has qualified for his 14th world speedway final, after winning his semi in Italy.
But Martin Dugard has been eliminated.
It was a close shave for Oxfordshire's Janet Goodman and her fellow England Cricketers, against India in the World Cup.
Beating them by just three runs.
Today they're hoping to do, what the men couldn't…by beating favourites Australia.
England's score of 208 gives them a fighting chance.
Owners of one of the world's most famous cars have been holding their annual get-together.
Dozens of Bentley drivers came to show off their pride and joy and to take part in a rally through the countryside.
MARK LIPSCOMB/Moreton in Marsh
TONY LAMBERT/Bentley Enthusiast
Male speaker
’ Oh it's most interesting, I mean you take a wrong turning and everybody follows you.
Everybody turns in the country fields and what have you.
It is very enjoyable’.
Voice over
The first Bentley was built back in nineteen nineteen and sold in nineteen twenty-two.
This is one of those originals and still giving its present day owner great enjoyment.
But even on a wet summer afternoon whether you take a front or back seat, this really is called travelling in style.
Finally tonight, back to the International Air Tattoo.
And although the weekend's displays were overshadowed by that mid-air collision, the thousands of people who turned out at RAF Fairford will have much more to remember than that.
To mark its Seventy-Fifth anniversary, the RAF put on show its most famous aircraft from two world wars…and of course the planes of today.
Voice over
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Labour MP arrested
FTSE up 16
The hundred shares index closed up sixteen point five at twenty eight forty four point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, fifty eight.
WESLEY SMITH/
Good Evening.
An RAF board of inquiry has begun investigating the crash involving two Russian jet fighters at the International Air Tattoo.
The planes collided in mid-air in front of a quarter of a million people.
Viewer's Video/KIM BARNES/RAF Fairford
PAUL BEAVER/Jane's Sentinel
WHELFORD/Gloucestershire
BRUCE ARKELL/Farmer
Both pilots managed to eject, suffering back injuries and a fractured jaw.
Although they're both experienced test pilots, it's thought they might not have the same aerobatics experience as Western teams, like the Red Arrows.
He says the problem with some Eastern European teams is that maybe they only spend ten hours, instead of three hundred hours spent by the Red Arrows.
The RAF has convened a board of inquiry into the crash…which, in an unprecedented move, will include two Russians.
But in Whelford there's concern amongst villagers.
The wreckage landed in a field belonging to farmer Bruce Arkell.
Now he wants aerobatic flying near the village to be stopped.
He says we see them going up in the air, they do these tight manoevres.
Any failure of the controls, they're going to drop out of the sky.
All sides will be keen to see just what the Board of Inquiry discovers…and anxious to prevent it happening again.
The widow of a security guard who was killed during a robbery has appealed for help to track down his killers.
Ron Letts was hit by a stolen van.
GARETH FURBY/Milton Keynes
MARY LETTS/Widow
Voice over
Today Mary Letts hid her grief and appeared at a news conference in the hope it'll help police catch her husband's killer.
Ron Letts, who was 50, and had only worked as a security guard for two years, was run down outside a wharehouse near Milton Keynes.
He'd tried to stop a truck which was loaded with stolen aluminium scrap worth just a hundred pounds.
The police believe the killers may be just petty criminals, who are now terrified, after a simple job stealing scrap metal, went horribly wrong.
Today Mrs Letts was accompanied by her two sons Martin and Stuart.
She wants the killer caught for their sake.
She says the boys are angry.
She wants them to see the killer caught and tried.
Securicor has now put up a reward of twenty-five thousand pounds.
Two members of a singing group have been killed in a motorway crash, just days before their television debut.
Rose Patterson, who was twenty-eight, and twenty-six year old, Dee Miller were part of the group, the DIVAS.
Both women were killed on the M-four near Swindon when their car crashed into the back of an army convoy and caught fire.
On Wednesday, the DIVAS will be seen in Central's new series for rising stars,’ Pot of Gold’.
The family of a man shot dead in a row over a fence have started legal action against two people cleared of the killing.
The family says justice hasn't been done.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Kings Stanley
JOYCE ALLISS/Wife
Tony Alliss was killed during an argument over a boundary fence near to his home in Kings Stanley near Stroud.
His neighbours, Terence Maule and his son Graig were charged with murdering Mr Alliss.
But at their trial two years ago, they were cleared, after the judge ruled that there was no case to answer.
The Alliss' have never accepted that outcome, and now they're taking civil action to claim damages against the Maules.
Female speaker
I want to clear my husband's name.
He was villified in court.
It was a farcical trial.
They've got to be made to pay for what they did.
Voice over
The family are claiming they should be compensated for the income they lost as a result of Tony's death.
Terence Maule declined to talk to us about the matter other than to say he was aware the Allisses were taking action.
A fire has caused thousands of pounds worth of damage at a car factory.
The fire broke out earlier this evening at the Honda carplant in Swindon.
It took around fifty officers two hours to bring it under control.
People living near the factory alerted the emergency services when they saw thick black smoke pouring out of the roof of the plant's smelting room.
The cause is not yet known.
Police have released a series of security photos of a man they believe has robbed more than twenty building societies.
In the latest incident, in Gloucester, he got away with three thousand pounds after threatening staff with a knife or a gun.
This series of photographs was taken by a security camera at the Leeds Building Society.
The Swindon Town striker, Dave Mitchell, is leaving the County Ground to play in Turkey.
Mitchell, a first team regular last season, is joining Izmir after being offered a deal which was too good to turn down.
The fee is only twenty thousand pounds, but Mitchell had a clause in his Swindon contract which fixed the price at that if he wanted to move abroad.
(That's all from the Central newsroom until 6.15am on GMTV.
Goodnight.)
RUNS=0:05
The biggest collection of Ferraris ever seen outside Italy gathered at Silverstone at the weekend.
They were there for a motoring festival, with more than two hundred million pounds worth of classic cars on show.
Liz Hannam reports.
SILVERSTONE Northamptonshire
NIGEL HUNT Ferrari Owners' Club
BARRY EVANS Ferrari Owners' Club
STIRLING MOSS Racing Driver
VAUGHAN DAVIS Owner
Voice over
It's the most expensive car park in the world.
There are more than 600 Ferraris here and the cheapest one costs at least £60,000.
The occasion is the 25th birthday of the U-K owners club and around half of its 1,300 active members have turned up for the celebrations at Silverstone.
The only qualification is being able to afford a Ferrari and its running costs.
The front badge, much loved by car thieves, costs £70 and even a simple radiator cap, basically the same as a Fiat's, cost £18.
But Ferrari owners are adament its worth the money.
Male speaker
It's the power and the glory of the Ferrari.
Voice over
Reporter asks: Would you take it shopping?
He replies: It's not the type of car I'd want my wife to take to the shops.
To say’ Sorry dear, but there's a dent in the car,’isn't something I'd want to hear.
Male speaker
Most cars move over when they see a Ferrari, except if it's a Porsche.
Voice over
A car similar to this G-T-O fetched four million pounds at auction last year.
It headed a display of the most reverred cars in the Ferrari club.
Also there was Stirling Moss driving the car that won the 1961 TT Race.
He says he can't get the same enthusiasm for modern racing cars.
Male speaker
I don't think modern drivers get the same sense of fun as we had.
It's not any less skillful, it's just different.
Voice over
It's a view shared by many at the Historic cars festival.
Vaughan Davis, who's from Chipping Norton in Oxfordshire found the pieces of one of the most successful racing cars in history in a barn.
Mother Gunn had previously won Le Mans in 1928.
Male speaker
I remembered the car from Brooklands.
I took the bits home in a lorry and it took 25 years to rebuild.
Voice over
Since being rebuilt, it's broken many coveted racing records including the fastest Brooklands lap, in which it averaged almost 140mph.
But you don't have to be a racing driver or even very rich to enjoy the Historic Cars.
For some it's just enough to say’ I was there.’
Leaders of Bosnia's warring factions meet
FTSE down 29
The hundred shares index closed down twenty nine point two points at two three four eight 
The pound is up at one dollar ninety one, and down at two marks, eighty four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
In cricket, Gloucestershire face their most important game of the season this Wednesday when they take on Essex in the quarter finals of the Nat West Trophy.
Their hopes could rest on the performance of the country's best bowler: Courtney Walsh.
Mark Kiff reports.
COURTNEY WALSH/Gloucestershire and West Indies
TONY WRIGHT/Gloucestershire Captain
Voice over
This is the last thing that 58 of the country's batsmen have seen this season before losing their wicket.
Courtney Walsh in full flight unleashing an unplayable delivery.
It's the sort of performance that has placed the gentle West Indian giant at the top of the bowling averages.
And it couldn't have come at a better time for the 29 year old bowler in this his benefit season.
He says that often in a benefit year, a player's form suffers, but for me things have been going very well.
His rich vein of form has come after a winter which saw him left out of the West Indies World Cup team…their loss has been Gloucestershire's gain.
He says it gave him time to put his feet up and relax.
Now he's enjoying his cricket.
Walsh has been known as the demon bowler, but to the Gloucestershire team, who kknow hin as Shortie, he's more often been their saviour.
He says some overseas players are disasters but Courtney has been great for Gloucestershire.
The Jamaican born bowler has been in superb form in the Cheltenham Festival…on Wednesday his bowling against Essex could swing the match.
He says it's a big game for me and the club.
I just hope we get the right result and have something to celebrate and another game to look forward too.
From one Golden boy to another…
Nigel Mansell who's one Grand Prix win away from the World Title.
He completed his twenty-nineth victory of his career in the German Grand Prix at Hockenheim.
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
Mansell was slow to start…and Williams team mate Ricardo Patrase got a flyer sneaking into the first bend ahead of the field.
But it didn't take long for Mansell to steal back the lead and remained in control until an early pitstop.
The Williams team gave him a quick change of tyres…but not quick enough to prevent Patrase and Senna fly past into the lead.
There was drama as Mansell tried to assert himself again…a close call as Senna holds the bend and Mansell slides into trouble.
But typical Mansell courage and skill took him past his arch rival…and with Patrasse in the pits it was left to Mansell to claim victory…only just though on a set of well worn and blistered tyres.
Next stop…the Championship.
A win at Budepest would give Mansell the drivers title.
And then thoughts will turn to his future with the Williams team.
From the thrills of the Grand Prix circuit to the spills of the rally world.
This time a team from Gloucestershire are going to the top of the world.
They're the first British team to enter the unusual drive from Paris to the Arctic circle.
But not only do they have to be tough motorists…they also have to be skillful photographers and writers too.
Mark Kiff joined them in training.
MARK MUSCHAMP/Driver
PHILIP LOWNDES/Photographer
Voice over
Cleeve Hill overlooking Cheltenham provides one of the most glorious views in the Cotswolds.
It also forms the ideal terrain for 2 Gloucester men, Mark Muschamp and Philip Lowndes, who are preparing to take part in a rally with a difference.
The Paris North Cape Race, which takes the competitors from France to the northern-most point of Europe, combines the skill of an expert off road racer with the talents of a top class photographer.
He says there are many differences to the rally.
They have to carry out photopghraphy and write a report.
He says they have to photograph issues not connected directly with the rally, perhaps the environment or wildlife.
The race will take Mark and Philip 30 days and 8,000 miles deep into the Arctic Circle with temperatures down to minus 10; the focus of their ambitions; to get into the winning frame.
The jury at the trial of former Swindon Town manager Lou Macari is expected to retire to consider its verdict tomorrow.
Macari and two other club officials are accused of defrauding the Inland Revenue by paying illegal tax-free bonuses to players.
Gareth Furby reports from Winchester Crown Court.
Voice over
Jewellery worth more than a hundred thousand pounds has been recovered by police investigating a string of burglaries.
Now, though, they're faced with the task of finding the legal owners.
Tim Hurst reports.
COLEFORD/Gloucestershire
JUNE 1992
Det Insp WAYNE MURDOCH/Gloucestershire CID
Voice over
It may look like an exclusive jewellers, 4 display cases stuffed with expensive rings and necklaces; in fact it's a police station in the Forest of Dean Gloucestershire.
Every item in the cabinets has been stolen, in the same burglaries that netted thousands of tools and pieces of garden equipment, and recovered by the same team of detectives.
The jewellery and medals, including an Iron Cross, are believed to have been stolen in Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Oxfordshire and perhaps Birmingham.
The haul is worth more a hundred thousand pounds and the hunt is on for the owners.
Some rings, like this solitaire diamond, are worth almost £2,000.
The police squad dealing with the investigation are on 0594 836494.
That's 0594 836494.
Two rows of aluminium prefabs look set to be preserved for the nation…as listed buildings.
If the move's successful the tin-roofed temporary homes, built nearly fifty years ago, would have the same protection in law as Blenheim Palace.
Simon Garrett reports 
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
STANLEY BENNETT/Prefab Resident
SUE TOWNSEND/Prefab Resident
TONY TOWNSEND/Prefab Resident
Voice over
When the The Raddings prefabs were put up in nineteen forty-six they really weren't meant to last more than ten years.
They were part of a rush rebuild after the war, mostly aimed at rehousing men returning from the conflict
’ A temporary prefabricated structure can be put up in a very short time with manual labour.
It's among the first of about thirty thousand which are being built in Britain.
It goes together as simply as a child's building blocks
But these were a cut above the ordinary.
Built by Dowty to house engineers and technicians they were much sought after
Male speaker
When I was allocated the house people thought I was dead lucky.
They thought I knew someone and had been pulling strings, but I hadn't
Voice over
Because many prefabs have now been bulldozed English Heritage wants them listed and protected from redevelopment.
Much to the delight of residents who've always known their homes were special
Female speaker
They were only meant to be temporary, to last ten years, so it's a bit of a laugh.
Then again, it's not funny really it's quite an honour, to have your home listed.
We're going to set up a safari park in the back garden and cream teans on the lawn
Voice over
Some householders think modern architects could help solve the homelessness problem by building some more
Male speaker
They always seem to want to build square boxes, not proper houses like these.
We've got a good garden, lots of space, what more could we ask for?
Voice over
Pictures of the prefabs are going on show at the Royal College of Art as part of the appeal for listed status
Welcome back 
ERIKA BARNES
RICHARD BURNELL/Olympic Gold Medallist
Pictures BBC SPORT
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
Golden memories of a golden moment.
When Richard Burnell made a little sporting history.
In 1948 down on the River Thames in his home town of Henley he was preparing to race in an Olympic final.
Male speaker
For the first time in my experience, I had non stop cheering to the start.
I remember thinking if that's the noise now, what if I don't win.
Male speaker
I was a wiley old man and eased off.
My partner carried on working like mad.
I wasn't too exhausted, but he was wacked.
Voice over
A gold medal for Burnell to emulate the achievements of his father and father-in-law.
An achievement that means more as the years go by.
Male speaker
When we won it was the biggest race.
Since then it's put us into a special class of people
Voice over
But neither were the games ever to be the same.
For Richard Burnell, the Olympic spirit of 1948 has been tarnished by the passage of time.
Male speaker
My concern is that it's far too big and political and money orientated.
Although we trained seriously, it was a semi recreational pastime.
Amateur meant amateur then.
Voice over
Today Oxfordshire's Steve Redgrave carries on the British rowing tradition.
Hoping to win his third Olympic title, in Barcelona.
Whilst the spirit surrounding the games may have changed since Burnell's time; the pot of gold at the end is still as treasured.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
YORK
ROGER DAY/Lecturer Open University
JACKIE KEIRS/Neighbour
JOHN GOLBY/Open University
ROGER McMEEKING/Bursar York University
Voice over
Andrew Pask…a thirty one year old mature student from Bolton in Lancashire…appeared before magistrates this afternoon…he's charged with murdering Dr Elizabeth Howe…at York University…
Her body was found in a hall of residence only hours after she'd arrived to teach at a summer school of the Open University…today courses continued despite the tragedy…
He says; Over the last 48 hours we have found ourselves drawing closer together as a group.
Everything will be overshadowed by these events but we intend to go on making the week work as well as we can.
Dr Howe who was thirty four had lived in Edith Road in Oxford for three years…
A friend is looking after the house today…
Her husband Jeremy…cwho's head of drama for BBC Radio Three and two daughters…
Jessica who's six and Lucy, four, are staying with friends…
She says; The last time I saw him with the two children was on Saturday.
They were bubbling in the car because they were going away on holiday.
Dr Howe…an Oxford graduate…had been a tutor in English at the Open University based at Foxcombe Hall in Oxford for the past two years…she's recently published her first book…through Cambridge university Press called the First English Actresses…colleagues say she had a bright future.
He says; She was a good academjic but more important from our point of view she was a good teacher.
At York University…
Police frogmen have been searching lakes looking for a weapon…believed to be a six inch blade.
He says; It seems it was an isolated incident involving two people.
There is no reason for fear or concern and that is the feeling we have been trying to get across.
Andrew Pask was remanded in custody and will appear in court again in a weeks time.
The RAF crews who are flying aid into Bosnia have been talking about the dangers they face.
They've been using flight manouevres last seen in the Vietnam war to avoid being hit by gunfire from the ground.
The journey begins at RAF Lyneham, with a stop over in Zagreb before the tense and hazardous flight into Sarajevo.
Our reporter Erika Barnes and cameraman Steve Dann joined the RAF on one of their missions to Bosnia.
Colonel MARK COOK/Commander British Contingent
Voice of/Flt Lt MAX BURTON
LARRY HOLLINGWORTH/UN Operations Chief for Refugees
Maj VANNESSA LLOYD-DAVIS/Doctor
Sq Ldr STEVE POTTER/3 weeks in Sarajevo
Voice over
The mission begins in the early hours at RAF Lyneham.
Hercules aircraft are loaded with aid.
Their target is wartorn Bosnia, to feed an embattled nation.
But their task is being sabotaged by those who have war in their sights.
It's described as the largest humanitarian crisis to afflict Europe since the second world war.
The United Nations effort centres around Zagreb in Croatia.
Once a casualty of war itself, now occupied by the peace keepers.
At the airport, crews from many nations prepare to fly to the crisis centre; Sarajevo in Bosnia.
The town has caught the world's attention, but the horrors are further reaching.
Male speaker
The other day I went to an area with 300,000 muslims surrounded by Serbs.
They can't get out and the media can't get in to tell the story.
It's desperate.
They're being bombed and shelled every day and night just as in Sarajevo.
They're suffering greater casualties, but the outside world doesn't know.
Voice over
The RAF who're delivering aid to Sarajevo know all too well of the risks.
They're not a target of the war-ing factions, but they have to duck and dive to avoid the cross fire.
Male speaker
The landing was invented by the U.S. We come in at 1,500ft out of range of fire.
Then there's a steep approach when we nose down at 30 degrees.
The G comes all the way off.
It's a quick approach, so we're less exposed.
Voice over
Sarajevo Airport; and the Hercules is unloaded at top speed.
Nations are united to distribute aid to the people who are captive in their own land.
Male speaker
The task to try to feed the people is a Herculean task.
We're getting food like corn beef milk and flour and dividing into packages and taking into inaccessible places.
Voice over
Indeed the task is becoming almost impossible.
Shortly before this visit, a UN convoy heading for the town of Gorazde was caught in a minefield.
Female speaker
Unfortunately we only got within 15km from the town.
We'd been providing cover for the convoy, when a vehicle went over a land mine.
We were in the middle of a landfight and spent the night in a Serb Police APC.
It's all go.
When it happens, we have to react to a new challenge.
Voice over
But the disaster means the future of the aid convoys will have to be reconsidered.
Within 20 minutes, the crew are airborne again.
Another tactical maneovre keeps the plane clear of the fighting.
Hovering low before another steep escape.
It's a war that will be difficult to forget.
The lasting picture I have is of devastation.
The airport is a relative sanctury because of UN protection.
For the 3 weeks I've been there, there's been shelling every night just a few metres from where we were.
As the United Nations continue their efforts to find a peace in a troubled land.
In the meantime, RAF crews will continue to take comfort to the victims who are prisoners in their own land.
A great grandfather with an artificial knee and a steel plate in his leg is back in training, as a contortionist.
Seventy-five year old Marcel Callow has been practising his art for more than fifty years.
He's retired now, but he can still twist his body into positions most TEENAGERS couldn't manage.
CLARE LAFFERTY Worcester
MARCEL CALLOW Contortionist
You'd certainly never guess that he suffered from arthritis…that was the chair cracking…not his hip.
And it's hard to believe that just four months ago he underwent surgery to have an artificial knee and a steel plate put into his leg.
His talents kept the hospital staff well entertained.
Marcel was a professional contortionist for decades.
With his daughter Antionette he performed in music halls all over the country.
In those days his act was even more spectacular.
Forty years on Marcel's wife Ellen now makes up his appreciative audience.
Your eyes may be watering.
But Marcel says we're all capable of such feats.
He says it's just a case of mind over matter.
There are those who'd say marcel really shouldn't be doing things like this at his age.
They might even say he was round the bend.
But Marcel would no doubt take that as a compliment.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Bosnian peace talks begin
FTSE up 35
The hundred shares index closed up thirty five point two at twenty eight seventy nine point four 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty nine and down at two marks, fifty seven.
Welcome back.
Just after the Second World War a village was sentenced to death by planners who called it a rural slum.
But many were outraged and the community's plight sparked a national debate.
(WES TO READ NEXT)
Eventually the proposal was dropped.
Forty-five years later Erika Barnes has been back to the village, now a thriving community.
REG PIKE/Villager
PAT FELTHAM/Villager
Capt TIM FORSTER/Race Horse Trainer
ANNE SHONE/Community Shop
WINIFRED CARTRIGHT/Villager
Male speaker
’ Neighbours, this is no struggle.
It's a fight for every bit of soil.
It's for something deeper, something in your blood, that no one can take from you.’
Voice over
The battle cry of 1948 which saved the life of an Oxfordshire village.
Planners had wanted it to die…it was called a rural slum.
But it caused a national outrage.
Male speaker
’ The village of Letcombe Bassett is to be killed.
It's crime — it's too small’
Voice over
The villagers responded to the call: Bassett was too old to die.
They packed a protest meeting, which most remember to this day.
Male speaker
The mood of the meeting was, they were trying to save Bassett.
It's a special place.
It's the people isn't it.
I've lived here all my life.
To me, they're the best people in the world.
Voice over
And it's the people that saved the village.
People like Pat Feltham, whose family has lived in the village for generations.
Female speaker
I was born here.
I have no intention of moving I love it.
I've always been happy.
What ever changes were made, I've lived with them.
My father was a ferrier and ran the pub and business together.
My grandfather lived with us.
He'd catch the rabbits and loved a pint of beer.
Voice over
And the rabbit catcher's great grandson carries on the village tradition, which has been enhanced with the arrival of Capt Tim Forster and his Grand National successes.
Male speaker
I like to think in a minute way, I have helped to keep things going.
It employs 20-30 people.
Most live and work in the village.
It's the biggest work force, particularly as farming employs fewer people.
Voice over
Why Letcombe should have been sentenced to death is as much a mystery now as it was then.
Male speaker
It doesn't make sence.
We've got light and water.
Male speaker
The council already has a site for houses.
All we want is mass sewerage.
Male speaker
How much would that cost?
Male speaker
About four thousand five hundred pounds.
That's ha'penny on the rates.
Male speaker
Well that doesn't seem much.
Voice over
Now with the pub no longer open and no school, the community shop is the focal point of the village; but forty five years on they've shown there really is life after death in Bassett.
Male speaker
The bureaucrats got it wrong.
Life in village is important.
The Vale of White Horse is very helpful.
The ethos has changed, it was a reaction after the war.
Voice over
Winifred Cartright returned home from war work to hear Letcombe Bassett could die.
Forty five years on she's still deeply attached to the village.
Female speaker
I'd hate to leave.
It's home.
I went to school h ere.
It wouldn't be right to move.
Voice over
Reporter asks: What's so special about village life?
Female speaker
Fresh air, healthy living a quiet way of life.
Voice over
The late poet laureate John Betjamin joined the debate all those years ago.
He said’ It's Bassett and you love it.
You and your fathers before have known the shape of the hills, the curves of the streams and watercress beds.
You've protested to the nation and you've been noted.
Well done Letcombe Bassett.’
Workers excavating the site for a new hotel have unearthed the remains of dinosaurs who inhabited the area (150) a hundred and fifty million years ago.
Experts on the Jurassic age are calling it the most significant discovery of its kind in Northern Europe.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
NEVILLE HOLLINGWORTH/Geologist
ROBERT DICKINSON/Museum Curator
JURASSIC PARK/Courtesy of UIP Universal
Workmen digging the site for the new Hilton Hotel at Lydiard Fields have discovered the bones of several large marine reptiles — including Pliosaurs, Plesiosaurs and Ichthyosaurs — who inhabited the area when it was covered by sea.
Also unearthed — perfectly preserved examples of the food they lived off — literally hundreds of ammonites and other small sea creatures.
The Swindon area, in common with the rest of Britain, was covered with a sub-tropical sea throughout the Jurassic age.
It was also much further south than it is now — just 20 degrees north of the equator.
A number of other dinosaur bones found nearby are currently on display at Swindon Museum — an exhibition which doubtless owes its popularity to a movie that's doing rather well at the box office.
Steven Spielberg's dinosaurs are frightening enough…but none of the experts would have wanted to encounter a real-life sea dragon.
Dr Hollingworth hopes laying the foundations for the Hilton Hotel will unearth still more items of interest.
The earth-moving work ends this week, and for the workmen involved there's no shortage of souvenirs to take home.
Cricket now, and the quarter finals of the Nat West trophy, Northants have made a disappointing start.
Chasing the Sussex total of (230-9) two hundred and thirty for nine, they're currently (36-2) thirty six for two.
Worcestershire won the toss at Swansea and put Glamorgan into bat.
The home side are (228-6) two hundred and twenty-eight for six.
A woman died and three other people were injured in an accident involving two cars and a fully laden car transporter.
The accident happened on a busy dual carriageway when the transporter hit a grass verge and landed on top of one of the cars.
SIMON GARRETT/Wheatley
Fire Service Video
Insp DAVID WISE/Thames Valley Police
MIKE PILL/Oxfordshire Ambulance
Voice over
The car transporter ended up blocking the A40 northbound after going out of control on a sliproad.
It hit a grass verge and virtually took off.
It came down against the crash barrier.
Two cars heading towards it had nowhere left to go.
The transporter ended up on top of one of them.
Male speaker
The car transporter was travelling down the slip road of the A418 to join the A40 when it left the sliproad.
It mounted the verge and entered the northbound carriageway colliding with two Rover cars heasding north towards Oxford
Voice over
A woman passenger in the silver rover died when the transporter landed on top of her.
The driver of that car was injured and had to be cut free…two people in a second car which hit the transporter's tractor unit are also hurt
Male speaker
We've taken three patients to hospital.
One was certified dead on scene.
The driver of the one car took about 45 minutes to cut free
Voice over
The weight of the transporter with five new Rovers on top made it impossible for emergency services to lift off.
Emergency services say the people in the cars which it collided with were incredibly unlucky
Male speaker
The scene speaks for itself really.
It's a very tragic accident.
They didn't stand a chance.
Especially not the car nearest us…the passenger
Voice over
Traffic on the A40 was diverted away from the area for some time.
The transporter is being taken away for examination by Department of Transport experts investigating the cause of the accident
A judge has said that a financial consultant who went broke owing investors almost two million pounds was a trusted man of good character.
In his summing-up, the judge said it was for the jury to decide if Christopher How had been dishonest.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
38 witnesses, among 90 creditors owed almost £2 million when How went bankrupt, have told the court they believed he'd put their money into secure deposit accounts.
The proseution, calling on boxes of financial records and documents, say How deceived his investors by channelling their savings into speculative building projects in France.
A couple whose baby was a victim of cot death are opening up their stately home to raise money for research.
James and Laura Lonsdale, who are close friends of the Princess of Wales, say they don't want other parents to suffer as they did.
KINGSTON LISLE/Oxfordshire
ANGELA PERRY/Study of Infant Death Foundation
The Princess of Wales was one of scores of mourners who attended Louis' funeral last year.
Louis' mother Laura is the Princesses' Lady-in-Waiting and a close family friend.
Eight months on, the Lonsdales are now raising money for the cot death charity that helped them come to terms with Louis' death.
They're opening up their seventeenth century home in Kingston Lisle near Wantage to the public.
The public will get their first chance to look around the twelve acre gardens.
They'll be able to fish for carp in the estate lake; view the famous hall with its unique flying staircase…so-called because it has no visible means of support or wander throught the wood that the Lonsdales planted in memory of their son.
All the money raised will go the the Foundation for the Study of Infant Death.
The charity depends almost a hundred per cent on the public for its funds.
Most of that money is spent on research.
That research has reduced the number of deaths by a half.
The house opens for one day on July the thirty first.
A thousand visitors are expected although sadly the Princess won't be able to attend.
(WES ad lib)(Anne next)(Still to come on Central News.
The village they couldn't kill.
Forty-five years after a death sentence, it's still going strong.
And best foot forward.
The contorionist who's back in business.)
In Central News tonight: Arson attack…a sex offenders' clinic is targetted.
When is a gypsy not a gypsy?…the High Court is asked to decide
And the tragedy of cotdeath…
A family open their home to fund research
RUNS=0:40 
Good evening,
ANNE DAWSON
Arsonists have tried to destroy a building which is being converted into a clinic for men who've sexually abused children.
There were two attacks, the first shortly before midnight, the other in the early hours of the morning.
(WES TO READ NEXT)
WESLEY SMITH
Police say it was only swift action by security men that prevented a serious fire.
The protest group fighting the plan says it wasn't responsible and has condemned the attacks.
HUGH OWENS/Upton on Severn
GRAEME BOWD/Upton on Severn
TONY CLARKE/West Mercia Police
SALLY RADNOR/Protest Group
There's been controversy in Upton Upon Severn in Worcestershire ever since plans for the clinic were first revealed.
Twenty six men, all of them responsible for sexual abuse of children, are due to be treated here.
There's been loud and strong protest over the past few weeks as parents have campaigned against the clinic claiming it presented a threat to their children's well-being.
Last night some-one decided to take the protest a step further.
Petrol bombs were used to try to set the place alight.
Although there was little evidence from the road, the two attacks damaged an outhouse and a garage housing the shell of a 1919 vintage car.
The house involved is known as the Boynes.
’ We consider that this was a serious attempt to set fire to Boynes itself.
I think the actions of the security firm at the time were very quick, and but for their actions I feel we may have had far more serious consequences than we actually did.’
This is the second attack by fire on these premises.
A few weeks ago the boundary hedge was fired.
These are also the second premises to be attacked.
Last year arsonists attacked a house in Coventry also earmarked as a clinic.
Those plans were eventually abandoned.
The latest attacks has been roundly condemned by those campaigning against the clinic.
’ This quite frankly is just reckless, dangerous behaviour.
I hope that it hasn't been done by anybody in the town.
We've implored at public meetings all along that nobody takes the law into their own hands.
This sort of behaviour is totally unacceptable.
We don't condone such behaviour at all.’
The objectors say their protest will continue, but using only legal means.
’ Most of us I'm sure agree that this kind of work, although pioneering and unproven, if it does some good that's super.
But we really don't feel it should be done as openly as this within a community of young families and children.
At the end of the day the safety of our children is of paramount importance to us.’
The clinic owners didn't want to comment.
The objectors also say if that takes from now to Christmas, then so be it.
The parents of one of the singers killed in a motorway crash say they'll be watching the group's debut on national television.
Two members of all-girl group The Divas died on the M4 just days before the broadcast.
It's now emerged that one of the women was pregnant…her mother says she had everything to live for.
KIM BARNES/Reporting
ELLEN MILLER/Mother
ALAN CUTLER/Manager
Voice over
This was to have been the debut the Divas had strived for…the women recorded this performance for Central TV's programme Pot of Gold to be broad cast tomorrow night.
But two of them, Rose Patterson and Dee Miller were killed on the M4 near Swindon at the weekend…
Now Dee's parents say…
intv
The women died when their hired Astra crashed into the back of an army convoy coming back from a show in the early hours.
After much consideration their contribution to Pot of Gold will go out…their manager says it's what they would have wanted…
intv 7.34
intv parents…??
intv?
The High Court is being asked to define what constitutes a genuine gypsy.
The case is being brought by three councils who want to evict a group of travellers from their roadside home.
The travellers argue that as they lead a nomadic lifestyle, they are legally gypsies and can stay where they are.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Central London
JANET SMITH/Gloucs County Council
STEPHEN DAVIES/Traveller
Now, using legal aid, they've brought the matter to the High Court.
The travellers are joined by colleagues from Devon and Warwickshire.
The case revolves around whether the travellers aretrue gypsies leading a genuine nomadic lifestyle.
They say they are, the county council says they're not.
Female speaker
The only definition we have under the legislation is that a gypsy leads a nomadic lifestyle.
We are saying that this applicant does not do that
Voice over
The Travellers' barrister David Watkinson told the court that both parties considered this case to be very important.
It would help to define how widely the term Gypsy applied, and who exactly could be called a gypsy.
None of the Gloucestershire travellers came to the High Court today.
They preferred to sit it out on the Fosse Way.
But they had their own ideas about what a nomadic lifestyle means.
Male speaker
It's crazy saying that when they've forced us to be nomadic.
I have been moved on two or three thousand times in the last few years
Voice over
The case is expected to take three days.
The judgement will come some time after that.
A tourist board which has folded with debts of more than three hundred thousand pounds was warned about its financial predicament nearly eighteen months ago.
The board promoted tourism through five counties but ceased trading yesterday leaving forty five people out of work.
Nick Clark reports.
NEIL ROBSON/Chief Executive/ West Oxon Dist Council
STAN BOWEN/Thames
Voice over
The Thames and Chilterns tourist board had nearly eight hundred members — it's role to promote attractions and boost tourism in counties including Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire and Berkshire.
It was funded by local authorities, the English Tourist Board and members from hoteliers to specialised holiday companies.
It's budget — around one and a half million pounds a year.
At the head office in Witney yesterday staff were told their fate as the limited company was declared insolvent with debts of more than three hundred thousand pounds a year.
The chief executive John Bethell has already resigned.
Today it's been revealed the board were warned in March last year about the state of their finances by officials from West Oxfordshire District council.
Male speaker
We alerted them last year.
Voice over
Now an investigation is being called for to find out what has happened to the money.
Male speaker
No-one knows where it is.
We should find out.
Voice over
It's feared that without active promotion tourism may suffer in the region, perhaps not at the major centres but at small businesses like bed and breakfasts.
But the English Tourist Board say they'll support the region in the absence of a regional tourist board, and will urgently seek a replacement.
People living near the M40 are demanding action to reduce noise created by the motorway.
A delegation of councillors is lobbying the Government because they say the noise is unbearable.
The meeting comes on a day when the roads minister announced improvements to reduce noise impact.
Debbie Kelly reports.
MURCOTT/Oxfordshire
GORDON EVANS/Landlord
VIC HUNT/Farm Manager
Cllr BRENT PRESTIDGE/Cherwell District Council
Voice over
A quiet country pub in the peaceful Oxfordshire countryside, but the view now from the landlord's window is of the M40 motorway and like many other villagers living along its route; he says his peace has been shattered.
Male speaker
It's in the mornings and early evenings that its noisy.
I don't need an alarm clock because it wakes you up.
I have to shut the windows.
Voice over
Vic Hunt has let a hedge grow in an attempt to reduce the noise at his house, but it doesn't work.
Male speaker
We have got to live with it, hopefully we can put barriers up but it is here to stay and it will get worse.
Voice over
Tests carried out by council officers at Mr Hunt's home before the motorway was built found noise levels to be similar to those found in a quiet bedroom.
Now they're around levels found in a noisy office and they're getting worse.
Today Local councillors and Banbury MP Tony Baldry are lobbying the transport minister Kenneth Carlisle dem, anding noise reduction levels.
Male speaker
Compensation is not the answer.
The answer is to control the environment properly to reduce the noise and contain the noise for everybody's sake.
Voice over
The meeting comes on the day that Kenneth Carlisle announced measures to reduce traffic noise.
He proposes using special porous asphalt, trying new road surfaces and building noise barriers and earth mounds, initially roads carrying 75,000 vehicles a day will be tackled.
The M40 currently carries about 45,000, but that's due to increase by 30% in the next 10 years, so councillors are pressing for the M40 to be included.
Aviation enthusiasts are calling for a memorial to be built on a hillside where a wartime pilot crashed.
The pilot was testing Hurricane fighters when he died.Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
KEITH DAVIS/Aviation Expert
DEREK JAMES/Aviation Historian
BRIAN RICHARDS/Country Club Manager
Voice over
It was a misty December morning in 1940, when test Pilot Jack Hathorne crashed a Hurricane fighter plane into this leafy glade on Robinswood hill.
They say you can still see a gap in the treeline where the Hurricane shaved the tops off what would then have been saplings.
Just a few yards away, people using the Matson dry ski slope have no idea of the tragedy that took place more than 50 years ago, but now a group of aviation enthusiasts aim to change all that.
They want a memorial erected on the site in honour of the pilot.
They were the backroom boys who tested the planes which helped win the battle of Britain.
It's important he is honoured.
Jack Hathorne was a former RAF pilot who went on to test fly Hurricane fighters being built at Brockworth during the second world war.
His experience as a flyer was invaluable and those who worked with him at the time, recall the day he died.
He says Jack had been advised not to fly that day because of the mist.
But he flew anyway.
He was that sort of chap and failed to return.
The hillside is now part of the country club complex.
Its owners say they'd be pleased to allow a memorial on the site.
It would be an honour to have a memorial on the site.
So now this overgrown patch of woodland soon could have a permanent reminder of the tragic crash which ended the life of one of Britain's wartime test pilots.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
M40 SOUTHBOUND/Oxfordshire
SGT RICHARD PENGILLEY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
It was on this stretch of the M40 near Banbury that Philip Walker, who's 46, was seen driving his Ford Escort at speeds of up to 114 miles an hour.
A lorry driver used his mobile phone to alert police, affter spotting that Walker was drinking from a half bottle of spirits.
He says
Today Oxford Crown Court heard Walker was arrested after crashing into a police car, which blocked his path on a motorway slip road.
A breath alcohol test reavealed that he was more than three times over the legal limit.
Walker told police he'd bought two half bottles of vodka to drink in a roadside layby because he was depressed over problems at work.
His solicitor said he was suffering from an acute nervous breakdown.
But Judge Leo Clark told him:
Walker was jailed for nine months and banned from the driving for two years.
The court heard he had also lost his job.
MARK KIFF/ Sulhamstead/Berkshire
KATE WEST/Drink Drive Victim
MAUREEN WEST/Mother
POLICE VIDEO
MIKE FOSTER/Executive Chairman/Courage
Ch Supt LEN WISE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Kate West and her mother Maureen know only too well the cost of drink-driving.
18 months ago, Kate was the victim of a drink-drive accident, which killed 6 people, including her boyfriend.
The tragedy has wrecked the family's life.
Kate West says been it's been horrible.
People say she was lucky to be alive, but she didn't feel lucky.
She had to mourn for her friends who died in the accident.
Maureen West says her daughter is still having nightmares and waking up in the middle of the night.
It's still affecting their lives 18 months later.
Kate is playing the main part in a drink-drive campaign organised by Thames Valley Police.
She appears in a video aimed at driving home the dangers of mixing cars with alcohol.
What makes this campaign unusual is that it's backed by a major brewery, Courage.
It's the first time a leading drinks company has lent its weight to such a campaign.
The brewers see no contradiction in their involvement.
Mike Foster, Executive Chairman of Courage, says they're proud of their products and would defend people's right to use them.
Sadly some customers don't consume their products sensibly and drink-driving is a prime example.
It's also against the law and therefore something they condemn.
The police are grateful for the brewery's support.
Chief Superintendent Len Wise says he has no worries about the brewery being involved.
The police's message is NOT don't drink; but don't drink and drive.
Kate says she hopes the campaign will spare someone else the misery she's suffered.
She says I wouldn't want anyone else to go through this.
It's just a living hell.
Africa is facing its worst drought this century, and the Northampton based charity World Vision is warning that millions will die unless the West provides help.
Worst affected is Somalia, where it's estimated that three children are dying every minute.
Robin Powell reports.
NORTHAMPTON
ANDREW BARNES Lifeline Africa Appeal
ALI MAHDI Somalian President
Voice over
Somalia, July 1992; children fight over a bag of rice, the loser's left to lick what's left off his shirt, while 2 others pick scraps from the ground.
These children tucking into pizza 4,500 miles away are trying to help.
They're just taking a well-earned break from publicising the Lifeline Africa Appeal that's just been launched by the Northampton-based charity, World Vision.
It's all in response to the drought that's bringing Africa to its knees.
The Horn of Africa's bearing the brunt of it; Ethiopia, Sudan and the comparatively wealthy Kenya.
But nowhere's suffered more than Somalia.
Nearly one million Somalians are on the brink of death by starvation or disease.
The drought means crops have failed and food is scarce, while vital resources are being frittered away in a bitter civil war.
2 months ago this woman was a mother of 9.
Now she's visiting the graves of her husband and 7 of their children.
Perhaps the dead are the lucky ones.
This man has the unenviable task of telling hungry women and children queueing for food that they're waiting in vain.
It's a situation the authorities can't begin to cope with.
Like his people, the Somalian President can only beg for help.
World Vision can't hope to end the death toll in Africa.
It's estimated that 5,000 Somalian children are dying every day; 3 every minute.
By that calculation, 9 have died since the start of this report.
But the charity does aim to offer the chance of life to millions who'll otherwise become mere statistics of a human tragedy.
Nuclear Electric to shed 3
FTSE up 25
The hundred shares index closed up twenty five point four at two three seven three point four 
The pound is up at one dollar ninety two, up at two marks, eighty four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A building firm is weathering the recession by putting up homes that are five hundred years out of date.
Its traditional oak framed houses are even selling to the Japanese.Richard Barnett reports:
WEOBLEY/Herefordshire
MIKE BOUND/Border Oak
KINGSLAND/Herefordshire
FRANCES ANTHONY/Owner
CHRIS ANTHONY/Owner
JOHN GREENE/Border Oak
Voice over
The north Herefordshire village of Weobley has more than its fair share of ancient timbered cottages.
And now the same techniques once used by medieval craftsmen have created two brand new homes.
Little Brook Cottages are the latest project completed by Border Oak, a firm based at Kingsland.
It specialises in building oak framed houses using 500 year old methods.
Male speaker
You need the skill of a violin maker and also a lot of strength to work with timber frames.
The main advantage of building this way is the houses fit into old villages so well.
Voice over
The process starts at the firm's woodmills, where carpenters create the box frames.
It takes 900 separate pieces of oak to build a typical timber framed house.
And that's 4 weeks cutting, shaping and piecing together in the workshop using techniques, both old fashioned and up to date.
In January, work began on erecting the frame of Little Brook Cottages at Weobley.
At least today's timber frame builders can use a crane to haul the weighty beams into place.
At one time, the space between the timbers would have been filled with mud and straw.
In the 20th century, foam insulating panels covered with plaster are used.
Once completed, the house blends in well with older cottages in Weobley.
And the creamy yellow hue is actually more authentic than the black and white houses around it.
The fashion for black and white dates from the Victorian era.
The new owners of Brook Cottages are delighted with their ancient and modern home.
Female speaker
The house has the best of the old and the new.
Male speaker
He is very pleased with his new home.
Voice over
Border Oak builds around 30 timber framed homes a year from manor houses to small cottages.
The firm says its buildings cost no more than modern steel frame houses.
And despite the recession, it has a full order book with some requests from the most unlikely places.
Male speaker
The firm has just had an order for a village of 16' timber framed homes in Japan.
Voice over
English eccentricity or inspiration from the golden age of medieval architecture.
There's no doubt the timber framed house is making a long overdue comeback.
Starting this week, Central television is bringing you an improved weather service.
Our forecaster Charlie Neil is being given the chance to bring you more detail on our region's weather conditions, and sometimes a look ahead to local events.
In the latest in our occasional series, Inside the Globe, Wesley Smith has been taking a look behind the scenes at the Weather Department.
CHARLIE NEIL/Weather Presenter
JOHN BANNISTER/Meterologist
ANDREW ECCLESTON/Computer Expert
ROB GOLDING/The Weather Department
And tonight's actual forecast follows this programme.
It's 10 a.m. and Charlie Neil, Central's main weather presenter, arrives at the Weather Department.
From here, forecasts are compiled, not just for Central, but for broadcasters all over the World.
After a cup of coffee, it's Charlie's task to discuss the day's prospects with one of the duty meterorolgists who staff the Weather Department 24 hours a day.
Glen Spencer will already have scanned the satellite sequences and computer print-outs before Charlie arrives.
Glen explains to Charlie what the day's prospects are.
Charlie tell us that she has to programme the computers to show the correct illustrations.
While Charlie programmes the computer graphics, to give us a clearer view of what the weather has in store, the rest of the team work towards later forecasts for home and abroad.
Then into the studio to record 3 lunchtime forecasts; one for each of Central's 3 sub-regions, South, East and West.
The production control team rehearse the bulletin and tell Charlie via an earpiece how long she has to talk for.
At the same time she presses a button to change the weather maps and with her foot, she controls a prompting device.
It's reflected on a mirror so at home it appears as though she has learnt the information off-by-heart.
Charlie explains that some people blame her when the weather does not turn out as they had hoped.
The Department provides all the information for the weather on 2 of Sweden's TV channels.
The information is compiled at the Weather Department headquarters in English and sent by satellite to be translated and processed elsewhere.
Soon, they broadcast a national British Service on the new Breakfast Time ITV channel, GMTV.
Computer expert, Andrew Eccleston, explains that they were fed up with old-fashioned forecasting methods, so came up with something new.
Rob Golding from the Weather Depertment explains that they compile hundreds of forecasts every week for television and other groups like the AA.
Gone are the days when people stood in front of boards with magnetic symbols.
The Weather Department is always experimenting with new ideas.
Weather is something that effects us all, so Charlie and her team will use the latest technology to bring 21st Century forecasting to your screen, 8 years early.
Welcome back: Our countryside is disappearing at an alarming rate and urgent action is needed to protect it for future generations.
(WES TO READ NEXT) That's the conclusion of a new report which says an area the size of four counties has been lost to development since the war.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
TONY BURTON/CPRE
JANE FRANCIS/Buckinghamshire CPRE
BILL LAPHAM/Aylesbury Vale District Council
KEITH STOKES-SMITH/Protestor
DAVID SHAKESPEARE/Bucks County Council
GILLIAN FALWAY/Oxfordshire CPRE
This would become dual carriageway with an embankment of up to twenty-nine feet…something environmentalists are keen to prevent.
It's the kind of development that worries the council for the protection of rural england.
In its report titled the Lost Land published today, it claims our countryside is disappearing at an alarming rate.
He says the pressures on the countryside are just too great — we need to revise the way we plan our roads, housing and farming policy and take more care of the countryside.
The CPRE's figures show a dramatic change in the landscape.
In Hereford and Worcester, the amount of land covered by roads offices and houses has more than doubled since the war.In Gloucestershire the figure is ninety-five per cent, with a similar impact on pasture-land.
In Oxfordshire, the amount of land under concrete has increased by more than half — and in Wiltshire the increase was seventy-nine per cent.
Improved road access brought about by the M-1 has led to a doubling of urban development in Northamptonshire — and the same again for Buckinghamshire.
where There, the growth of Milton Keynes has been a major factor, but smaller towns have also felt the pressures of development.
This is the Watermead estate begun in the mid eighties just outside Aylesbury — the CPRE says it doesn't object to housing being built, but the way it's done’
She says for every ten acres used for a house 30 acres actually get used up in building pavements roads and so on.
He says we do take care in planning our housing — it's a question of balancing the needs of people and the countryside.
Where possible we use derelict land first — for instance this estate here was built on the site of a factory.
There's disagreement too over road planning for Aylesbury.
This house on the A41 south of the town would be demolished if the proposed southern bypass for the town goes ahead.
He says the current road-building programme is the biggest in this country since Roman times.
I would probably use such a road, but I question the road policy we have in this country — do we really need all these roads?
He says the justification is right behind us — this roundabout carries 44,000 vehicles a day — almost twice the number of cars going into London on the M40 every day.
The environment isn't just about grass and cows…it's about people.
Although countryside must always be important…people must come first.
Besides questioning the policy of planning new roads, houses and offices, the CPRE wants to draw attention to the knock-on affects of that building.
She says here in Stanton Harcourt there's been gravel working for more than 30 yearsand that means lorries, dust, noise and a general loss of amenity…so for a very long time people face the loss of the countryside around them.
The CPRE hopes’ The Lost Land’report will sting decision-makers and planners into action — otherwise, it argues, much more countryside will disappear under concrete in the next forty-five years.
A gang of fruit thieves has raided an entire Pick-Your-Own strawberry field.
They then went into a cold store and stole dozens of cartons of cream.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Stanton St John
PAUL CLARK/Pick-Your-Own Manager
DONALD HARMER/National Farmers' Union
Male speaker
I came to cheer myself up after finding the cold store broken into.
Instead I found the field stripped of strawberries
Voice over
Pickers were diverted on to another plot after the theft was discovered.
In the meantime the younger strawberries have had a chance to come through.
It's the first time the Rectory Farm at Stanton St John has been hit by strawberry rustlers.
And no one can think of a similar incident on this scale.
Checks have been made on roadside sellers throughout the area because the fruit is easily identifiable.
It's a special variety planted only two months ago.
One theory is that they were stolen by experts with an order already in mind.
Male speaker
I think they had been sold before they had been picked.
They took the cream because it goes naturally with the strawberries
Voice over
The farm reckons it took twenty man hours to clean up the strawberry patch.
Most Pick-Your-Own plots are relatively unguarded and couyld be easy prey to the picker gangs.
It's a serious concern for farmers.
Male speaker
I think we've all grown used to small loasses of fruit and vegetables but not on this scale.
It's a worrying development
Voice over
The theft appears to be unprecedented and gives scrumping a whole new meaning.
Farmers will have to keep a close eye on their security from now on.
(Wes ad lib)(Anne next)(Still to come on Central news.
The lost lands of rural England.
Conservationists say it's time for the building to stop.
And how one woman turned a bed of weeds into a beautiful garden.)
A mare in foal has been stabbed fifty times in what her owner describes as a brutal and motiveless attack.
It's the latest in a series of similar attacks on horses across the region.
ERIKA BARNES/Chipping Norton
LEONARD WILLOUGHBY/Mare Owner
Voice over
Another defenceless victim of a sick mind.
Amanda Jane3 a family pet was stabbed fifty tilmes across her body and head.
The worst injury it too awful to show.
A large section of flesh was cut from her hind quarters.
It was a brutal and mindless attack.
The attack happened at Pershore in Worcestershire.
Thhe mare, who is six months in foal is still shocked and in agony.
She's being cared for back home at Chipping Norton in Oxfordshire.
Amanda Jane's owners want these horrific attacks to stop.
They want help in tracing the culprits.
They know a white sierra car was seen stalking the area and are warning other house owners to be on their guard.
They don't want Amanda Jane suffering to be in vain.
Immigration officials have refused entry to a Russian medical expert who was coming to Britain to help a paralysed teenager.
LYDBROOK/Forest of Dean
Seventeen year old Stephen Dent from Lydbrook in the Forest of Dean was treated in Moscow earlier this year.
His family invited his physiotherapist, Galina Guseva, to continue her work over here as their guest.
But immigration officials said no, believing she was coming for paid work.
Stephen's family want the decision reversed.
The Marquis of Blandford has again failed to appear in court on four charges of dodging taxi fares.
June 1993/LONDON
Jamie Blandford was due to stand trial four weeks ago but that was postponed while he continued treatment for his drugs problem.
But today, when he didn't appear at Horseferry Road Magistrates Court in London, the court was told that he was still unfit.
The case will be heard in his absence next month.
Police hunting the killers of security guard, Ron Letts, are trying to trace a vital witness who may have seen what happened.
Tonight they're setting up a road check in the area where he was murdered.
ERIKA BARNES/Milton Keynes
Det Sgt DAVE PURNELL/Thames Valley Police
Now police want to talk to a man in his fifties who was walking a black labrador-type dog in the area at the time.
Male speaker
Well, it's difficult to surmise what he may have seen.
We're keen to trace him because he might be able to tell us something like a piece of a jigsaw really that may help to put the case together
Voice over
It's been a difficult and painful week for Ron Letts' family.
They said he understood the risks of the job but everyone on the case agrees it was a pointless killing.
Male speaker
Mrs Letts is terrifically brave but it's an awful tragedy.
I think they're doing as well as can be expected.
They're a very supportive family and they're helping each other through this tragedy at the moment.
Voice over
Tonight police will return to the place Ron Letts was killed.
They'll be stopping motorists in the hope of jogging their memories about the events of seven days ago.
A man has died in hospital, after being released from Police custody.
The fifty year old was arrested at Pittville Park in Cheltenham for being drunk and incapable.
CHELTENHAM
He was seen by a doctor at the police station and certified fit to be detained.
After being released, he was taken home, but collapsed.
He later died in Cheltenham General hospital.
Police are investigating.
Pirate video copies of the film, Jurassic Park, have been seized by police along with other counterfeit items.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
The videos were part of a number of fake goods which were being sold at a market in Tewkesbury.
Gloucestershire Trading Standards have launched an investigation.
In Central News tonight: Guilty of fraud…the financial adviser whose investors lost nearly two million pounds.
Clinic's opening postponed…charity backs down over centre for sex offenders.
And a mother's wish granted…her glue sniffing son gets help at last.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
A former financial consultant has been found guilty of two charges of fraud.
Christopher How, a regular adviser on radio programmes and in newspapers went broke owing his investors two million pounds.
(WES TO READ NEXT)
WESLEY SMITH
The court has been told that How cheated his clients by putting their money into risky investments and property deals.
The jury has yet to reach verdicts on another seventeen charges.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
The once well respected investments expert pleaded not guilty to nineteen charges of theft, deception, unauthorised trading and failing to keep proper accounts.
The Prosecution alleges that How cheated his clients by ploughing their savings into speculative holiday home development projects in France.
Many of How's clients were in court today for what they'd hoped would be the final day of a complex five week trial.
During that time, thirty eight witnesses have been called and mounds of financial documents have been examined.
The mother of a glue sniffer with convictions for theft and violence has welcomed the news that her son is being placed in psychiatric care.
It marks the end of a three year campaign by the family to have their son receive special treatment.
SIMON GARRETT/Swindon
Dr MARY ROWLAND/Bristol Prison Medical Officer
FAY FOULKES/Mother
GAVIN FOULKES/Brother
KEN FOULKES/Stepfather
At 22, more than a third of Andrew Hobbes life has been destroyed by glue sniffing.
Addiction led to theft and violence.
The fun-loving teenager of his family's memory is gone.
Today the family has new hope, but it took an eight week jail term and the care of the prison's medical officer to have Andrew admitted for treatment
Female speaker
He's very disturbed and quite bizarre in his behaviour.
We need to see if he can be admitted to hospital.
He has serious personality damage.
He's probably brain damaged and psychiatrically disturbed and quite depressed
Voice over
Andrew's family has been trying for three years to get treatment for him.
But 32 previous arrests for shoplifting failed to result in a jail sentence until now.
The barn where he used to sleep rough is now empty…and for his mother there is relief
Female speaker
I've just got to learn to let go now.
It was a daily routine with Andrew.
To let the authorities look after him
Voice over
Do you think you'll ever get your brother back again?
Male speaker
I hope so.
In some way.
He won't be the same but he's still my brother
Voice over
Andrew will now be cared for for an indefinite period at a psychiatric institution in Wales.
His family have a message for other parents who may be hoping for a similar hospital place for their glue-sniffing child
Male speaker
Don't give up, don't give up hope.
Keep fighting for a law to stop this glue sniffing
Voice over
The Foulkes live in hope Andrew may one day come home cured to them.
They say the old Andrew will always have a home with them
A charity has postponed the opening of a sex offenders treatment centre after two arson attacks on the building.
The surprise statement was greeted with scepticism by protesters who say they believe it's a ploy designed to throw them off their guard.
STEVE KEELING/Upton on Severn
MARIANNE ABBOTT
KATH BUXTON
JOHN CLEMENTS
People in Upton on Severn have been campaigning for a month against plans to open a treatment centre for twenty six child abusers in a country house near their village.
They say it's the wrong place and will pose a threat to their children.
Earlier this week the house, known as the Boynes, was firebombed causing damge to an outbuilding and a garage.
Within forty eight hours of that attack the charity behind the scheme, The Faithful Foundation, today issued a terse statement saying it has’ suspended its intention of opening’the centre’pending representations’to the Home Office, the Department of Health and the police.
Far from being overjoyed at the apparent climbdown protesters believe it's a plot to throw them off their guard.
Female speaker
they might be thinking that we'll relax, we don't really know.They could be playing for time.It could be they are seriously re-thinking.
Female speaker
I think it's a red herring.
Male speaker
The only thing I want to hear is that they've called it off.
Voice over
The Faithful Foundation has declined to explain or clarify its statement.But if it was designed to wrong foot protesters they've failed.
Protesters says they'll be here as long as the Foundation is.Even when sale signs go up they'll still be outside the house.
Earlier this year the Foundation withdrew from a similar scheme in Coventry when its proposed centre was again the victim of an arson attack.
Upton protesters say they condemn such tactics and have nothing to do with the similar attack in Worcestershire.
They're confident that they have enough persuasive power to win the battle legally — and they'll campaign until they do.
Welcome back:An aerial stuntman is waiting to find out whether a bungee jump from more than ten thousand feet has earned him a place in the record books.
The stunt — which involved jumping out of a hot air balloon attached to a piece of elastic — has never been attempted in Britain before.
And, as Robin Powell reports, it's unlikely that anyone will want to try it again.
IAN ASHPOLE/Bungee Jumper
CLEMENTINE REEVE-TUCKER/Ian's God-daughter
LOUISE ASHPOLE/Ian's Wife
Voice over
It was the ultimate stunt; jumping out at 10,000ft on a piece of elastic.
The stuntman; balloonist Ian Ashpole from Ross-on-Wye.
No-one's ever bungee-jumped from a balloon before, but as Ian went up, up and away, none of his home town fans ever doubted they'd see him again.
At 12,000ft, Ian jumped.
The elastic stretched to 400ft; about 3 times the average for a bungee jump.
These pictures were taken by on-board cameraman Simon Ward.
He goes first.
Minutes later, we caught up with Ian at Ross Golf Club, after a safe landing by the 18th hole.
Ian WAS hoping the jump would earn him a place in the record books, but a spokesman for the Guinness Book of Records said there wasn't a suitable category.
Some time soon Ian's planning a flying circus 10,000ft up.
Until then, he's putting his feet up and who'd blame him?
Gloucester's star rugby player Mike Teague is to leave the club to play for the Midlands side Moseley next season.
The former England international announced the news just before leaving to go on holiday.
The move's been greeted with dismay by some officials at Gloucester.
Nick Clark reports.
MIKE TEAGUE
ALAN BRINN/Gloucester RFC
Voice over
Cricket now, and a bumper crowd has been watching Gloucestershire put up a good fight against Essex in the quarter finals of the Nat West trophy.
The game has brought the Cheltenham festival to a thrilling climax.
Mark Kiff reports from the College ground.
PHILIP AUGUST/Club Secretary/Gloucestershire
DEREK PRINGLE/Essex and England
Voice over
And for the latest from Cheltenham, let's go live to the ground, and our reporter Mark Kiff. (live ob)
MARK KIFF/Live from Cheltenham
RUNS=0:40est 
And in the other Nat West quarter final, Northamptonshire seem to be heading for victory over Glamorgan.
Northants made two hundred and twenty-four for eight off their sixty overs.
In reply, the Welsh side are a hundred and twenty-four for seven off forty-seven.
Mortgage reposessions fall but arrears grow
FTSE up 49
The hundred shares index closed up forty nine point eight at two four two three point two .
The pound is up at one dollar ninety two, and up at two marks, eighty four.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Not guilty.
Macari cleared of Swindon Town tax fraud, but Hiller and Farrar are convicted.
Ban these posters: MP says cigarette advert code is being flouted.
And who stole my mother?
The abandoned foal that's losing the will to live.
So, Lou Macari acquitted.
Brian Hillier and Vince Farrar guilty.
Gareth Furby reports on the end of the five week trial.
Voice over
NICK CLARK/Reporting
JULY 1989/BRIAN HILLIER
JULY 1989/BRIAN HILLIER
BILL BRADSHAW/Sunday People
JANUARY 1990/BRIAN HILLIER
MAY 1990/GARY HERBERT
TOMMY DOCHERTY/Former Manager/Man Utd
Voice over
So, Lou Macari acquitted.
Brian Hillier and Vince Farrar guilty.
Gareth Furby reports on the end of the five week trial.
Voice over
Just a few minutes ago Lou Macari left the court buildings with his wife Dale, and his solicitor Stephen Pollard, who made this statement.
STEPHEN POLLARD/Macari's Solicitor
An MP has called for a total ban on tobacco advertising because he says the industry's voluntary code is a waste of time.
A survey has shown that the code is constantly being breached…especially in his constituency.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
OXFORD
ROSEMARY SHERGOLD/Parents Against Tobacco
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
Voice over
Is it a stylishly cute picture of a rhinocerous or a clever way of pushing young people into smoking.
The colour purple, in this case a hat, is a familiar symbol in the advertising world, but according to Parents Against Tobacco it's in breach of the tobacco advertising code.
Female speaker
Children like animals and there's no doubt this is a very attractive one.
Voice over
The code does say adverts should not contain material which would encourage children
Rosemary Shergold is waging a constant battle against the tobacco companies, and she's enlisted the help of Oxford East MP Andrew Smith.
They have discovered that Oxford has a near monopoly of complaints over breaches of the voluntary advertising code, compared to the rest of the country.
Last year the city was responsible for 77% of complaints, the year before 35%.
Most of them have been about the health warning on the advertisement being obscured or obliterated, some have referred to their being too close to schools.
Andrew Smith says Oxford is probably no different to anywhere else, but it's the only place monitoring the code.
Male speaker
Our children are not being served by this code and it's time for the government to bring in a complete tobacco advertising ban
Female speaker
I wish the rest of the country couldfollow our lead but they need government support and they're not getting it
The Tobacco Advisory Council refused to be interviewed, but said they were happy that the industry was keeping to the code.
Voice over
The Employment Secretary has told jobless people in Gloucestershire the county is better off for work than most places…even though dole queues have doubled in the last two years.
But on a visit to a local job centre, Gillian Shepherd has admitted some government training doesn't help unemployed people as much as it should.
Simon Garrett reports 
GLOUCESTER
GILLIAN SHEPHARD MP/Employment Secretary
ANTHONY POETON/Gloucestershire CBI
Voice over
In the three months Mrs Shephard's been in her job Unemployment has climbed steadily.
Today she was keeping her options open.
Female speaker
I'm not sure I'm qualified for any of them.
Not hairdressing.
Kiss-o-gram?
No I think I've passed that age.
Voice over
People searching for work face a tough task.
During the recession Gloucestershire's seen sizable increases in unemployment.
2 years ago the total was just under 8,000.
Last summer it'd had topped 14,000 and today almost 20,000 people find the job hunting tough going.
Female speaker
Very hard.
I've written so many applications and you hardly ever get an answer
Female speaker
There are jobs if you want to be self-employed or work for commission but there's nothing for someone like me
Female speaker
Gloucestershire is faring much better than many other parts of England.
Half the people who lose their jobs get another one within three months.
Voice over
But businessmen say interest rates must fall for vacancies to increase.
Male speaker
Interest rates are very hard on business.
Lots of firms which grew up in the eighties have collapsed leaving debts unpaid and it's very hard for the rest of us
Voice over
Some say government backed qualifications don't help.
Male speaker
Employment training doesn't work.
Other schemes don't work.
How many people do you know who get jobs after training schemes?
Not many
Female speaker
I admit the National Vocational Qualifications aren't yet well enough known.
But we're trying to do something about that.
Voice over
The success of Mrs Shephard's plans will be judged solely by the jobless totals.
A foal has been orphaned after it's mother was stolen by thieves.
The dazed animal was found wandering on a motorway slip road.
Ken Goodwin reports.
MANDY CULLEN/Foal's Owner
BRIAN CULLEN/Foal's Owner
Welcome back.
Villagers are battling with a mobile phone company over the siting of an aerial close to their homes.
(WES NEXT)
It's one of hundreds being put up all over the country and residents say it was put there without planning permission or consultation.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Haydon Wick
TERRY PUFFETT/Resident
TONY MAYER/Thamesdown Council Leader
Male speaker
It was the shock of having an installation like that next to my home.
You expect to be notified of anything like that.
It dominates the skyline.
It's an eyesore for the whole of the village
Voice over
Other residents are equally angry and fearful for their health
Female speaker
I just don't like it when things are erected without any permission whatsoever.
Female speaker
I think we should have been consulted first
Voice over
Terry and his wife Janice have been fighting Vodaphone with a petition and a stream of correspondence.
The council says there's nothing they can do about it because Vodaphone don't need planning permission.
Male speaker
There's nothing the council can legally do.
I hope Vodaphone will think again about the siting.
I think it's in the wrong place
Voice over
Vodaphone say they have carried out their duty to the letter of the law.
They contacted the planning authority and no objections were made.
Originally they offered to take measures to blend in the mast with it's surroundings; now the company seems to be softening its attitude.
They say: We are very actively seeking another location for this aerial.
Veterans of the Second World War aiming to re-create the airborne drop over Arnhem are undergoing parachute training.
Most are now in their seventies and needed doctors certificates to prove they're up to it.
ROBIN POWELL/Netheravon
PETER CLARKE/Arnhem Veteran
GEOFFREY HOLMES/Jump Organiser
JEFF CHANDLER/Instructor
At 72 he's preparing to do it all again, landing by parachute along with scores of other veterans to mark the 50th anniversary of one of the most famous battles in history.
The aim of Operation Market Garden was to secure a bridgehead at Arnhem, a Dutch town close to the Germnan border.
But Panzer tanks forced the British onto the defensive, and the operation failed.
Peter Clarke, a pilot based at RAF Fairford, was captured 9 days after flying in supplies.
His co-pilot was one of thousands who never returned.
The man behind the anniversary jump is veteran parachutist Geoffrey Holmes from Henley-on-Thames.
Some will be jumping solo, others — including Peter — in tandem.
The instructor's used to training younger men, but has every confidence in his latest pupil.
Sadly, the low cloud base put paid to any jumping today, but weather permitting, they'll be packing their chutes again tomorrow.
50 years ago it proved a Bridge Too Far…next September the men from Arnhem are hoping for a happier ending.
A fox cub who was reared with a litter of puppies and grew up believing that he was a dog, has been returned to the wild.
The cub became so domesticated he had to be put through a special programme to prepare him for life in his natural habitat.
ABI DONALD Milton Keynes
Insp PHIL McCARTHY RSPCA
COLIN SAVAGE Milton Keynes Wildlife Hospital
Voice over
Freddy the Fox being taken into the countryside to start his rehabilitation from a domestic pet to a wild animal.
Freddy was only ten days old when he was found abandoned.
He was put with a litter of puppys and successfully reared.
Unfortunately though, he became too domesticated and didn't have a fear of humans so he was put on a programme to help him adjust to the wild.
Male speaker
We put him in a pen at a secret location within Milton keynes, and then it was a matter of leaving him alone, and thankfully this fox has adjusted to the wild.
Voice over
The plan started to work within a few day he became shy and nervous of humans even at feeding times.
He say; Two weeks on his own is enough, this fox is already showqing signs of his natural instincts.
So hopefully it'll be free again.
And sure enough the time came for his release…the pen was opened and he was free to go, after an uncertain start Freddy the Fox took his first step in the world as a wild Fox.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Murder suspect remanded
FTSE up 33
The hundred shares index closed up thirty three point four at twenty nine seventeen point six 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty eight and up at two marks, fifty seven.
A council has voted to ban foxhunting on all its parks and open spaces.
But councillors stopped short of extending the ban to land which is leased by tenant farmers.
SIMON GARRETT/Worcester
KEVIN McNAMARA/Anti-hunting councillor
JAMES HEREFORD/Pro-hunting councillor
A hundred and fifty tenant farmers and pro-hunting demonstrators turned up to Hereford and Worcester County Hall to hear the debate.
A narrow majority voted for a ban in parks and open spaces…but moves to make tenants conform to the ban as well were defeated by three votes.
The farmers were reasonably satisfied
Male speaker
Some farmers allow hunting on their land, some don't.
I don't think there'll be much change
Male speaker
I don't see why we should be dictated to anyway.
Other landlords aren't trying to tell their tenants what to do.
They don't try to get them stop hunting
Female speaker
I think it's absolute madness it's a legal minefield and it's an extraordinary way of going on whether you're for hunting or not.
Voice over
In a half-way motion the councillors decided to try to persuade tenants to join in with the ban…even though they won't be compelled to do it.
Opponants of field sports believe few will bar the hounds from their land voluntarily
Male speaker
They're not prepared to listen to reason.
Even if the vote had gone against them today they'd probably have flouted it even then.
They're convinced they're right in doing so
Voice over
A partial ban hasn't set the champagne corks popping on either side.
The supporters of the hunt believe today's decision may be the thin end of the wedge
Male speaker
An important principal's been breached here that Parliament was specifically asked 18 months ago to ban hunting and chose not to do so.
It is not up to councillors to frustrate the will of Parliament in this matter
Voice over
In a free vote on a matter of conscience tempers ran high and decisions really pleased no one.
In the end the one certainty is that the fox hunting debate will be aired in the council chamber again before very long
An elderly woman's in hospital recovering from burns and shock after an explosion wrecked her caravan home.
Neighbours pulled her to safety just minutes before flames took hold.
It's thought the fire broke out after she left the gas on.
KIM BARNES/Radley
JUDY PERSON/Neighbour
ALICK JACOB/Son
GERALD BROWNSILL/Neighbour
It's thought the 92 year old had left the gas on…when she went to make a cup of tea the kitchen went up.
Neighbour Judy Person probably saved her life…
She says she was black and blue on the knees and all burnt on her hands.
She wanted to sit down but I said we've just got to get out as soon as possible.
The flames were licking at the window.
Her son who also lives on the site says he's confident the homes are safe…
He says oh, I think so.
But having looked at this I don't think I shall be using the gas, let's put it that way.
The caravan took just minutes to burn through.
Residents realise there's little time to deal with a fire…
He says you've just got to get out.
You don't wait to pick up personal belongings, you just get the hell out.
One resident expressed concern about the number of water hydrants but the site warden says provision has been checked and approved by the fire service.
Mrs Clark is said to be stable in the burns unit of Stoke Mandeville hospital tonight…and according to her son hoping to move back into a new caravan.
A police force is selecting new recruits with the help of videos showing them the kind of incidents they might have to tackle.
It's part of a gruelling two-day selection course designed to find people with the right qualities for a difficult job.
JOHN CAINE/Droitwich
KEITH BRISTOW/West Mercia Police
’ Zero Four can you attend 22, The High Street.
Had a report of shouting comming from a houes.
Can you deal.
Over.’
Dealing with incidents like this is an all too common occurence for a police officer.
How he or she handles it is vital.
Thats's why West Mercia have developed a video exercise to see what potential recruits would do.
21-year-old Jason Hardman is one of 3,000 who applied to join the force — this year West Mercia will take on about a hundred.
Video scenarios like these allow recruiting officers to test recruits like Jason more throughly.
’ The important thing is that they understand what they are comming into.
This is a realistic view of policing.
It's not what you see on television.
Policing is about dealing and caring for people.’
And dealing with people who may be very upset.
’ Bravo Alpha.
Can you return to the police station and go to the front office where a female is very upset.’
For those who get this far only about about half are offered a job.
For Jason, he must have done well on the video excercise, he's just been told he can follow in his father's footsteps and join West Mercia Police.
(Wes ad lib)(Anne) Still to come on Central news.
Return to Arnhem.
The veterans who want to recreate their historic parachute drop.
And, The call of the wild…
Freddie, the friendly fox, goes home.
A council has voted to ban foxhunting on all its parks and open spaces.
But councillors stopped short of extending the ban to land which is leased by tenant farmers.
An elderly woman's in hospital recovering from burns and shock after an explosion wrecked her caravan home.
Neighbours pulled her to safety just minutes before flames took hold.
It's thought the fire broke out after she left the gas on.
KIM BARNES/Radley
JUDY PERSON/Neighbour
ALICK JACOB/Son
GERALD BROWNSILL/Neighbour
It's thought the 92 year old had left the gas on…when she went to make a cup of tea the kitchen went up.
Neighbour Judy Person probably saved her life…
She says she was black and blue on the knees and all burnt on her hands.
She wanted to sit down but I said we've just got to get out as soon as possible.
The flames were licking at the window.
Her son who also lives on the site says he's confident the homes are safe…
He says oh, I think so.
But having looked at this I don't think I shall be using the gas, let's put it that way.
The caravan took just minutes to burn through.
Residents realise there's little time to deal with a fire…
He says you've just got to get out.
You don't wait to pick up personal belongings, you just get the hell out.
One resident expressed concern about the number of water hydrants but the site warden says provision has been checked and approved by the fire service.
Mrs Clark is said to be stable in the burns unit of Stoke Mandeville hospital tonight…and according to her son hoping to move back into a new caravan.
A police force is selecting new recruits with the help of videos showing them the kind of incidents they might have to tackle.
It's part of a gruelling two-day selection course designed to find people with the right qualities for a difficult job.
JOHN CAINE/Droitwich
KEITH BRISTOW/West Mercia Police
’ Zero Four can you attend 22, The High Street.
Had a report of shouting comming from a houes.
Can you deal.
Over.’
Dealing with incidents like this is an all too common occurence for a police officer.
How he or she handles it is vital.
Thats's why West Mercia have developed a video exercise to see what potential recruits would do.
21-year-old Jason Hardman is one of 3,000 who applied to join the force — this year West Mercia will take on about a hundred.
Video scenarios like these allow recruiting officers to test recruits like Jason more throughly.
’ The important thing is that they understand what they are comming into.
This is a realistic view of policing.
It's not what you see on television.
Policing is about dealing and caring for people.’
And dealing with people who may be very upset.
’ Bravo Alpha.
Can you return to the police station and go to the front office where a female is very upset.’
For those who get this far only about about half are offered a job.
For Jason, he must have done well on the video excercise, he's just been told he can follow in his father's footsteps and join West Mercia Police.
(Wes ad lib)(Anne) Still to come on Central news.
Return to Arnhem.
The veterans who want to recreate their historic parachute drop.
And, The call of the wild…
Freddie, the friendly fox, goes home.
In Central news tonight: Robbed of their retirement — the couple who lost their savings to a fraudster.
Keep off: A council bans hunting from its parkland.
Good evening,
ANNE DAWSON
A former financial consultant who lost almost two million pounds of his clients' money has been found guilty of seven charges of theft and fraud.
A jury convicted Christopher How on two fraud charges yesterday, and delivered five more guilty verdicts after spending the night in a hotel.
(WES TO READ NEXT)
WESLEY SMITH
Many of the clients who depended on him for their pensions have had to go back to work after their life savings were wiped out.
Now they're fighting for compensation.
We have two reports.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
Many of How's investors attended the court for today's verdicts.
They heard the judge say they may find some of those verdicts diffcult to understand; that was no reflection on their credibility as witnesses.
She said perhaps they were naive, but she's glad he's been found guilty.
KIM BARNES Gloucester
ELAINE ARTUS Investor
MICHAEL ARTUS Investor
JOSIE BROWN C J How Action Group
MIKE WARBURTON Wealth Protection Specialist
How had set up a property firm called Prosperpoint, and transferred investment cash from clients like Mr and Mrs Artus to a bank in the Isle of Man, then on to Switzerland, and back to Prosperpoint.
This cash was invested in France, some used to buy a holiday chateau at Narbonne, another £200,000 to buy 12 holiday chalets, and £100,000 to buy land options.
The investment failed and the money vanished.
Christopher How operated as an investment consultant out of offices in Gloucester, and in Cheltenham town centre, as well as from offices in Worcester, where he wrote a financial column for the evening newspaper.
Many of the 90 investors who trusted him with their savings were in court during his trial.
They trusted him because they believed his work was guaranteed by FIMBRA, the financial watchdog body based in London.
They weren't told FIMBRA had kicked him out in 1988 and so they aren't entitled to compensation.
FIMBRA say it's cases such as CJ HOW which prompted the Financial Services Act.
The Act provides a much higher level of protection for investors, including improved monitoring, and compensation arrangements through the Investors' Compensation Scheme, since August 1988.
That's seven months AFTER Christopher How was expelled from FIMBRA.
Elaine and Michael Artus, their savings wiped out, will keep up their fight for compensation.
They've had to come out of retirement, she to help in a hairdressers, he to work in a shop.
072993programme
Top businessmen say Govt must help economy
FTSE down 11
The hundred shares index closed down eleven point six at two four one one point six 
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety one and up at two marks, eighty four.
(ad lib)
Welcome back:Now for another in our occasional series’ In Praise of Folly’.
Towards the end of the last century a Maharajah decided to help out an English village which had no regular water supply.
The resulting well was used for more than seventy years, and now is fully restored and a much-loved landmark.
STOKE ROW/Oxfordshire
LAUREEN WILLIAMSON/Local Historian
Voice over
The village of Stoke Row in south Oxfordshire might seem a world away from India, but the two have been connected for 130 years.
For centuries, villagers had to get their water from disused clay pits, because the water table in the chalk Chilterns was so deep down.
Edward Reade from nearby Ipsden House decided to do something about it.
As Lieutenant Governor of the Indian North-western provinces, he was friendly with the Maharajah of Benares.
He pointed out the similarity between the Chilterns and a part of the Maharajah's estate and the suffering of local people on both because of the lack of water.
The maharajah offered to make a gift of a well to the village of Stoke Row.
So a bore hole was sunk 368ft; more than twice the height of Nelson's Column.
It was an incredible feat of engineering, dug by hand.
Above it, a winding mechanism made by Wilders of Wallingford, a golden elephant and a gilded dome.
Female speaker
The funny thing is alot of the locals shunned to use it because it was such an unusual building and they'd got used to their habits of using deserted claypits and rainwater.
Voice over
But most were happy to use the well, taking a share of the 700 gallons of water raised daily from it.
The Maharajah also paid for a warden's cottage nearby; a tiny octagonal building with just 3 rooms.
It's been restored and is still lived in.
Next to it, is a 4 acre cherry orchard endowed by the Maharajah to pay for the upkeep of the well.
He also sent money to pay for a party to mark Queen Victoria's survival of an assassination attempt.
Female speaker
The Maharajah sent over £200 to the village to celebrate her survival of an assassination attempt.
There was a feast at The Cherry Tree for the men; beef and beer, oranges and teacakes for school-children.
Voice over
Although piped water was connected to the village in 1906, it proved unreliable and the well was still in use right up to the second world war.
The warden's cottage didn't have water laid on until 1949.
They had to’ borrow’water from friends and neighbours until then, since the well had become difficult to operate.
It then fell into disrepair, until a fund was set up to restore it.
One of the village pubs, the Cherry Tree still has mementos of festivities at the well; including a vial of well water mixed with river-water from the Ganges brought over for centenary celebrations in 1964.
The Duke of Edinburgh was the guest of honour at the ceremony, at which he was presented three jars of cherries from the orchard.
But it wasn't a Royal who was the last person to use the Maharajah's well, but a local man in unusual circumstances.
Female speaker
A man who's recently died called Percy Stalwood who lived next door reckons that he was the last person to use the well.
His mother-in-law had always used well-water, so when she died he felt it appropriate to draw water from the well to make the tea at her funeral.
Voice over
The well and the warden's cottage have now been restored with money raised by an appeal fund.
The well, once a life-saver for the villagers of Stoke Row, is now an intriguing curiosity for visitors who must be surprised by this touch of India in an English landscape.
Henley rowers Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent are through to the coxless pairs finals in the Olympics.
PICTURES BBC SPORT
The pair, who are favourite to win the gold, led from the start and had a comfortable win, beating the German team by nearly three seconds.
Redgrave has already won two gold medals and will become Britain's most successful current Olympic sportsman if he wins his third.
A group of Russian orphans who spent a three month break in the region have now been offered places at schools in England.Fifty orphans came to the Malvern Hills as guests of local schools.And they were heartbroken when they had to return to Russia.Richard Barnett reports:
28 JUNE 1992/HEATHROW
MALVERN/Worcestershire
COLWALL/Worcestershire
ANDREW AUSTER/Headmaster
Voice over
These were the harrowing scenes at Heathrow airport as the group of Russian orphans prepared to return home to a country that regards them as mentally retarded…just because they're without parents.They'd spent twelve happy weeks in the Malvern Hills, being cared for by local schools.And they were dreading going back to Russia.
But even as preparations were being made to fly them home, talks were going on with independent schools all over England in the hope of finding them free places.Andrew Auster is one of the organizers of the scheme…and he'll be taking some of the orphans at the Downs School in Colwall:
Male speaker
He had hoped the orpahns would go back to one home in Russia.
But they went back to the same orphanages which were grim.There was a determination to help them.
Voice over
Carolyn Alexander, a parent with two daughters at the Downs School, is in Moscow finding out if the orphans want to return to England:
Female speaker
All the children want to come back to England.
Voice over
The schools who've volunteered to help the orphans will meet the cost of the air fares and fees themselves.
Just five more places are needed and then all fifty youngsters can return to England.In the long term charities hope to set up their own orphanage near Moscow, to give the Russians the love and care they crave.But for the next year at least, the orphans can look forward to the best of British schooling.
The annual cost of crimes involving cars in one city has exceeded five million pounds.
Police fear thieves are turning to car crime because the courts are imposing tougher penalties for burglary and robbery.
Liz Hannam reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
SIMON JAY/Car Crime Victim
Det Sgt Tony Everitt/Thames Valley Police
CLIVE LONGHURST/Association of British Insurers
Voice over
It's a sight all to familiar in garages up and down the country.
Thieves, having stolen a car, take it for a joy ride and then strip it before setting it alight to destroy the evidence.
It can be heartbreaking.
Simon Jay had his briefcase and cassette radio stolen from his car this morning.
Detectives in Milton Keynes have just finished a survey of car crime.
In just one week a hundred and ninety four crimes were committed, causing a loss of almost a hundred and one thousand pounds.
This means, in a year, car crime accounts for more than five million pounds in Milton Keynes.
It's a growing problem.
And the more car crime there is, the more it costs to insure.
Premiums have gone up an average 17 per cent this year.
Insurers who used to assess their premiums every year, are now having to reassess them every six months and in some cases every four.
In an attempt to beat the car thief more sophisticated alarms are being brought onto the market.
But as the alarms become more advanced so do the thieves.
The advice from police is: If you have valuables don't leave them in the car.
A project designed to keep bored youngsters from resorting to car crime by giving them motorbikes to play with has been receiving some expert advice.
The scheme involves trial riding over a series of obstacles.
Britain's champion in the sport has been lending a helping hand.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CINDERFORD/Gloucestershire
JOHN CARTER/Probation Officer
STEVE SAUNDERS/Trial Bike Champion
Voice over
He makes it look so easy.
But 9 times British trials bike champion Steve Saunders from cheltenham has been practicing since he was in shorts.
Now he's using his skills as an inspiration to people like Stuart.
He's 17, admits that in the past he hasn't always remained on the right side of the law, but is now staying off the streets, with the help of the trax project.
He says that bored youngsters turn to crime — joy riding cars etc.
The scheme keeps bored kids off the streets.
Trax has been set on forestry commision land near Cinderford.
A variety of agencies are involved including the probation service.
He says it helps those who are interested in bikes, and prevents them straying into crime.
He says that it requires skill and balance.
Trials bike champ, Steve put on a display to show what can be achieved.
He says that that it's a good way of introducing youngsters to trials riding, as well as keeping them off the streets.
He says it's amazing the way Steve throws the bike around.
he says that it's brilliant: but very difficult to do it to Steve's standard.
The project only planning permission to operate for 3 months, but organisers are hoping to convince the council that it's a runaway success.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
OXFORD
ANDREW SAXTON/Weightlifter
BARCELONA
Dr RICHARD NICHOLSON/Bulletin of Medical Ethics
CHRIS MOXON/Club General Secretary
STUART PARTLET/Neighbour
ROBERT HAWES/Solicitor
EDDIE SAXTON/Father
Dr DAVID COWAN/London University/Drugs Control Centre
Voice over
Andrew Saxton, a champion weightlifter and major medal hope for Britain, was obviously upset when he emerged to protest his innocence against drug taking this afternoon.
The twenty five year old'is insisting the drug is not banned.
His world started falling apart two days ago when he was found to have failed random drugs tests taken two weeks ago before the games began.
He's one of three including sprinter Jason Livingstone.
The announcement was made this morning.
Andrew Saxton is already a Commonwealth Bronze winner and was runner up in the World Championships.
He is in the 100 kilogramme class and has lifted nearly four times his own weight.
He trains under the guidance of his father Eddie at the Morris Motor Club In Cowley.
Even this evening it was unclear whether the Clembuterol inhaler was banned by the Olympic Committee or not
It's come as a major surprise to his friends at the training club.
This afternoon frantic efforts were being made to sort out the confusion.
The family solicitor was locked into the Detached house on the Watlington estate for an hour before emerging to give a short statement.
He was expecting to lodge an appeal with the Barcelona authorities.
Andrew's father flew to Spain yesterday to collect his son.
But they may be hoping in vain.
One interpretation of the rules suggests the ban applies to a class of drugs…and Andrew Saxton may have fallen foul of that.
For now Andrew Saxton continues to carry the weight of the world on his shoulders and he's hoping the decision will be reversed before the event starts.
Dr RICHARD NICHOLSON/Bulletin of Medical Ethics
RUNS=1:30
The former chairman of Swindon Town Football Club Brian Hillier has been jailed for twelve months.
A jury yesterday found Hillier guilty of conspiring to cheat the Inland Revenue.
The club's former accountant Vince Farrar has been given a six months suspended sentence.
Gareth Furby reports from Winchester Crown Court.
STEPHEN POLLARD/Hillier's Solicitor
MIKE EVELING/Inland Revenue
VINCE FARRAR/Former Swindon Town Accountant
Voice over
New tests have shown that homes throughout an entire county could be at risk from the radioactive gas Radon.
The gas, which seeps out of the earth from underground uranium deposits, can collect in dangerous concentrations in some houses.
Jessica Fowle reports.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE
CHILTON/Oxfordshire
JOHN MILES/Radon Scientist/NRPB
MAURICE JONES/Environmental Health Officer
Thousands of people across Northamptonshire are being exposed to the potentially lethal radon gas in their own homes.
Until now it had been thought that the problem was largely confined to Devon and Cornwall.
Radon comes from the uranium that occurs naturally in the ground.
It's not a problem when it's in the open air but it can seep into buildings and when it becomes trapped in an enclosed area it's potentially lethal.
As a cause of lung cancer it comes second only to smoking, and research shows that people who live in houses affected by the gas run a one in thirty chance of dying of lung cancer.
The National Radiological Protection Board wants people to take notice of the new figures but not to panic about them.
And Northamptonshire's environmental health officers are backing up that message.
Once the monitoring has established the precise level of radon present, it's possible to install equipment, for around a thosand pounds, that'll pump the gas out of the house.
And while research continues to build up a clearer picture of the distribution of radon across the country, environmental health officers are hoping that the new results will encourage local authorities to enforce strict building regulations.
A team of researchers has completed a tour of more than four hundred public houses across the country.
But it was more than just a pub crawl.
They were compiling information for a guide to the Great British pub-goer.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
KATE FOX/Author
JOHN HONEYMAN/Landlord
OXFORD
ROSS BUCHANAN/Bar Manager
According to a new book called PubWatching, there's nothing uniquely human about enjoying a drop of alcohol.
Research for the book was carried out by a team from Oxford.
They visited pubs all over the country, immersing themselves in pub culture — playing darts and drinking with the lads.
Nice work, if you can get it.
PubWatching identifies several different pub types, the author's favourite being the Estate Pub, like the Liden Arms in Swindon.
Male speaker
It's a good pub with a friendly atmosphere.
Voice over
Equally unmistakeable — the Yuppie Pub, like Oxford's Duke of Cambridge.
But as society changes, so do pubs.
After all, there aren't so many Yuppies around any more.
But what of the notion that pubs won't survive into the next century?
So, rest assured.
Until humans lose the need for social bonding — not to mention their animal instinct for alcohol — you'll always have a local.
A jackdaw with a taste for seedless grapes has made his home in an exclusive lingerie shop.
He flew in three days ago and has become so accustomed to the highlife that he now refuses to leave.
But his life of lace and glamour is about to come to an end.
MARIA COYLE Oxford
ANN WILKINSON Shop Owner
Voice over
You'd think this bird had an eye for the women.
He arrived at Saratoga in Oxford an exclusive ladies lingeries shop on Tuesday.
And he's been hanging around there ever since.
Passers- by might expect a few satin teddies in the window.
But not a tame jackdaw wanting a bird's eye view.
Anne thinks he was probably reared as a pet and then dumped.
But he's soon to learn his behaviour's just not natural.
He has a passion for seedless grapes, fresh chicken and spiders in the bath.
But on Sunday this highlife of glittering gold and glamour will be over for good.
He's swapping his city life for a life in the country at the Blue Cross sanctuary for birds and animals in Burford.
He'll be sorely missed by the woman who took him under her wing…
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Bentley to receive conditional pardon
FTSE up 8
The hundred shares index closed up eight point nine at twenty nine twenty six point five 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty eight and up at two marks, fifty eight.
In Central news tonight: Stroke victim robbed…
A widow's threatened as she lay in bed.
Holiday tragedy: Man dies after falling from the boot of a car.
And, Queen of the castle: But the taxpayer is paying her mortgage.
Good evening:
ANNE DAWSON
A widow who's only just been allowed home from hospital after suffering a stroke has been robbed as she lay in bed.
Three masked men broke into her bungalow, and threatened to beat her with a club.
(WES NEXT)
WESLEY SMITH
They then ran off with just twenty five pounds in cash — money she'd saved to pay fuel bills.
Police are warning other elderly people in the area to be on their guard.
GARETH FURBY/Badbury
TRIXIE SELMAN/Widow
SYLVIA WILDERN/Daughter
PETER SANDAL/Wiltshire Police
Over the past year Trixie Selman has lost her husband and suffered a stroke.
But the eighty year old has soldiered on.
After six weeks in hospital she was allowed back home.
But to the criminal she's was just an easy target.
Early this morning she woke to find a masked gang standing in her bedroom.
She says she heard a dog barking just after three am.
Then the men burst into her bedroom and said’ we want your money.’
The police believe one of the gang visited the village yesterday…to search for likely targets.
He says someone called at her house at noon yesterday, and its likely he returned later with the robbers.
It's possible the gang made their getaway along the nearby M4.
They only escaped with about twenty five pounds, money which Mrs Selman had been saving to pay bills.
She says its awful.
She was worried they were going to hit her.
Mrs Selman celebrated her eightieth birthday just last week.
This afternoon she was being cared for by police and relatives.
And despite what's happened she's determined to stay on at her bungalow, her home for the past thirty six years.
But the police are now warning other people to call them immediately if they're every approached by anyone suspicious.
A man has been killed after riding on the boot of a car as it drove across a seaside caravan site.
Mark Perrins suffered head injuries when he fell.
He went into a coma and died soon afterwards.
RICHARD BARNETT/Brean
STEVE DANIELS/Family Friend
Male speaker
There wasn't room in the car and Mark rode on the boot.
He fell off and was killed.
Voice over
Mark fell onto the road with such force that he went into a coma from which he never recovered.
He was certified dead a short time later.
Male speaker
He was built like a mountain.
You wouldn't think a fall from a car would kill him.
Voice over
Holidaymakers at the Brean campsite said they were shocked by the death:
Somerset police investigating the death say they are questioning two men.
Mark Perrins was married with a young daughter and two children from a previous marriage.
A woman who owns a castle worth more than a million pounds is having her mortgage paid by the state — but she says she's planning to return all the money.
Joanne Willies-Williams lives on income support, and receives a further four hundred pounds a week in benefits to pay the interest on her mortgage.
She says she's highly embarrassed, but the alternative is being homeless and penniless.
CHRIS MOORE/Rodborough
JOANNE WILLIES-WILLIAMS/Fort Owner
Now she'ss claiming compensation, but Mrs Willies-Williams is broke, living on £30 a week income support, with the DSS paying her mortgage interest of £1500 a month.
People in Stroud have criticised a system which pays the mortgage of anybody living in a castle.
They say: It could be spent on more deserving cases.
Why doesn't she sell up and move to something smaller?
Mrs Willies Williams isn't happy to be taking the money either.,
Female speaker
It shouldn't be happening.
I feel very embarrassed about it.
Voice over
It is strange and I can understand the criticism, but if I sold it, I'd have no home and no money.
Five months ago the castle was the subject of a second mortgage application for which Mrs Willies-Williams was sentenced to nine months in jail, suspended for two years, for attempted fraud.
Mrs Willies-Williams is fighting for damages from the National Trust because she says they wrecked her business.
When that claim is settled Mrs Willies-Williams says she'll donate her past state handouts to charity.
The DSS is taking action to cut down on big mortgages being paid by the taxpayer.
From Monday, it says the limit will be on mortgages up to 150,000 pounds.
That will drop to 125,000 from April.
Secretary of State Peter Lilley says in future help should be targetted at those with the greatest needs
By then, Joanne Willies Williams hopes to have the money to stop claioming help, and meet her future commitments to Rodborough Fort.
Colleges within Oxford University should be scrapped, according to a report prepared by a leading adviser to Baroness Thatcher.
It says a cultural revolution is necessary if students are to be adequately equipped for the twenty-first century.
The university says the report is just an attempt to grab headlines.
MARIA COYLE/ Oxford
SIR DOUGLAS HAGUE/ Author of Report
PETER NORTH/Vice-Chancellor Elect
AKAASH MAHARAJ/Oxford Student Union
Voice over
Oxbridge University Colleges may have produced most of our nation's leaders for generations.
But according to Sir Douglas Hague a revamps needed to meet the demands of the 21sst century.
His report called Transforming the Dinosaurs has been produced for an independent think tank group called DEMOS.
In it he proposes the closure of at least one college at year that they reopen after three years and that they will not be allowed to employ anyone who's previously taught at an Oxbridge university.
Intv.
Sir Douglas Hague didn't study at Oxford or Cambridge.
His degree in commerce was from Birmingham University.
But he's now an associate fellow at Templeton College in Oxford…so is he viewed as the enemy within.
Intvs.
(Wes ad lib)(Anne) Still to come on Central news.
Going up in the world.
Taking off with Britain's next hanggliding champion.
And, a bird's eye view of the world of lingerie.
Welcome back…
(ANNE) In a few minutes…the pub watchers' bible…
A new book looks at the modern drinker…
(WES) but first here's Tim Russon with summer sport 
TIM RUSSON
PETE HARVEY
As long as they've been racing hangliders in Britian Pete Harvey from Milton Keynes has flown as fast and soared as high as the very best…
In the past ten years…he's helped the UK win the world championship…and won everything else going…apart from the British Title…
But this summer the crown should be his…he's way ahead of the rest with just one race to go…
Pete Harvey flies…races…and competes for fun…for him hangliding is more than a sport…more than a hobby…it's a passion
Pete says he just wanted to get in the air so he read about the sport in magazines and then got in touch with the association…he says the sport is easy if you know what you are doing but you can pay dearly for your mistakes
as one of the country's top pilots Pete Harvey makes very few mistakes…he competes in all wathers…and all conditions around the world…so how do you race hangliders…
Pete says they set off and race around a course…they are given a landmark such as a cross roads or a church and they have to fly to that point take pictures of it and the fastest there and back takes the points
another aspect of hangliding is survival…
Pete Harvey has just broken the European endurance record…a flight of 300 kilometres…
Pete says that on one flight recently he was up in the air for nine hours so you have to take food and drink with you to keep going…in this country survival is not a problem but it can be hard when you're flying across deserts and things like that
there are over 4000 hangliders in Britain…what started out as a daredevil sport has been accepted as a safe form of flying…and the thrill the sensation…
Pete says there's great freedom in the air…you can float to wherever you want to…the sensation is great especially when you are flying on the last wind of the day
theone championship left to win for Pete Harvey is the British crown…his name's not on the cup yet but if current flying form has anything to do with it it soon will be…
Pete says there's one race to go and that's at the end of August…he's in the lead and hopes to win the championship
and today was near perfect for hangliding in Buckinghamshire…the weather the wind…the thermals gave Pete harvey just the lift he needs to chase the british crown…the landing was near perfect too…
which is more than can be said for the Gloucestershire cricket season…the Cheltenham festival is underway and the only ones feasting on runs at the moment are Derbyshire…
they resumed this morning on 408 for 5…the damage done although Gloucestershire took the last five wickets at a cost of just 113 runs…
last two to go were…
Base and Vandro…
Cooper took out Base's off stump and then a few balls later Courtney Walsh wrapped things up and derbyshire were all out for 521…
so the talk amongst the locals was how were they going to get the runs…
the openers Hodgson and Hinks got off to a sound enough start…
boundaries though were too few and far between…
they tried to get the score moving as best they could…but Derbyshire had different ideas…
Hodsgon was the first to go…bowled by Base for 25…and that turned out to be the joint top score
Hinks went next caught behind off Malcolm for 15…and after that it was downhill…the county were all out for just 139…so they're still 382 runs behind…
signs of winter came floating in today as the new national hunt season got underway at Bangor…
Gloucestershire trainer Chris Broad saddled the first winner…and Wantage jockey Graham McCourt took the second race…
Oxford United skipper Andy Melville is set to join Sunderland…in a part exchange deal with half a million pounds and Irish defender Anton Rogan coming to the Manor…
and finally if you enjoyed the Tour de France…take yourself out into the Cotswolds on Sunday for the biggest local cycle race of the year…it's the Tour of the Cotswolds…calling amongst other places at Stroud…
Tetbury Cirencester…
Bourton…and Brockworth…start and finish is in Gloucester Park
TIM RUSSON
DAVE COMETSON/Team Captain
MIKE ORAM/Boat Pilot
MIKE STICKLER/Observer
TREVOR DOWN/Swimmer
IAN CAMPBELL/Swimmer
MARK KIFF/Reporting
PICTURES BBC SPORT
Voice over
Two R-A-F bases with more than a hundred years' service between them have closed as part of defence cuts.
The bases were officially handed over to the army at noon today.
Robin Powell reports.
ABINGDON Oxfordshire
KEMBLE Gloucestershire
Grp Capt PETER HENDERSON Station Commander
KEMBLE Gloucestershire
Voice over
Shutting the gates for the last time…
RAF Abingdon is now officially closed for business after sixty years serving the nation.
Even the Station Commander had a lump in his throat.
The public may best remember its airshows, but history's more likely to credit Abingdon with the vital maintenance work it carried out on Allied aircraft from World War Two to the Gulf conflict.
Until recently F-Shed was where Jaguar fighter planes were serviced.
Today it looks rather different.
Defence cuts and a changing world order have turned what was once a bustling workshop into an empty and eerie expanse of space.
R-A-F Kemble is the base that didn't want to die.
Like Abingdon, Kemble is handing over to the army.
They lowered the Air Force ensign, but as the flag of the Royal Ornance Corps was being raised in its place it fell off.
Kemble's best known as the home for seventeen years of the Red Arrows.
The Arrows moved out when the base was first due to close nine years ago.
Then it earned a reprieve, this time it won't — a sobering thought for the sixty or so staff who are losing their jobs.
Female speaker
It's been great.
I feel as if I'll always have somewhere to come home to.
Male speaker
I'll have to look for another job, but there's nothing suitable in this area.
Voice over
Abingdon's more lucky — all except civilian staff have been re-located — and closure's rather easier to swallow.
The re-structuring of Britain's defences will, of course, be a gradual process — RAF Hullavington is one of the bases due to close in the autumn.
But few who attended today's ceremonies were in any doubt they were witnessing the end of an era.
Retrial ordered for battered wife jailed for murder
Channel Four fined and urged to name terrorist source
The High Court has fined Channel Four seventy five thousand pounds for contempt of court for refusing to reveal the source of claims that Loyalist death squads are operating in Ulster.
Arafat ready for talks with Israel
FTSE down 12
The hundred shares index closed down twelve points at twenty three ninety nine point six.
The pound is up at one dollar ninety two, but down at Two Marks eighty three.
(ad lib)
Two families have been terrorised by a mob because they tried to help police catch joyriders.
Youths fired an arrow through the window of one house and set light to another in an attempt to silence them.
Simon Garrett reports 
OXFORD
Chief Supt RALPH PERRY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Early yesterday morning this arrow shattered the window of a house on Oxford's Barton estate.
Last night a Vauxhall Astra careered up and down outside crashing down the garden fence.
The back of the neighbouring house was set alight
Male speaker
In the past these people have been very supportive of the police.
they've identified offenders and have been attacked verbally and physically by these yobs
Voice over
A woman with two small children lives in one house, a couple with three young ones in the other.
They're all too frightened to talk…both families want to be moved out of Oxford.
Neighbours are desparate for something to be done about the hotters who terrorise their streets
Female speaker
It's terrible but what can you do?
They'll end up killing someone
Female speaker
You just don't know who'll they'll do next.
It's worrying especially when you've got young children
Voice over
But there are others on the Barton estate with a different view
Male speaker
They shouldn't grass, if they grass that's what they should expect
Male speaker
They grass people up they get what they deserve, round here anyway
Voice over
Because of the arrow attack there had been uniformed patrols on the Barton estate…but they'd been withdrawn before the chanting mob attacked
Male speaker
Unfortunately those officers were needed to help out with the incident at Milton Keynes…shortly before the display.
But the car's been recovered and is being forensically examined.
However we have made nine arrests on the estate.
Voice over
The nine are aged from fifteen to twenty-six, six are male, three are young girls.
Police say they'll be patrolling Barton tonight but they're anxious to avoid a confrontation.
Ironically the incident comes on the same day a new motor project for youngsters was launched two miles away in Horspath by motor racing star…
John Watson.
Trax hopes to deter potential joyriders…it's come too late for the people of Barton
The American Airforce has published a report of an investigation into the crash of an EF One Eleven fighter plane earlier this year.
But people who live under the flight path used by the jets say that the report doesn't explain properly HOW the accident happened.
2 APRIL 1992/BARTON HARTSHORN/Buckinghamshire
MARY RAINS/Steeple Aston/Action Group
Voice over
The plane came down into the car park of an agricultural company at Barton Hartshorn in Buckinghamshire.
It spiralled to the ground and burst into flames, narrowly missing a building where forty people were working.Both members of the crew were able to eject safely.
The official report echoes eyewitness accounts of fire on board shortly after takeoff from the Upper Heyford base in Oxfordshire.
In a radio conversation departure control told the crew’ Sweep 02 — tower advises that your tail appears to be on fire.
The crew responded:’ Affirmative.
We're on fire.
Unable to tell where the fire's coming from.
The report gives details of the jet's mission and clears both the crew and the equipment of any fault.
It makes it clear that the fire caused the accident but it doesn't give any explanation of what caused the fire.
Members of a local action group say this isn't good enough.
Female speaker
I expect that is something we will never find out.
But it would be nice to know what actually caused that crash.
Especially since we have up to ninety two planes flying over us each day…
I wish we knew what caused the fire.’
Voice over
But the USAF said that it's standard practice.
A spokesman explained’ Frank and open exchange of mishap information is vital in order to determine the cause of the accident and recommend effective action.
For that reason the safety mishap report must be kept confidential’
The EF One Eleven has a good safety record — in its eleven year history this was the first crash in peacetime.
But camapigners insist that if they are to trust the aircraft information must not be held back from them.
A former maid of the Princess Royal has won the right to sue a national newspaper.
The Court of Appeal has ruled that she can use an ancient law to sue the Today newspaper for claiming she stole letters belonging to the princess.
The decision's being hailed as a legal milestone.
Nick Clark reports.
LONDON
LINDA JOYCE
MARK STEPHENS/Solicitor
Voice over
Linda Joyce toasts a successful judgement to the cameras on the steps of the High Court.
it's beer not champagne because she says, this is a victory for the ordinary person.
Three years ago Miss Joyce was accused by the Today newspaper of stealing letters sent to Princess Anne by her equerry Commander Tim Lawerence.
Miss Joyce could not afford to sue for libel, for which Legal Aid is not available, so she chose the ancient legal route of malicious falsehood which IS covered by legal aid but has never before been used in this way.
Today claimed malicious falsehood wasn't an applicable action but the country's number two judge vice chancellor Sir Donald Nicholls this morning said that it was.
He described the article as grossly defamatory…and said the case contained the essentials of a malicious falsehood action.
Female speaker
It's wonderful news for the poor person.
Voice over
There are key differences between libel and malicious falsehood.
Basically in a libel action a newspaper MUST prove any defamatory comments printed are true.
In malicious falsehood the aggrieved, in this case Miss Joyce, must show the Today's comments are false.
Male speaker
It's a watershed decision.
Voice over
It'll be many months before the case next comes to court but Linda Joyce is happy at last she has an opportunity to clear her name and that her case has opened the way for others in a similar position.
Voice over
Good Evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Chief Insp JOHN REEVE/Thames Valley Police
BEATTIES' SPOKESMAN
Det Supt DAVID BLAIR/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
More than a hundred police officers spent eighteen hours in a painstaking search through one of the largest shopping centres in Europe.
Three fire bombs had already been found and made safe when the first device went off, shortly after two this morning.
Luckily they were near the B-H-S store and put the fire out before it had a chance to catch hold.
But less than an hour later another firebomb ignited in the Habitat store, and this time the emergency crews weren't so lucky.
It spread to the roof causing thousands of pounds worth of damage.
A third device was detonated in a controlled explosion.
In all five other devises, including three in the library were made safe.
No warning was given and police say they face an impossible task in fighting this kind of terrorism.
The first device found was in a toy shop.
Staff there, who don't want to be named were horrified that children should be the target of a terrorist attack.
Police evacuated the centre and didn't allow anyone back — even to their homes.
More than two hundred people spent the night at a near by school
Police weren't saying which terrorist group was responsible.
But they said the type of attack bore all the hallmarks of the I-R-A.
The centre re-opened at eleven o'clock this morning.
The fire bombs had certainly caused major disruption, and some damage, but nothing like the devastation intended by the terrorists.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Milton Keynes0
KEVEN LANGDON/Tandy
SIAN FRASER/Petites
PHILLIPA ECCLES/Chamber of Commerce
PETER BUTLER MP/Con North East Milton Keynes
1989
Prof PAUL WILKINSON/Anti Terrorism Expert
Voice over
The IRA has been attacking commercial centres Like the Metro Shopping Centre in Gateshead…and the Brent Cross centre by the M25 as part of a campaign to disrupt business life in Britain.
Milton Keynes appears to have been a victim of that.
The shopping centre may have been open again today…but business was well down.
Male speaker
We normally expect to see a lot of people on a Friday but they're just not coming through the doors
Female speaker
I would say we've lost about fifty per cent but we're putting on a promotion to try and get people in
Voice over
Half empty shops point to the fact that the devices were discovered during one of the busiest periods of the week…
Thursday late shopping, and Friday.
It will cost hundreds of thousands of pounds, and may have a knock-on effect.
Female speaker
It can't be good for morale coming at the beginning of the school holidays.
Shopping has been hit quite badly
Voice over
The MP for the area, Peter Butler, was quick to condemn the attack.
Male speaker
They seem to be working their way around the main shopping areas of Britain over the last two years.
They're too cowardly to attack military targets
Voice over
It's not the first time Milton Keynes has been hit by firebombers.
The Animal Liberation Front struck at Dickens and Jones in the same centre in the 1980s.
But yesterday's attack is part of a wider campaign says expert Professor Paul Wilkinson.
Male speaker
It goes hand in hand with Semtex and car bombing.
The public and police have to be on guard against all these tactics.
There's no evidence the IRA has suddently just become interested in purely attacking property
Voice over
Milton Keynes is picking up the pieces and pleased that at least no one lost a life.
But it may be some time before shoppers confidence is restored.
The Olympic weightlifter Andrew Saxton who was sent home from Barcelona after a positive drugs test may be allowed to compete after all.The British Olympic Association says it is a possibility.
The case of Saxton, who's from Oxford, is being discusssed by Olympic officials, amid increasing doubt over the accuracy of the test results.
He's claimed that the drug he took was only for his asthma, and was NOT on the list of banned substances.
Saxton is waiting by his 'phone for news from Spain, and says he's ready to fly back there if called.
RUNS=0:40
A census of Britain's butterflies is being carried out to find out which species are most in need of protection.
The Butterfly Conservation Society says the information could help save some of the rarest examples from extinction.
RICHARD BARNETT/Cleeve Hill
GARY ROBERTS/Butterfly Conservationist
SIMON GLOVER/Butterfly Conservationist
Male speaker
The Butterfly Conservation Society is liasing with landowners to make sure habitats for the insects are protected.
Voice over
Conservationists are visiting thirty key sites all over the country to monitor populations of our rarest butterflies.
Britain has 57 resident native butterflies, which are joined in the summer by around half a dozen migratory species:
Male speaker
Gloucestershire has already lost two species of Blue, so it's important to protect the Chalkhill Blue.
The reserve is an ideal place for people to come and see butterflies.
Voice over
The butterfly census will be completed at the end of this month.
And surely this is one case where a rising population in the countryside would be welcomed by everyone.
Dog owners from all over the country have been showing their appreciation for what they claim is the most royal of breeds.
Although the Queen prefers corgis, most of her ancesters had pugs.
And in county circles it seems they're still as popular as ever.
GRAEME BOWD Swinbrook
GEORGE TAYLOR
CAROLA
JOAN PENGELLY Show Judge
Voice over
Pug people say their club is classless, but the dogs do seem to attract a certain kind of owner.
They generally live in the shires and eat cakes and cucumber sandwiches.
The breed has been in Britain since the eleventh century, when by William of Orange reputedly owner the first.
At their annual meeting in Swinbrook owners agreed that most Pugs belong to extroverts.
Male speaker
They tend to attract a bit of attention if you're an exhibitionist.
I like to haver this dog to protect me against gorgeous women.
Voice over
Lulu Freston takes her pugs to the House of Commons where she works for an MP.
Conservative of course.
She once lost one on the tube.
It costs about three hundred pounds to be a pug person, that's the price of a pedigree puppy.
But they don't eat much and can live for 15 years.
For these proud owners you could say it's just a case of puppy love.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Britain ratifies Maastricht treaty
Britain has ratified the Maastricht Treaty just hours after Lord Rees-Mogg withdrew his legal challenge in the light of the turmoil on the European money markets.
Pessimism over monetary union
The Prime Minister has said the ERM crisis means that the timetable for European economic and monetary union looks unrealistic.
Education plans changed
The Government has changed its plans for education including the abandonment of league tables of test results for seven and fourteen-year-olds.
Rifkind backs US on Bosnia
The Defence Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, says he is backing calls by the United States for its allies to agree on a joint strategy to end the war in Bosnia.
FTSE up 15
The hundred shares index closed up fifteen point two at twenty-nine, forty-one point seven.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-nine and down at two marks, fifty-five.
Welcome back.
Coming up later, the chalkhill blue and other butterflies.
But here with the sport is Tim Russon.
(TIM NEXT) Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
RICHARD MAINWARING /British Champion
for the past ten he's dominated the world of barefoot…this weekend…he skies in the British national Championships which are being held at the Cirencester Club in the Cotswold water park…
if he wins…and he's the favourite of course it will be his ninth championship in ten years…a world record for barefoot ski-ing…and one of the best in any sport in this country…
Richard says he started ski-ing on the coast and then one day went out with skies and that's how he started barefoot…he says three years ago he stopped competing as life or death and just goes out to enjoy himself
Richard's record is even more remarkable when you consider he's just celebrated his fortieth birthday…and is competing against skiers half his age
he says he doesn't go out so often but it's more a question of qality and not quantity…its tough to stay on top but he goes out to Florida most years to train and learn the new techniques
The Cirencester club is reckoned to be one of the best ski-ing venues in all of Europe…every day this week Richard Mainwaring will be running…racing over the water…the secret of success is fun
and you can watch them barefoot in the Cotswold water Park this weekend…another Gloucestershire sportsmen who's celebrating a record is jockey Willie Carson…at the weekend he rode winner number three thousand five hundred…so where better place to start our round-up than in the winners enclosure 
ADRIAN WHITBREAD/Swindon Town
Oxfordshire jockey Richard Dunwoody has a few thousand to go before he can ever catch Carson…that can't be done in jump racing of course…but the new champion is off to a flying start to the new season…two winners on saturday he won the first at Newton Abbot this afternoon
Riding through Gloucestershire yesterday some of the best cyclists in britain as the 1993 Tour of the Cotswolds got underway…the first race was way back in 1951 but this could be the last unless a sponsor is found to save the race…
this one was the biggest and best in a long while…for the first time in 30 years it was open to professionals as well as amateurs and drew in two former world champions in Tony Doyle and Danny Clark and three Milk Race winners in…
Chris Lillystone…
Connor Henry and Shaun Sutton…they raced for 119 miles…start and finish was in Gloucester Park…and it covered practically every road in the Cotswolds…
Birdlip…
Bibury…
Bourton…
Winchcombe…
Painswick were all on route…
first man home in a sprint finish was Mark Walsham from Chesterfield in derbyshire…
His prize was three hundred pounds and the silver cup and let's hope his is not the last name to get engraved on the Tour of Cotswolds Trophy
A new name soon to be engraved in the swindon town hall of fame is centre-half Adrian Whitbread…a five hundred thousand pound signing from Orient Adrian was on the County Ground pitch for the first time today to line-up with his new team mates for the annual pre season picture…and as you'd expect it was all smiles
Adrian Whitbread says the players have made him feel very welcome and he has settled in well…although he was a bit nervous for the first game on Saturday…he says Town are a good team and he's looking forward to playing for them also on parade for pictures today…
Town's other new signing's Norweigan striker Jan Aage Fjortoft…
Dutchman Luke Nijholt and assistant manager David Hay…
Town drew 2-2 at Wycombe on saturday the season is just 12 days away…
and finally the action can't come quick enough for this man…
Gloucestershire's Syd lawrence is back in action tomorrow…he play's in his benefit game at Cheltenham…
The Lawrence eleven against the rest of the world…they start at twelve
The Department of Transport's being criticised for starting roadworks on a busy motorway at the height of the holiday season.
The work's already led to queues up to eight miles long.
But the police blame the tailbacks on motorists driving too fast through the contraflow and causing accidents.
ROBIN POWELL/M4
JO LLOYD/Automobile Association
PC BRIAN NORTHCOTE/Swindon Traffic Police
There's a 3-mile contraflow either side of Junction 15, and holiday-makers bound for South Wales and the West Country are advised to find an alternative route.
The Department of Transport insists the resurfacing work is unavoidable, but the AA says it's badly timed.
There've already been several tailbacks — the longest stretched for 8 miles.
But the DoT's standing by its decison to start the work now.
A spokesman said: The traffic on the M4 is just as busy early in the summer as it is in August, and we wanted to get on with the work before the autumn to take advantage of the longer days and better weather.
The police are urging motorists to remain patient, but early evidence suggests the advice isn't being heeded.
There were 2 accidents in this morning's rush hour, only prolonging the delays, and the police are warning that if motorists continue to drive at 80 through the contraflow the consequences could soon be far more serious.
The work's scheduled to last 18 days, but the contractors are working round the clock to try and finish sooner.
In the meantime, motorists caught speeding through the contraflow can expect to receive a court summons in the post.
Skin cancer warnings could soon be given with the weather forecast, according to an agency that monitors the level of harmful rays in sunlight.
From today newspapers are being supplied with figures for the past week's level of ultra violet radiation.
It's hoped that within a year there'll be forecasts of when the danger is at its height.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
CHILTON/Oxfordshire
Dr ALASTAIR McKINLEY/NRPB
STEVE FARRELL/Skin Cancer Sufferer
Dr ROD SINCLAIR/Dermatologist
Dr Alastair McKinley is monitoring the amount of ultraviolet rays from the sun as part of his work at the National Radiological Protection Board.
The monitor picks up the amount of ultraviolet or UV rays coming from the sun.
These are the harmful rays which cause skin cancer.
Some are deflected by the ozone layer, but others penetrate to ground level.
The measurements are fed into a computer and from this week the NRPB is sending out each week's results to newspapers.
It's hoped that in the future, it'll be possible to predict levels of UV.
He says ideally it will be possible to predict levels of UV so that people can take appropriate precautions to guard against sun exposure.
The fashion for tanned skin is the main cause of the doubling of malignant skin cancers in the last ten years.
One in five hundred people in the UK can expect to develop a melanoma, or skin cancer in their lifetime.
Steve Farrell, chief engineer at Prodrive in Banbury moved to England from Australia eleven years ago and with a history of skin cancer in his family was always on the watch for it.
A month ago he had a positive diagnosis and was treated at the Churchill Hospital.
He says he was upset initially but also releived that the system was working.
I knew from my family history I was likely to be vulnerable to cancer and luckily it was diagnosed and treated in time.
Steve was treated at the Churchill Dermatology Hospital in Oxford — where there's concern about the growing incidence of skin cancer:
He says you can still go out and enjoy yourself in the sun but it's important to wear a hat and protective clothing — and to avoid the sun altogether when it's at its height.
The message is…cover up and not to be fooled into thinking our relatively mild English climate is a safeguard against the risk of skin cancer.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the best on barefeet.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
KEN GOODWIN/Cheltenham
ARTHUR TAYLOR/Pensioner
Insp EDDIE WHITLOCK/Gloucestershire Police
He says the wheels were slashed, windows broken, it was wrecked.
Some residents we spoke to were frightened to talk publicly for fear of reprisals.
One told of how his wife regularly has stones thrown at her when she goes shopping.
Others said they had now decided to speak out because something has to be done.
She says that it's horrible, they get bricks thrown through their windows and clothes lines cut down.
She says living here is hell, and the kids just won't leave them alone.
The police say they are investigating.
He says that they try to deal with the complaints as they come in, but getting enough evidence for an arrest takes time.
But for Arthur Taylor enough is enough — he's moving out.
He says that the estate stinks, and he's leaving.
Most people who live in the street agree that it's not children from their road who are the culprits.
But whoever is to blame, the residents say unless the police do something quick they're faced with a miserable summer.
A pensioner who's been robbed of more than three thousand pounds in three months, says if the men are caught, the judge should lock them up and throw away the key.
On the second occasion she was hit in the face when she found two men rifling her home.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
DORIS SEALEY/Robbery Victim
Insp DAVE SMITH/Gloucestershire Police
The men got away with £500 from a handbag.
From the same house three months ago thieves stole life savings of almost £3,000.
The police are looking for two men, one of them about 23, with scruffy black hair, a white shirt and blue jacket and trousers.
The other in his 30's, with ginger hair and moustache and a tweed sports coat.
Police investigating the murder of a prostitute are examining possible links with the deaths of three other women.
Detectives have already been to Scotland to talk to colleagues there…and they're pooling information with officers from forces all over Britain.
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
Det Insp WAYNE MURDOCH/Gloucestershire Police
When prostitute Carol Clarke was found dumped in a canal in Sharpness docks in Gloucestershire in March police interrogated crew members from visiting ships and searched through her extensive list of clients.
Four months later her killer is still at large and detectives are looking at the possibility that she may not have been his first victim
The search for Carol Clark's killer is leading to the re-examination of the death of prostitute Diane McInally in Glasgow two years ago.
Two men were arrested but not brought to trial.
In November last year Natalie Pearman, a young Norwich prostitute, was found strangled on waste ground in the city.
Carol Clark was the third woman to die.
A month later Karen McGregor was the second Glasgow prostitute murdered.
Her battered body was abandoned on scrub land next to a city car park.
In each case the life style and violent death is similar.
But detectives in each force are finding information hard to come by.
Other prostitutes and their clients are slow to talk
Karen McGregor's mother says more women must come forward
Detectives say they've no proof that a serial killer is responsible for the four women's deaths, but they are pooling all information in the hope that a common link may be found
A young woman has been sexually assaulted by a cyclist.
The eighteen year old was punched as she walked along a path in Campbell Park in Milton Keynes.
Her attacker then dragged her into bushes.
He's described as white, in his late 30s, with greying hair.
He was wearing black or navy blue shorts.
A former Grand National jockey charged with burglary and deception has failed to turn up for a court appearance.
Dermot Browne, from Blackbird Leys in Oxford, is accused of stealing two guns and goods worth five thousand pounds, during a break-in at a house earlier this year.
He was due to appear at Oxford Crown Court.
A judge has now issued a warrant for his arrest.
IRA admits planting Milton Keynes bombs
The IRA has admitted planting the firebombs which closed Milton Keynes shopping centre last Friday.
21 hurt in more Belfast violence
The announcement came as twenty-one people were injured in two car bomb attacks in Belfast.
Funeral for Wimbledon murder victim
The funeral of Rachel Nickell, who was murdered on Wimbledon Common, has been held near her family home in Bedfordshire.
Children's home closes after damning report
The Ty Mawr children's home in Gwent is to close down following a damning report.
Building society urges tax credit scheme
The Abbey National Building Society is urging the Government to consider a new tax credit scheme to try to revive the housing market.
FTSE up 20
The hundred shares index closed up twenty point six at twenty-four, twenty point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety-three and up at two marks, eighty-five.
(ad lib)
lets turn the speed up now and head for Silverstone which this weekend staged the biggest kart meeting of the year…four hundred drivers…the best in the world were there…along with our man Mark Kiff 
SIMON CULLEN/Defending Champion
MARTIN HINES/World Champion
CHRIS STONEY/Winner
Voice over
Three weeks ago Silverstone played host to the Formula One Grand Prix.
This weekend it was the turn of the kart racers…the sport which produced Nigel Mansell, Aryton Senna and most of the world's top drivers.
The Coca Cola British Kart Grand Prix is the one all the competitors want to win.
Simon Cullen says this is the biggest meeting in England.
The biggest karts racing are the 250cc Fomula E…these machines can reach a hundred and forty miles on the long straights at Silverstone.
World Champion Martin Hines is the man they want to beat.
Martin Hines says he's been a winner here twice and everyone will be looking to beat him.
One thing's for sure: it will be a tight race.
But no joy for him…the race turned out to be a great duel between Staurt Meade and the eventual winner Chris Stoney who was rather pleased at his success.
Chris Stoney says I'm almost the happiest person in the world.
But it's not just fun for the grown ups.
The cadets as young as eight were racing flat out.
Perhaps the next Nigel Mansell is among them.
and finally tonight action from the sunday cricket league…the big match was at New Road yesterday Gloucestershire against Worcestershire 
Voice over
Didcot in Oxfordshire is a town best known for its power station, so it probably doesn't figure in most people's top ten tourist destinations.
But for one group of enthusiasts, a week in the shadow of the cooling towers is their idea of a perfect holiday.
Jessica Fowle reports 
DIDCOT/Oxfordshire
CLIVE SPARLING/Publisher
ANTHEA PERRY/Credit Control Clerk
KERSTIN FLETCHER/Solicitor's Clerk
ALINE PASTOOR/Teacher
Voice over
It's no five star hotel…but the volunteers on a work week at Didcot Railway centre can't think of a better place to spend their dream holiday.
They spend the week polishing, cleaning and painting…restoring the old locomotives to their former glory and doing essential trackwork.
In return for their hard work they get a chance to fulfil a lifetime ambition.
Male speaker
I'm looking forward to workers' playtime when we get the chance to do some driving and stoking.
Voice over
For some of the fifty volunteers it's a chance to escape their day jobs and really be themselves.
Female speaker
Most of the time I work behind a desk and have to wear smart clothes and have long nails and a nice hair-do.
This is so different.
This is what I really want to do.
I feel quite peculiar — It's so exciting.
Voice over
And others find romance.
On woman met her husband on a working week
Female speaker
We started just being good friends.
Most people meet at a disco or something like that.
We met doing our hobby.
That's not so strange.
Voice over
This woman's been coming from Holland every year for the last fourteen years
Female speaker
Someone just said that I must be mad.
He's right really.
Voice over
And they enjoy themselves so much that they don't even mind what people call them.
Female speaker
It doesn't matter really.
I suppose we're all train spotters at heart.
Voice over
Kevin Maxwell has caused a stir by turning out for his village cricket team.
Photographers were asked to pay fifty pounds a head to take pictures of the troubled businessman, who's facing theft and fraud charges.
But the star attraction proved a flop with the bat — he was out first ball.
Robin Powell reports.
IPSDEN/Oxfordshire
KEVIN MAXWELL
DAVID HORTON/Ipsden Cricket Club
Voice over
Taking time off from more pressing matters, Kevin Maxwell lines up with his local cricket team.
Mr Maxwell, facing eight charges of theft and fraud following the collapse of his father's media empire, is never far from controversy.
And a fifty pound fee for the privilege of taking photographs of him was hardly likely to win him friends among the assembled media.
But the fee, he insisted, was nothing to do with him.
Kevin Maxwell often turns out for his local village Hailey, though judging by some of his fielding you wouldn't have guessed it.
The Maxwell pensions scandal had put the organisers of this year's clash with neighbouring Ipsden on a sticky wicket…but after much debate the decision was to play on.
Not that Mr Maxwell was in the mood to talk about his off-the-field difficulties…
…but if he WAS concentrating on his game, it WASN'T very hard.
There was a hush of expectancy as he walked to the wicket…but this is what happened the first ball he faced…
Out for a golden duck — but as Mr Maxwell returned to the pavilion, a wry smile suggested that just now keeping his place in the Hailey first team is the least of his worries.
A paperboy has been telling of his ordeal at the hands of a gunman.
The boy had just started work when a raid took place at the newsagents where he worked.
The police have praised the teenager's actions.
Julie Dolphin reports.
BLETCHLEY/Buckinghamshire
BEN COSSTICK/Robbery Victim
CHRIS QUIGLEY/Manageress
Det Sgt TONY EVERITT/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Paperboy Ben Cosstick was back on his delivery rounds today, just forty eight hours after being held at gunpoint during a robbery at a newsagents in Bletchley.
Ben, who's fifteen, had just started work at Stars Newsagents when he was approached by the gunman.
The robber then forced Ben, the shop's manageress and her son into a cupboard.
They were ordered to open the safe and hand over cash and cheques amounting to more than a thousand pounds.
The raider then locked the cupboard and left.
They spent 40 minutes locked inside…another paperboy arriving for work raised the alarm.
Today the police praised the way Ben handled the situation.
The robber's described as a white male, in his early to mid twenties and of medium build.
He's around five feet eight inches tall and speaks with a Liverpudlian accent.
He was wearing a red ski balaclava, a dark cotton jacket and tracksuit bottoms.
A driving examiner has gone on trial on four charges of indecent assault.
It's alleged he fondled the women and suggested they take off their clothes while they were taking their driving tests.
John Kiddy reports.
Police are hunting arsonists who're targeting hay barns at the height of the harvest.
So far no one has been injured, but the firebrigade fears lives could be lost if the fires continue.
Gareth Furby reports.
WOOD EATON/Oxfordshire
FIRE SERVICE VIDEO
BRIAN HENMAN/Farmer
DAVID LAIDLAW/Oxfordshire Fire Service
Det Insp DAVID BUCKENHAM/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
There were three barn fires overnight.
This one, at Wood Eaton in Oxfordshire, was the worst.
Three hundred tons of freshly harvested hay and straw went up in smoke.
And at one point hundreds of pigs in a nearby building were in danger of being roasted alive.
Firecrews kept them cool and today they were no worse for their ordeal.
But the fire burned on, with the cost of the damage estimated at around sxity thousand pounds.
He says it means they'll have to start again and buy straw in for the winter.
Last night there were also barn or hay fires near Chislehampton and near Cowley.
No one was injured but the firebrigade is worred if the spate continues there could be loss of life.
He says it could divert manpower away from more needy areas.
The police say there've been seven suspicious barn fires around in the Oxfordshire in less than a week.
He says it could be individuals, or even a gang.
The police are also urging farmers to keep a close watch on their barns until the aronsonists are caught.
Hello there…the olympic gold rush hit Central South over the weekend…first as we predicted…as we hoped…the Henley on Thames rowing machine of Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent cruised home in the coxless pairs…and while they were enjoying themselves in Spain.
TIM RUSSON
.
back in Oxfordshire the village of Little Coxwell was celebrating two gold medals…back home from Barcelona came Matt Ryan…the winner of the three day event…he's Australian by birth…but is based in Britain…as Mark Kiff reports 
MATT RYAN
Voice over
The village of Little Coxwell in Oxfordshire has never seen anything like it.
Almost all the 98 residents of the village were out last night to greet their local hero…the youngest just three months old.
Even the town crier of nearby Faringdon was on hand to give an official reception.
And waiting to be re-united with his golden partner…
Kibah Tick Tock…stabled in the village and proudly wearing the Australian colours.
A delay of two hours didn't dampen the enthusiasm of the villagers to greet their adopted Olympian…
Matt Ryan…who won the individual gold in the three day event and led Australia to a famous win.
Matthew Ryan says his girlfriend had warned him there would be a few people to greet him but nothing like this.
Inside the Eagle Tavern, the drinks were flowing…all that glistened really was gold.
Matt says to receive a reception like this is really great and it's wonderful to be accepted as part of the village.
For the villagers it was a night to remember.
She says it was tremendous to realise there was a double Olympic Champion in the village.
He says it's great for the village.
She says that considering he's only lived here for a short while, it's fantastic the way people are celebrating his success.
And the celebrations went on long into the night…they couldn't have done any better Down Under.
also back from the Olympics is cyclist Steve Farrell…no rest for him though he was on his bike again yesterday trying to defend his title in the Tour of the Cotswolds 
STEVE FARRELL
CHRISTOPHE LEBARS
Voice over
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
The IRA has admitted planting eight firebombs in Milton Keynes last week.The admission came in a statement which went on to accuse the police of endangering public safety by ignoring bomb warnings.
(WES NEXT)
WESLEY SMITH
Two of the bombs exploded, causing thousands of pounds worth of damage.
Six others were found and made safe after a nineteen hour search of the shopping centre.
Tonight, police emphatically denied that they had ignored any warnings.Chris Moore reports.
31 JULY 1992/MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Det Supt DAVID BLAIR/Thames Valley Police
The firebombs, similar to these used by the IRA in previous attacks, brought chaos to one of Europe's largest shopping centres.
The first went off at two a.m last Friday.It caused little damage to British Home Stores.
but another an hour later, caused thousands of pounds damage at Habitat.
Police said at the time that it looked like the work of the IRA.
Today from Dublin, came the admission.
The Provisionals said that one of their active service units had placed the devices, causing damage to prime commercial property.
But the statement went on to accuse the police here of’ deliberately ignoring IRA bomb warnings, or failing to clear areas targeted in warnings.
It added that this foolhardy and wilful disregard was clear evidence of the cynicism within the British establishment, and warned of tragic consequences for the public.
But Thames Valley police say it's not they who are risking lives.
Male speaker
It's ridiculous to suggest that this or any other police force ignores bomb warnings.The IRA's claim that a warning was given in this case is just not true.
Voice over
Meanwhile, police hope that family snapshots could help identify the bombers.
They want to find families who attendad a Thomas the Tank Engine exhibition at Milton Keynes library last Thursday, when the devices were hidden.
They may have unwittingly photographed the terrorists.
Police are asking for anyone who took photographs or video film during the day to contact them.
The police are linking the attempted rape of an Oxford woman with the rape of a student earlier this year.
The latest incident happened just half a mile from the previous assault, and the attacker's description appears to be the same.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
OXFORD
Det Insp DAVID BUCKENHAM/Thames Valley Police
8 APRIL 1992/RAPE VICTIM
Voice over
The latest attack happened as the twenty seven year old woman was walking home through the centre of Oxford after a party in the early hours of Saturday morning.
As she approached County Hall on New Street, she was grabbed from behind by a man who dragged her down an alley.
He indecently asaulted her and tried to rape her.
Detectives believe this attack was carried out by the same man who raped a student from Somerville college two months ago in public toilets in the city centre.
Male speaker
The description given seems to fit the previous attack on the first of June, when a 20 year old student was raped in the toilets in Magdalen Street.
The attacker this time is described as having blond to gingery wavy hair, and it's a similar description to the previous attack.
Voice over
A week after the Magdalen Road attack, we spoke to the victim.
She was worried then that the attacker might strike again.
Female speaker
I don't think that there's any way he can realise what he put me through…what he's still putting me through.
The thought of him attacking someone else…
I just couldn't stand it.
Voice over
Detectives say there must have been other people in the area around the time of this latest attack who could help their search.
He say: We would impress on the public this is the second attack…we would like them to come forward with whatever information they've got.
If they do suspect someone or know someone fitting the description, speak to us in confidence and we will investigate it.
We really need to catch this man before he attacks someone else.
The police have issued an artist's impression of the attacker.
He's white, in his late twenties, about six feet tall with gingery blond wavy hair.
He was smartly dressed in a white shirt and dark trousers.
Meanwhile, they're appealing to women not to go out alone at night.
Two twelve year old girls have been sexually assaulted by a masked man in Milton Keynes.
The girls were threatened with a knife and forced into bushes on the riverside walk near the Open University at Walton Hall.
The Football Association is considering re-opening its investigation into financial irregularities at Swindon Town.
It follows the trial of three former Swindon officials last week on charges of defrauding the Inland Revenue.
Former club chairman Brian Hillier and accountant Vince Farrar were both found guilty, while the former manager Lou Macari was acquitted.
The F-A will now decide whether it should take action against the men which may include banning them from football for life.
Now to the latest in our series looking at unusual gardens.
Tonight, two acres of land that were once an orchard but have now been transformed into a series of separate cottage gardens.
Each plot is like a different room in a house, with its own plants and blends of colour.
RICHARD BARNETT Weobley
LANCE HATTATT Garden Owner
JANE HATTATT Garden Owner
Nearby pride of place goes to a clump of mullein.
Each garden room has been designed to group particular plants and colours to best affect.
David and Jane Hattatt have taken ten years to turn an old damson and apple orchard into one of the region's most imaginative gardens.
They're still busy planting, although there's no master plan:
Male speaker
It's better not to have a master plan so you can decide what to do as you go along.
Voice over
Many cottage gardeners avoid brilliant colours, fearing they look too gaudy.
But Arrow Cottage boasts many eyecatching plants…like the Gentiana Lagodechiana and the Bergamot variety called Cambridge Scarlet.
These are balanced by the gentler hues of shrubby potentillas…and generous planting of white blooms.
Female speaker
They like bright splashes of colour even though others may think it's a bit hectic.
Voice over
Thousands of people visit the Arrow Cottage every year…many return regularly to see how the garden rooms change over the seasons.
And for the Hattatts there's always a new challenge:
Female speaker
It's hard work but there's always the thought that next year the garden will be even better.
Voice over
Music.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Rifkind warns of Bosnian action
The Defence Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, has warned that NATO air strikes in Bosnia could be imminent.
Benefits changes condemned
Labour has condemned proposals to change the state benefits system which would see child benefit payments being replaced by child tax allowances.
Calls for deportation review
The Metropolitan Police Commissioner, Paul Condon, has called for a review of deportation procedures following the death of a Jamaican woman after a deportation order was served.
Three police officers have been suspended.
FTSE up 3
The hundred shares index closed up three point three at twenty-nine, forty-five exactly.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, fifty-seven.
The remains of hundreds of woolly mammoths from the Ice Agehave been found on a site which was to be turned into a rubbish dump.
The discovery settles a debate over the sort of environment they lived in.
It shows they could exist in WARM as well as COLD climates.
JESSICA FOWLE/Stanton Harcourt
KATE SCOTT/Oxford University
Until now historians believed that the woolly mammoths of that time could only survive in freezing conditions.
But the discovery of the remains of hundreds, even thousands, of the huge animals in the river bed of the Thames has changed all that.
Vegetation, like this tree found in the same area, suggests that the mammoths were existing in a climate at least a couple of degrees warmer than southern Britain has now.
Female speaker
People think of mammoths trudging through arctic wastelands.
At this site it's quite clear they were living in a prtly wooded area in quite a warm environment.
Voice over
It's an important achievement for volunteers who've flown all the way to Oxfordshire from America to be part of this Earthwatch project.
Female speaker
We have to know who was here before us to figure out ourselves better.
Female speaker
With the next trowel-full I'm going to find a new species and I keep hoping they'll name it after me.
Voice over
The volunteers may find themselves at the centre of an even more important discovery.
Stone tools and weapons have been found on the site suggesting there could be a human encampment nearby.
Female speaker
If we found some human remains it would be an extraordinarily important site.
Voice over
The RAF's been lending a hand helping to lift a 9 foot curly mammoth trunk from the ground.
And there's been cooperation from the site's owners too.
They've agreed to postpone development of a rubbish dump for at least 10 years.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, will it be third time lucky for Big Syd?
Gloucestershire's top bowler makes another comeback.
Plus, the view from the bridge.
Not one…but TEN special gardens.
Welcome back: Gloucestershire and England fast bowler David’ Syd’Lawrence made another comeback today after twice shattering his left knee.
Wesley Smith
It was an emotional return, playing in his own benefit match with some of the sport's biggest names.
SIMON GARRETT/Cheltenham
DAVID’ SYD’LAWRENCE/Gloucestershire and England
JACK RUSSELL/Gloucestershire and England
MALCOLM MARSHALL/West Indies
DENIS LILLEE/Australia
It was the sight Gloucestershire fans thought they'd never see again — Syd Lawrence advancing purposefully down the wicket at Cheltenham.
His twice broken kneecap still bears the scars — for Lawrence today was the test he's been waiting for.
Male speaker
I've been bowling in the nets for the last two weeks.
It's responded well without too much swelling.I'm looking forward to it but how I feel tomorrow is the real test
Voice over
The team sheets read like a chapter from Wisden's great cricketers.
Names like Kalicharan, Lamb, Greenidge — all here to pay tribute to a battling comeback
Male speaker
Probably one of the most horrific things I remember on a cricket field.
It's difficult to describe the sound the kneecap made — it was like banging two cricket bats together
Male speaker
Syd's a big strong lad what happened was unforatunate.
Hopefully he can recover and regain his test place and give it his best shot.
At his best he's awesome
Male speaker
What I love about Syd is he's a great trier.
He never gives in and that's half the battle in fast bowling.
Fit and well he'd make a lot of difference to the England side
Voice over
The boundaries came thick and fast for Lawrence's side — but it was the number seven batsman the crowd wanted to see.
Hit second ball made four — the fielders showing the minimum inclination to intercept it.
Not everyone was absorbed with play — most were looking for a sign that Syd was back
Male speaker
He's probably the only man that can come back from that.
I suppose he'll take it easy now and try to strengthen up for the winter
Male speaker
I don't think he'll ever get back to full blast…
I hope so but I don't think so
Voice over
After six overs Lawrence says he felt good
Male speaker
It feels fine, great.
A lot of people wrote me off too early but I feel good
Voice over
But there's still a lot of stiff training and stern testing to follow before the big Lawrence comeback is complete
Brewers have been competing for the title of Best British Beer at the industry's own version of the Oscars.
More than three hundred breweries from all over Europe showed off their finest in front of some familiar faces.
KATE GARRAWAY/London
BOB JONES/Judge
TONY CHAPMAN/Brakspears of Henley
COLIN DEXTER/Author
Male speaker
We start by looking at the colour of the beer and then we try the smell.
It should be nice and fruity.
Voice over
More than three hundred beers from across Britain and eighty from the Continent are here.
The region's breweries competed for the prize of Best Bitter.
None of them won but they still considered the day a victory.
Male speaker
We get a lot of publicity out of it.
If people come from all over the country to try our beers its good for us.
Voice over
For others it was just a great day out…a chance to sample a famous brew and spot some familiar faces like Colin Dexter, creator of TV's Inspector Morse.
Male speaker
The organisers saw Morse drinking beer all the time on television and thought even if I didn't know anything about the quality of beer I must be a quantity man.
Voice over
The festival is opening to the public until the end of the week but if you are not an ale fan its probably best to give it a miss.
The organisers say this is one time people really are here for the beer.
A man has foiled a raid at his local filling station despite being threatened with a hammer.
The gang fled, but police say although the man was brave to tackle them, they can't encourage others to do the same.
ROBIN POWELL/Woodmancote
Det Con MALCOLM WOOD/Gloucestershire Police
JOHN SMALLWOOD/Villager
LYN WOODS/Owner of Stolen Car
SHARPNESS/Gloucestershire
Voice over
The raid took place at the Elf service station at Woodmancote near Dursley.
3 men in balaclavas entered the garage shop by smashing a glass door panel, and were loading a dustbin with cigarettes when they were disturbed by a man in his thirties.
They threatened him with a claw hammer, but he stood his ground, and the gang fled in 2 stolen cars.
As they drove off he threw a concrete block at each car in turn, smashing the rear window of one, cracking the windscreen of the other.
The man, who lives locally, won't be identified.
The police admire his courage but they'd rather he'd dialed 999.
But villagers say they've had enough.
Earlier the same gang had tried to ram-raid the Co-Op in Sharpness.
Again they were foiled — this time by a security cage lining the shop window.
Anyone with information is asked to contact Dursley Police.
It's just been announced that three hundred and thirty workers are to lose their jobs at an oil and gas extraction equipment factory.
Cooper Oil Tools are cutting production at the plant in Woodchester 
WOODCHESTER/Gloucestershire
People living in a picturesque village say it's become a rat run for lorries trying to avoid crossing the Severn Bridge.
They're blaming a new system of tolls which means drivers only have to pay going one way.
KEN GOODWIN/Newnham on Severn
NEVILLE NELDER/Gloucestershire County Council
BARBARA ALLSOPP/Newhnam Parish Council
DAVID FOICE/Mgr
He says that they damage roads — the tolls must be reasonably priced in order to stop drivers using rat runs.
Surveys carried out by the council and school children showq a marked increase in traffic over the last year.
In a twelve hour period the number of lorries has increased by over two hundred — and it's similar with commercial vans.
The reason?
Tolls across the bridge operate only going into Wales.
So rather than pay nine pounds ninety pence it's claimed that many lorry drivers take a detour through gloucester, then heading back down the A48 through Newhnam.
He says that it would cost him more money if he went the other way.
She says that they are causing damage and disruption.
The managers of the severn bridge deny one way tolls are causing extra traffic.
He says that there may be a few who go the long way around, but not many.
A by pass for Newhnam seems unlikely, residents are hoping that time saved by the new second crossing might entice drivers back onto the motorway.
Bee keepers say a new ban on moving hives may cost them thousands of pounds.
The Government wants to stop the spread of a parasite which is killing bees in their millions.But some keepers say the controls are too strict.
GARETH FURBY/Banbury
MIKE HARRIS/Beekeeper
BOB SIMS/Beekeepers' Association
Mike Harris keeps more than six million bees in a hundred and twenty hives.
At this time of year he would normally move his hives north to the Derbyshire peak district, to take advantage of the flowering heather.
But now he's not allowed to move North of Oxfordshire.
The Government wants to control the spread of the varroa mite, a parasite which can weaken and eventually kill bees.
Mike will now have to feed his hives with a specially prepared solution of sugar and water.
He says everyone in the county will have to feed syrup.
The heather would have kept the bees going throughout the winter.
Beekepers in Oxfordshire believe the county is still free of the Varroa mite.
But they believe it's only a matter of time before the disease crosses the county boundary.
He says its in Berkshire and other neighbouring counties.
They'll find it in Oxfordshire in the autumn.
The answer, say the Oxforshire beekeepers, is to learn to live with the disease.
On the continent its common.
But honey yeilds are still high.
In the meantime, Mike Harris will miss out on this years batch of heather honey.
And the tons of sugar needed to feed his bees will cost him several thousand pounds.
He says the Government should help out with the extra cost.
Tonight the Ministry of Agriculture said it sympathised with the bee keepers, but compensation wouldn't be paid.
Its main priority was to control the disease.
In Central News tonight,
What about us?
The family on benefit who fear for their future.
Fined, the Mexican chief who brought his dog into Britain.
And a secret unravelled…the bones that solve the mystery of the Ice Age.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
STEPHANIE REEVE/Banbury
MANDY GRASSIE/Mother
RACHEL GOVER/Welfare Rights Worker
DONALD DEWAR MP/Shadow Social Security Secretary
The Grassie family receive one hundred and twenty four pounds a week in income support, and a further forty two pounds in child benefit, making a total of one hundred and sixty six pounds.
The loss of child benefit would cut their income by twenty five percent.
The No Turning Back group say families in genuine need like the Grassies would be compensated in other ways, but Mrs Grassie isn't convinced.
She says that its almost impossible to live on state benefits at the moment and to cut them would be criminal.
Welfare workers are also concerned about how such radical changes would affect families like the Grassie's.
The Labour party agree that changes will have to be made in the benefit system, but say that today's proposals are not the answer.
He says we're going toward a two tier system and those dependant on the state are seen as failures.
It's thoroughly unpleasant.
But while the arguments continue in Westminster, families such as the Grassies's are hoping the reforms will make it easier rather than harder to make ends meet.
BARRY LEGGE MP/Con Milton Keynes SW
Mr. Legge, isn't any change going to see the needy worse off?
(Barry Legge) No, I think it'll be quite the reverse, at the moment we have a benefits system that stretches right across the spectrum, and there are many people receiving benefits at the moment that don't really need them.
(Presenter)
But how do you decide who is needy and who isn't?
(Legge)
Well, we already do that at the moment, trying to assess a myriad of individual benefits with people filling up forms and sending them all over the country.
Our basic aim is to have a whole person benefits structure whereby one's got one benefit with various elements in it which take account of the individuals needs.
(Presenter) Many elderly people have paid into pensions etc for years, isn't it their right to have all the benefits they're entitled to?
(Legge) Yes, that's absolutely right and there will be no change for those elderly people who have paid into the benefits system.
(Presenter) Some don't perceive it that way and say it could be political suicide for the Conservatives (Legge)
Not at all.
All the political parties have accepted the fact that social security has got to change we're spending over a third of public spending on social security and each political party is reviewing it to find way of making it more effective and to make saving.
We must leave it there, Barry Legge thank you very much indeed for joining us, thank you.
A Mexican chief has been fined three hundred and fifty pounds after bringing a dog into the country illegally.
He spent a night in police cells after being arrested while on an international tour.
But he told magistrates the dog is sacred to Mexicans and he didn't know he needed an import licence.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
XOKONOSHETL GOMORRO/Mexican Chief
GRAHAM JONES/Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
Xokonoshetl Gomorro gets his possessions back after a night in police cells.
The Mexican chief is on an international tour with 40 members of his tribe which peformed last night in Oxford.
But this dog, known as a Mexican hairless, landed him in court when trading standards officers in Felixstowe discovered it had been brought in without a licence.
Thinking Senor Gomorro was about to leave the country without returning to Suffolk they got in touch with colleagues in Oxfordshire.
The chief was arrested and held overnight…where he was reminded of the plight of his ancestors.
He says if I just brought a dog then I can figure out how it was before with our ancestors, that without anything they were imprisoned.
It was terrible, I couldn't sleep.
The case was brought by Oxfordshire county council on evidence from Felixstowe but trading standards don't think the cross-country pursuit was an over-reaction.
He says if there'as any possibility of rabies getting into the country it's a very serious matter.
We need to have the deterrent effect this action would have.
If there was any other way without keeping Mr Gomorro in the cells we would have done so.
Senor Gomorro was fined 350 pounds and told that illegally importing an animal is a serious offence.
He told magistrates to Aztecs the dog is sacred and ceremonial and he simply didn't know he needed a licence.
There's been a sharp increase in so called distraction burglaries — old people living on their own are the main victims.
The burglars, often children, keep their victim talking at the front door while an accomplice gets into the house and grabs what he can.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM
PHYLLIS/Burglary Victim
Det Sgt BARBARA HARRISON/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
They look innocent enough.
A knock on the door — an old lady living alone.
But in the time it takes these children to ask for a drink of water an accomplice has slipped in the back and helped himself.
The whole operation has taken just sixty seconds.
This was just a reconstruction — but answering the door to a stranger in this way cost phylis her seven hundred pounds life savings:
She says that he pushed past her and said he'd lost somthing in her garden.
He then stole her savings.
The police file on distraction burglaries in Gloucestershire is bulging — twenty cases in the last month alone, with an increase when schools broke up.
She says they use a variety of excuses — most of which involve keeping the victim talking at the door.
The police are warning people who live on their own not to trust anyone who turns up at their door, unless they can prove who they are:
She says even if they look angelic, they could still be thieves.
She says it's terrible that people could do this to pensioners.
The police are also urging people who keep money at home to have it banked for safety — they want to make sure that people like phylis don't lose cash that took years to save in just a few short seconds.
A businessman in the Forest of Dean says wandering sheep are fouling his factory and putting off potential customers.
He wants the sheep to be kept out of the industrial estate.
Richard Barnett reports.
CINDERFORD/Gloucestershire
ROGER SANDERSON/Businessman
CYRIL THOMAS/Commoners Association
Voice over
It's early morning on the Forest Vale industrial estate in Cinderford, and company boss Roger Sanderson starts work outside his plastic mouldings factory.But while other businessmen are checking their ansaphones and fax machines, he's faced with swilling down sheep droppings left by the flocks that roam the estate.It's a task that has to be repeated several times a day, and Mr Sanderson has had enough.:
Male speaker
It's filthy around the factory.And when visitors come they often step in the sheep droppings.
Voice over
Roger Sanderson wants the Forest of Dean Commoners Association…a grouping of sheep farmers…to keep better control of their animals so they don't stray onto the industrial estate and roads.The right to graze the Forest of Dean dates back thousands of years, and it's jealously guarded by the commoners.They say its up to the businessmen to fence the sheep out if they're proving troublesome:
Male speaker
Anyone moving onto common land should fence the livestock out if they have a problem.
Voice over
As the argument goes on, Roger Sanderson says the time he spends cleaning up instead of working in his factory is money down the drain.
Fire has damaged a disused hotel at Abingdon in Oxfordshire.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
It's thought the fire may have been started by squatters in the hotel who were trying to keep themselves warm.
No one was hurt.
A local authority has been found guilty of maladministration for not telling residents before giving planning permission for floodlights at a rugby stadium.
TUFFLEY/Gloucester
A report by the Local Government Ombudsman says that residents living near the Memorial Ground at Tuffley should have been warned by Gloucester City Council about the possible nuisance the glare might cause them.
The Council has called an emergency meeting to decide what action to take.
Lorries are to be banned from the centre of a Cotswold market town.
Residents first called for a ban four years ago, claiming that heavy vehicles were ruining their quality of life.
Now, they've finally got their way.
Robin Powell reports 
CHIPPING CAMPDEN/Gloucestershire
BOB LUCK/Gloucestershire County Council
Lt Col GERALD FURTADO/North Cotswold Councillor
Voice over
Chipping Campden — in all respects but one an unspoilt town on the edge of the Cotswolds.
Its only scourge — heavy lorries — rumbling through its streets, polluting the environment and damaging historic buildings.
The county council's already provided an advisory route directing lorries away from the town centre — now it's going one step further, banning all vehicles weighing more than seven and a half tonnes.
The council grew so tired of lorries cutting this corner short and hitting the casement of the listed building next to it that it had to build a specially high kerb.
For councillor Gerald Furtado, a veteran campaigner for the lorry ban, it's just one of the trouble-spots.
Now Mr Furtado wants similar bans along the B-Four-Six-Three-Two, relieving the neighbouring villages of Willersey, Weston-sub-Edge and Mickleton.
The Chipping Campden ban comes into effect in the autumn — lorry drivers doing regular business in the town have until then to apply for special permits.
All other lorries will have to steer clear of streets originally designed for a more traditional form of transport.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
PAT ALEXANDER/Lion Publishing
ADAM STEINHOUSE/Friend
Voice over
The Thai airbus came down last Friday 14 miles north of the Nepalese capital Kathmandu.
The plane was completely destroyed when it hit a mountain in bad weather as it was trying to land.
A search of the area is still going on, but it's thought that all 99 passengers and fourteen crew were killed.
Among them were thirty three year old Bill Raeper, and twenty eight year old Martin Hoftun, both writers from Oxford.
They were on their way to Kathmandu to research a book on Nepal.
Bill Raeper was well known in literary circles in Oxford.
He's written a number of books, including biographies and children's books.
His publisher says his death is a great waste.
Martin Hoftun was a postgraduate history student at Wadham college.
He was a quadraplegic, confined to a wheelchair, but this didn't stop him travelling all over the world.
The flag at Wadham college was at half mast today as a mark of respect for the two men.
Farmers have attacked new legislation which will ban stubble burning.
They say it will force them to grow crops that aren't needed simply because they can't burn the waste from more useful crops.
Liz Hannam reports.
POLICE VIDEO
1990/DRAYTON/Oxfordshire
ROBIN GROOM/Wiltshire Fire Service
DAVID JENKINSON/Farmer
Voice over
It was fires like this one at South Marston near Swindon which made legislaton on stubble burning a necessity.
Police estimate the smoke spread across two hundred square miles.
And two years ago this thirty-one car pile-up at Drayton in Oxfordshire was caused by smoke from stubble burning.
It creates enormous problems for the emergency services.
From next year stubble burning will be banned.
But critics of the new legislation say its too broad.
It hits farmers of Linseed particularly hard.
David Jenkinson has a two thousand acre farm near Cirencester.
He says the fibrous nature of Linseed makes it impossible to plough back into the soil.
The problem is particularly acute, he says, for farmers in the Cotswolds.
If the law isn't amended Mr Jenkinson fears that the familar sight of Linseed in flower will become a rarity.
The Cotwolds is an important test centre for new varieties of Linseed.
The crop itself is used in the manufacture of paints, putties and furniture.
It's even being tested in Canada as an oil which helps prevent cancer.
It's one of the few crops the European Community isn't growing enough of.
The E-C wants to increase production by fifty per cent.
Mr Jenkinson believes controlled burning wouldn't harm the environment
The Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food says it's aware of the problem for Linseed farmers and will be conducting tests in September to see how it can be disposed of more effectively.
But it will not allow farmers to burn Linseed under any circumstances.
Police have issued an artist's impression of a man wanted for two attacks on women in Oxford.
OXFORD
A governor of a school for disturbed children has been accused of importing obscene magazines.
Peter Righton, a leading authority on the treatment of children, is vice chairman of the governors of 
TODDINGTON/Gloucestershire
Three and a half million mountain bikes have been sold in Britain over the past four years.
Designed for use off-road, their increasing numbers have brought them into conflict with ramblers and other groups using the countryside.
Now, steps are being taken to try to accommodate everyone.
Debbie Kelly reports.
FOREST OF DEAN Gloucestershire
NICK GILES Cyclist
SANDIE HOWELLS Cyclist
COLIN PALMER British Mountain Bike Federation
JOHN ANDERSON District Forester
HILARY CARPENTER Pedalabikeaway
Voice over
It may not be the most relaxing way to enjoy the countryside, but thousands are addicted to one of Britain's fastest growing sports.
Male speaker
It is a different sort of enjoyment because you get so much variety.
If you are riding on the road you just see different towns, but in the forest there is such variety, that an hour ride becomes what you want it to be.
Female speaker
You get fitter as you go along.
It just gives you a buzz.
You don't appreciate when you live here all your life, what there is in the forest.
Voice over
But the new sport means that areas once only accessible by foot, are now on the cyclists route and as walkers and horse riders now vye with the bikers for the limited open space.
Cyclists can use any of Britain's 20,000 miles of bridleways and certain tracks, but they're banned from the 100,000 miles of footpaths which causes tension.
Male speaker
We are bound to see certain hot spots where the mixing of large numbers of bikes and large numbers of walkers is not tenable and that is where some form of management is necessary.
Voice over
And this is exactly what's happening in the Forest of Dean in Gloucestershire, where the Forestry Commission is positively encouraging cycling.
Male speaker
People can see forests and quietly enjoy it and not damage it.
Obviously there has to be guidelines but we find cycling very compatible with quiet enjoyment of the forest.
Voice over
Cyclists and the Forestry Commission have come up with a special scheme, policed by rangers on mountgain bikes, cyclists are allowed anywhere in the forest, apart from 3 nature reserves which are out of bounds and families as well, as the more energetic are catered for with an 11 mile trail along disused railway tracks.
Female speaker
We get a lot of people who have not cycled for years, they cycle tentatively for an hour, but then come back again to cycle the whole trail.
Voice over
As an extra safeguard, the Commission has agreed a code of conduct for cyclists.
Male speaker
It is commonsense really.
Male speaker
If you see cycling as a problem and you don't want to know, I think you are being defeatist.
We are coming to terms with a major sport which is of great interest to a great number of people.
Voice over
With Britain's roads becoming more crowded and dangerous, cyclists are looking to escape to the countryside in the Forest of Dean.
They believe they've produced the blue print for a positive cycling future.
Woman wounded by attack at grandchild's funeral
The grandmother of a child killed in violence in Sarajevo may need her arm amputated after a mortar bomb attack at the child's funeral.
Rail complaints reach record high
A report claims that complaints about Britain's rail services have quadrupled in the past decade to reach a record high.
Baby deaths close ward
A ward at Guy's Hospital in London has been closed following the deaths of two babies who may have been infected by a bug there.
Plans to privatise Strangeways
Plans have been announced to try to privatise Strangeways Prison which was extensively damaged in riots two years ago.
Queen Mother celebrates 92nd birthday
The Queen Mother has been celebrating her ninety-second birthday with a walkabout to meet more than a thousand well-wishers who had gathered outside Clarence House.
FTSE down 12
The hundred shares index closed down twelve point seven at twenty-four, o seven point five.
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety-two and down at two marks, eighty-three.
(ad lib)
Canoeists and boaters who use the last freely navigable river in England could soon need a licence before getting on the water.
Proposals have been put forward to control use of the river.
But some boatmen fear the new regulations could destroy their livelihoods.
Simon Garrett reports 
SYMONDS YAT/Gloucestershire
ANDY NEALE/Wye Project Officer
TONY GARDINER/Wye Boatman
PAUL HOWELLS/Wyedean Canoe Centre
Voice over
The River Wye was first proclaimed a public right of way by King Edward the Confessor nine hundred years ago.
Since that time other rivers have become regulated.
Now the Wye's the only major river in England where anyone can bring a boat and put it on the water without any form of licence.
A report's been commissioned by the National Rivers Authority and carried out by a group of local councils.
It calls for registration of boats and more management of the river to safeguard it
Male speaker
Because there's been a dramatic increase in traffic in recent years we need to assess the impact on the river's special environment.
There are sometimes conflicts of interest, like the obvious one between navigation and angling
Voice over
That traditional battle between fishermen and boatmen makes many waves on the river.
The boatmen fear they'll be restricted as the report suggests to satisfy the wealthy owners of fishing rights
Male speaker
It's very negative — there's little to say navigation will be improved.
They want revenue from us but there's nothing about further opening up the river
Male speaker
They'll just spoil the river if they demand licences — lots of groups who use the river won't be able to pay.
I wouldn't like to say what the impact will be on my business
Voice over
The report's authors say they want the best for everyone
Male speaker
The Wye is used for a whole range of activities including people who just want to walk the banks or go for picnics.
We want them all to take place without conflicting
Voice over
Comments are now being sought from interested parties on the rivers future direction
Recovering mental patients have been learning to deal with the world outside by taking canal cruises…although there's hard work involved as well.
They've been restoring a battered old narrowboat.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
JUSTIN SATCHELL/Project Manager
JANICE MILES/Community Healthcare Trust
Voice over
You could easily believe Beryl the Narrowboat is a rotting hulk…it's certainly the impression she gives moored by the Canalside in Aylesbury.
But Beryl is an ugly duckling rapidly turning into a beautiful swan…all through the hard work of recovering mental patients.
Male speaker
They've been involved at every stage through carpentry, electrical and painting work through to its present state
Voice over
One side of Beryl's been left as it was to show the difference between before and after.
About a dozen mental patients going through rehabilitation in Aylesbury have been working on the boat which was taken on by the Dandelion Trust.
The idea is to give a taste of life outside for mental patients who may have been inside institutions for up to twenty years.
Female speaker
It's of tremedous valuer because it give patients and clients a chance to do things they wouildn't otherwise do
Voice over
There's still plenty of work left to do on Beryl and the organisers are hoping they'll be able to keep the project going after the renovation is complete.
But they need funds, the Dandelion Trust is trying to raise four thousand pounds a year to keep it going.
Now news of live football coming up on Central in the new season.
Matches from the First Division will be shown regularly on Sunday afternoons.
And there's a different partner for Jimmy Greaves in soccer's newest double-act.
Chris Moore reports.
JIMMY GREAVES
JOHN SILLETT
TONY FRANCIS
Voice over
John Sillett who returned to manage Hereford United for one season only last year, and best known as Coventry City's F A cupwinning manager — is Central's new signing for the new season.
He replaces Ian St John as Jimmy Greaves sidekick analysing the region's best action from the first division on The Central Match LIVE.
Its a reunion of two men who last teamed up at Chelsea more than a few years ago.
So now the dynamic Duo is Greavsie and Snoz.
’ There are times you don't agree in football.
I'm sure we'll disagree on manythings.
Thats when one can be the straight man and the other can have a go at him.’
’ Can you promise you won't be mincing your words?’
’ No way — we'll tell the truth when its needed to be told.’
Tony Francis returns to the Central Sports team to present the Sunday programme.
’ There's nothing better than seeing you local teams.
Even if you support Birmingham you want to see whats happening down the street.
Its got a regional feel.’
Sunday's new LIVE action is an addition to our sports output.
Central Sports Special will continue on wednesday nights — with Goals Extra every Saturday teatime.
Now cricket and news of the latest county championship matches.
At Worksop Gloucestershire were put in to bat by Nottinghamshire and are now (239 for 6) two hundred and thirty nine for six, Athey knocking up a hundred and thirty two.
Meanwhile Worcestershire elected to bat at New Road and are (266 for 7) two hundred and sixty six for seven.
And at Chelmsford Northants are batting after winning the toss against Essex.
They're (326 for 5) three hundred and twenty six for five after ninety five overs.
Welcome back:This Sunday marks the thirtieth anniversary of the Great Train Robbery, one of the most notorious crimes in British history.
Wesley Smith
It was big news THEN, and is STILL making headlines.
Tonight, in a special report, we turn back the clock to 1963.
1963/MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Bridego Bridge
MALCOLM FEWTRELL/Former Chief
IVOR LEONARD/Photographer
BILL TEAR/Trial Spectator
BUSTER EDWARDS/Great Train Robber
Voice over
They shocked the country, they shocked the world.
Thirty years ago this week a gang of audacious, daring robbers held up the London to Glasgow mail train and made off with over two and a half million pounds.
In today's money it would be about thirty five million.
And today it's as hard to believe it happened as it was thirty years ago.
Male speaker
I don't think it could be done today but there was a lamentable lack of security because nobody thought this sort of thing could happen
Voice over
The Great Train Robbery still lives in the public imagination, and the drama still goes on.
Two of them escaped prison, and Ronnie Biggs is still at large in Rio De Janeiro.
Male speaker
There's no money left from the robbery, that went years ago.
I have a sketchy lifestyle because I can't work and I must make a living the best way I can
Voice over
The raid had been meticulously planned and choreographed for months.
Two London gangs had joined forces to stop the train at Sear's Crossing in Buckinghamshire by rigging the signals.
At ten past three in the morning they coshed driver Jack Mills, and then uncoupled the engine and lead carriage in a manouvre they'd practiced at Rail marshalling yards in London.
They had to revive driver Mills to take the train a mile down the track to Bridego Bridge.
There they unloaded their loot into waiting landrovers and lorries.
They told the remaining post office staff not to raise the alarm for another thirty minutes.
Ivor Leonard was the first pressman on the scene.
Male speaker
we had no idea how big the story was to become, it started off as just a robbery and just got bigger and bigger in the following weeks
Voice over
The gang had used pickaxe handles, army style ballaclava hats, and stocking masks, all of which are on display at the Thames Valley Police Museum at Sulhamstead.
It was recovered from Leatherslade Farm near Brill where the gang had holed up after the raid…just twenty eight miles from the scene.
That was their second mistake.
They thought they were untouchable there.
They'd laid in for a siege with dozens of eggs, cans of luncheon meat, and tea.
They relaxed as they counted the money into seventeen bundles of a hundred and fifty thousand, and some of them left their fingerprints.
Male speaker
That was their undoing.
They left Leatherslade Farm in a panic.
They'd planned to stay there a long time and they left fingerprints all over the place
Voice over
The gang had played monopoly as they wiled away the hours, perhaps dreaming of Park Lane and Mayfair.
Instead their carelessness led them to Jail.
Male speaker
the worst aspect of Leatherslade farm was that so many took their gloves off.
That's illustrated by the fact that four people who kept them on did not get caught
Voice over
Leatherslade Farm was a treasure chest of clues for the detectives.
Everyone of the gang was known to the police and the first arrests came within a few days:
Male speaker
the first arrests were in Bournemouth.
Two of them had gone to Oxford and then Bournemouth.
On the way they bought three second hand cars which was odd because only one of them could drive
Voice over
Gradually the gang was rounded up, and nine were put on trial in Aylesbury.
Bill Tear was there for every day of the three week hearing.
Male speaker
Wilson looked as if you'd be happy to have him in your home.
James the racing car driver looked good as well.
The really evil looking one was Gordon Goody
Voice over
The crime had stunned the world.
Now the prison sentences would do the same.
Most of them got thirty years.
The judge said he would never expect to see another crime like it.
Bruce Reynolds and Buster Edwards were eventually senetnced after being on the run in Mexico.
Jimmy White laid low in Britain and was finally caught in 1966.
Buster Edwards now runs a Flower stall outside Waterloo Station.
Male speaker
if you're a thief you are going to get nicked sometime you can't afford to have regrets
Voice over
Ronnie Biggs harks back to a bygone age.
Male speaker
I regret that the good old times of cops and robbers are over.
Then it was a bit like Robin Hood planning a raid in Sherwood Forest
Voice over
Malcolm Fewtrell has his feet more firmly on the ground.
Male speaker
if anybody had seen the driver Jack Mills in the weeks after the robbery, as I did, they would have no admiration for these people
Voice over
Thirty years on the robbery still fires the imagination.
But some might care to reflect that driver Jack Mills died in 1970 a broken man.
Charlie Wilson died in 1988 in a drugs dealing dispute.
It was the crime of the century, but most of them paid dearly for it.
Traders who've gone out of business in a showpiece shopping complex are suing the developers for damages.
They're claiming almost half a million pounds in compensation, plus extra damages because bailiffs were sent into their shops.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
ALISON CASTREY/Legal Advisor
VALERIE CAPPER/'Femme Seule'
ROGER PITMAN/Formerly 'Rebajaz'
DEBBIE PITMAN/Formerly 'Rebajaz'
MAVIS LARKHAM/Formerly 'Ruffles'
British Waterways Film
CATHERINE ALEXANDER/Pearce Developments
Traders say they were promised that Merchants Quay would be at the centre of a thriving complex of shops, restaurants and homes, but now they're surrounded by offices, and cut off from customers.
Sending in bailiffs was the last straw.
One shop visited by the bailiffs, and still in business, blames a huge drop in predicted turnover.
Others have since closed, pushing some owners onto the dole.
Gloucester Docks was a thriving port until the 1960's, when it went into decline as traffic moved to the motorways.
Developers began work in the 1980's, and opened Merchants Quay 3 years ago.
They've been surprised by today's legal moves.
A £90,000 claim for damages for the use of bailiffs in the shopping complex will be heard in the High Court.
A woman who's been writing to a convicted killer facing the gas chamber in America is to visit him on Death Row.
For the past year Maureen Timmins has been corresponding with him in San Quentin jail where he's waiting execution for the murder of his pregnant wife.
Maureen is convinced he's innocent, and is going to America to campaign for a retrial.
RICHARD BARNETT/Parkend
MAUREEN TIMMINS/Prison Campaigner
Female speaker
He doesn't want to be executed and for his children to think he's a murderer.
He's innocent and wants to prove it.
Voice over
Today another letter from Michael Hamilton dropped onto the mat…the 137th this year.
He gets no visitors, and so the letters to Maureen are a lifeline:
ACT
Writing to US prisons is a family affair.
Maureen's daughter Amanda also has pen pals in American jails.
Female speaker
People think we're mad writing to prisoners.
But some of them were just in the wrong place at the wrong time.
And that's no reason not to communicate with them.
Voice over
Maureen leaves for San Quentin early next month.
She hopes soon after her penpal will be given a second chance to prove his innocence and escape the gas chamber.
Counterfeit designer clothes seized by trading standards officers are being sent to Romania.
Hundreds of T-shirts, jackets and trainers which would normally have been destroyed will now be put to good use in orphanages there.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
PAUL GALLAND/Gloucestershire Trading Standards
BILL NEWTON/Romanian Appeal Organiser
The clothes are being taken to Romania by an ex-trading standards officer.
Since retiring, Bill Newton has helped run a charity in support of Romanians…particularly the children.
Bill's visited the country several times.
His photographs show how useful the clothes and trainers will be.
The big name companies whose clothes were forged have given Gloucestershire's trading standards officers their full support.
The clothes will be sent to Romania in September.
Children there won't care if they're counterfeit.
They'll just be glad for some comfort.
(WES ad lib)(Anne next) Still to come on Central News.
The Crime of the Century.
Thirty years since The Great Train Robbery.
Plus, the cow that flies…but not everybody's over the moon…
In Central News tonight,
Fraud inquiry.Drivers and homeowners may not be insured.
Letter to Death Row.
The mission of mercy to a US jail.
And the crime that shocked the world.
Whatever happened to the Train Robbers?
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The fraud squad has been called in to investigate the activities of John Allen insurance.
Police fear too that many homeowners could also be left with no protection if they're burgled.
GARETH FURBY/Aylesbury
DOUGLAS GRICE/Customer
GUY SUTTON/Insurance Broker
CLIVE PROBITTS/Accountant
MARK TOBIN/Customer
MARK BISHOP/Insurers' Association
Voice over
Douglas Grice paid a hundred and thirty nine pounds to insure his car.
But the company which took his money just two months ago has now closed down.
The police are now investigating a possible fraud.
They're worried cash paid to the brokers hasn't been passed on to the insurance companies.
And at the moment for all Douglas Grice knows his insurance policy documents are worthless.
He says if he has a crash he won't know if he's going to have to pay out or the insurance company.
Other people are contacting alternative insurance brokers in Aylesbury to try to find out if their policies are still valid.
He says some people haven't got the cover they've paid for.
Others may have to pay twice for one lot of insurance.
The police don't yet know how many people are affected…but neighbouring businesses say the office was busy until the moment it suddenly closed down.
He says they moved the office equipment out into vehicles.
Then a sign went up saying the business had transferred.
The police are advising everyone who's worried to contact their insurance company direct.
Bricklayer Mark Tobin has already done so…and his policy is still valid.
He says he pays direct to his insurance company so that's ok, but he doesn't know how anyone else stands.
He says everyone must look carefully at their cover notes and receipts and contact the insurers
Tonight there was no trace of the owners at the Aylesbury office.
Detectives have already taken away mail and company papers.
Defence and Aerospace contractors Smiths Industries have announced another round of redundancies.
BISHOPS CLEEVE
Fifty four jobs are to go at their plant in Bishops Cleeve near Cheltenham.
The company is blaming a downturn in orders.
The latest redundancies bring the total number of job losses at the factory to thirteen hundred, in less than three years.
Meanwhile, hundreds more job losses have been announced in an area which has already suffered heavily from the recession.
Two engineering firms within a couple of miles of each other are making the cuts, but their MP insists their chances of finding new jobs are good 
SIMON GARRETT/Woodchester
GILES DERRETT/Cooper Oils
GRAHAM FLETCHER/Stroud District Council
DERRICK JEFFERIES/Works Convenor
ROGER KNAPMAN MP/Con Stroud
Over a hundred years ago they started making brass taps in the factory which is now Cooper Oils of Nailsworth.
Now it's oil platform equipment.
The names of family firms like Newman Hender and Macevoy were mainstays of Stroud's crucial engineering industry.
Now they're to close because the American owners can make more money transferring production to Leeds shedding 330 jobs.
Male speaker
Our masters have had to size up the capacity they have at different plants and it made more sense to move production to Leeds
Voice over
Other key employers have suffered too.
Bentley pianos…also of Woodchester finally closed this year jending a similarly long tradition.
Benson's at Brimscombe have transferred their production to the third world.
And today Fluid transfer at Nailsworth cut seventeen staff…also blaming the recession.
Cooper's closure is the biggest nail yet in a well hammered coffin
Male speaker
This is the second or third closure announced in recent times — it'll have a major impact.
It's not just 300 people at Cooper but the knock-on effect to suppliers, the post office and the pub down the road — they're all effected
Voice over
Staff at Cooper are pessimistic
Male speaker
We've had people working excessive hours to meet deadlines and we've been profitable.
We've given them no bother as far the union is concerned — they've had a free hand and we feel severely let down
Male speaker
It's a joke, mate, it's a joke.
The only plant in the UK making a profit
Male speaker
There'll be no chance for me getting a job.
I'm 51.
Not round here.
Voice over
But the town's MP says recovery means they have excellent prospects of new work
Male speaker
Very good indeed.
The firm's given us notice of this.
The economy is poised for take-off and the figures in Stroud over the last few months but I fully understand the fears of the workers and their families
Voice over
Cooper Oils are phasing the shutdown…the site will be emptied in just under two years.
Nobody's expecting a big queue of potential purchasers
Plum growers have had their worst crop for more than twenty years.
They say bad weather in the Spring has left plum trees bare.
Inevitably that means higher prices in the shops.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Blakeney
KENNETH BABER/Fruit Grower
BLAISDON/Gloucestershire
MARY WALTON/Plum Grower
It's the same story up the road in Blaisdon…a village that for decades has been famed for its plums.
Growers here had expected a bumper season.
Plums are notoriously difficult to grow…often falling victim to the weather and pests.
Even in Blaisdon, fruit growers are beginning to look to more reliable crops.
Mr Baber has about three hundred plum trees on his farm.
Last year they produced about forty pounds of fruit each.
This year they're averaging a pound and a half.
That of course means there'll be fewer in the shops.
Inevitably, the more scarce the fruit, the more expensive it becomes.
Last year Mr Baber's plums cost just twenty five pence per pound.
So advice to jam makers this year is…try some new flavours.
Cricket…and Gloucestershire wicketkeeper Jack Russell has been added to the England squad for tomorrow's Fifth Test against Australia.
The world's largest and most unusual hot air balloon has taken to the skies.
Shaped like a giant cow it is being used to advertise a rave party.
But people living nearby say the cow is an unwelcome sight.
They want the party banned.
KATE GARRAWAY Milton Keynes
BRIAN WAKEFIELD ESP Promotions
MURRAY BEETSON ESP Promotions
The story goes its designers drew up the plans in millimetres and the maker mistook the measurements for inches.
But whatever it's origins there is now no doubt this is the world's largest hot airballoon and to promotors ESP the perfect rave ambassador.
The party's in Milton Keynes and to us the only thing worth mentioning for Milton Keynes is the concrete cows.
And this ballooon makes those look a bit silly.
The legal rave called Woodstock 2, promises to be an event on the scale of it's mascot.
The organisers call it a dance festival.
Thirty thousand people are expected to turn up to nearly forty hours of music.
Male speaker
We are offering a once in a life time chance to enjoy dancing.
Voice over
However that party is facing strong opposition from people living in nearby Wavenden.
There are alot of old people living in this village and we don't want it here.
Female speaker
it will be terrible there is bound to be overspill and vandalism.
Voice over
The party is to go ahead at the end of August.
Local people say they'll keep fighting to get it banned.
The promoters are promising tight security to prevent ravers leaving the site.
There is a ban on alcohol and drugs and new age travellers will be discouraged.
They say the rave will be big but like its mascot it will also be inoffensive.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
New anti-hunting campaign
FTSE down 3
The hundred shares index closed down three point seven at twenty nine forty one point three 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, fifty six.
In Central News tonight,
Accused of kidnapping: The driver who took the law into his own hands.
Hostile reception: A rector turns his garden into a farm.
And a commercial breakthrough…the first TV ad for a university.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
When the police called in the boys' parents, one of them accused Mr Wisson of kidnapping.
A solicitor says that, technically, he DID act outside the law, but police say he did the right thing.
KEN GOODWIN/Milton Keynes
JOHN WISSON
GRAHAM SANDERS/Solicitor
Det Sgt ALAN YOUNG/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
John Wisson was driving through Milton Keynes with his wife and an auntie to see his newly born grandson.
But the trip nearly turned into tragedy, when a brick was flung at the windscreen of his car.
He says he heard a loud bang — his windscreen shattered, he spotted some children.
John saw the children, who were aged about eight, and decided to take action.
He says he grabed the children and put them in the car.
He drove to the police station.
At the police station he was confronted by one of the children's angry mother.
He says she was abusive and accused him of abducting her child.
John insists he did nothing wrong — but a solicitor says taking the law into your own hands can be risky.
He says there's no such thing as a citizens arrest.
He should haev held the children at the scene and called the police.
Two Norfolk men were recently jailed for siezing a youth they thought had been stealing bicycles.
They were charged with kidnapping.
Their five year sentence was reduced on appeal.
But the case illustrates the fine line between acting in a public spirited manner, and breaking the law.
In the case of John Wisson, the police seem to be on his side.
He says that under the circumstances he did the right thing.
But there's a sting in the tail.
The children can't be prosecuted because they're under ten years old.
And the police won't give Mr wisson their address, so he's unable to launch a private prosecution against their parents.
He'll have to pay the three hundred pound repair bill himself.
A Bishop has expressed deep concern over the behaviour of one of his vicars who ordered a television camera out of his garden.
The vicar is being taken to court by his own church leaders over the state of his rectory, where the garden has been turned into a farmyard.
But when a camera crew arrived at the rectory, they got a hostile reception.
HARRIET RYLEY/Woodford
ANNE COOMES/Diocesan Spokesman
Once the scene of quiet tea parties and garden fetes, the beautiful green lawns have disappeared from the rectory in the Northamptonshire village of Woodford.
In their place, dozens of sheep, goats, chickens and geese roam freely.
The Reverend Michael Prentice, lives here with his wife.
Parishioners say if they want to speak to him they have to do so at the gate.
Villagers say the place is an eyesore and he is a disgrace to the church.
She says it is disgusting.
There use to be garden fetes on the lawn and what has happened is terrible.
She says it used to be beautiful, but the rectory and the church are a disgrace.
She says they used to have garden fetes here.
She says people should look up to men of the cloth, and she's told the vicar he's a disgrace to his profession.
But when a Central News camera crew approached the vicar for an interview, they weren't welcome.
He shouts get off his land and his wife screams hysterically.
The crew was accused of trespassing and asked to leave by the police, who were called by the vicar when they arrived
After a long running row with the locals, the diocese has decided enough is enough and plan legal action.
She says it is a very big embarressment to the church.
We are here to serve the community and to have a vicar who can't is a very big embarressment.
Today, the Bishop of Peterborough, who is privately very distressed about the goings on in and around St Mary's, decided not to make any public statement.
But the behaviour of Reverend Prentice has only added to his anguish.
A man severely brain damaged in an operation more than twenty-five years ago, has lost his fight for compensation.
MALVERN/Worcestershire
Keith Atkinson from Malvern, was left deaf and with double vision after an operation for brain tumours, at Oxford's Radcliffe Infimary.
High Court Judge Mr Justice Rougier has cleared Oxfordshire Health Authority of any blame but expressed his deepest sympathy for Mr Atkinson.
Sixty workers at a clothing company could face redundancy because the firm is relocating.
MILTON KEYNES
Alexon is transferring from Milton Keynes to Luton.
The staff are being offered the choice of moving or taking redundancy.
The rarest breed of pig in the world has just been introduced into England.
Kune Kune pigshave all the usual piggy characteristics like the curly tail and the stubby snout.
But they're also hairy.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Madley
DAVID PRICE/Kune Kune Owner
Kune Kunes originate from New Zealand.
In Maouri their name means fat and round.
Last year they were officially classifed as an endangered species.
So a couple of pairs were brought to this country to breed.
David and his family are thrilled with the results.
Scientists at Liverpool University are now drawing up a breeding programme for the UK herd.
There's already a waiting list for the piglets.
So far from going to market, these little piggies will be squealing all the way to very good homes.
A baker who hasn't had a day off sick in three quarters of a century is still slaving over a hot stove at the age of (87) eighty-seven.
Over the years, Cyril Gray has helped to produce more than (125) a hundred and twenty-five million loaves of bread.
ROBIN POWELL Swindon
CYRIL GRAY Baker
MARGARET EMMETT Cyril's Daughter
Not that there haven't been mornings when he'd rather have stayed in bed.
Though he's handed down management of the firm to his daughter Margaret, Cyril still spends each morning making sandwiches at the back of the shop…then it's off to the bakery in nearby Wanborough in the afternoon.
At 87, he's the oldest working baker in Britain…and an inspiration to his customers and colleagues.
The business has changed beyond all recognition since Cyril started out in bakery aged 13…and he's concerned that independent bakers like himself may soon be a thing of the past.
But Cyril has no plans to put away his rolling pin just yet…he hopes to carry on working into his 90s.
So what's his secret?
He admits to being a little bit partial to the cakes he makes, but as Cyril says, it hasn't done him much harm, has it?
So, there you have it.
Cyril's secret for a long and active life — treat yourself.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Atherton started well
FTSE up 2
The hundred shares index closed up two point one at twenty nine forty three point four.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty nine and down at two marks, fifty six.
Environmentalists have condemned governmment moves to speed up road construction, which could mean that a controversial new bypass is built sooner than expected.
The Transport Secretary wants to cut down on lengthy public consultation.
But protestors say it'll just mean more environmental damage will be caused more quickly.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Hereford
JOHN MacGREGOR MP/Transport Secretary
GUY WOODFORD/CPRE
PETER NUTT/Dept of Transport
COLIN SHEPHERD MP/Con Hereford
But there's plenty of disagreement over how best to solve it.
Proposals to build a bypass were first introduced in 1986.
But it would have meant destroying part of the ancient Lugg Meadow.
A public inquiry was held.
It cost hundreds of thousands of pounds.
But after seven months of debate, the proposal was scrapped.
The Department of Transport says it's ridiculous that after seven years Hereford is still no nearer getting its bypass.
It's now announced new measures to speed the process up.
They include holding a’ round the table’conference with all interested parties.
Environmentalists though are worried that the Government is just trying to rush through unpopular projects.
News of the trial conference has been welcomed by Hereford's MP.
The trial conference will be held in Hereford some time next year.
And once again the battle of the countryside versus congestion will rage.
A new University is spending half a million pounds on TV advertising to attract more students.
The glossy commercial features a killer whale…several seal lions and a voice-over by Angus Deayton, but some people are sceptical whether it's the way to create the right impression 
University Advertisement
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
Prof MICHAEL BROWN/Vice-Chancellor
MOIRA JOHNSTON/Oxford University
There's not a lecture theatre or even a student bar in sight…but this is the way De Montfort University in Milton Keynes and Leicester hopes to trawl the best of undergraduates
Male speaker
We're trying to convey two things.
That De Montfort University has campuses at Milton Keynes and Leicester.
And that we proivide good quality education for students of 17 to 22 years…and it gets their attention
Voice over
At Oxford…where there's a somewhat older university…some students are quite specific about what makes the right course for them
Female speaker
Mostly semiotics, gender issues or economic critiques of art.
Voice over
So whales won't cut it then?
Female speaker
No, not in the least
Female speaker
I think Universities are going to be considered seriously on their courses and grades and things like that
Female speaker
If they need to advertise their schools they don't have enough students so it might not be that good
Female speaker
I certainly look at television and adverts and I'm taken in by it
Voice over
Oxford recruits not as a whole University but by college.
They are unlikely to follow suit
Female speaker
I don't think we would engage in that sort of thing.
We do a lot of promnotion to encourage applications.
Oxford applicants tend to be the most self-selecting in the country.
They know they want to come here when they apply
Voice over
The campaign's just starting, and already it's generating much attention…proof say De Montfort University authorities that it's money well spent
(WES ad lib)(Anne next) Still to come on Central News.
Rediscovering hidden treasure.
A new home for the museum exhibits that are seldom seen.
Plus, Nice One Cyril.
The baker who hasn't lost a day's work in seventy five years.
WELCOME BACK: A special antiques roadshow is up and running to save hundreds of thousands of museum artefacts from decay and ruin.
Wesley Smith
Hidden treasures from damp storerooms across Oxfordshire are being moved to a new purpose-built centre, to be put on show for the first time.
MARIA COYLE/Oxford
JONATHAN WALLIS/Conservation Officer
KAREN HULL/Museums Collections Manager
Intv.
Packed away on dusty dark shelves weights and measures used by council trading standards officers, miniature fairground memorabilia made by a keen amateur craftsman from Oxford, and discovered only yesterday a crescent shaped match box.
All this would have rotted away had the rescue operation not swung into action.
Intv.
Every peice like this child's teaset will need to be photographed and catalogued on a computer.
There are 600 thousand pieces to be carefully packed and boxed for the journey.
This is where they're bound for.
A two million pound purpose built centre in Standlake.
The size of one and a half football pitches when it's completed in November next year it will have not only space but air conditioning, an education room and laboratory for the conservationists.
The aim is to loan more of the local history objects out to the local community.
If you lived through the second world war you'll recognise the sound of the air raid bell.
You might even recognise these…silk stockings which every girl, was wearing when the Americans were in town.
Dozens of gliders have been soaring over the region competing in one of the country's largest gliding championships.
And among the pilots, a man who's more used to flying Tornado jets.
Nick Clark reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
CHRIS WEBB/Competitor
GARY STINGEMORE/Competitor
TED RICHARDS/Competition Organiser
Voice over
It's the morning briefing, and for pilots of powerless aircraft the state of the weather is of paramount importance.
Male speaker
The weather looks good.
Voice over
Today's the inter-services competition and the launching has had to be delayed.
The cumulus cloud that's evidence of the thermal lift which will keep the gliders airbourne is still too far off.
So there's plenty of time to kill.
Let's hope she never becomes a pilot.
Today's task will take the aircraft west towards Bristol, then north near Stratford and back again.
It's a total distance of three hundred kilometres and will take around four hours.
Male speaker
I think lack of lift may be a problem.
Voice over
Vital liquid refreshment is stowed away, and…if you're desperate to go to the toliet…well there's no alternative at five thousand feet.
Leading the field so far is Gary Stingemore.
And that's fitting because he's an RAF Tornado pilot.
Male speaker
It's very different.
Voice over
Eventually the conditions are just right and the tow planes move into action, hauling more than forty gliders to the start point.
Along the way pilots take photographs of certain landmarks to prove they've gone the distance.
Male speaker
It's quite exciting waiting for them to come back.
Voice over
Nearly four hours on and they're drifting back.
First to land is Romeo 11, that's the Tornado pilot again.
His official time three hours forty five minutes.
