Anti-vivisection campaigners say that scores of monkeys have died in cruel and unnecessary experiments at Oxford University.
The university has rejected the accusation, as Gareth Furby reports.
OXFORD
BUAV VIDEO
RALPH COOK/BUAV Organiser
GEORGINA FERRY/Oxford University
Voice over
The British Union for Abolition of Vivisection opposes the trapping and caging of animals, so it's employed an actor to portray a monkey for its latest campaign.
But the group hopes these pictures will have a stronger impact.
It claims they show monkeys being captured in a tropical forest.
Most, says they group, will die en route to laboratories across the world.
And those that survive, it says, are being used in uncessary experiments.
The group claims more than 150 monkeys like this have been experimented on at Oxford University.
Some, it's said, have electrodes implanted into the brain to measure their brain activity as different tasting solutions are squirted into the animals mouths.
BUAV says the university's experiments serve no useful purpose.
He says how can they be of use in curing Anorexia or Bolemia when they're caused by socio-economic factors which monkeys can't experience.
Oxford East MP, Andrew Smith, today backed the campaign to end the trade in Monkeys.
But Oxford University insists its experiments are necessary.
She says they need to know more about the workings of the human brain and monkey brains are the most similar to ours.
But the campaigners want the trade in Monkeys banned and it's a cause that some Oxford shoppers today seemed ready to back.
A panel of European judges has been visiting a town carrying Britain's hopes in Entente Florale.
It's a competition to find the most floral town in Europe, with representatives from eight countries battling for the title.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CHELTENHAM
BOB SHACKELL Cheltenham Parks Dept
WILLY DE PUYSSELEYR Chief Judge
Voice over
Viewing the flowers Cheltenham style; from the back of a horse-drawn coach.
This is what the judges of Entente Florale had come to see; displays which have made Cheltenham 3 times winner of the prestigious’ Britain in Bloom’event.
Now the town is going for the big one, but to get the title Entente Florale, it needs to beat off competition from seven other nations.
But the judges from those countries were were giving little away.
He says that he likes the flowers, but could they make Cheltenham a winner?
He can't say!
He says they've other towns to look at.
He says Cheltenham is a beautiful town, but a winner?
Can't say yet, I'm afraid.
Thousands of hours of work by Cheltenhams parks and gardens department have gone into creating the displays.
Businesses and residents have done their bit with hanging baskets.
But will it be enough?
He says the stiffest competition is from Aix Les Bains in France, with it's backdrop of mountains and lakes.
But he's confident that Cheltenham can pull it off.
There'll be no decision on who's won for several weeks, while the judges tour towns in the 7 other countries taking part.
But here, fingers are crossed that Cheltenham will finish well ahead of the rest of the field.
Four jailed for Brink's-Mat robbery
UN Inspectors succeed in Iraqi mission
UN convoy reaches Gorazde
Farrah Quli spends first day at home
FTSE up 19
The hundred shares index closed up nineteen point three at twenty three, seventy six point one.
The pound is up at one dollar ninety two, and up at two marks eighty one,
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Voice over
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
NIGEL MANSELL
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
we've more celebrating to do yet…because the start of the new football season brought wins for Oxford United…and Swindon Town…and a draw for Hereford United…
It also brought three scorching goals…
To the Manor Ground first 
Voice over
all play again this week Oxford and Hereford are at home tomorrow night in the new coca cola cup…
Swindon are away to Bristol Rovers in the league on Wednesday…the last word on football is about United midfielder Jim Magilton who was injured in a road accident in Oxford on saturday night…he's out of hospital…and should be playing next week 
now we've news of two champions who couldn't find the winning formula this weekend 
Voice over
horse racing fans from all over the country came to the Cotswolds yesterday for a rather special day…
Gloucestershire's top trainer David Nicholson was opening the doors of his Condicote yard for the very last time 
DAVID NICHOLSON
Voice over
horse racing fans from all over the country came to the Cotswolds yesterday for a rather special day…
and we'll be following the duke as he moves to his new stables at Jackdaw's castle…finally tonight we're off sailing…
Farmoor resevoir in Oxfordshire was the venue this weekend for the disabled sailors championships…
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
RICHARD LITTLE/Oxford Sailing Club
HOWARD LEE/Oxford Sailing Club
GEOFF HOLT/Weston Sailing Club
’ BUGS’HUGHS/Royal Yachting Association
Voice over
Disabled or able bodied; the thrill of the wind and the water is just the same.
45 disabled sailors from all over Britain and Ireland turned up at Farmoor in Oxfordshire for a weekend of racing.
The event; the 12th national disabled sailing championships.
And they couldn't have chosen a better day; brilliant blue skies and fierce winds.
Reporter say: How was it out there?
Male speaker
Windy…
God it was rough!
Male speaker
In this sort of wind, you get quite scared.
I've been told the boats can't go over, but when you're out there, you wonder.
Voice over
Off the water the sailors need a bit of help rigging up, but out on the water they can compete alongside anyone.
Sail number 121; Jeff Holt from Southampton.
He used to be a professional sailor before an accident meant he lost the use of his legs, but he's still able to pursue the sport he loves.
Male speaker
It's the freedom.
You're out there on your own; independent.
Just you, the wind, the water and the sun.
Voice over
The boats are Challenger Trimarans; specially designed dingies that are very stable so they won't capsize.
More than 100 Challengers are used by disabled clubs up and down the country and their popularity is growing.
Male speaker
Once they get out there, they suddenly find they have freedom.
They get a sense of their own worth.
Our aim is to get them out of the chair, cut the chains and let enjoy the freedom of the sea.
Voice over
Kevin Curtis from Ipswich won the overall championship, but for the rest, the feeling of freedom was consolation enough.
Seventeen thousand people flocked to a remote field at the weekend — not to rave but to relive their youth.
A distinctly mature audience had come to hear a band whose fortunes they've followed for a quarter of a century.
Mike Rowbottom joined them.
CROPREDY/Oxfordshire
BILLY CONNOLLY/Comedian
Voice over
Fairport Convention; living proof that middle-age doesn't mean you're past it.
You just take more time over it.
The band celebrated 25 years of playing electric folk music at their annual festival over the weekend; an exhausting parade of music, memories and real ale.
Fairport has only one member of the original line-up still playing in the band, Simon Nicol.
But old hands like Richard Thompson and Ashley Hutchins still get together to relive old songs.
Fairport have a following stretching back to 1967.
These days the greying hair, spreading waists and failing sight are accompanied by a new generation; their children.
Fairport knows no generation gap.
Male speaker
It takes us back 20 years.
Male speaker
The atmosphere is great.
Everyone gets along really well.
Male speaker
It's something which used to happen years ago and I was delighted to come when my son suggested it.
Voice over
It's a recruiting ground for the younger generation and a meeting place for old friends like Billy Connolly.
Male speaker
It's gone beyond a fashion now.
I am locked in a time warp, but I'm lost in several time warps.
I'm the Master.
Voice over
The young could dance, the middle-aged could recover from it.
The economic slump was nowhere to be seen, but hairline recession was another thing.
There was always the real ale to stave off the effects of ageing for a while.
One thing remained timeless; the music.
A Bosnian man paralysed by shrapnel has spoken of his joy at being OUT of Sarajevo and IN Stoke Mandeville Hospital.
Although he'll never walk again, he'll get the help he needs to live as full a life as possible.
But along with other Bosnian patients in the region, he's also being given support from voluntary agencies as well as medical treatment.
KIM BARNES/Aylesbury
NESAD CAUSEVIC/Injured Bosnian
HIBA CAUSEVIC/Wife
Dr HANS FRANKEL/Consultant
PAT HOLLOWAY/Red Cross
Nesad Causevic, a policeman, was changing shift last November when a grenade blew up a few metres from his car.
Shrapnel slashed his neck and lodged in his spine.
Now he's about to get the follow-up treatment he couldn't get at home.
She says he's very happy and it's very important to him that's he's arrived at Stoke Manceville because it's well known.
His wife Hiba and son Vernes will probably stay with a local family as time goes on.
For the moment there's a great sense of relief.
She says in sarajevo she felt dreadful.
Her, at the moment, it's like dreaming, she still can't believe she's here.
Nesad's still being tested…but soon the lengthy rehabiliation work will begin…
He says he will learn to be independent, how to drive a car and to go to work, everything a paralysed patient can do these days.
What about the treatment he's had in Sarajevo?
He says considering the conditions it's very good.
He's free of all major complications it's quite remarkable.
Throughout the region voluntary agencies like the Red Cross are swinging into action.
Hundreds of local people have offered to help Bosnians like Adis Avdic and his mother, Amela, currently in hospital in Oxford
She says she was used to lots of shelling going on around her.
She's slept so well for two nights, even though she's sleeping on the floor of the hospital.
She can't get over the peace.
Adis and Nesad have paid a high price to find that peace.
Now it's hoped they can be helped to rebuild their shattered lives.
Genetic fingerprinting is being used to help stop the theft and illegal sale of endangered birds.
The technique was originally developed here in the region for use on humans.
But it also provided crucial evidence on the trade in birds, which is uncovered by Central TV's Cook Report tonight.
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
MIKE WEBB/Cellmark Diagnostics
The eggs of the peregrine falcon are worth up to ten thousand pounds each.
Often they're sold to rich businessmen in the Middle East, where falconry is a popular sport.
Roger Cook's team went undercover to try to stop the illegal trade.
They took delivery of two chicks in a supermarket car park.
It was claimed the birds were related and they'd been captive bred.
But using the technique of genetic fingerprinting at the Cellmark laboratories in Abingdon, scientists discounted the claims the birds were sisters.
They must have been taken illegally from the wild.
Male speaker
We took samples from two birds and we prepared DNA fingerprinting which are represented on this piece of film as a series of bands.
Voice over
The relationship between the two animals can be determined by the number of bands they have in common.
There were only six.
So I conclude they weren't related.
The laboratory was the first in Britain to provide DNA evidence in a prosecution involving birds.
More cases like the one exposed by Roger Cook will help stop rare birds being stolen from the wild.
Male speaker
I'd like to talk to you about a couple of perigrines you've sold.
’ He's definately got wild peregrines’.
Your words on the transcript.
Voice over
The two stolen peregrine falcons which began their life in a cardboard box, are being returned to their home in the wild.
Still to come on Central News, the murder that will not die.
A decade on, who killed Eila Karjalainen?
Plus, return of the Cedar Boys.
The school that escaped the Holocaust.
In Central News tonight:
The victims will pay.
Higher insurance as car crime rockets.
Home at last.
The innocent man who spent two years in an Indian jail.
And, escape from hell.
But Bosnian war victim will never walk again.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
New figures show an overall increase of twenty five per cent in all car crime in that one area.
Police say that despite new initiatives that figure is still rising.
Insurance companies say a rise in premiums is inevitible.
SIMON GARRETT/Gloucester
HELEN BUTTERY/Crime Victim
MICHAEL EDWARDS/The Insurance Service
Det Ch Insp MICHAEL HUMPHRIES/Gloucestershire Police
PC MARK LLOYD/Gloucestershire Police
Cllr COLIN HAY/Police Committee Chairman
Helen Buttery still has her car…or what's left of it.
It was badly damaged in an accident with car thieves.
Now on top of her injuries her insurance is set to go through the roof
Female speaker
It makes me feel very bitter.
It's very common but even though police try their best the culprits get away with it so often
Voice over
Helen's not alone.
The firm which carried out the survey says all Gloucestershire motorists could soon be paying the price for crime in higher insurance premiums
Male speaker
If it goes on it certainly will.
Gloucestershire drivers currently pay less than people in cities but that gap will have to narrow
Voice over
Gloucestershire has risen to top of the national list for thefts from cars…and ninth above London, Thames Valley and Merseyside for total car crime.
Despite new initiatives like Operation Gemini…thefts from cars are still rising.
Beyond a general shift of crime from town to country police can't say why Gloucestershire's such a prime target
Male speaker
I wish I knew the answer.
There was a movement of crime towards the shire counties but we are doing something about it
Voice over
Mark Lloyd spends half his working time chasing car crime.
He patrols Cheltenham's streets and car parks.
Even now drivers leave windows and sun rooves open and park in darkened cornors where the thieves feel safest
Male speaker
That device there costing 20 or 25 pounds means the car will still be here when the owner comes back.
The theft of the car won't be a problem.
But it's the only one in this area so protected.
Even after all the publicity the public still don't secure them.
Voice over
At best police resources are stretched.
Hundreds of millions of pounds are wasted in car crime each year while Gloucestershire's force is forty officers short-handed.
Some politicians believe the public would prefer to pay a few pounds more council tax and less in insurance
Male speaker
The government in order to protect people has put a stop to us collecting this money.
That's now got to be paid out in increased insurance premiums.
Voice over
Police say this year overall car crime's on the wane in the county…but they admit there's a long way to go
A man who was held in an Indian prison for two years has accused the British Foreign office of failing to help him.
Nick Brown was cleared of drugs charges in Goa, but has only just been allowed home after a long campaign by his mother.
He says the British did nothing for him while he was awaiting trial.
HARRIET RYLEY/Oxford
NICHOLAS BROWN
Back home seven months after his release from prison in Goa, Nicholas Brown is a bitter man, angry about what he sees as a complete lack of help from the British authorities.
His ordeal began during a holiday with friends in November 1990.
Mr Brown who's from Bampton in Oxfordshire was arrested by police who planted cannabis on him to extort a bribe.
Two years later the campaign waged by his mother, Marilyn Brown resulted in his release.
She had even stood in the last election against her MP, Douglas Hurd, to highlight her son's plight.
During the time Nicholas was in jail, the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, always insisted there was only so much he could do to help:
Nicholas says his delayed return — he was released last Novemebr, but only came back to Britain a fortnight ago — was due to difficulties in getting back his passport from the Goan authorities.
The Foreign Office however says there were no problems in getting back his passport and adds:
’ We did a great deal on behalf of Nicholas Brown and are very surprised to hear that he has any complaints about the Foreign Office.
We would like to hear from Mr Brown and will certainly look into any complaints he has.’
Nicholas Brown doesn't have any immediate plans for the future.
He just wants to rest and catch up with friends.
An eighty eight year old woman has died just hours after two bogus officials called at her home.
Detectives say it was probably the shock that killed her.
KAREN THOMPSON/Northampton
Det Insp GERRY WRIGHT/Northamptonshire Police
Two men posing as officials from a Water company called at Grace Barber's home in the King's Heath area of Northampton.
A friend arrived and challenged the men who were in her bedroom.
After they left, the victim became ill and was taken to hospital where she died a few hours later.
Grace Barber suffered from a heart condition but detectives believe the incident played a part in her death.
Detective Inspector Gerry Wright says although she had heart disease she may well have lived for several years, if it hadn't been for the sudden shock of finding two men in her house.
He says he's angry, everyone has elderly relatives.
Both men were white with Irish accents.
One was about five foot six, clean shaven with dark hair and in his late twenties.
He was wearing a browny beige cardigan.
The second man was about five foot eleven, again clean shaven but younger.
He had fair short hair and wore a red tartan jacket.
Police believe the two men had been in the area for some time possibly in a blue transit van which had ladders on its roof.
They may have tried to get in at another address without success.
Detectives are appealing for witnesses.
Now a return visit to one of our summer gardens.
Four years ago a couple began work on a garden to be laid out on the site of an old country house.
Central South saw what they'd achieved by 1991, and now we've been back to check on progress.
HARRIET RYLEY Coleshill
DENNY WICKHAM Gardener
MICHAEL WICKHAM Gardener
4 years ago Michael and Denny Wickham began laying out a garden of’ walls’and’rooms’following the plan of the house.
It had stood here for 300 years — a revolutionary building when it was built…until it was destroyed in a fire in 1952.
The Wickhams live in the clockhouse which was the old brewery and laundry for the big house opposite.
They planted shrubs and flowers in beds where the walls were, and put gravel inside the rooms and pieces of slate where the staircase was.
This was how it looked two years ago — now there's more height in the garden, but there's still a long way to go.
She says it is coming on slowly — it's a long-term job…an awful lot of work…we never envisaged how much time we'd spend weeding the gravel and general tidying up all the time.
The Wickhams don't garden strictly by the rules — where the poppies they'd sown in beds spread into the’ rooms’…they're left to flower…
Plans to make metal arch’ doorways’have yet to materialise…but the herbs planted to make a green carpet are starting to spread.
He says neither of us is really a trained gardener…we're very lucky as we have two experts trained at Kew and Wisbech who live locally and tell us what to do.
Michael and Denny also look after the gardens they laid out in front of the old house and the walled garden beside the clockhouse.
Here they've now installed a greenhouse which is their pride and joy and somewhere to relax after a hard day's gardening.
Reporter asks if they ever think it's too much work?
Denny replies no — because I've always beleived in it…
Michael adds once we've got the bit between the teeth we go on til we get it right.
About 600 people visit the garden every year — the next open days are September the 12th and the 3rd of October.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Detective shot in head
A detective has been shot in the head during a bank raid in Kent.
Gas jobs threat
British Gas has warned that twenty thousand jobs could go if its monopoly is ended as suggested in a report by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Better news for Laura
Five-year-old, Laura Davies from Manchester, who underwent a liver and bowel transplant in the United States, is said to be responding well to new drug treatment after earlier worries about a decline in her health.
FTSE up 16
The hundred shares index closed up sixteen point seven at thirty, twenty-five exactly.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-nine and up at two marks, fifty-two.
Welcome back: The murder of a student ten years ago started an inquiry that crossed international boundaries and inspired an Inspector Morse novel.
Wesley Smith
The body was discovered in a wood, but with no evidence to point either to the killer, or to the motive.
In a special two-part report, Gargy Patel examines the Mystery of Eila Karjalainen.
KINGSWOOD/Oxfordshire
JOHN BOSHER/Gamekeeper
ROGER NICKEL/Retired Detective
RICHARD NEAVE/Medical Artist
Det Insp JOHN HAYWARD/Thames Valley Police
Gamekeeper John Bosher returning to the Blenheim estate wood where 10 years ago he came across a half decomposed body.
The discovery was the start of a murder investigation that has never been solved.
For the police, it was almost impossible to identify the body.
No clues to say where the woman came from, no match with anyone on their missing persons list.
Detectives decided to use what was then a fairly new technique to help give body an identity.
Richard Neave, a medical artist, was brought in to reconstruct the face of the dead woman.
His work is known throughout the world.
It's featured in television dramas such as Taggart and Prime Suspect 2.
As Richard Neave put the finishing touches to his reconstruction, police discovered a rucksack in a layby beside the A40, 6 miles from the wood where the body had been found.
John Hayward remembers well the breakthrough on the case which he eventually took over.
When they compared the clay head with the photograph, it was the same person.
Eila Karjalainen was a Finnish student who was on a hitch-hiking holiday in England.
She'd disappeared in August almost four months before her body was found.
No-one knows for certain where she was going or what happened that summer of 1983.
Despite a major publicity campaign, only a few people thought they'd seen her or even spoken to her.
Tomorrow night we hear from some of those witnesses and from the creator of Inspector Morse, who based his latest book on the Eila's murder.
Her body was flown back to Finland to be buried, leaving behind a mystery that still hasn't been solved.
A group of Jewish refugees has been re-united more than fifty years after escaping from Nazi Germany.
The boys were evacuated by the Rothschild Family and billeted in Britain.
Most of them lost their families in the concentration camps.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Waddesdon
JACK SPIER/Ex-Refugee
URI SELLA/Ex-Refugee
BERND KATZ/Ex-Refugee
LORD ROTHSCHILD
Jack Spier has trouble keeping his emotions under control whenever he looks at the Red Cross letter from his parents saying goodbye.
They were allowed twenty two sparse words before being taken to a Nazi Concentration camp.
Male speaker
The letter says be good to your god, be good to yourself, and try to be a support for us
Voice over
Jack was spared the worst of the Nazi regime.
He was one of thirty jewish boys evacuated from a Frankfurt School six months before war was declared in 1939.
They were taken out and supported by James and Dorothy Rothschild close to Waddesdon Manor near Aylesbury.
Fifty four years later the boys and their families came together again to honour their benefactors in the garden at the Manor.
They were known as the Cedar Boys and it became clear that nearly all of them had been orphaned as the Third Reich took its terrible toll on European Jewry.
Male speaker
I had an inkling of what was going on but my parents kept most of it from me
Male speaker
We used to get beaten up on our way to and from school.
We had to be accompanied by bigger boys
Voice over
Jews had been denied citizen's rights of any kind.
They were forbidden to go into certain areas and they weren't allowed to have passports.
Eight-year old Jack Spier and his friends were allowed out on special travel cards.
When they arrived at Waddesdon they were registered as aliens.
Male speaker
The people of Waddesdon were very good to us.
We quickly integrated into the schools and grew to like the place
Male speaker
We had a very good English Teacher.
She would put drawings up on the walls saying This is a table or this is a cat, and then she would say: Now to class
Male speaker
We were like a big family of brothers and sisters.
We had to be because we had lost our real families
Voice over
The Rothschilds continued to take an interest in the boys long after the war, and after the death of James and Dorothy their cousin Lord Rothschild has continued the association.
Male speaker
They knew something very bad was going to happen because they were quite prescient.
So they did something about it when nobody else did
Voice over
Eighteen of the cedar boys came to the manor for the ceremony.
They have become successful for , they have their own familes.
Jack Spier has a bakery business and six daughters.
But none have forgotten the pain of being driven from their parents nor the welcome and love they were given at Waddesdon as a small compensation for that loss.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Cricket…
Gloucestershire have enjoyed mixed fortunes in the first day of their County Championship match against Northamptonshire.
9.
Football now…
Oxford United's game against Swansea this evening in the Coca Cola Cup marks a special occasion.
The game coincides with the 30th anniversary of Oxford's debut in the Football League.
To celebrate the club has invited the team which played Barrow in 1962.
Now to another in our series on Summer Gardens.
Shotover House Park is a rare survivor from the eighteenth century.
The gardens were landscaped more than two hundred and fifty years ago, but the original, design has survived almost unaltered.
SHOTOVER PARK/Wheatley/Oxfordshire
SIR JOHN MILLER
Voice over
Almost 3 centuries ago all this was forest, part of the Royal Forest of Shotover just outside Oxford.
When the estate's then owner, James Tyrell, decided on a new house and gardens in 1734, he was set upon having the latest fashion.
The ideal of the time was to arrange nature in such a way as not to make it look rearranged.
The plan for Shotover was simple; stretching along an axis from west to east, it began at an octagonal pond, leading to an obelisk, then the house itself.
From there to a lawn, another pond, then another lake known as the canal and finally to a gothic temple.
This folly was the first of its kind at a time when all things gothic suddenly became very fashionable.
Designed by William Kent who'd been commisioned to improve the landscape at Shotover, it's an exotic, mysterious building, topped with battlements, pinnacles and turrets.
Male speaker
It's official designation is an eyecatcher; the idea was you looked out of the windows of the house and that your eye was drawn to the temple at the end of the lakes.
Voice over
Directly in front of the house beyond a huge weeping beech tree so big it's propped up with telegraph poles in concrete.
There's the obelisk.
It commemorates a visit to Oxford by Queen Elizabeth the first and is another focal point in the garden.
From it the path leads to another temple also designed by William Kent and from there to the octagonal pond.
Until the last world war there was a team of eight gardeners to look after the grounds.
There are only 2 now, though they do have the advantage of mechanisation.
Male speaker
The mowing used to take a week, now it just takes a couple of days.
But we don't maintain the kitchen gardens and the greenhouses anymore.
Voice over
Largely because of absentee owners, the gardens at Shotover have changed remarkably little; Sir John Miller hasn't changed much either, though he has made his own — living — additions to the grounds.
He's always been fond of animals and spent much of his life working for their welfare.
His passion is horses.
He's President of the British Horse Society.
He also keeps a range of rare breeds at Shotover.
Male speaker
I call them my foibles, I don't intend to eat them.
I like to look at them and show them to my guests.
I've always been fond of animals and it interests me to have them about to look at.
Voice over
The world's biggest dog agility competition has just begun.
And the search is on to find the top dog among an entry of eight hundred collies, German shepherds and even poodles.
Richard Barnett reports:
MALVERN Worcestershire
GERRY ECKERSLEY Organizer
Voice over
It's billed as a dog agility extravaganza, as hundreds of pets compete across the Three Counties showground in Malvern.Over the next six days the dogs will be leaping over hurdles, jumping through hoops, and careering through tunnels.
Their performances are being timed, and on Sunday morning the pick of the bunch will compete for the title of Britain's most agile dog.
Almost all breeds are here…although Border collies tend to dominate the proceedings.
There's even a class for mini dogs…they have to be under fifteen inches tall for this competition…but at least they only have to clear fifteen inch hurdles.Dog agility is this country's fastest growing canine sport, and many of the eight hundred dogs at Malvern have taken part in events all over Britain.But this is the biggest ever:
Male speaker
The dogs love to take part.It seems like they are enjoying the chase.
Voice over
Dog agility appeals to all ages…although seven year old Daniel Treagus was having trouble with his Cavalier King Charles spaniel which refused to climb the A frame:
Male speaker
The dog is frightened of the A frame.
Voice over
To see an expert at work, we joined Jack the Border Collie in the ring:
Dogs and owners are apparently revelling in this ultimate test of agility.And one competitor found an easy way to build up her pet's stamina.
RAF Hercules targetted over Sarajevo
120 British aircraft may be used against Iraq
FTSE down 21
The hundred shares index closed down twenty one point four at two three five four point seven 
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety three and down at two marks, eighty one.
Safety procedures are being urgently reviewed after a chemical leak at a major manufacturing plant.
Some of the thirteen hundred workers had to be evacuated TWICE after being allowed back into the factory too soon.
One man was taken to hospital.
Tim Hurst reports.
BROCKWORTH/Gloucestershire
GLEN MEREDITH/Construction worker
ROGER GRAHAM/Fire and Rescue
Voice over
1,300 staff at the ICI Fibres plant at Brockworth near Gloucester were ordered outside when toxic vapour began leaking into part of the plant.
One man was overcome by Thermex vapour, used in fibre manufacture and is being detained in hospital overnight.
Some workers had to be evacuated twice, in what the company admit was a mistake.
The vapour was escaping from a valve which had been dismantled.
Police sealed the factory's main gate, ambulances and 8 fire appliances arrived within minutes.
The company say no lives were put at risk, but safety procedures are being reviewed.
They say some workers were allowed back before a final all-clear had been given and so a second evacuation was necessary.
Parents are being warned not to be complacent after news that vaccinations against a deadly form of meningitis are to be introduced for children.
The Department of Health says the routine jabs will start in October.
But the National Meningitis Trust says parents must still remain vigilant.
Ken Goodwin reports.
OXFORD
HELEN BUTTERY/National Meningitis Trust
Voice over
Researchers at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford helped develop the new vaccine.
It will protect children from the haemophilus or hib strain of bacterial meningitis, which is responsible for around 65 childrens deaths in the UK every year.
The Meningitis Trust, which is based in Stroud, helped finance the research.
She says that they're delighted at news of the vacinations.
But more work needs to be done.
But the Meningitis Trust is introducing a note of caution; the disease occurs in many forms, parents mustn't drop their guard.
She says that they mustn't become complacent.
Parents, and GPs must be alert to the symptoms.
The vaccinations will be introduced in october, but at first will only be available for children under one year old; the age they are most at risk from this form of meningitis.
The new stretch of the M-Forty was badly planned, with no thought given to its long-term implications, according to a report just published.
Its authors say the motorway has opened the floodgates for development on a scale planners hadn't envisaged.
With plans afoot for two more major routes through the region, the Government's being urged not to make the same mistake again.
Robin Powell reports.
PETER HEADICAR/Oxford Polytechnic
PENNY EVANS/CPRE
Voice over
’ And that will be England gone, The shadows, the meadows, the lanes.
All that remains will be concrete and tyres.’
A grim picture painted by the Council for the Protection of Rural England…with poetic assistance from Philip Larkin.
The authors of a new report it commissioned suggest the Oxford to Birmingham stretch of the M40 was badly planned, with little consideration of its long-term implications.
Peter Headicar and his colleage Bob Bixby argue that when the M40 was planned, no account was taken of the devastating effect that resulting projects would have on the countryside.
Another planning bungle — the report claims — no provision for a service station.
Hence the row over the proposed site at Tetsworth.
The Government eventually opted for services at Ardley, but they won't be ready for many months.
Until then motorists have to make do with these temporary toilets which opened today.
It's all symptomatic, according to the CPRE, of a lack of cooperation between Government departments.
The DoE insists the M40 corridor will remain an area of environmental restraint, the only exceptions being Bicester and, two junctions further north, Banbury.
The DoT told us: We have received a copy of the CPRE report and are studying it.
We have no other comment to make.
The Department's currently committed to improving the A420 Swindon to Oxford road.
That's likely to join up with a new A-road to East Anglia.
A second London orbital road's expected to be built between the M3 and M40.
That, in turn, could link up with the cross-country route near Aylesbury.
Like the M40, the CPRE warns, those roads could become magnets for new villages, hotels and superstores…and hasten the day when the Oxfordshire countryside really is submerged under concrete and tyres.
New world motor racing champion Nigel Mansell has threatened to retire from the sport if the Williams team from Oxfordshire doesn't renew his contract for next season.
But the chances are that Mansell will be racing alongside Frenchman Alain Prost next year.
From Nigel Mansell's home on the Isle of Man, Tim Russon reports.
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Voice over
Hercules planes from RAF Lyneham have been flying across what was formerly Yugoslavia for the past six weeks.
Their mission to deliver food and supplies to the beseiged city of Sarajevo.
Every day there've been two to three flights taking off from Zagreb and flying across disputed territory to Sarajevo.
The hills around the city are held by Serbian forces, and the Hercules have been using a special steep landing technique, to keep them out of range of the rebel guns until the very last minute.
But this morning appears to have been was tragetted by a ground to air missile as it was taxi-ing down the runway and preparing to take off.
He says they picked it up on the radar and had to take evasive action.
Until now Sarajevo airport has been almost a haven from the gunfire.
The presence of United Nations troops seemed to provide some protection to the Hercules crews.
But today's alert suggests Serbian rebels may now be prepared to fire on Hercules planes when they're at their most vunerable, as they taxi in the airport perimeter.
The Ministry of Defence says two Hercules planes are now waiting for orders at Zagreb and they may be recalled back to Lyneham, if flights into Sarajevo prove to dangerous to risk.
An inquest jury has returned a verdict of unlawful killing on five people who died in a fire in a block of flats.
The inquest heard that a man confessed to starting the fire as a’ prank’.
He committed suicide three days later.
But the victims' families are not happy with the way the inquest has been handled.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
FIRE SERVICE VIDEO/HOVE/Sussex
NICK BEACOCK/Campaign For Bedsit Rights
Voice over
29 year old Andrew Mannings from Cheltenham was one of 5 people who died in the fire which broke out in converted flats at Hove in Sussex last April.
Someone had set light to a sofa on the second floor beneath a party on the floor above.
The inquest at Brighton was told how Trevor Carrington, a guest at the party, had confessed to his brother that he'd started the fire as a’ prank.’
When he heard of the multiple deaths, he committed suicide by throwing himself under a lorry.
The jury today returned a verdict of unlawful killing.
But the families of the victims were not happy with the way the inquest was conducted.
They critisised the coroner for refusing to hear evidence about who owned the building which didn't have a fire escape.
Today they were given approval to mount a High Court Challenge over the coroner's conduct.
That challenge is likely to take months to come to court.
The Government has announced tough new action to deal with illegal gypsy encampments.
The proposals will mean it'll become a criminal offence to camp anywhere without permission.
The announcment comes on the day of a clear up operation at a public park which was invaded by a group of gyspies.
Residents say the abandoned site is now a health hazard.
Erika Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
SYBIL SPACKMAN/Resident
Cllr JIM MASTERS/Wilts County Council
Sir GEORGE YOUNG/Housing Minister
SARAH EASTWOOD/Gypsy
LIAM TILLER/Planning Officer/Oxon County Council
Voice over
Rubble and rubbish; the sordid remains of a gypsy invasion.
An environmental hazard and an eyesore at a park off Swindon's Cricklade Road.
For the third time in recent months residents sufferered the nuisance and threat of unwanted neighbours.
Swindon is suffering a plague of illegal encampments, although some gypsies are more considerate than others.
In an effort to deal with the problem, there are some permanent gypsy sites, although far from enough.
Hay Lane in Swindon is full to capacity and has to turn families away.
The County Council would like to provide more places like this.
But in future, the onus will be on the travellers to apply to run their own official sites and not local councils.
And today the Government announced tough new powers to deal with the illegal encampments.
Local councils can get a warrent to tow away illegally parked caravans.
And can seize caravans as an alternative to fines.
However these Swindon residents are petitioning for bollards and gates to prevent another invasion on their park.
They hope this will clear up the problem here and elsewhere, for good.
A family is living in the firing line of over-enthusiastic golfers because of a planning mistake.
The eleventh hole of the new course has been put in the wrong place and the club says it's too expensive to move.
But Barry Gates says he's having to pay the price.
So far he's collected around five hundred balls from his garden.
JESSICA FOWLE Coleford
BARRY GATES Golf Course Neighbour
BRYAN COOPER Golf Course Owner
His home near Coleford in Gloucestershire backs onto the eleventh green at the Forest Hills Golf Club.
And the golfers' wayward shots have dropped out of bounds.
Indeed Mr Gates has picked up around five hundred balls which have gone astray on his land.
Male speaker
It's a nuisance really.
If you run the dog down the field, you look over your shoulder all the time, waiting for one to hit you.
Voice over
It all came about when the eleventh hole was accidentally built nearly twenty metres closer to the house than intended.
Mr Gates complained to the council, who said the green should be moved.
The course owners say they could compromise.
Male speaker
We don't see it as a major problem to the properties around the green.
Technically we should move it.
There should be a compromise.
Voice over
The course owners say extra bunkers may do the trick.
But the neighbours want the hole moved to where it should have been in the first place.
Perhaps the only way to reach a solution would be over a glass or two at the nineteenth hole.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Miners trapped in pit
Six miners have been trapped two thousand feet underground at Blisthorpe Colliery in Nottinghamshire.
One has now been released.
Man remanded in Rachel case
Colin Stagg has been remanded in custody charged with the murder of Rachel Nickell who was stabbed to death on Wimbledon Common in front of her two-year-old son.
FTSE up 48
The hundred shares index closed up forty-eight point six at thirty, seventy-three point six.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-one and up at two marks, fifty-four.
The murder of a Finnish student a decade ago has remained unsolved despite the use of revolutionary techniques to identify her.
There were too few witnesses, and too few clues.
Reconstruction
COLIN DEXTER/Writer
Det Insp JOHN HAYWARD/Thames Valley Police
BARRY COLMAN/Farmer
Reconstruction
JOE HARDY/Hostel Warden
Sometime that August of 1983, police think she was picked up by someone who strangled her and dumped her body in a wood on the edge of the Blenheim estate in Oxfordshire.
A murder inquiry that still remains unsolved today.
A mystery that inspired the creator of Inspector Morse.
Colin Dexter was captivated by Eila's story.
Eila had left her native Finland for a holiday before starting a nursing course.
At the age of 23 she'd already travelled alone in Europe.
But her parents didn't want her to go.
They were worried for her safety.
After their reconstruction, 35 witnesses called the police saying they thought they'd seen Eila.
One of them was local farmer Barry Colman.
One Sunday that August, he left his farm near the Oxford ring road to meet a friend for lunch.
From Oxford Eila may well have travelled north through Woodstock, where that weekend there was a Barry Manilow concert, and then on to Charlbury Youth Hostel.
The warden at the tiem remembers seeing someone like Eila, but they could find no record of her name.
The problem for the police was that her body was hidden in King's Wood and the rucksack dumped 6 miles away at Barnard Gate.
Tiem and weather had worn away any forensic evidence.
For some the memory still remains, 10 years after her death.
The gamekeeper who found her body.
The retired policeman who began the inquiry.
The scientist whose art created Eila's face.
The file on Eila Karjalainen will stay open.
Some fear the murder may never be solved.
but the mystery will remain for years to come.
Football, and after just one game in the premier league Swindon Town have been in the transfer market to sign Wolves striker Andy Mutch…
The fee is two hundred and fifty thousand pounds and Mutch, who'll sign tomorrow, is expected to make his debut at the County Ground against Liverpool on Sunday…
There's been no luck for another of our teams…
Hereford United have lost both of their opening games…
Last night they went down 2-0 to Torquay in the Coca Cola Cup.
TIM RUSSON/Hereford
On Saturday they lost to Scarborough.
Last night at Edgar Street Torquay turned them over with two goals in four minutes just before half-time.
Paul Trollope the ex Swindon boy got the first which highlighted the holes in the Hereford defence.
The second wasn't much better.
Torquay were given too much space and too much time and striker Adrian Foster made the most of it.
In the second half Hereford shook themselves up.
A reshuffle took Anderson into midfield and they looked a lot more lively.
The running, the effort, is there but the finishing touches — that extra bit of class -is missing at the moment and United have got to do something about it.
They created several openings in the second half.
It wasn't a case of missing sitters and throwing away chances more of being so near and yet so far.
It was a frustrating night for the fans.
A goal or two is what everyone needs and at least United have a chance to come back in the cup with the second leg at Torquay next week
081893programme
Scientists are developing an anti-aids vaccine which could be used to immunise millions of people.
It would work by using genetically-engineered parts of the HIV virus to inject healthy people.
If the theory is correct, trials involving HIV infected patients could go ahead as early as next year.
MARIA COYLE/Oxford
Dr SUE KINGSMAN/Biochemistry Department
DAVID SWALES/’ Body Positive’Self Help Group
MICHELE O'GRADY/HIV Liaison Officer
Voice over
At the biochemistry department at Oxford University scientists are joining the international race to try and find a vaccine for AIDS.
The idea is to strip the HIV virus of six of its nine genes…leaving the three genes which target cells prone to HIV and the gene which controls whether the virus grows.
The mini virus would then be genetically engineered altering the control gene so it and would be triggered to work as a defence mechanism if the body became HIV infected.
Intv.
David Swales has AIDS.
He helps to run Body Positive a self help group for sufferers like himself.He welcomes any scientific advance but remains cautious.
Intv.
Oxford City council's HIV liaison officer is working to combat a growing number of heterosexual infected people in the district, the best prevention she believes is still safe sex.
Intv.
Even if the money and the knowledge were available to produce a vaccine for mass immunisation, public opinion could still determine whether genetically engineered viruses will treat HIV in the future.
Whether it's ethically correct is yet to be debated.
Thieves have raided a widow's home and stolen ten thousand pounds of her late husband's jewellery.
The burglary happened on the anniversary of his death, and while the woman's teenage son was asleep in the house.
GRAEME BOWD/Milton Keynes
JEANETTE BLOOMER/Burglary Victim
Det Sgt DAVE PURNELL/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The raiders struck while Jeanette Bloomer was on holiday with her family.
It's the third burglary at their home in the Furzton district of Milton Keynes.
And this time the thieves grabbed items which money can't replace.
Exactly four years ago Jeanette's husband Tim died of cancer.
Most of his jewellery was taken, rings, bracelets, watches and cufflinks, plus items he gave to Jeanette.
Altogether ten thousand pounds worth of valuables were stolen.
Female speaker
I got a phone call to say what had happened.
I was gutted.
They broke open five jewellery boxes.
They took things that I wanted to pass on to the children
Voice over
The thieves were clearly determined to break into this house.
They tried to force several doors and windows, finally gaining entry through the conservatory.
Jeanette's eldest son David was not with the rest of the family.
He slept through the raid.
The house has a burglar alarm, but it was switched off.
Male speaker
The son was there so it is unfortunate that the burglars were not disturbed.
But at least he was not injured.
Voice over
Mrs Bloomer has offered a one thousand pounds reward for the return of the items stolen.
She's now left with little more than photographs to bring back memories of her late husband.
A weed that's so poisonous it can kill horses and cattle is thriving, because chemicals once used to destroy it have been banned.
The plant is sprouting on roadsides and railways and then blowing onto farmland.
And now there's a new threat, because the laws designed to control it may soon be scrapped.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
TED CUDD/Stable Owner
MARK DAUNCEY/Gloucestershire County Council
In its flowering state, it's ignored by livestock because of a bitter taste, but that dies off in the autumn.
The taste may change but the poison doesn't.
One stable owner at Evesham in Worcester is having to clear ragwort from his land by hand.
Indiscrimate roadside spraying using more powerful weedkillers has been banned because the chemicals found their way into water supplies.
The Ministry say’ we are concerned about ragwort, but we're considering repealling the Weeds Act in the interests of de-regulation.
Farmers can control it by ploughing it in.’
Ploughing though isn't an option on roadsides and motorways.
Selective spraying will go on, even if the law is scrapped.
Meanwhile Mr Dauncey says he wants stable owners to get together to force positive action on a growing problem.
Still to come on Central News, the real-life crime that Inspector Morse tackled.
The murder helped prove a new science and became the plot in a detective novel.
And, Par for the Course…
The home which is raining golfballs.
In Central News tonight:
Gun ring smashed…
Police raid thirty-five homes.
Three months for killing swans…
But neighbours say its not enough.
And lost independence…
Man is told he can't keep his artificial legs
Good evening,
ANNE DAWSON
A hoard of lethal firearms has been seized by police in a series of raids on homes.
Detectives say a hundred and ninety officers, many of them armed, were involved in Operation Lucy which has smashed a nationwide drugs and guns racket.
(WES TO READ NEXT)
WESLEY SMITH
The haul included machine guns probably bought on the black market from armies in former Eastern Bloc countries.
Twenty people have been arrested and police say more arrests may follow.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Luton
Det Ch Supt JOHN BRANSCOMBE/South East Regional Crime Squad
Male speaker
Voice over
They were being supplied to criminals for drugs dealing protection or armed robbery
It's understood three were arrested at Milton Keynes in co-ordinated raids at Melick Road in Beanhill, and Lancaster Gate and The Crescent in Bletchley.
Another eleven were arrested in Northamptonshire.
Drugs were also seized and police say it was part of a long term campaign, codenamed Operation Lucy and targeted on a guns and drug network.
Neighbours in Milton Keynes were taken by surprise.
Male speaker
It's a bit close to home.
Male speaker
That's a bit of a surprise.
Female speaker
It's a bit nervewracking., We don't know anyone over there 
Voice over
The operation involved 150 regional crime Squad detectives and was organised from Luton Police Station In Bedfordshire.
Suspects are being held at various police stations in the Home Counties including Milton Keynes.
The dawn raids happened less than a day after a Detective Sergeant was shot with a machine gun in Kent.
But there's no direct link say police.
Male speaker
We're looking at it.
There could be a link but it's early days.
Voice over
Meanwhile it's been revealed that thirty people have been arrested and thousands of pounds worth of drugs seized during raids in North Oxfordshire.
Six people have been charged with possession of drugs with intent to supply others.The big fear from police at the moment is availability of cheap automatic weapons from Eastern Europe.
These days they can cost hundreds rather than thousands of pounds, and drug rings are known to be using them.
The Uzi is capable of firing thirty rounds a second and detectives are glad to have captured what they have.
The other weapons are hardly less dangerous including shotguns, rifles, and powerful high calibre handguns.
But they say the investigation is in a very early stage and there could be more raids and arrests to come.
A man has been jailed for three months for shooting dead a pair of swans.
Neighbours who offered a two thousand pound reward for the capture of the culprit say it's not long enough.
SIMON GARRETT/Stroud
Alfred Dines shot ten air gun pellets into one swan and eleven into its mate.
A vet told Stroud magistrates the birds died a slow agonising death.
Dines only admitted the charge when it was proven that guns found in his car had fired the shots.
People living on the Ryeford canal where they were killed believe three months isn't long enough.
Male speaker
I do indeed.
I think anybody round here would think that
Female speaker
I don't think it's enough.
It should be more like three years…or more than that…cruel thing
Male speaker
He should have a bit longer.
There's a lot of strong feeling round here.
A lot of animal lovers.
No one likes to see wildlife hurt
Voice over
The maximum sentence which could have been imposed was six months.
Because Swans have belonged to the crown since Henry the eight's day Dines was prosecuted for criminal damage to property…rather than animal cruelty which carries a lesser penalty.
Locals had promised a two thousand pound reward for information leading to the gunman's arrest.
The person who did tip off the authorities turned it down.
They said it was their public duty to help.
The chairfman of the magistrates Mr John Wright told Dines his offences were serious.
He had carried out a deliberate act causing unnecessary suffering and cruelty.
Dines is already serving thirty months at a young offenders' institution for robbery.
Today's sentence will be added to that.
There's a new pair of swans on the Ryeford canal now…residents are pledged to watch out for them
An eighty-six year old man has been told that he can't keep his artificial legs because he's too accident prone.
The hospital says he'd risk serious injury if he were to fall while using the legs.
But Percy Fryer says the decision means he's lost his independence.
ERIKA BARNES/St Briavels
PERCY FRYER
Dr STEPHEN ANDREWS/Prosthetist
Every day is a tiresome and frustrating struggle for Percy Fryer.
Just getting out of bed is a battle.
When he asked for an artificial leg for his newly amputated right leg he was told not only that he couldn't have one, but he'd also have to give up his existing left false leg, which he'd had for six years.
Percy says losing his artificial limbs means he'll lose his independence and his dignity.
Male speaker
I feel let down.
I told them I wasn't going away without a leg.
Voice over
But the Disablement Services Centre in Bristol, says it won't make Percy the artificial legs he needs, because they're worried he may fall over.
Male speaker
He was given a leg to help him get him from his wheelchair to the toilet.
He may have a fall.
Voice over
The Centre says it took into account Percy's age, stength and fitness.
But now they have agreed to give Percy another assessment.
Under the microscope: DNA testing to catch a rapist.
Under review: School in child abuse investigation may re-open.
And under fire.
The school where police learn to shoot back.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
The men, who match descriptions of the rapist, have all agreed to give a blood sample.
The DNA technique has already been used to spectacular effect, even trapping a murderer.
This report from Gareth Furby.
Det Insp DAVE BUCKENHAM/Thames Valley Police
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
DR PAUL DEBENHAM/Cellmark Diagnostics
Voice over
The blood samples have been sent to the Home Office forensic laboratory in Aldermaston.
And the results are expected within a few weeks.
Many of the potential suspects resemble this impression of the rapist.
Others are known sex offenders.
In June an Oxford student was raped in a public toilet.
Just over two weeks ago a 27 year old woman was sexually assaulted in an alleyway.
And in September last year a 15 year old girl was assaulted in a churchyard.
Forensic scientists have now identified the attackers DNA pattern from a sample of body fluid.
He says all the men have agreed to take it, and anyone who refuses may be the man.
In the 1980s murderer Colin Pitchfork was caught by Leicestershire police after he asked a workmate to take his test.
But that investigation involved thousands of men giving blood.
Although Thames Valley police are confident the Oxford rapist does come from the local area.
They have no plans at the moment to introduce mass testing.
The procedure was developed by the company Cellmark, which is based in Abingdon.
The DNA pattern is unique for every person.
And from two different samples there's a perfect match.
He says it is ideal to identify one person from a group.
The police are now also checking records of indecent assaults in Oxford, to see if the pattern of attacks goes back further than last year.
A school at a centre of a child abuse investigation may reopen in the Autumn.
Governors want the school to stay in business, but at the moment they have no pupils.
Social workers say if the school IS to re-open they'll first need to be satisfied about the welfare of any new pupils.
Tim Hurst reports.
TODDINGTON/Gloucestershire
ROBERT LASLETT/Chairman of governors
Voice over
New Barns School at Toddington in Gloucestershire, which caters for disturbed children, closed early for the summer holidays and police began an investigation, after the vice chairman of Governors, Peter Righton, was questioned about imported pornography.
Mr Righton shares at house at Evesham with the school's headmaster, Richard Alston, who was immediately suspended.
All 22 pupils, aged between 6 and 13, were withdrawn by their social workers and are now being questioned by specially trained police.
In spite of the on-going investigation, governors want to re-open in the Autumn.
Gloucestershire Social Services department, which will be responsible for overseeing the private school, say if new pupils are enrolled the school will be subject to detailed inspections regarding the welfare of the children.
Peter Righton has been summonsed to appear in court next month to face allegations concerning obscene material.
A group of pensioners are sueing the Cheltenham and Gloucester Building Society after losing hundreds of thousands of pounds in a failed investment scheme.
The pensioners claim the society didn't give them adequate warnings of the risks involved when it advised them how to invest their money.
Clare Lafferty reports.
WORCESTER
DEREK WOODWARD/Investor
PAUL STAFFORD/Solicitor
Voice over
Derek Woodward from Worcester is one of around two hundred pensioners who lost money in the failed investment scheme.
The Cheltenham and Gloucester Building Society advised him to mortgage his home and invest the capital to give him and his wife an income.
But the investment company collapsed, and now Mr Woodward and his wife owe sixty thousand pounds and may loose their house.
The Building Society, based in Gloucester, has set aside interest payments on the debts owed to it and is investigating the possiblity of making some compensation payments.
But the pensioners want more.
A firm of Worcester solicitors has taken up their cause, and has now issued writs against the C.
The solicitors want all the mortgages to be written off, and they will claim compensation for the distress caused to their clients.
No one from the Cheltenham and Gloucester Building Society would be interviewed.
But in a statement, a spokesman said the Cwas doing all it could to help the investors.
He said suing the building society would only delay matters and make resolving the problem more costly.
Two people have been killed in a crash between a car and lorry which completely blocked a main road for five hours.
CALLOW/Herefordshire
It happened on the A forty nine (49) at Callow, just south of Hereford.
A man and a woman in the car died instantly.
The driver of the lorry was treated in hospital for shock.
A farmer has turned the clock back fifty years to harvest his crop of wheat.
Instead of driving a modern combine harvester, he's using a binder to cut the corn into sheaves.
Richard Barnett reports:
PENCOMBE/Herefordshire
EDWARD LEGGE/Farmer
JANET LEGGE/Farmer
Voice over
As this wartime film of Land Army women shows, the way to harvest cereals 50 years ago was to use a binder.
The machine cut the crop and tied it up in sheaves.
By the early 1950s the binder had been rendered out of date by the combine harvester, which cut the crop and separated out the grain in one operation.
But now at Shortwood farm in Herefordshire, the binder is making a comeback.
The farm is open to the public and it's reviving old fashioned techniques as living history.
Farmer Edward Legge was born at Shortwood 71 years ago and he remembers harvest times of old.
Male speaker
In the old days there were around a dozen people in the field at harvest time.
It was much more fun than nowadays when the farmer is on his own.
Voice over
It's a slow process, cutting a field with a binder.
This 1938 Massey Harris model, designed to work with a horse or tractor, will take 2 days to harvest this 4 acre crop of wheat.
A combine would do the same job in an hour.
The sheaves have to be put in groups of 6 to form stooks.
After a fortnight drying out, the sheaves will be stacked in a rick ready for thrashing to separate out the grain.
Stacking the stooks proved a popular attraction for visitors to the farm, although for some the whole process seemed rather baffling.
Female speaker
The open farm is a good idea because it teaches townspeople about the countryside.
Voice over
The farm attracts 6,000 visitors a year and with farming facing an uncertain future, reaping the rewards of the past makes good sense.
A three-times World speedway champion has been taking motorbike lessons…so that he can pass his test.
Simon Wigg has been at the top of his sport for a decade but has never ridden on the road.
Mark Kiff went to see him on the day he took his test.
AYLESBURY Buckinghamshire
SIMON WIGG Learner Rider
ALASDAIR FORBES Motorcycle Instructor
Voice over
Simon Wigg has lined up on the starting grid in more world championships than most people have changed tyres.
When it comes to competing there's no one tougher…the Aylesbury racer has even broken his neck in the pursuit of victory.
It seems there couldn't be anyone better qualified to ride motorbikes than Simon Wigg…the only problem is that he's not qualified…he's never passed his motorcycle test.
Now he's gone back to driving school in an effort to pass with flying colours.
Simon has made his name in speedway and long track racing…he's triple world champion…but today he faces his biggest test yet.
Simon's progress from world champion to fledgling novice has been monitored by senior instructor Alasdair Forbes…but what can you teach a world champion?
So after a last minute practise session on the open road it's off to the Aylesbury test centre…no chequered flag in prospect but the possible thrill of discarding those rather embarassing Learner plates for the world's best.
And after a nerve wracking hour…the verdict…yes or no:
So it's off with the number plates…forget next month's world championships…here comes the thrill of the open road.
Woody Allen denies child abuse
FTSE up 8
The hundred shares index closed up eight point eight at two three six three point five 
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety three and down at two marks, eighty one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Women are being warned not to walk alone at night after two attacks in Swindon town centre.
In the first, an eighteen year old was grabbed from behind while walking between Regent Street and the Wyvern Theatre.
In the second incident, a thirty year old screamed and fought back when she was attacked in Groundwell Road.
A group of travellers are going to court to challenge a council's right to move them on.
The travellers say they should be allowed to lead a nomadic life.
RICHARD BARNETT/Hollow Fosse/Gloucestershire
STEVE DAVIES/Traveller
A police force which shot a man dead last year has unveiled a new centre for teaching officers to use guns.
West Mercia Police believe they now have one of the world's most sophisticated centres for training armed officers.
It cost two million pounds, and includes the latest in video technology, as Adrian Britton reports.
WORCESTER
BILL BRADLEY/Firearms Instructor
PHIL DAVIES/West Mercia Police
ALAN BAILEY/Chief Instructor
A pioneering scheme to screen Afro-Caribbean people for the blood disorder Sickle Cell anaemia has been launched.
In Britain one in ten black people carry the sickle cell gene.
The screening aims to help explain the consequences of the illness.
OXFORD
MERRY FRANCE-DAWSON/Sickle Cell Sufferer
Dr TOM NICHOLSON-LAILEY/Sickle Cell Clinic
Voice over
Taking blood samples to screen for Sickle Cell disease; the only way to find out whether someone has the condition, or is a carrier.
Sickle cells are blood cells which instead of being round, are sickle, or moon-shaped.
They evolved in the bloodstreams of people in hot countries as a defence against malaria and occur mainly in black people.
In certain conditions sickle cells clump together, blocking the bloodstream; at best causing pain; at worst, a stroke.
Sufferers need to avoid stress, cold, or lack of oxygen, all of which make some of their normal blood cells turn into sickle cells.
Female speaker
If I've been doing alot which is tiring and it's cold, I tend to become more run-down and off-colour.
Voice over
This is one of 2 clinics in Oxford testing Afro-Caribbean patients between the ages of 16 and 40.
The condition, which varies from mild forms to the most serious, Sickle Cell Anaemia, cannot be cured, but there is treatment.
There is still widespread ignorance about Sickle Cell Anaemia and the chances of passing it on.
Carriers don't suffer themselves, but have genes which can pass on sickle cell.
If 2 carriers have children, there's a one in 4 chance their child will have normal blood cells, a one in 2 chance they'll have children who also be carriers anda one in 4 chance of them having a sickle cell sufferer.
But this is all chance.
They MIGHT have4 unnaffected children, or 4 sufferers.
Male speaker
In most couples either one or both will prove not to be carriers, but if they are, we can give them counselling and reassure them.
Voice over
But until there's a better understanding of sickle cell, there's always the danger the disease will be passed on by carriers unaware they have the gene.
In part two: Can't beat the feeling.
Oxford put some fizz into the Coca Cola Cup.
Just champion: The speedway star who's one’ L’of a rider.
And making a comeback: A bit of farming history crops up again.
Welcome back: Oxford United celebrated thirty years of league football at the Manor Ground in style last night.
They beat Swansea City in the new-look Coca Cola cup by three goals to nil.There to enjoy the party were some of the early pioneers of local football.
Here's Tim Russon 
Voice over
And tonight, Swindon Town are playing in the league, at Bristol Rovers.
News of that game on our late bulletin at ten thirty.
Cricket now, and the latest from the County Championship.
At Bristol, Northantonshire declared their first innings on 251 for 6…
Gloucestershire, in their second, are 45 for 2.
At Weston-super-Mare, Worcestershire are 230 for 5 in reply to Somerset's first innings total of 328.
RUNS=0:04
A TV scriptwriter whose career began when she entered a writing competition because she needed the prize money, is now enjoying undreamed of success.
Lucy Gannon, creator of the Central TV series Peak Practice and Soldier, Soldier, is being deluged with offers of work.
LUCY GANNON/Writer
1988
PEAK PRACTICE/Central Television
SOLDIER SOLDIER/Central Television
It's eight thirty in the morning and the creator of Soldier Soldier and Peak Practice is already hard at work at her converted farmhouse in the Derbyshire countryside.
Her greatest fan — her husband — died almost a year ago and the work has helped her cope.
Lucy says’ when George died I phoned my agent and said give me three weeks off to get over the physical shock.
After that I realised that — like anyone else — I had to go on earning the money.
So, I made a promise to myself that I'd never be late with any deadlines.
And I've done that.
It was hard to start with, but now I'm back into the swing of it’.
It was George who encouraged Lucy at the start of her career — a career that began with a typewriter on the kitchen table at the couple's council house in Derby.
He'd encouraged her to enter a writing competition.
Apart from anything else she was unemployed and they needed the two thousand pounds prize money.
CLIP FROM PEAK PRACTICE
Peak Practice — a tale of Derbyshire doctoring — has become one of Central's most successful series.
Another is being filmed for the Autumn schedules.
Though modest, Lucy admits she gets a buzz from seeing the characters she creates come to life on the screen.
Lucy says’ It's lovely.
When people stop me, like the lady in the local post office…
Because you realise the characters have come to life for people.
And that's exciting’.
CLIP FROM SOLDIER SOLDIER
Soldier Soldier has already had two series, its third starts in the autumn.
Lucy says’ I want to get it right.
I want stuff on the TV that keeps people interested…that's real drama…with peaks and troughs, unexpected twists and turns.
Drama that makes people laugh.
Next from the Lucy Gannon stable, another series of Peak Practice, a one-off study of a nurse turned killer starring Dawn French…and a theatre commission from the Royal Shakespeare Company.
Lucy's father said she had a headful of nonsense, her public would disagree 
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Last miner found dead
Peter Alcock, the last miner of six trapped in the Bilsthorpe pit in Nottinghamshire, has been certified dead at the scene.
Inquiry into pit collapse
An inquiry has begun into the pit collapse with a focus on the roof support system.
Child cruelty mother freed
The Appeal Court has freed Heidi Colwell, the mother who jailed for leaving her young child alone at home while she went out to work.
Lebanon attacks flare up
Israeli warplanes have attacked three sites in eastern Lebanon to avenge a bomb attack on soldiers for which the pro-Iranian Hezbollah has claimed responsibility.
FTSE down 8
The hundred shares index closed down eight point one at thirty, sixty-five point five.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-one and down at two marks, fifty-four.
And some news just in,
Sally Gunnell has broken the world record to win gold in the women's four hundred meter hurdles final in Stuttgart.
Her time was (52.74) fifty-two point seven four seconds.
A nurse who was jailed for three months for assaulting an elderly woman in her care is appealing against her conviction.
She claims her alleged victim was confused and made up the whole story.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
Magistrates were told that in February this year, while working in the Ashbury Lodge Nursing Home in Swindon, she lost her temper and hit 88-year-old Sarah Fribbens in the face.
Mrs Fribbens, who was said to be too frail to give evidence in the original court case, died last weekend, from an unrelated cause.
Her doctor told Swindon Crown Court that Mrs Fribbens was registered blind and suffered frequent bouts of confusion, and Judge John McNaught said it was important not to attach too much weight to a statement she gave to the police.
The court then heard evidence from June Shell, a care assisitant who was working alongside Frak on the night in question.
Mrs Shell said Frak appeared angry when she discovered that Mrs Fribbens had wet the bed.
She heard Mrs Fribbens cry out, Don't hit me, and then a noise which sounded like a punch.
She admitted failing to report the incident, and withholding information when interviewed by the police.
But she denied that the only reason she later gave evidence against Frak was to avoid any suspicion that she'd hit Mrs Fribbens.
Rebecca Frak is unlikely to give evidence.
The case is expected to end tomorrow.
Still to come on Central News, Yes please, Minister.
A monster surprise for the little boy from Bosnia.
And the agony…and the ecstasy.
A-level students reach the moment of truth.
Welcome back: A five year old Bosnian airlifted to Britain from Sarajevo upstaged the Health Minister today, and publicly thanked hospital workers for treating him and his fellow evacuees.
Wesley Smith
The Minister had planned a speech of thanks himself during a visit to Stoke Mandeville Hospital…but Adis Avdic stole his thunder.
MARIA COYLE/Stoke Mandeville
AMELA AVDIC/Adis's Mother
Dr BRIAN MAWHINNEY MP/Health Minister
Voice over
On his first ministerial visit to a hospital to meet with Bosnian evacuees, Dr Brian Mawhinney presented five year old Adis Avdic with a cuddly dinosaur, revealing his own daughter is a Jurrassic Park fan.
At a news conference Dr Mawhinney then publicly thanked staff at the 12 NHS hospitals caring for 21 Bosnian patients.
But Adis, who's receiving treatment for paralysis, stole the show with his own personal message.
sound up.
But the question of refugee status for Bosnian patients after treatment was evaded by the Minister and diplomatically dealt with by the boy's mother.
Intv.
Amela Avdic
Intv. with Minister Dr Brian Mawhinney
Adis who appeared before news cameras at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford earlier this week was transferred to Stoke Mandeville because it houses the national spinal injuries centre.
He'll be at Stoke Mandeville for some time and will receive schooling with lessons in English.
The Minister also paid a private visit to thirty year old Nesad Chowchavich, a Bosnian policeman who's paralysed after being injured in a grenade attack.
A record number of pupils received their A-level results today, but many will be left wondering if they'll get the place they want at university.
It's been predicted that the number of places on courses is likely to be frozen this year.
But students are being advised not to panic.
KEN GOODWIN/Cirencester
SARAH TIMBERS/Student
NIGEL ROBBINS/College Principal
JESS ENDERBY/UCCA
FRANCES RAVELL/A-Level Student
ANDREW PEW/Careers Adviser
She says that she's got the grades she wanted — she's very happy.
Sarah's place at University is now assured along with other classmates, some of whom found it all a bit too much.
She says she got her grades, she's very shocked!
But for some, who didn't get the grades they hoped for, there's abject misery.
Teachers are on hand to offer comfort and advice.
Cirencester tertiary college's principal says he's pleased with this years results.
He says he's worried that those who just missed out on their grades might find it harder to get into university.
A record number of students took A-levels this year, but cuts in funding for popular university subjects such as arts and social sciences means some who didn't quite get the required grades may not get in.
At the UCCA building in Cheltenham where applications for university places are processed, it's been chaos today, with worried students calling for advice.
He says there could be problems on some courses.
But it's a bit early to make predictions.
At the Gloucestershire careers office a special service has been set up to advise students who may find that they can't get into college this year.
Many are desperate.
She says that she feels suicidal.
But it's not that bad is it?
Yes!
He says the message is, don't panic.
Get some advice as soon as possible.
With more A-level passes coupled with the financial squeeze on some universities the competition for places is greater than ever this year.
While many will go onto to further studies, others might have to think again.
A nurse who was jailed for three months for assaulting an elderly woman in her care is appealing against her conviction.
She claims her alleged victim was confused and made up the whole story.
She says that she's got the grades she wanted — she's very happy.
Sarah's place at University is now assured along with other classmates, some of whom found it all a bit too much.
She says she got her grades, she's very shocked!
But for some, who didn't get the grades they hoped for, there's abject misery.
Teachers are on hand to offer comfort and advice.
Cirencester tertiary college's principal says he's pleased with this years results.
He says he's worried that those who just missed out on their grades might find it harder to get into university.
A record number of students took A-levels this year, but cuts in funding for popular university subjects such as arts and social sciences means some who didn't quite get the required grades may not get in.
At the UCCA building in Cheltenham where applications for university places are processed, it's been chaos today, with worried students calling for advice.
He says there could be problems on some courses.
But it's a bit early to make predictions.
At the Gloucestershire careers office a special service has been set up to advise students who may find that they can't get into college this year.
Many are desperate.
She says that she feels suicidal.
But it's not that bad is it?
Yes!
He says the message is, don't panic.
Get some advice as soon as possible.
With more A-level passes coupled with the financial squeeze on some universities the competition for places is greater than ever this year.
While many will go onto to further studies, others might have to think again.
In Central News tonight:
Why won't they operate?
Heart patient claims it's because he smokes.
Bank Holiday tragedy.
Flat tyres may have killed five.
And tears of frustration.
The A-level students who didn't quite make it.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
Wesley Smith
WESLEY SMITH
Mr Ashmore says he's tried to stop smoking, but can't.
The controversy has thrown up confusion, with one doctor saying there IS a ban on smokers, and a hospital cardiac unit insisting there ISN'T.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Swindon
BRIAN ASHMORE/Heart Patient
Dr MICHAEL HELLIER/Consultant Physician
Dr HARRY MILLWARD-SADLER/Southampton General Hospital
Dr BRIAN MAWHINNEY MP/Health Minister
Brian Ashmore says he suffered his first heart attack thirteen years ago and he's been back into the Princess Margaret Hospital in Swindon five times since with related problems.
He's been told an operation will help him but says it's only on condition he gives up smoking for six months.
Mr Ashmore is fifty three and is registered sick.
He used to smoke sixty cigarettes a day and says he's brought it down to between fifteen and twenty roll-ups.
But now he can't go any further.
He says he found out about the ban while he was the subject of a court case where medical reports were needed.
It was from staff at the Princess Margaret Hospital.
Mr Asmore's GP has refused to comment.
The Hospital won't speak about individual cases but they say they never do their own cardiac cases anyway.
They are passed on to other specialist Hospitals, and in this case the Southampton General where they believed surgeons wouldn't accept smokers…
However the Southampton Hospital insists that while it discourages smoking and won't allow it in the building, they have no ban on heart operations.
Health Minister Brian Mawhinney, speaking at Stoke Mandeville Hospital he said the decision was down to the doctors.
Male speaker
Consulktants must take the decision on the clinical evidence
Voice over
Meanwhile Brian Ashmore sits at home smoking and taking a daily cocktail of drugs, still hoping someone will give him the treatment he needs.
A head-on car crash in which five women were killed may have been caused by flat tyres.
An inquest has been told that two tyres on one of the cars involved were seriously under-inflated.
The driver lost control while overtaking.
Ambulance Service Video/CROWMARSH GIFFORD/Oxfordshire
April 1993/CROWMARSH GIFFORD/Oxfordshire
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
BRIAN WILMOT/Survivor
Voice over
The crash on the A423 at Crowmarsh Gifford came as drivers streamed home on the Easter Bank holiday.
The cars collided head on a closing speed estimated at 100 mph.
Three of the victims were in a Metro the others in a Honda.
All five sustained massive injuries but the driver of the Honda survived and today he gave evidence at the inquest.
Male speaker
All I can remember is the car going in front of me.
It was so quick.
I blacked out then.
Voice over
Other drivers described how the Metro overtook a caravan and then started weaving from side to side.
It finally crossed the road and struck the Honda.
The Metro was driven by 49 year old Valerie Webb.
She died along with her sister Sylvia and 77 year old Alice Mulford.
The other victims were Mr Wilmot's wife Sylvia and her sister Marjorie Poynton.
Both back and front seat passengers were wearing seat belts.
The coroner Nicholas Gardner said the Metro driver's attempts to regain control of her car may have made matters worse.
He recorded a verdict of accidental death.
A woman rider has been crushed to death by her own horse during a trials event.
Vanessa Weaver's stallion became entangled in a fence and rolled over on top of her.
It's the fourth such death this year, and the sport's governing body has now set up an inquiry.
JESSICA FOWLE/Kingsey
JOHN LAWRENCE/British Horse Society
HUGH THOMAS/British Horse Society
Voice over
Vanessa Weaver was an experienced horse-rider and eventer, competing in the intermediate class.
She was riding in the first day of the Tythrop Horse Trials at Kingsey in Buckinghamshire when the accident happened.
Approaching jump fifteen, a triple bar fence on the cross country course, Kharon, her hungarian stallion, jumped too early.
Male speaker
The horse took off too early.
It became entangled in the fence.
When it rolled over we believe it rolled onto her.
Voice over
Mrs Weaver, who was wearing a helmet at the time of the fall, was pronounced dead at the scene.
The trials continued today with many competitors unaware of what had happened.
But even those who'd heard the news seemed undeterred.
Male speaker
It makes you think but at the end of the day you've trained your horses to be here and do it well.
Male speaker
It's unfortunate that such things serve to bring you to your senses and make you realise that of course it's dangerous.
Voice over
Vanessa Weaver is the fourth person this year to be killed during horse eventing.
Male speaker
Although it's tragic the risks are very low.
In terms of safety we are constantly looking at it and if we can learn anything at all we'll put whatever procedures we can in place.
Voice over
Since eventing began in 1948, there have been only twelve deaths.
The British Horse Society is anxious to find out why a third of them should have happened in this year alone.
Two people have been charged with firearms offences after a police operation to smash a gun ring.
Machine guns, shotguns and rifles were among the weapons recovered in a series of raids on homes in Milton Keynes, Northamptonshire and other parts of the country.
One of the people charged comes from Milton Keynes.
Five other people are still being held, five more have been released on bail.
Hundreds of people from all over the world have come together to talk about elves, hobbits and dragons.
They're members of the Tolkien Society, fans of the man who wrote Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit.
To some they're simply an engaging fantasy, but for others they create a secret world that can last a lifetime.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
RAYNER UNWIN Son of Tolkien's Publisher
ANGELA SURTEES Tolkien Fan
Voice over
Dark mountains; mystical valleys; fierce enemies; the world of John Ronald Reuel Tolkien.
The story of a perilous journey across Middle earth to conquer the evil of the Dark Lord.
The task ahead, to destroy the Ring of Power.
Through his books, Tolkien created a mythical world.
The Lord of the Rings has become a classic.
Some say it's heroic and romantic; others say it's pure science fiction.
100 years after the author's birth, Tolkien fans have gathered in Oxford, to pay homage to the man who did his utmost to make fantasy reality.
Among them, the first child ever to read The Hobbit; the son of the publisher Stanley Unwin, who was paid a shilling to read the book and say whether it should be published.
The centenary conference at Keble College will hear from more than 80 speakers on various aspects of Tolkien's work.
And to coincide, the Bodlean Library has opened an exhibition showing original sketches and maps he drew on the back of exam papers.
For years he sent his own children letters from Father
Christmas complete with illustrations.
The story of his own life attracted almost 500 visitors on the first day.
There's always the attraction of having a drink in the Eagle and Child, where Tolkien, along with colleagues like C.S.Lewis and T.E.Lawrence would meet every week.
And the discussions continue even now.
The pub is staying open all day during the conference.
For the Tolkien fans, it all adds to the atmosphere.
For many, Tolkien created a fascinating world, where there was good and bad.
And it's the human side to his outlandish characters that has touched them.
Those who knew him describe him as a typical Oxford don, courteous, charming, an unassuming man to whom fame came very late.
Dressed in tweeds and constantly pipe smoking, his imagination often ran away with him.
Labour accuses Government of’ dithering’over Somalia
FTSE down 4
The hundred shares index closed down four point one at twenty three fifty nine point four.
The pound is up at one dollar ninety three, but down at two Marks eighty,
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
English winegrowers are about to harvest a record crop of grapes — but it could lead to them facing new restrictions on production in the future.
The European Community have set strict limits on the amount of table wine that can be produced.
If the quota's exceeded, growers could be forced to stop planting new vines.
Julie Dolphin reports.
NEWENT/Gloucestershire
TOM DAY/Managing Director/Three Choirs Vineyard
STEPHEN SKELTON/English Vineyards Association
ROGER FISHER/Bothy Vineyard
Voice over
Staff at the Three Choirs Vineyard in Gloucestershire are looking forward to an excellent harvest this year.
But the prospect of a bumper crop is being soured by the threat of a European Community ban on the production of any more table wine.
Tom Day believes the industry will reach its EC quota this year and winegrowers will be forced to stop planting vines.
With this in mind, the company has been investing money in planting new crops before the threat of a ban becomes reality.
Growers can get around the ban by planting vines for quality wines rather than table wines.
But the extra investment needed is simply beyond the reach of many growers.
The English Vineyards Association wants the EC to take a more flexible approach to its restrictions on growers in this country.
It wants Brussels to consider bringing some table wine vines into its quality wine scheme.
The owners of the Bothy Vineyard in Oxfordshire insist that winegrowers in the UK should be allowed to run their businesses as they see fit.
English wine growers have only been operating on a commercial basis for the past 20 years.
So compared with the commercial clout of the continental magnums, they'll just have to be satisfied to remain as miniatures.
Football.
Swindon Town survived a seven goal thriller to take the points against Bristol Rovers at Twerton Park last night.
But the end was marked by an amazing sight — all eleven Town players in a defensive wall on the goal-line, following an illegal backpass to the goalkeeper.
Erika Barnes reports.
TWERTON PARK/Bath
Voice over
In command and in the back of the net.
Swindon took control in the third minute, Shaun Taylor nodded in Paul Bodin's corner.
Glenn Hoddle's free kick was the start of the next goal.
An up and under allowed in leg's-eleven, Dave Mitchell; a high kicking effort claimed number two.
And from the next attack came a penalty.
Craig Maskell tripped and upended by the beaten Steve Yates.
Paul Bodin's strike high into the top corner gave Swindon a 3-0 lead.
But Rovers weren't sunk.
And right on half time Mayhew poked a header passed Frazeer Digby.
Mitchell claimed his second in the second minute of the second half.
Another high stepping affair bundled over Swindon's fourth.
All was not lost for Rovers, when substitute Marcus Stewart claimed another.
And then if that wasn't exciting enough, Swindon fell foul of the new back pass rule, although Swindon wouldn't agree this panic clearence constituted a back pass?
It meant 11 Townsmen had their back against the wall for an indirect free kick; an incredible sight within the 6 yard box.
Rovers though gave the match a block buster finish, as Paul Hardyman busted the wall.
But too late.
Swindon won the battle…just…4-3.
The days of farmers taking cattle to market may be numbered.
New technology is taking over, and sheep and cattle are now starring, and being sold, on satellite television.
Debbie Kelly reports.
NORTHBROOK/Oxfordshire
MARK MILLER/Auctioneer
MARTIN WOODWARD/Assessor
RICHARD LINES/Farmer
Voice over
Thursday morning.
Banbury cattle Market; the biggest in Europe.
Farmers bring their animals, buyers look and then bid.
But now new technology is moving in on the traditional auctions.
This is the new market place.
The cattle are about to be sold, but they won't move any further than the farmers' field.
This is selling by satellite.
Male speaker
It is ridiculous to sell one beast at a time to one person.
With this satelite system it can be improved.
Voice over
The cattle are filmed on video; the video is then compiled in television studios.
On auction day, the pictures are fed via satelite dish direct to buyers television sets.
They then bid on the telephone via a broker who is in the television studio.
Male speaker
It is like a live stock market, the buyer and seller is not there, but there is a live auction taking place.
Voice over
At Banbury cattle market they're trying an alternative computerised system.
In the mornings, Martin Woodward assesses sheep brought into market for sale by farmers.
In the afternoon, he goes to the farm to grade animals which are to be sold by computer auction; his information is fed into a computer on auction day; buyers can bid by tapping into their computers.
Male speaker
It is a godd idea for the average sheep.
It is a good idea for the buyer who has no time to come to market, but it will never replace the special advantages of the live stock auction.
Voice over
One advantage is that the animals don't have to be moved so much so lorries don't clog up town centres, but there are disadvantages, market day is a chance for farmers to meet and keep track of prices.
Male speaker
I know some people say it takes time, but I think if you spend a year producing a lamb it is nice to see it sold and you do the best you can for it.
Voice over
Auctioneers maintain the introduction of new technology buying will complement not destory the markets, but inevitably they will bring changes to the traditional market day.
Business experts have warned that the jobs which councillors hope will be created by redeveloping the site of old car works could be a long time coming.
The council says the redevelopment is an historic opportunity for the city, and that they're right to be optimistic.
Julie Dolphin reports.
Cllr JOHN POWER/Oxford City Council
GEORGE SIEMIENIUCH/Grant Thornton
Voice over
60 years ago the Rover plant at Cowley formed the backbone of the city's industrial life.
Today due to the decline in the motor industry, it's a shadow of its former self.
It's streamlined its production and will contine to produce its top of the range Rover 800 series in a state of the art assembly plant.
Before the end of this year the company plans to close its North and South works.
But last night councillors approved ambitious plans by Arlington Property Developments for offices and industrial units to be built at the two sites, along with a hotel.
A superstore and retail warehousing will be built on another site due for closure.
In all, it's hoped more than 5,000 jobs will be created.
But business advisors in the city have sounded a word of caution.
They say the jobs could be a long time coming.
Just yards from the sites earmarked for development, the effects of the recession are clear to see.
50,000 sq ft of office space lie empty in the city.
The developers hope the scheme will return Cowley to the kind of economic success it saw during its motoring heyday.
While efforts continue to save the Jensen sports car company from liquidation, a small workshop says it has a full order book for the cars.
Pure Class International restores classic Jensens, and has a four year waiting list.
Richard Barnett reports:
ROSS ON WYE/Herefordshire
WEST BROMWICH/West Midlands
ALAN STRANGE/Pure Class International
SHARON STRANGE/Pure Class International
Voice over
There are 12 Jensen cars in the Pure Class restoration workshops at Ross on Wye and customers are queueing to bring their vehicles in.
It's in stark contrast to the inactivity at Jensen's own factory in West Bromwich, where they've sold just one car in the past 6 months.
Pure Class have specialized in restoring Jensens for 4 years.
They spend up to 3,000 hours bringing what look like rusty writeoffs back to pristine condition.
The cost of a full restoration is between £15,000 and £40,000.
The cost of a new Jensen is over £100,000.
And that's why the Ross on Wye firm say its business is booming, while Jensen is more than half a million pounds in the red.
Male speaker
Jensen have priced themselves out of the market in the recession.
It's important to keep the Jensen marque alive.
Voice over
Pure Class restores cars for customers in the United States, Germany and France and it seems that despite the troubles of the Jensen company itself, there's no lack of demand for these sleek machines with their muscular 7 litre Chrysler engines.
Female speaker
The Jensen is a joy to drive.
It certainly turns heads.
Voice over
Self employed craftsmen are called in to do specific work on the cars being restored, each with their own special skills.
It's no easy job returning cars like this to their former glory, but Pure Class now even manufactures all its own body panels.
So even if Jensen does go out of business, their cars will remain kings of the road.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
Sgt KEITH HAYNES/Thames Valley Police
The 17 year old youth was at Banbury's social services department with his sister, when a row broke out with another man.
The teenager was stabbed in the neck on these steps in front of staff.
He staggered inside for help, but although staff and later ambulancemen fought to save him, he died later.
It's very frightening, we're very upset about it.
We just didn't know what was going on, there was blood on the road.
It was frightening.
The man ran off towards Banbury railway station, where police say they later found a weapon hidden in the men's toilet.
They want to hear from anyone who saw him running through town, or boarding the Liverpool to Dover train.
Any persons who saw anyone on that train looking agitated or with traces of blood, we'd like to hear from them.
The office run by Oxfordshire county council was closed to the public while police carried out forensic investigations.
Staff who witnessed the murder are said to be very distressed.
Meanwhile a 24 year old man from Oxford was arrested later as he arrived at Oxford train station.
He's been taken back to Banbury where's he helping police with their enquiries.
The RSPCA has called for a full investigation in the case of a Worcester man filmed torturing a cat.
The attack was recorded by animal activists and both they and the RSPCA say the man must be prosecuted.
We have a report from Sandy Barton — some viewers may find the pictures disturbing.
AMATEUR VIDEO/WORCESTER
AMATEUR VIDEO
GRAHAM HALL/UK Animal Watch
TIM SCOTT/RSPCA
An elaborate fraud has been uncovered by sharp-eyed staff sifting through student paperwork.
Detectives are now trying to trace the ringleader of what could be a new international racket.
Tim Hurst reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Ch Insp COLIN HANDY/Gloucestershire police
MIKE SCOTT/PCAS
Voice over
At the busiest time of year for staff at P-Cas, the Polytechics Central Admission System at Cheltenham, in Gloucestershire, just as the A-level results are announced, staff have spotted bogus applications from dozens of West African students.
They list false addresses, qualifications and references.
Taken at face value, they'd result in a college place and authentic P-Cas documents which could then be used for fraud.
More than 60 bogus applications have been found so far, mostly posted in Manchester and London.
No bogus student who's slipped through the system is likely to take up a polytechnic place; the paperwork is what they're after, not the course work.
Hundreds of staff at polytechnic and further education colleges have been on strike in a protest over pay.
The stoppage means some students will have to wait longer to learn whether they've secured a college place.
Mark Kiff reports.
OXFORD
ANN BLACK/NALGO Branch Secretary
Dr CLIVE BOOTH/Director/Oxford Polytechnic
Voice over
Clerical staff at Oxford Polytechnic vacated their desks for the picket line.
They were among thousands of members of the union NALGO taking industrial action.
Nene College in Northampton was also hit.
The union has rejected a 4.3% pay offer.
Ann Black, NALGO Branch Secretary, says it's becoming increasingly difficult to provide the professional services we supply to students.
We can see that the quality of education students are getting is deteriorating.
The stoppage was planned to coincide with the day A-level results were announced.
The Polytechnic usually receives hundreds of phone calls from students trying to find out if they've secured a place at college.
Today an answer phone message advised them to ring next week.
Dr Clive Booth, Director of Oxford Polytechnic, says some students will be caused worry.
We hope by next week that we shall be sorting out the offers we're able to make.
So students will in any case have to wait until Tuesday.
By Thursday of next week, most students will have been told where they stand.
Ann Black says it will cause some stress for students hoping to ring today.
However, they will not be able to get through to any polytechnic or college in the country.
So it's not something where particular colleges or students will suffer.
The union is threatening further industrial action.
Students are being told there's no need to worry about their applications.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, the all-star cast that's already in rehearsal for a Christmas show with a difference.
But first, here's Tim Russon with the sport.
Hello there.
TIM RUSSON
BRIAN HORTON/United Manager
ANDY MUTCH/Swindon Town
Brian Horton says they could not have had a better match.
Portsmouth brought a lot of fans.
There was a good atmosphere and they got the right result.
The bookies always write them off but United aim to prove them wrong.
Game number two takes them to the West Midlands tomorrow.
Team news: Les Robinson has been suffering from flu but should be fit.
Teenager Mark Druce is travelling with the squad but United hope to be unchanged.
What about West Brom.
They've enjoyed a fair old start.
The win at Bristol Rovers was in the Coca Cola Cup.
Tomorrow's their first home game.
Over at the County Ground there's another new face.
Andy Mutch has been trying his new kit on for the first time today.
Signed from Wolves for a quarter of a million pounds, Mutch is a proven goalscorer.
He got one against Swindon last season and can't wait to go looking for more in the Premier League.
Andy Mutch says every young lad wants to play in the top league and he is looking forward to it.
And it's one of the biggest games of the season on Sunday.
Team news: there's no Steve White.
He's got an ankle injury which means that Andy Mutch is certain to play.
The mighty Liverpool are already on the march.
They've won two, Swindon have lost two.
In Division Three Hereford have kicked off with the wrong foot.
They've lost both of their opening matches, one in the league and one in the cup.
Things can only get better.
Manager Greg Downs is making two changes for tomorrow's game.
Dave Morris comes into defence, and Leroy May is back in the attack.
What of Chesterfield?
They've won both of their opening matches.
United need a point.
The goal of the first week belongs to Oxford and Chrissy Allen.
It all but sunk Pompey and put United on the crest of the wave.
Rule the Manor Men.
First news of Saturday football comes in Goals Extra tomorrow tea time…the Central live match on Sunday is Birmingham against Wolves…there's plenty of other things going on…here's a taster in our Action Roundup 
On the other side of the world another Banbury team are driving for victory in the world rally championship…
Colin McRae winner in Nez Zealand starts as favourite to take the Rally of Malaysia…
Back home Cowley Stadium stages a special American football challenge match on Sunday…the Oxford saints against an airforce team from Upper Heyford…get ready for take-off…
Also flying high will be the motor cross men racing in the Oxford Grand National at Warren Farm at Culham…
and there'll be talk of another Grand National in Gloucestershire on Sunday when David Nicholson opens up his new stables at Jackdaws Castle for the very first time…they'll be off and running there at half past ten…and its a sure winner for a good day out
We'll be showing you more of the horses, and we'll have action from the tennis finals on Monday night.
Now we're going to meet a man from Banbury who has to be one of the most amazing golfers in the world.
The Ryehill Course near Bloxham in Oxfordshire is where we're going for the first in a new series of the Friday Feature.
STEVE CUNNINGHAM
GARY WILLS/Coach
Steve Cunningham says people can't understand how can you can hit the ball if you can't see.
But it's all about technique, if the stroke is right you'll hit the ball.
Steve's been playing golf for 18 months now.
His coach, his teacher, his eyes come from Ryehill professional Gary Wills.
Gary Wills says they've done a lot of work on the swing and all he does now is aim the golf club him.
They've developed a method to help putt by pulling back the club every inch for every foot.
Steve says he gets great satisfaction out of it and making one par in a round of 18 makes it worthwhile.
Gary says that the game is all about patience and determination and Steve's got it.
And Steve says golf is golf.
If he makes a bad shot he says it's because he's blind but Gary says it's because his technique is wrong.
So good is Steve that he's now been invited to play for England in the next World Open Golf Championship for the Blind, that's in Australia next year.
At the moment he's searching around for sponsors.
He's struggling to find the money for the trip, but he'll be there.
Steve Cunningham will never rival the Faldos of this world.
The army has been called in to help rehouse some badgers.
The animals have been recovering at a wildlife sanctuary, and are now well enough to be moved into a purpose built set.
It required some heavy duty digging — that's where the soldiers came in.
KEN GOODWIN/Tewkesbury
ALLAN BROCKBANK/Vale Wildlife Rescue
ALLAN BRUSHWOOD/Badger Protection Group
He says prepare to dig…dig!
The badgers waiting to move in have been recouperating at the Vale Wildlife centre near Evesham.
He says that they get quite a few injured badgers this time of year.
Meanwhile the soldiers were getting some help with the spadework.
He says that the little boy has done so well, he can have a berret!
Badgers live in large family groups, but they're not very tolerant of unfamiliar smells.
That's why badgers which have spent some time recouperating need a home of their own.
The concrete pipes were donated by a local supermarket which is being built nearby.
They provide some secure accomodation for the newly released badgers.
He says that they need protection against baiters who try to dig up the sets.
The badgers have also been innoculated against TB, a disease some farmers and vets think the animals pass onto cows.
As for the children, there's a reward for all that digging.
A ride with the soldiers who've shown they're the best badger bunker builders in Britain.
Most of us are still thinking about our Summer holidays, but one group of people are already preparing for Christmas!
They're working on a new show for the festive season, but it's not the traditional pantomime.
LIZ HANNAM/Oxford
ANTHONY NEWLEY/Scrooge
VICTOR SPINETTI/Jacob Marley
KELLY HEMWOOD/Street Urchin
THOMAS WHITECROSS/Street Urchin
It's no surprise the audience is looking forward to this show with Great Expectations…
They've been promised a Dickens' of a time.
They're in Oxford for a preview of Scrooge the musical…what's been billed at the hottest show outside of London.
Skinflint Ebeneza is played by showbiz legened Anthony Newely, who starred in several smash hit musicals including Stop the World I Want to Get Off.
So why should a man more used to glamorous roles want to play a mean old miser?
Male speaker
Scrooge is a magnificent role.
The audience starts out hating him.
Then as the evening goes on they begin to understand him and at the end they genuinely feel sorry and care for him.
Voice over
Reporter asks: What sort of demands does the part put on you?
Male speaker
Emotionally and physucally extensive, because you're on stage from curtain up to curtain down.
I always says its longer than Hamlet and not as funny.
Voice over
Other familiar faces are Stratford Johns, who everyone will remember as Charlie Barlow in Z-Cars, and Victor Spinetti who starred in most of the Beatles films.
He plays Jacob Marley, and it will be a welcome return visit to Oxford for him.
Male speaker
The first show I did was in Oxford.
It was South Pacific.
I shared a dressing room with Sean Connery.
It was his first job as well.
I stayed in Beaumont Street in Oxford.
Now I have to find somewhere else.
Voice over
Most of the children in the cast will be chosen from Oxford schools.
Female speaker
It was brilliant.
I wasn't nervous, but I might be on the night.
Male speaker
It was hard work, learning the steps.
Voice over
When Scrooge was premiered in Birmingham last year Gloria Honeyford called it the hottest selling ticket outside of London.
Male speaker
It's that most cursed of expressions a family show.
It's a delight to watch.
Moving, funny, silly and things go up in the air and come down.
Its a great night out.
Voice over
Scrooge will play at the Oxford Apollo from the fifteen of December to the twenty-second of January.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Bosnian peace plan
International mediators have called a ten-day break in the Bosnian peace talks to allow the warring factions to consider a peace plan.
Triple murder in Oxford
Three members of the same family have been found murdered in Oxford.
A man is being questioned.
Tough Budget ahead
The Treasury Secretary, Michael Portillo says the next Budget will include extremely tough decisions.
Demjanjuk release blocked
Israel has blocked the release of John Demjanjuk, acquitted of being the Nazi death camp guard, Ivan the Terrible.
He may face fresh charges.
FTSE down 7
The hundred shares index closed down seven point nine at thirty, fifty-seven point six.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-one and up at two marks, fifty-four.
A suicide verdict has been recorded on a hospital patient who hanged himself with his dressing gown cord.
GLOUCESTER
Charles Brook, who was a retired factory worker, was found hanging from a bannister in a tower block at the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital in June.
Earlier this year, a thirty four year old woman died after jumping from a window in the same block.
The Gloucestershire Coroner said hospital staff were not to blame for Mr Brook's death.
The woman sacked by footballer Paul Gascoigne as his personal assistant has published a controversial biography of him.
Paul Gascoigne, The Inside Story charts the life of the world's most talked about footballer.
It ranges from the triumphs to the turmoils, and digs deep into Gazza's private life.
ROBIN POWELL/Hankerton
JANE NOTTAGE/Author
GEOFFREY NOTTAGE/Jane's Father
Voice over
Paul Gascoigne is gifted, tempestuous, always unpredictable.
Now Jane Nottage, his former personal assistant and commercial manager, from Hankerton near Tetbury, has tried to unravel the complexities of Gazza's life in a new biography.
In it she describes a prodigious talent…with a tendency towards self-destruction.
Most youngsters inherit a passion for football from their dads…in Jane's case, it was the other way round.
Jane's fluent Italian helped her land a job on the organising committee of the 1990 World Cup, which is where she and Gazza first met.
The tournament proved to be Gascoigne's finest hour…he became a superstar overnight…and Jane spent the next 2 years helping him arrange a multi million pound transfer to the Rome club Lazio.
The move was delayed because of a serious knee injury…
Jane says it's a tribute to the player's determination that he ever played again.
But Gascoigne sacked Jane in April — no reason given, though Jane suspects it had something to do with the fact his girlfriend didn't like her.
That's when she started work on the biography — which she completed in just 4 weeks.
The book casued a stir when it was serialised in a Sunday newspaper…with new revelations about Gazza's problems off the field, including an eating disorder.
But Jane insists she's still a Gazza fan…and that no-one would be happier than her if he put his troubles behind him and established himself as the best, as well as the most talked about, footballer in the world.
Britain's first nuclear power station is being taken to pieces.
Decommissioning work on the reactors began four years ago, but only now can the outside world tell the difference, as giant cooling pipes are lifted out by crane 
SIMON GARRETT/Berkeley
PETER WEBSTER/Site Manager
For thirty years the so-called Gloucestershire spider of Berkeley power station has dominated the skyline on the River Severn.
Today, the first visible signs that it's day is done.
It was switched off in 1989, and now the hundred foot long pipes used to carry hot carbon dioxide to run the giant turbines producing electricity are coming down.
99 per cent of Berkeley's radioactive insides have been removed.
Now only the heavily contaminated heart of the machine remains
Male speaker
The core will stay for some time.
It's encased in concrete and steel and will stay in place for tens of years.
The legs of the spider are coming off but it's heart will stay in place
Voice over
The pipes are sealed to contain their contamination.
They'll be cleaned and sent for scrap.
Decommissioning Berkeley will take another seven or eight years…but even then constant security will be needed around the reactor core
Male speaker
It's going to be in the order of 100 years before the site's completely cleared.
But much sooner than that you'll see obvious changes in the skyline
Voice over
When Berkeley was being built in the 1950s the world watched enviously on as Britain looked forward to an era of incredibly cheap electricity.
In the event Berkeley probably cost more than it ever yielded.
In future years all that'll remain will be two concrete stumps
Male speaker
You'd still see basically the central reactor block.
The height may be reduced and the other buildings will be lowered and not much else will show in profile
Voice over
.
The pro-nuclear scientists say it was a necessary prototype which spawned the next generation of power stations.
The antis say it's an atomic eyesore…a dangerous heirloom to leave future generations.
Still to come on Central News, blind determination.
The young golfer with the biggest handicap of all.
And a Dickens of good time.
The ghost of Christmas yet to come.
In Central News tonight:
Triple murder.
Man held after mother wife and daughter are beaten to death.
Freed.
Nurse jailed for hitting patient has conviction overturned.
And the tears of a clown.
The woman Gazza sacked spills the beans.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The victims are thought to have been killed with a hammer several days ago.
Their bodies were discovered when friends who'd been trying to contact one of the women became worried and called the police.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
STAN FULLER/Family Friend
ALAN WILLIAMS/Susan's Ex-boyfriend
PEGGY CLANT/Neighbour
MARGARET FULFORD/Neighbour
TOM WHITEHOUSE/Susan's Employer
Sgt PAUL BRIGHTWELL/Thames Valley Police
Three generations of one family murdered in their own homes.
70 year old Florence Jeffrey, her daughter Margaret Godfrey and grand-daughter 22 year old Susan Godfrey.
The were all attacked with a hammer.
Close friends are devastated by the killings.
They were said to be a happy and adoring family.
Male speaker
They were a wonderful family.
My wife has taken it badly.
Susan was like a daughter to me.
They were a close family.
Male speaker
A happy family.
They all got on quite well.
There was never any trouble.
Voice over
Police discovered the first body at this house in Nelson Street in the Jericho area of Oxford.
Neighbours had raised the alarm.
They hadn't been able to contact the elderly woman, who lived there.
Last night the body of Mrs Jeffrey was found in an upstairs bedroom.
Soon after, her son-in-law, Ron Godfrey was arrested.
Female speaker
When I came down here, I thought I must have known who it was.
They were a lovely family and I'm distressed.
Voice over
Later two other women, Mrs Jeffrey's daughter, and grand-daughter were found dead at their house in Westrup Close in New Marston.
It's believed their bodies had been there for some time.
The first neighbours knew of what had happened was when police broke into the house last night.
Female speaker
It's horrifying, horrifying, because they were totally ordinary people.
Voice over
The Godfrey's house has been sealed off, whilst forensic investigations continue.
It was only sold a short while ago, and the family were hoping to move to this house in Eynsham, but the sale fell through.
The murders have shocked friends and colleagues.
Margaret Godfrey worked as a cleaner for Oxford University.
Susan Godrey had two jobs.
One in an office at the Lucy factory in Jericho and one as a barmaid at the Cavalier pub in Marston.
Male speaker
She was a nice girl, quiet, popular and an efficient barmaid.
It still hasn't sunk in.
Voice over
Police have recovered a hammer at one of the murder scenes.
They're keeping an open mind on why the women were killed.
Male speaker
35 officrs are working on the case.
They're doing house to house inquiries.
We're trying to build up a picture of what happened before the event.
Voice over
Susan's father, Ron Godfrey is still being questioned by police.
He's was a fireman and a soldier before starting up a contract cleaning business which he ran from home.
It's said he'd recently hit financial problems.
A nurse has walked free from an appeal court after a conviction for assaulting an elderly patient was thrown out.
She'd been convicted and sentenced to three months in jail after magistrates found her guilty of punching the woman in the face.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Swindon
REBECCA FRAK/Freed Nurse
SUSAN SLY/Grand-daughter
CHRISTINE PALMER/Ashbury Lodge Home
Voice over
Rebecca Frak walked out of Swindon Crown Court and hugged her husband Adam in delight.
She'd spent ten days of a three month sentence in jail for allegedly hitting an eighty eight year old patient in her care.
Today the conviction was quashed.
Female speaker
I would just like to thank everyone who has supported me, family, friends, and everyone else.
You have been wonderful
Voice over
Mrs Frak, a state enrolled nurse had been convicted by magistrates of common assault on Mrs Sarah Fribbins.
She was a patient at the Ashbury Lodge nursing home in Swindon in February.
She has since died from causes unconnected with the incident.
It was said that Mrs Fribbins had suffered a bruise to her eye after being hit during a bed changing incident.
But the court heard there were important differences between Mrs Fribbins original statement, and the evidence given by witness June Shell, a care assistant at the home.
Judge John McNought said the appeal had thrown up serious inconsistencies in the evidence.
It had given great anxiety to him and his collagues on the bench.
It was possible Mrs Fribbins bruise was caused by accident or by someone else.
He quashed the conviction.
It's left Mrs Fribbins daughter and granddaughter in a state of confusion.
Female speaker
I've just visited my grandmother at the chapel of rest and I'm pleased she doesn't know anything about this
Voice over
The mystery of who hit Mrs Fribbins may never be solved, but it's felt it weighed heavily during her final weeks.
Female speaker
It must have been playing on her mind.
She was an old lady and would have found it hard to forget
Voice over
Mrs Frak says she bears no one from the home any ill will.
Female speaker
I bear no malice towards anybody.
Everybody was trying to do their job
Voice over
Now she plans a celebration with her husband and two sons before thinking about going back to work.
A man's been airlifted to hospital tonight after a crash involving two lorries a trailer and several cars.
Ambulance Service Video/WENDLEBURY/Oxfordshire
It happened on the northbound carriageway of the A(34) thirty four, near junction nine of the M(40) forty.
The crash caused tailbacks of six miles.
Earlier today a lorry driver suffered serious injuries when four heavy goods vehicles crashed on the same stretch of road.
The man 
Ambulance Service Video/STRATFIELD BREAK/Oxfordshire
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
MARGARET FULFORD/Neighbour
TOM WHITEHOUSE/Susan's Employer
Three generations of one family murdered in their own homes.
70 year old Florence Jeffrey, her daughter Margaret Godfrey and grand-daughter 22 year old Susan Godfrey.
The were all attacked with a hammer.
Close friends are devastated by the killings.
They were said to be a happy and adoring family.
Police discovered the first body at this house in Nelson Street in the Jericho area of Oxford.
Neighbours had raised the alarm.
They hadn't been able to contact the elderly woman, who lived there.
Last night the body of Mrs Jeffrey was found in an upstairs bedroom.
Soon after, her son-in-law, Ron Godfrey was arrested.
Later two other women, Mrs Jeffrey's daughter, and grand-daughter were found dead at their house in Westrup Close in New Marston.
It's believed their bodies had been there for some time.
The first neighbours knew of what had happened was when police broke into the house last night.
Female speaker
It's horrifying, horrifying, because they were totally ordinary people.
Voice over
The murders have shocked friends and colleagues.
Margaret Godfrey worked as a cleaner for Oxford University.
Susan Godrey had two jobs.
One in an office at the Lucy factory in Jericho and one as a barmaid at the Cavalier pub in Marston.
Male speaker
She was a nice girl, quiet, popular and an efficient barmaid.
It still hasn't sunk in.
Voice over
Police have recovered a hammer at one of the murder scenes.
They're keeping an open mind on why the women were killed.
A nurse has walked free from an appeal court after a conviction for assaulting an elderly patient was quashed.
She had been sentenced to three months in jail.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Swindon
REBECCA FRAK/Freed Nurse
Voice over
Rebecca Frak walked out of Swindon Crown Court and hugged her husband Adam in delight.
She'd spent ten days of a three month sentence in jail for allegedly hitting an eighty eight year old patient in her care.
Today the conviction was quashed.
Female speaker
I would just like to thank everyone who has supported me, family, friends, and everyone else.
Voice over
Mrs Frak, a state enrolled nurse had been convicted by magistrates of common assault on Mrs Sarah Fribbins.
She was a patient at the Ashbury Lodge nursing home in Swindon in February.
She has since died from causes unconnected with the incident.
It was said that Mrs Fribbins had suffered a bruise to her eye after being hit during a bed changing incident.
But the court heard there were important differences between Mrs Fribbins original statement, and the evidence given by witness June Shell, a care assistant at the home.
Judge John McNought said the appeal had thrown up serious inconsistencies in the evidence.
It had given great anxiety to him and his collagues on the bench.
It was possible Mrs Fribbins bruise was caused by accident or by someone else.
He quashed the conviction.
A man's been airlifted to hospital after a crash involving two lorries a trailer and several cars.
Ambulance Service Video/WENDLEBURY/Oxfordshire
The accident happened on the northbound carriageway of the A(34) thirty four, near junction nine of the M(40) forty.
And earlier a lorry driver suffered serious injuries when four heavy goods vehicles crashed on the same stretch of road.
The man 
Ambulance Service Video/STRATFIELD BREAK/Oxfordshire
Britain's first nuclear power station is being dismantled.
Decommissioning work began four years ago…but only now can the outside world tell the difference as giant pipes are lifted off by crane.
SIMON GARRETT/Berkeley
PETER WEBSTER/Site Manager
The hundred ton gas ducts used to carry pressurized carbon dioxide from the reactors to drive the giant turbines which produced the electricity for half of Gloucestershire.
More than ninty-nine per cent of the radioactive material at Berkeley has already been taken away.
Although most of the remaining buildings will be cleared…the memory of Britain's first nuclear power station will last some time
Male speaker
It's going to be in the order of 100 years before the whole site's cleared.
In the meantime there will be some changes to the skyline
Voice over
What'll happen to the site in the meantime isn't clear.
It's possible a gas power station could use the turbines to produce electricity again…but the nuclear reactor is fated to become an architectural curiosity
The army has been called in to help rehouse a group of badgers.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
The animals had been recovering at a wildlife sanctuary, and were ready to go back into the wild.
But they needed a purpose built sett and that meant a lot of digging, which is where the soliders came in.
They helped dig the badgers' new home…there were also a few young recruits on hand to help with the spadework.
The concrete pipes help provide protection from baiters.
A collection of vintage farm machinery built up by one man over thirty years is to be auctioned off tomorrow.The field full of equipment includes tractors shipped over from America in the nineteen forties to help the British war effort.Richard Barnett reports:
TAYNTON Gloucestershire
RALPH WILLIAMS Collector
ROBERT MARSHALL Auctioneer
Voice over
Peer through the trees at Hill Farm, Taynton in Gloucestershire and you get a glimpse of one man's obsession.
Look across the field and you can appreciate why space for storing vintage agricultural machinery on the farm has finally run out.
Ralph Williams is just 39 and for 30 of those years, he's bought every ancient tractor or old machine he could get his hands on.
But now he's selling up his 28 tractors and 150 other pieces of bygone farm tackle.
Male speaker
He started collecting as a child and he's been buying ever since.
He'll be sorry when he's sold his collection.
Voice over
Pride of place in the auction tomorrow will go to the rarest tractors which came originally from the States.
The earliest is this 1931 International Harvester.
10 years later the Americans helped the British war effort by sending us tractors like the yellow Minneapolis Mowline and the green Oliver 90.
There's plenty of evidence of Ralph's catholic tastes in collecting.
So alongside the tractors, is a 1930s Royal Enfield motorcycle and even a horsedrawn hoe called a Hereford skimmer.
Elsewhere, there's a locally made 60 year old winnowing machine for separating the wheat from the chaff and even some ancient milk churns.
Male speaker
He's expecting interest from all over Britain and abroad in the sale.
Voice over
Around 1,000 prospective buyers are likely to turn up for tomorrow's sale.
And some bidders are expected to buy 2 tractors, so they can get their collection off to a good start.
No further comment from Queen over Fergie photos
FTSE up 6
The hundred shares index closed up six point three and two three six five point seven 
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety three and up at two marks, eighty.
Before we go a look ahead to a special series on Central South next week.
Mike Rowbottom has been inside Grendon Prison in Buckinghamshire, where the prisoners face a regime that's unique in Britain.
GRENDON UNDERWOOD/Buckinghamshire
Voice over
Grendon takes the country's toughest and most violent criminals.
They come from the roughest jails where they expect trouble all the time.
Once inside Grendon, they're forced to look inside themselves.
Their worst enemies, prison officers, become first name friends.
Their world is turned upside down and that's the first stage to changing it completely.
Inside Story starts Monday On Central News South.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
A fresh appeal's been made for witnesses to the murder of teenager who was stabbed to death at a social services office.
A man is still being questioned about the death of Ian Barnes.Chris Moore reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
Voice over
17 year old, Ian Barnes was at Banbury Social Services Department yesterday morning, when a row broke out with another man.
A knife was produced and Mr Barnes was stabbed in the neck on the office steps, in full view of the office staff and a relative.
He managed to stagger into the building, but died despite the efforts of staff and ambulancemen to save him.
His killer ran off towards Banbury railway station where police say they found a weapon hidden in the men's toilet.
A 24 year old man was later arrested as he arrived at Oxford train station.
He's still in custody, but there's no news yet of possible charges.
Police say they still want more witnesses to the incident.
In particular they want to speak to anyone who saw a black man, aged about 24, who was at the Social Services office in Calthorpe Street and was also seen later at Banbury and Oxford train stations.
He was wearing a brown leather jacket, black jeans and was carrying in a blue holdall.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
GLENN HODDLE/Swindon Manager
NICK CUSACK/Oxford United
OWEN PICKARD/Hereford United
Voice over
and if you're not going to a game tomorrow…you can switch Central on at tea time for all the football news…we're heading off now to Milton Keynes for a story of adventure for our Friday Feature 
JAMIE CARR
MANDY MITCHELL/Fitness Coach
Voice over
some bike ride isn't it…we'll let you know how Jamie gets on in that race…we're racing off to our action round up now and first stop for Mark Kiff is the British Horse Trials Championship at Gatcombe Park 
Voice over
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd has been taking a break from the Bosnian crisis, to tackle less troubled waters closer to home.
He's been diving into local affairs to help raise money for charity.
Gargy Patel reports.
CARTERTON/Oxfordshire
DOUGLAS HURD MP/Foreign Secretary
SUE WESTON/Pool Manager
DEE BULLEY/Town Mayor
PHILIP HURD
Voice over
These days, it always seems to be in at the deep end for Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd.
Taking a break from the Bosnian conflict, he kept a long standing promise to his local swimming pool to help raise money for leukaemia and heart research.
Accompanied by his 12 year old son Philip, the Witney MP managed twenty lengths.
A good way, he says, to keep fit in his job.
Some of the money he's helping to raise will go to an Advice Centre for families of personnel from RAF Brize Norton stationed in the Gulf.
His visit barely caused a ripple of excitement at Carterton pool, but his efforts were appreciated.
She says that's very good.
He has a typical geriatric stroke.
For Philip Hurd, a rare chance to get the better of his father.
After just half an hour in the pool, it was back to the troubled waters of the Foreign Office.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
OXFORD
DARREN KERRY
MARJORIE FOX/Oxford Housing Rights Centre
Voice over
Darren Kerry bought his house for sixty three thousand pounds with two brothers but after losing his job he fell behind with his mortage payments…he begged Citibank, with whom he had the loan to reduce the payment…he even found a buyer prepared to pay sixty three thousand pounds…but with interest he then owed sixty five thousand pounds…and Citibank apparently refused to allow him to sell it…
Today at Oxford Crown Court admitted one charge of arson…after he set fire to his home in desperation…
Judge Patrick Medd sentenced Kerry to 12 months in jail suspended for two years…
’ The Pressure you were put under by Citibank’he said’refusing to accept the sixty three thousand pounds must have been frusrtrating and infuriating to a degree’
After the hearing Darren and his brother Mark condemned Citibank for its action.
Citibank issued a statement…this afternoon…saying it had no record of any formal offer from potential purchasers…its is always our policy to work closely with customers who have difficulties in oredr to reach agreement.
Reposssession proceedings are always a last resort in this case we believe we acted responsibly and the customer was fully informed of our intended actions at every stage.
Advisors say tMr Kerry is just one of many people under financial stress because they're behiund with mortgage payments.
Mr Kerry's home has now been sold for over twenty thousand pounds less than he paid…
Mr kerry is in rented accomodation…vowing never to take on another mortgage.
Conservatives in the region are calling for a tough new privacy law to prevent the hounding of the Royal Family in the Press.
The call for a clampdown will be heard at the Tory party conference next month.
But newspaper editors say there's no way a fair privacy law could be made to work.
Kim Barnes reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JOHN JONES/Oxford W
LIBRARY PICTURES
ANITA SIVRET/Editor/Gloucestershire Echo
Voice over
It's been another day of unwanted exposure for the Duchess of York with yet more holiday snaps emblazoned across the tabloids.
Now the row over whether the photos are an invasion of privacy is gathering pace.
Tories in the region say recent royal coverage has been deplorable.
Now Oxford West and Abingdon Conservative Association are calling for a new privacy law aimed at curbing the telefoto lens.
They've tabled a motion which will be debated at the Conservative Conference next month, when party faithfuls are expected to condemn the behaviour of newspapers.
But editors say a privacy law would create more problems than it solves.
One thing is certain, Fergie's plight has certainly moved a lot of newspapers, even if it hasn't moved the public.
The Calcutt inquiry into press self regulation is expected to report back next year.
In 1990, Heritage Minister, David Mellor said the press were drinking at the last chance saloon.
Now it could soon be time gentlemen please.
DONALD TRELFORD/Editor The Observer
Voice over
As the calls for a new privacy law were mounting, journalists and photographers were massing outside a Gloucestershire estate where John Bryan is reported to be renting a cottage.
Richard Barnett reports:
PAINSWICK/Gloucestershire
Voice over
The press began gathering early this afternoon, after a newspaper reported that John Bryan rents an 18th century cottage belonging to his friends, the Lord and Lady of the Manor of Painswick.
No one answered when we called at the Manor House, which is at the end of a long secluded drive overlooking the estate.
It's understood Mr Bryan had been thinking of returning to Painswick this weekend to escape the hoarde of newsmen beseigning him in London…
The luxury car maker Aston Martin is to make sixty five more people redundant.
NEWPORT PAGNELL/Buckinghamshire
In the past year a hundred and fifty people have lost their jobs at the Newport Pagnell site.
The company blames the cuts on the recession.
A man has appeared in court in Cheltenham charged with rape.
Twenty six year old David Cull of no fixed address is accused of raping a twenty-year-old woman in a derelict building in Cheltenham a week ago.
He was arrested in London on Wednesday night.
both Hereford and Swindon are hoping to end their losing runs this week…
United play at Torquay tomorrow in the coca cola cup…
Swindon go to Southampton on Wednesday…we can celebrate something tonight…a new National Junior Tennis Champion…it's three cheers for Banbury teenager Claire Taylor 
Voice over
Oxfordshire couldn't lose in the National Final at Nottingham on Saturday…number one seed Lizzie Jelfs from Banbury's West End Club was playing the number two seed Claire Taylor from the Banbury West End Club…
The first set went to Taylor…she was hitting harder and was much quicker.
around the court…6-3 the score…
Young Claire looked a good bet for the second set as well she was 4-2 up at one stage until Lizzie fought back and took and forced the tie break which she won…
So it was all on the last set…in the last five matches between these two Lizzie Jelfs has won all five…
Claire Taylor turned the form book upside down this time though…she took control early on and went on to win 6-1…
Games set…match and the junior national title to Miss Taylor 6-3 6-7 6-1
another Central South success story this year has been the form of Gloucestershire racing trainer David Nicholson…yesterday he opened his new stables at Ford for the very first time and racing folk turned up in their thousands 
DAVID NICHOLSON
Voice over
The David Nicholson open day is just as big draw as some of the top races these days…
And Jackdaws Castle which sits high on the Cotswolds is now looking down on the racing world…
The horses have been here for a year but up until yesterday the doors have been closed to the fans…yesterday they were opened up and thousands rolled up.
David Nicholson says the open day is by popular demand and he hopes the fans follow him if he's successful…the whole day is organised by his wife
Last season the Nicholson yard turned out a record 100 winners…so is the pressure on to better that this time around
David Nicholson says they were ready to write him off l; astr season when he moved into a new stables so yes they've got to keep going
There's a change of jockey at Jackdaws Castle…
Richard Dunwoody has signed up for Martin Pipe…young irishman Adrian Maguire is the new man…they should have 80 horses in training soon…
Waterloo Boy…and the old favourites are raring to go…a tip for the season is Silver Wisp…that's from the horses mouth…well almost
A bloody battle has been fought in the region…more than a century after the war ended.
The Battle of Antietam Creek was a key point in the American Civil War.
Now it's been re-enacted by enthusiasts from this country and abroad.
Kim Barnes reports from Eastnor Castle in Herefordshire.
MIKE BUSSEY American Civil War Society
BILL DAVIES American Civil War Society
ALVIN St
Voice over
He says the story is one of futility.
It was the bloodiest day in American history.
Many soldiers needlessly died.
Five and a half thousand men were killed and twenty-six thousand wounded on the blackest day of the American Civil War.
He says it was the worst day.
We had thirty-seven per cent casualties in ten minutes.
He says it was so bad.
I can't stand it.
We were running out of bandages.
Tactically the battle of Antietam Creek in 1862 was a draw.
Strategically, it was a victory for the union forces of the North.
It proved a turning point in the war leading to Lincoln emancipation proclamation liberating the slaves.
But that doesn't really explain why hundreds of people would want to dress up, and re-run the battle one hundred and thirty years later.
He says it's escapism.
Some people like model trains or football.
She says I like it, I like living history.
I like being a man or a woman.
Some twentieth century innovations are allowed but hundreds of members of the American Civil War Society gathered at Eastnor Castle for a weekend steeped in history, right down to the accommodation.
He says if you like meeting people, if you like camping, if you like living history, it's good.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
England beat Australia
FTSE down 15
The hundred shares index closed down fifteen point six at three thousand and forty two exactly 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, fifty three.
The comedian Ronnie Barker has spent two hours being questioned by police after accidentally buying stolen property.
Mr Barker had intended to sell the goods in the antique shop he runs with his wife.
Police say they now realise he was innocent.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Chipping Norton
RONNIE BARKER/Actor
Det Insp BRIAN JESSOP/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Ronnie Barker was hoping for a peaceful life when he retired six years ago.
He and his wife Joy bought a small antique shop in nearby Chipping Norton.
But that led him to be grilled by detectives for two hours because he unwittingly bought a cabinet stolen from an old lady in North Oxford a few days before.
Male speaker
I thought it was Beadle but very quickly realised it wasn't.
Anyway they questionedme and realised I had nothing to do with it and I got a letter saying I was completely innocent and apologising profusely
Voice over
Ronnie's story was splashed over the Sunday papers telling how he had bought the cabinet for fifty pounds from someone who walked into his shop.
He intended to mark it up for a hundred.
He was astonished to find three detectives knocking at his door to arrest him a couple of days later.
He was taken to Cowley Police Station and released after two hours when Police realised his role was entirely innocent.
Male speaker
Mr Barker found himself an innocent victim and he was questioned and released.
We will be taking no further action
Voice over
Ronnie wants to put the whole incident behind him and would rather not say any more.
Male speaker
It's all over now although the papers are still ferreting around.
But if you want to know what happened read the News of the World.
I never thoughtb I'd say that
Voice over
Ronnie is just glad it's all over, and aware that his past acting career had prepared him for his ordeal.
He starred in the prison series Porridge…but he won't be going there, instead he'll still be able to stay Open All Hours.
(wes ad lib) Still to come on Central News, played three lost three.
Welcome back.
Later on action from the battlefields of the American Civil War.
But now with the sporting action from the weekend, here's Tim Russon.
(TIM NEXT)
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures from SKY Sport
Voice over
This is the big time…and the guns don't come much bigger than Liverpool…
Swindon were blown apart…
Neil Ruddock's goal midway through the first half lit the fuse…and when Steve McManaman exploded a right footer just before half-time every Town fan must have been fearing the worst…
It's reckoned Swindon are too soft…not quick or hard enough for the premier league but few sides would have stopped the Anfield army at full charge…
McManaman made it three on 61 minutes…the County Ground faithful started to suffer from shellshock…the Town defence looked battle weary and beaten and surely would have stopped Ronie Whelan from scoring on a better day…
Swindon manager John Gorman tried to to rally his troups from the touchline but there was no stopping number five…
The shot from Mike Marsh found the net like a guided missile…
Swindon will have to learn to battle on…
Oxford United's flying start to the season came to a grinding halt in the West Midlands…they too were well beaten…
United's man of the match was keeper Paul Kee without him there could have been five goals flying into the Oxford net…
Albion fresh from promotion are always good at home with a big crowd cheering them on and their fans could have a lot to shout about…
Kee kept them quite for as long as he could and then from nowhere…from nothing United burst into life and went and took the lead…
A real beauty of a goal from Les Robinson…there'll not be many better than that this season but it's quantity rather than quality that counts and within two minutes it was one-all…
Kee did his best to keep Albion out but Andy Hunt couldn't fail with the rebound…
The second half was all Albion…they went two-one up just after the break thanks to a fine piece of striking from Kevin Donovan
Oxford were up against it now…
Kee's goal took some pressure…had some lucky escapes…but top marks to the United keeper…
Up front United faded…they never looked like finding a second goal and there was no surprise when Albion ran in a third…
Kieran O'Regan the scorer…
United the sufferers…
It was 3-1 in Hereford's third division game…with United missing out yet again…
Things started to go wrong after just 16 minutes when Steve Norris raced through and lobbed the ball over the heads for the first goal…
The second came from an aerial attack…
Lee Turnbull got the header…the United defence a severe ticking off from manager Greg Downs…
Hereford got a goal back just before half-time…good one too…
Owen Pickard sliding into a perfect scoring position…
There was a game on then…but Chesterfield had other ideas…they looked a smart outfit while United have still got a bit of catching up to do…the third goal from Norris highlighted the difference between the two teams…
A three year old girl who fell twenty feet from a window and survived is back at home.
Kimberley White was never expected to survive the fall, but has made a spectacular recovery.
Now her mother says all houses should have locks fitted to upstairs windows to prevent a similar accident.
KEN GOODWIN/Tewkesbury
JACKIE WHITE/Mother
Voice over
Kimberley White suffered serious head injuries when she fell from an upstairs window at her house in Tewkesbury.
Doctors feared she would die.
But she's made a miraculous recovery, and has now been allowed home.
But she must wear a special cap to protect her head while she waits for more surgery.
At her own suggestion, Kimberley's mother wanted to show the dangers of having no window locks by graphically illustrating how far her daughter fell:
She says that she and her husband saw Kimberley on the ground below the window.
She was making a sound, but hardly conscious.
She was rushed to hospital, but was not expected to survive.
Mrs White has now fitted window locks to her council house, but says that Tewkesbury Borough Council refused to help pay for them.
She thinks that the local authorities should fit window locks to all its properties inmmediatly.
She says that when you've nearly lost a child you realise that cost is irrelevant: Locks must be fitted to save lives.
Tewkesbury Borough Council says that whenever new windows are fitted in council properties, the locking types are always used.
But now the authority is also looking into the cost of modifying all of its windows.
Kimberley is lucky to be alive, and her mother says it's all due to the skill of medical staff at both Cheltenham and Frenchay hospital in Bristol where she was transferred.
But now she wants to make sure that all windows are fitted with locks so that other children don't suffer the same fate.
Swindon police say they're pleased with the way they handled the biggest test yet of their football security operation.
In their third premier league match, Swindon Town faced Liverpool, who brought three thousand supporters with them.
More than a hundred police officers were there to meet them.
KIM BARNES/Swindon
Supt GLEN SYMES/Wiltshire Police
Ch Insp SEAN O'SHEA/Wiltshire Police
Sgt TONY WHITE/Merseyside Police
Voice over
The planning begins weeks ahead.
Now that Swindon is in the premier league more of their matches will be so-called high priority and will be policed accordingly, like the match against Liverpool.
He says we're not expecting too many problems, but it is Liverpool and there is a known criminal following.
One hundred and six officers are on duty and these people are resonsible for them.
They'll be situated around the town and in and around the football ground.
Three thousand Liverpool fans are expected.
Officers are on the look-out for drink problems, pickpockets, and ticket touts.
He says we have had problems with forged twenty pound notes being passed at the ground and at garages in the town and at kiosks.
He says it's going well so far, although we have had some problems with ticket touts.
We haven't got the capacity crowd we expected.
Two officers from Liverpool's football intelligence unit are here to help Swindon.
He says The main thing is we can anticipate how many people will come.
It's crowd numbers and public safety, mostly.
In the end there was little bother, two arrests afterwards and the theft of 300 pounds from a food kiosk.
Police say there's no need for genuine fans to be any more worried now that Swindon's in the big league.
He says not if they're sensible, and don't carry money.
We haven't had any injuries so far today and that's great.
In fact the only aggravation was the pitch where not even the safest pair of police hands could stop Swindon losing five nil.
A new range of children's birthday cards which carry warnings about the danger of accidents are about to go on sale.
The company which makes them says they're an effective way of getting the message across.
GRAEME BOWD/Northampton
KEN TESTER/Giesen and Wolf
JANE COURT/Mother
Voice over
Each year more than ten thousand children are killed or injured on the roads.
The latest safety campaign comes from a firm of card manufacturers.
Its new range also warns of other dangers.
But is a birthday the right occasion to raise such serious issues?
Male speaker
Market research showed that some parents thought the message was too sober for a birthday.
But 80 per cent thought it was a good idea.
Children are very interested in the cards and it is a very effective way of getting this message across.
Voice over
Parents think the cards are a good way to raise the subject of safety.
Female speaker
At birthdays parents can look at the cards as well as the children.
After the party you can discuss the messages on the card.
Voice over
These children seemed to have got the message.
Female speaker
Don't play with matches and don't play near fires.
Female speaker
Don't talk to strangers.
They're dangerous.
Voice over
The cards are aimed at 4 to 7 seven year olds.
They go on sale next month.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
A fourteen-year-old boy who's been charged with twenty-seven crimes this year is spending two weeks in Spain at the taxpayers expense.
The police want him locked up but say they're powerless to detain him.
(WES READS NEXT)
WESLEY SMITH
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
SIMON COOMBS MP/Con Swindon
RAY JONES/Director
SWINDON
Voice over
The teenager, who's from Swindon, has been in the care of Wiltshire Social Services since the age on 9.
They say they've tried everything — including secure accommodation — but sending him to the Costa Blanca to stay with his grandparents seemed the most appropriate course of action.
The boy's MP is not impressed.
It's the third time this year that the boy's been to stay with his grandparents — and social services hope another fortnight will do him good.
The boy's thought to be one of a hard core of 8 children, all under 15, who are responsible for twelve per cent of all reported crimes in the Swindon area.
Swindon Police declined to be interviewed.
But one senior officer told us they felt let down by a legal system which denies them the right to detain an offender who's cost 400 police hours in just 6 months.
Critics are demanding changes to 2 important pieces of legislation…the Children Act of 1989 and the Criminal Justice Act of 1991, which forced the police to hand over to social services all offenders under the age of 15 once they've been arrested and charged.
But Ray Jones from Wiltshire Social Services insists that locking up young delinquents isn't always the answer.
Meanwhile Swindon Police are hoping that the 14-year-old's stay in Spain has improved his behaviour.
He's due back next week.
Protestors fighting plans to open a clinic for sex offenders have persuaded contractors not to work on the building.
The workmen turned away after parents told them of their fears for the safety of local children.
But the charity behind the clinic says the parents were over reacting.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Upton on Severn
JOHN CLEMENTS/Protestor
Voice over
CLINIC
Contractors turned up to start work at The Boynes at around half past eight this morning.
But they were met by a group of protestors with a very clear message.
The building has been the subject of controversy ever since locals were told that it was to be turned into a clinic for twenty six convicted sex offenders.
Protestors have been fighting the plans for two months.
This morning they were able to claim a small victory when the contractors turned away without doing the work.
The charity backing the opening of the clinic is the Faithfull Foundation.
Protestors claim the Foundation had agreed to temporarily suspend all work on the building while they discussed fears for their childrens' safety.
They now feel that the Foundation has reneged on that agreement.
No one from the Faithfull Foundation was available to be interviewed.
But a spokesman said that even if the Foundation decided not to open a clinic for sex offenders, work still needed to be done on the building.
He said asking workmen to undertake general maintenance work did not mean they were going back on their word.
(2)
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
POLICE VIDEO/M40/Warwickshire
FIRE SERVICE VIDEO
IAN COWLEY/Warwickshire Fire Service
MARTIN BARTLETT/Warwickshire Police
It began when a lorry carrying drums of paint burst a tyre and went out of control, careering through the central reservation.
Then an empty tanker lorry and three cars appear to have hit the wreckage.
The lorries did not catch light immediately, but while the fire service were freeing those trapped, the fire began.
Male speaker
Voice over
’ Shortly after their arrival however, there was the beginnings of a small fire towards the back of one of the vehicles which very rapidly spread and ignited the vapours for one of the loads of the lorries and that was industrial resin carried in drums.’
’ Is that a volatile load to be carried on a motorway?’
’ Industrial resin — this particular resin anyway — is very volatile.
It's very nasty vapours and has got a fairly low flashpoint and is unfortunately carried on the motorways every day of the week.’
’ Is it something you'd like to see carried less?’
’ We'd all like to see less and less chemicals carried on the motorways, but unfortunately, it's a fact of life that its one of the best ways for them to get the stuff around.’
Those using the motorway just before the accident said traffic had been heavy, with holidaymakers adding to the normal load.
Male speaker
Around 9.00 a.m. most mornings, the M40 is a particularly busy motorway.
There's very little way, bearing in mind that an accident like this happens so very quickly and no doubt traffic was using all 3 carriageways on the northbound, that they could have avoided an impact.
Voice over
Tonight, police said one of the drivers killed was from Northampton.
They're unlikely to be able to release names until tomorrow.
A man who barricaded himself into his house after threatening to shoot a tax inspector has walked free from court.
He sparked a twelve-hour police siege after a bailiff tried to seize his van.
Kim Barnes reports.
MAY 1992/OXFORD
Voice over
Police surrounded the house in Oxford's sidney street last May, after 51 year old Roger Jones threatened to shoot a tax inspector and a bailiff.
The court heard that the self-employed refrigeration engineer snapped when the bailiff tried to seize his van.
The prosecution said he pointed a double barrelled shotgun at the bailiff, the female tax inspector and a garage man called to tow the car away.
Police marksmen were then drafted in for a 12 hour siege after he barricaded himself in.
Mr Jones pleaded guilty to possessing a firearm with criminal intent and affray.
The judge ordered him to do 120 hours community service, saying you won't do it again, I hope you can put it all behind you.
His defence told the court the Inland Revenue, who thought Mr Jones owed £4,700, later discovered the debt was just £470.
Mr Jones no longer lives in Sidney Street.
Today the inland Revenue said: Calling in the bailiffs is a serious step and one which we only take when absolutely necessary.
And they add, there is ample opportunity for the case to be sorted out before the need for bailiffs arises.
A soldier has appeared in court charged with the manslaughter of a fellow serviceman.
Stuart Neild is alleged to have shot Paul Bartlett, who was twenty and from Aylesbury, while they were both on guard duty outside the Gibraltar Army Barracks in Hampshire on Saturday.
Neild, who's seventeen, was given bail by until October by Aldershot magistrates.
Relatives of British holidaymakers who're fleeing from the hurricane in the United States are tonight waiting anxiously for news.
Thousands of British tourists are in the Florida area, which has now been declared a disaster area.
Gareth Furby reports.
GLOUCESTER
CYNTHIA COLES/Wife
KEITH BETTON/Assoc of British Travel Agents
Voice over
Fifty years ago the people of Oxford raised over one million pounds in Warship Week.
It marked the beginning of a special relationship between the town and a ten thousand tonne cruiser, which has just been commemorated.
Kim Barnes reports.
OXFORD
STAN NEAL/HMS Enterprise
RON BELCHER/Royal Navy Association
Voice over
A service of remembrance.
The start of a reunion which has brought ex-servicemen from all over the country to Oxford.
The link is HMS Enterprise; a ship adopted by the town 50 years ago.
80 year old ex-petty officer Stan Neal rememembered his colleagues.
Male speaker
You have to remember them, it's nice to be back and we haven't changed at all, but you do remember those that didn't come back.
Voice over
In 1942, the people of Oxford raised £1.5 million in Warship week, at a time when the average wage was £2 a week.
It's worth £47 million today.
The fund-raising was launched by the government to beef up the navy's fleet in the middle of the war.
In return, Oxford was allowed to adopt the light cruiser HMS Enterprise.
She saw action all over the world, including taking part in the D-Day landings.
Some of Enterprise's crew returned to parade through Oxford.
Male speaker
In 1942, there was the biggest parade ever seen in Oxford.
We wanted to mark that.
Voice over
In 1942, the Enterprise gave Oxford this crest.
This weekend, the Navy Association presented the town with a bell; its rope made by Stan Neal.
Male speaker
Years ago, in 1909, my uncle taught me rope-making.
He said tie this and I'll give you a penny, but he never gavr me any money.
Voice over
Ex-petty officer, Sid Hall laid a wreath to remember lost colleagues.
The Enterprise was scrapped in 1946, but her special links with Oxford are not forgotten.
Finally, some of the country's flashiest car collectors have been getting together to show off their prized possessions.
They've spent thousands of pounds with the aim of turning heads.Chris Moore reports.
WOODSTOCK Oxfordshire
GEOFFREY PETER GASTER Personal Plate Owner
LEONARD PARKINSON Dentist
TONY HILL Rally Organiser
Voice over
Don't you just hate them?
The cars that are always ahead of you at the lights.
Flash motors and even flashier number plates.
But they insist they're just normal.
Owners of the prized plates gathered in Oxfordshire to judge the best.
Some had just been too good to miss.
You'd need £22,000 to persuade rally organiser, Tony Hill to part with his plate.
You could have bought an ITV franchise for less.
But the plates like these are not just for the rich.
The opposition were represented too.
Hust the number plate to buy Auntie for Christmas.
And speaking of needless repeats, do you think this owner is trying to make a point?
Well, it should confuse them down at Swansea.
This could be taking fatherley pride a bit too far.
No prizes for guessing the names of the owners here.
Or for guessing what this pair do for a living.
But no, this chap isn't a vet.
This joker won his category.
He's a circus performer.
And this one has definitely lasted longer than the people who thought it up.
I wonder what happened to the driver?
Six dead as Hurricane reaches 168mph over USA
Six people were killed and widespread damage caused as Hurricane Andrew swept from the Bahamas across Florida with gusts at up to a hundred and sixty-eight miles per hour.
State of emergency as one million flee homes
President Bush declared a state of emergency as up to a million people fled their homes.
Sarajevo Airport closed by fighting
Violence in Sarajevo hit the airport leading to the suspension of relief flights temporarily.
FTSE down 54
A turbulent day in the City has seen the hundred shares index closing down fifty-four point six at twenty-three eleven point one.
The pound is up more than six cents at two dollars, and up at two marks, eighty.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A report's due out next week on Grendon Prison, and its unique methods for dealing with inmates.
It's been prepared by Judge Stephen Tumim, Her Majesty's Inspector of Prisons, and is expected to praise the jail's progressive regime.
A Central News South crew has been given unprecedented access to film at the Buckinghamshire Prison.
In the first of a series of four reports this week, Mike Rowbottom brings us the Inside Story.
GRENDON UNDERWOOD/Buckinghamshire
DAVE CASTELEY/Prisoner
JOHN SHAW/Prisoner
JOE CHAPMAN/Prison Officer
JACK WRIGHT/Senior Medical Officer
Voice over
The first week in a new jail for Dave Casteley.
Her majesty's prison, Grendon, will be like nothing he has known before.
Male speaker
Come in mate; take a seat.
Voice over
Here, his worst enemies, dressed in prison officers' uniform, want to become his friends; not to be thought of as a screw, but a first name terms chum.
Male speaker
First of all, we're on first name terms here.
You won't be used to that.
How different is it from where you came from?
Male speaker
It's different.
Voice over
Dave Casteley and Joe Chapman are on Grendon's A Wing.
It's where prisoners come in from other jails.
They come in suspicious and uncertain and are given an adjustment period of up to 3 months.
If they handle it, they'll go on to another wing and that's when the hard work begins.
They'll need the friendship with the staff and fellow inmates, because Grendon, for the last 30 years, has been about confronting yourself and that's not easy.
Male speaker
I've learned that as long as you're happy with yourself, that's all that matters.
Voice over
Mick Bardell is serving 2 life sentences for murder and conspiracy to murder.
He meets in a group on D, going 3 times a week to talk about his life, their lives and their offences.
The idea is to make them reach into their minds and recognise what they did and why they did it.
Male speaker
The one thing I could never resolve was getting love and affection.
The one thing I could never do was please my mother.
I wound up getting raped and burned with cigarettes.
Voice over
It takes months for inmates to be that open, back on A wing they find it hard to understand.
Male speaker
The idea of trusting anyone, or saying what I think, I find daunting and frightening.
Male speaker
Nothing prepared me for the reality of A wing.
Suddenly I was on first names terms.
I was highly suspicious.
Male speaker
The idea is to get them to trust the staff and their peer group and get them to open up a bit.
Voice over
One thing A wing does is force inmates to talk to sex offenders — nonces in prison slang.
They are considered beneath contempt in the system, but at Grendon everyone has equal status.
New arrivals at A wing are told no violence is allowed.
It's a vital rule allowing people to talk freely, including sex offenders.
Male speaker
I knew I'd have to sit on my hands before I came here, but what if some sex offender starts talking about this or that?
Male speaker
It can take months for the violence to subside, they take it out on themselves by punching the walls or scratching their wrists.
Voice over
The time comes when the A-wing induction is completed and it's time to move on.
John Shaw, the elected prisoners' chairman of D-wing tells John Earle, a life sentence inmate, what to expect.
He asks: How intense is the therapy down there?
He replies: It's as intense as you want it to be.
Male speaker
I'm controlling my temper now and I'm learning to walk away.
Voice over
There are likely to be plenty of times in the coming months when he'll want to walk away, because no matter what attitude he starts with, he'll be affected by the Grendon experience and that can be frightening.
Tomorrow we'll see why.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
its the second leg of the first round of the coca cola cup tomorrow night…
Jimmy Magilton who missed the start of the season through suspension and was then injured in a road accident is back in the Oxford team to play at Swansea…
while Hereford are off to Torquay with a full strength squad…
Now we've three new champions to celebrate tonight…the first is Tony Allcock from Gloucestershire who yesterday won the singles at the Bowls World Championship in Worthing 
Pictures BBC SPORT
TONY ALLCOCK/World Bowls Champion
Voice over
our next champion is Pippa Nolan…riding a horse called Sir Barnaby she won the British Open Horse Trials at Gatcombe Park in Gloucestershire 
PIPPA NOLAN/British Open Champion
Voice over
and our last winner tonight is swindon speedway's young Australian rider Leigh Adams…he's won the world under twenty one championship 
Voice over
Hundreds of vintage tractor enthusiasts are expected to turn up to one of the biggest auctions of its kind.
The vehicles belonged to an eccentric collector and many have been restored to full working order.
KEN GOODWIN/Stroud
CHARLIE PRICE/Mechanic
AUDREY PENROSE/Cousin
JOHN HOLLAND/Auctioneer
Voice over
It's a truck the Beverley Hillbillies would have been proud of.
This auto tractor cost eleven hundred pounds when it was first built in 1940.
Now it could fetch many times this amount when it's auctioned.
The collection belonged to the late George Reynolds, who lived at Chalford Mill.
If it was old, and mechanical, George collected it.
His chum Charlie Price provided the engineering know-how to help get some of the battered old relics going.
He says that they both had a dream, to get take part in the Brighton races with the old tractor.
Now it will never happen.
As well as ricketty tractors and farm machinery there are also miscellaneous mechanical parts for sale.
Fancy this?
It's an old generator dumped from a Zeppelin as it flew over Stroud during the first world war.
When he died Mr Reynolds left everything to his cousin.
She says that she's not a mechanic, the items need a good home.
The auctioneers are expecting a good turn out tommorrow.
He says that they've no idea how much some of the lots are worth.
The public will decide.
They may be rusty, old and a little slow, but at tommorrow's auction these machines are expected to disappear fast.
A horse that stands just twenty one inches high is pulling in the crowds at a small breeds farm.
It's one of less than three hundred horses of its type left in the country.
In fact the breed is so rare it's attracting attention from criminal quarters too.
CLARE LAFFERTY Kington
JAY BRITTAIN Small Breeds' Farm
Voice over
At ten weeks old Thia stands at just twenty one inches.
But even when she's fully grown she won't be much over two feet tall.
Thia is one of a rare breed of miniature horses.
Nowadays there are only around two hundred and fifty left in the country.
In Victorian times they were very common, and often found in the nursery.
Now Thia is the star attraction at the Small Breeds Farm in Kington in Herefordshire where she's made friends with a jersey calf.
Hundreds of people have been to see her.
But not all the interest is welcome.
With some miniatures worth as much as five thousand pounds, they've become the target of thieves who steal them to order for people who want exotic pets.
When she's a few months older Thia will be allowed in the same field as the farm's other miniature, Carlsberg, a stallion.
At a towering twenty five inches he's certainly a horse she can look up to.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Hundreds attend funeral
FTSE up 7
The hundred shares index closed up seven point three at three thousand and forty nine point three.
The pound is down at one dollar, forty nine and down at two marks, fifty two.
Work has begun on a hard-hitting film about the Great Western Railway.
It tells the story of an engineer who loses his job because of the effects of being gassed during the First World War.
Relations between staff and management on the GWR were always thought to have been good, but the film calls that view into question.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
JOHN SAVAGE/Director
DEREK SHAW/Writer
TIM BRYAN/Curator
Jointly funded by local businesses and Thamesdown Media Arts, it's designed to appeal to both a Swindon and a national audience.
The film tells the true story of a Great Western employee called Bob who, along with many of his colleagues, sails to the continent to work on a light railway serving the trenches.
There he's caught up in a gas attack, and when he returns to Swindon he suffers recurring asthma.
One day he collapses while pulling a heavy load.
In this scene, Bob's accident is reported, and he's sacked.
Eventually, driven to despair, he throws himself under a train.
According to the writer, such experiences were typical.
The film contradicts the popular view that GWR's management was exemplary in the way that it dealt with its staff.
Experts agree that in reality, the company looked after the workforce no better than most other employers of that time.
The film-makers are, of course, lucky enough to be able to shoot the film in the very same workshops where Bob earned his living.
The site's about to be developed by Tarmac Construction, but Thamesdown Media Arts wants part of it to be set aside for a museum, telling the story — the whole story — of those who worked there.
Still to come on Central News, shedding light on church stained glass…
Welcome back: Five hundred years ago when most people couldn't read or write, education came from the church through sermons and images depicted in stained glass windows.
(Wes to read next)
Now a book's been published as a church-by-church guide unravelling the stories behind stained glass.
In the first of a two part series Simon Garrett takes a closer look at these medieval windows in’ Light on the World’.
JUNE OSBORNE/Author
Voice over
The living mouth of hell waits to devour the souls of the dead.
Christ sits in judgement.
A marauding infidel sports the head of a bishop.
The fifteenth century windows at Fairford are the most complete of their time in the world.
Once all churches were equally resplendent
Female speaker
Attendance at church was obligatory.
There was a heavy fine if you didn't go.
They would have known the Bible stories well.
They were posessed with the fear the world would end around the year 1500.
So we have the great West window of the last judgement with the souls divided and St Michael in the middle holding the scales separating the good from the bad.
They had great fun with the bad.
Depicting the bad — especially the devils they had great fun with.
The great and the good depicted include Henry VII and on the right we have the most fearsome devil you ever saw
Voice over
The great benefactors who built the churches and instructed the glaziers wanted favour with earthly princes and their heavenly God
Female speaker
Sir John Tame built it.
He was well in with the new dynasty and very anxious to establish his good standing with the king.
Having Henry VII's portrait up there helped.
Also he wanted to buy his way to heaven.
As a rich man it was believed if you commissioned a church or chantry chapel or stained glass windows like these it was a way of assuring a place amongst the the blessed
Voice over
Buying into everlasting life was appealing to those whose worldly existence was less than pure.
At Tewkesbury Abbey knights in armour appear as themselves — no attempt made to blend them with saints
Female speaker
A very rich lady called Eleanor de Clare married into the Despenser family who were not a particularly saintly lot.
She thought she better buy not only her way into heaven but that of all her husband and relations as well.
Even more unashamed is Eleanor de Clare's depiction of herself.
She's got virtually nothing on…dressed only in her shift as a quite uncharecteristically humble donor figure begging to come into heaven, please
Voice over
Even the remotest church has remarkable pieces.
At Deerhurst in Gloucestershire…
St. Catherine who was broken on a wheel…hence the Catherine wheel firework.
Four hundred years later…at Middleton Cheney in Northamptonshire she was modelled for William Morris by his wife Jane.
These works came from a Morris's glass catalogue.
Some ancient glass has been renewed with modern design.
But tomorrow we'll see how the acknowledged master of glass conservation is making Fairford's windows shine again with a medieval light
A judge's daughter who was jailed for supplying drugs claims that drugs and sex are freely available at the prison where she's serving her sentence.
Georgia Griffiths sold L-S-D to friends of a student who later leapt to his death from a window, believing he could fly.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
RICHARD DOWNS/Staffordshire Borough Councillor
Voice over
Georgia Griffiths was sentenced to nine months jail in June for selling LSD.
The conviction came after the death of New College student Henry Skelton after he jumped from the window of an Oxford house during a drugs party.
Sent to Drake Hall Womens Prison in Staffordshire The twenty one year old judge's daughter appears to have encountered a regime of drugs and drink with stories of sex and easy access according to the Daily Express.
One of the girls nicked some yeast from the kitchens and so we made our own homebrew — potent or what.
I got slaughtered and hence crashed fairly early.
However two of the possee went over the fence in an attempt to get to a nightclub in Bristol.
The women later sobered up and returned pleading pre-menstrual tension to the governor.
Her accounts come from letters to a penpal and published in the Daily Express.
Drake Hall is an open prison and other stories tell of women taking crack, Wicked drops or deliveries of parcels containing drugs, drink, and cigarettes, and a boyfriend of one of the inmates having sex inside the prison.
The revelations have brought calls for an investigation
Male speaker
If they are true then I think they should be investigated and the appropriate action taken
Voice over
The prison service has said: Inmates are sent to open prisons on the basis that they accept the rules.
Abuse of rules or being absent without leave will mean a return to closed prison’
Meanwhile the governor of Drake Hall prison has promised a full investigation into the allegations.
Relatives of an R-A-F bomber crew killed in the Second World War have flown to Russia for a memorial service.
RAF BRIZE NORTON/Oxfordshire
The families left Brize Norton in Oxfordshire as guests of the R-A-F.
They'll attend a ceremonial burial near where the men died.
The Hampden bomber crashed while on its way to help Stalin fight the Nazis, but the wreckage wasn't found for more than forty years.
TEWKESBURY/Gloucestershire
The accident happened near Tewkesbury when an articulated lorry collided with a road sweeper.
One lane of the motorway was closed and a driver was taken to hospital with minor injuries.
The former Chief Constable of Gloucestershire Albert Pacey says concern over burglaries and car thefts should not overshadow the dangers of major organised crime.
Mr Pacey has just taken over as head of the National Criminal Intelligence Service.
He says the public does not always appreciate the social cost of large scale fraud and racketeering.
GRAEME BOWD/London
ALBERT PACEY/NCIS Director General
Voice over
Last week Albert Pacey made the headlines when he described the criminal justice system as archaic and irrelevant.
Today he seemed anxious to avoid controversy as he spoke about his new role.
Formed last year the National Criminal Intelligence Agency targets major organised crime.
It's already had success against drug trafficking and it's information has led to the seizure of 8 million pounds in forged notes.
As Chief Constable of Gloucestershire Mr Pacey lead a force where car crime rose faster than anywhere else in Britain.
But he says the public should be just as concerned about big time criminals, although their activities might seem more remote.
Male speaker
There are often people behind street crime, like car theft.
There may be an organisation which has ringed it to be resold.
We are addressing that end of criminality so it will have an impact locally.
Voice over
He said the NCIS had already assisted his former police force.
Male speaker
The week before I left
Voice over
Gloucestershire there was an example of an arrest which led comprehensive intelligence on the suspect's activities.
Mr Pacey's new team has 500 prime suspects in its sights.
He says at least 2000 more require investigation.
A police force is testing a new laser gun which can lock onto a car from almost half a mile away.
Traffic officers claim the new gun can't be picked up by speeding motorists who use radar detectors to avoid being caught.
TIM HURST/Worcester
Insp PAUL AUSTEN/West Mercia Police
Voice over
The new hand-held equipment, on test in Hereford and Worcestershire, uses a laser light beam to pinpoint cars almost half a mile away.
It projects a laser dot onto the front of approaching vehicles and even in a stream of traffic it can isolate offending vehicles, with a read-out of speed and range.
And the beam can't be spotted by drivers who use radar trap detectors.
The gun is still being evaluated, and won't be introduced until it's been given Home Office clearance.
Drivers stopped in a 40 mile an hour limit testified to its accuracy.
The laser gun is manufactured in America, where it's already in use.
It'll cost about £6,000 a time to import it to Britain.
Good Evening:(Wes to read next)
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
MARIA COYLE/Oxford
16th August 1993
DINO DUGONIJIC/Injured Bosnian evacuee
DAVID WILSON/Radcliffe Infirmary
SENAD MIRVIC/Speaking through interpreter
Voice over
The good recovery made by these two Bosnian patients means they're now turning their thoughts to Bosnia and hopes of a reunion soon with friends and family.27 year old Dino Dugonijic and 26 year old Senad Mirvic were airlifted nine days ago for treatment at the Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.
Senad who's undergone eye surgery is being transferred to the John Radcliffe hospital for operative treatment on his jaw.
But Dino is now discharged.
He's said to be recovering well from an eyelid operation and reconstructive surgery on his nose.
At a hospital news conference he read out a speech of thanks.
Sound up of Dino thanking the hospital staff in English
During the conference Dino said through an interpreter that many people back home are worse, are still there and are not being treated as they should be, fuelling the controversy over whether the UN airlifted the most deserving cases.
Interview he sez it's appropriate that the men were brought to the Radcliffe for their eye surgery although it's straightforward treatment.
Both men will be in Oxfordshire for some time yet, but they're keen to go back to Sarajevo despite the dangers.
Intv he sez his family, his wife and two children are still there.
He wants a solution before further disasters happen as happened to him.
Dino is to stay with a British family living in Oxfordshire to recuperate.
He plans to go ahead with his wedding, which was postponed last Wednesday, on his return to Sarajevo.
The police have been accused of passing on confidential information about a fourteen-year-old delinquent who's spending two weeks in Spain at taxpayers' expense.
A Chief Constable has ordered a full inquiry into allegations of improper conduct by his officers, and an independent investigator is being called in.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
DAVID OAKENSON/Social Services Spokesman
SIMON COOMBS MP/Con Swindon
Voice over
It began as the scandal of a delinquent from Swindon enjoying a publicly-funded holiday on the Costa Blanca.
But now there are new allegations of another scandal closer to home.
Wiltshire Social Services want to know how the Mail on Sunday obtained confidential information about the 14-year-old for a story it ran at the weekend.
Labour spokesman David Oakenson says there's evidence to suggest the blame lies with Swindon Police.
Central South has been shown a strongly-worded letter sent by the Director of Social Services Ray Jones to Wiltshire's Chief Constable Walter Girven.
In it he expresses concern about the actions of a number of officers, including the Deputy Chief Constable Dirk Aldous.
The police have declined to comment, but in a brief statement Mr Girven said he was conducting an inquiry to ensure that officers in the force have behaved correctly, and that in the circumstances he was seeking an independent investigator from another force to undertake it.
The move has been welcomed by Swindon's MP.
David Oakenson says that if guilt is proved then decisive action should be taken.
Social services are standing by their decision to pay for the 14-year old to stay at his grandparents' villa, but refused to talk about the inquiry.
They're said to be concerned, though, about the effect all the publicity is having on the boy.
He's due to return from Spain in the next few days.
WESLEY SMITH
Good evening.
The police have been accused of passing on confidential information about a fourteen-year-old delinquent who's spending two weeks in Spain at taxpayers' expense.
A Chief Constable has ordered a full inquiry.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
DAVID OAKENSON/Social Services Spokesman
Voice over
It began as the scandal of a delinquent from Swindon enjoying a publicly-funded holiday on the Costa Blanca.
But now there are new allegations of another scandal closer to home.
Wiltshire Social Services want to know how the Mail on Sunday obtained confidential information about the 14-year-old for a story it ran at the weekend.
Labour spokesman David Oakenson says there's evidence to suggest the blame lies with Swindon Police.
Central South has been shown a strongly-worded letter sent by the Director of Social Services Ray Jones to Wiltshire's Chief Constable Walter Girven.
In it he expresses concern about the actions of a number of officers, including the Deputy Chief Constable Dirk Aldous.
The police have declined to comment, but in a brief statement Mr Girven said he was conducting an inquiry to ensure that officers in the force have behaved correctly, and that in the circumstances he was seeking an independent investigator from another force to undertake it.
A Bosnian evacuee who's been receiving medical treatment in this country claims there are more deserving casualties still suffering in the war zone.
Dino Dugonijic, was treated for facial injuries.
MARIA COYLE/Oxford
DINO DUGONIJIC/Evacuee
DAVID WILSON/Radcliffe Infirmary
Voice over
The good recovery made by these two Bosnian patients means they're now turning their thoughts to Bosnia and hopes of a reunion soon with friends and family.27 year old Dino Dugonijic and 26 year old Senad Mirvic were airlifted nine days ago for treatment at the Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.
Senad who's undergone eye surgery is being transferred to the John Radcliffe hospital for operative treatment on his jaw.
But Dino is now discharged.
He's said to be recovering well from an eyelid operation and reconstructive surgery on his nose.
At a hospital news conference he read out a speech of thanks.
Dino thanks the hospital staff in English
During the conference Dino said through an interpreter that many people back home are worse, are still there and are not being treated as they should be, fuelling the controversy over whether the UN airlifted the most deserving cases.
Interview he says it's appropriate that the men were brought to the Radcliffe for their eye surgery.
Both men will be in Oxfordshire for some time yet, but they're keen to go back to Sarajevo despite the dangers.
A judge's daughter, jailed for supplying drugs to a student who leapt to his death, claims drugs and sex are freely available in the prison where she's serving her sentence.
Georgia Griffiths is at Drake Hall Open Prison in Staffordshire.
She claims there are parties and nights out.
The Governor is considering the allegations and says security has been improved.
Oxford student, Henry Skelton fell from a window at New College after taking LSD supplied by Griffiths.
Football now.
In the first round, second leg of the Coca Cola cup, Hereford have won two nil at Torquay tonight.
The game went into extra time with Hereford eventually winning four three on penalties.
A police force is testing a laser speed detector.
It can home in on a car from almost half a mile away.
TIM HURST/Worcester
Insp PAUL AUSTIN/West Mercia Police
Voice over
The hand held guns in Hereford and Worcestershire use laser light to pinpoint on-coming vehicles projecting a laser dot onto the front of the car.
Even in a stream of traffic the laser beam can isolate the offending vehicles with an accurate read out of speed and range.
It is based upon light rather than radar.
It increases our range over our present equipment which is very effective but we can actually detect the motorist before he sees the officer on the side of the road.
We are waiting for the home office to approve this.
But it has proved during tests to be very effective.
We can pick out a vehicle from a line of vehicles and check the speed on that which at the moment we cannot do.
So it is a useful addition to our equipment.
The laser guns cost about £6000 each but will not be used officially by the West Mercia Police until they have been approved by the Home Office.
(The main Central News is at 6.25pm tomorrow, Goodnight.)
RUNS=0:05
Prostitutes in a town in the Central South region are paying higher Court fines than almost anywhere else in Britain.
Home Office figures reveal that women in Swindon face court bills that are almost twenty times higher than in some big cities.
Some prostitutes say the big fines mean they have to go back out onto the streets to pay off their debts.
Erika Barnes reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES/SWINDON/Wiltshire
KELLY/Prostitute
EDDIE NEILSON/Clean Up Campaigner
FRANK DOBSON MP/Lab Holborn
LIBRARY PICTURES
Voice over
Prostitutes in Swindon's redlight district charge each client £40 a night.
But it could land them with a court bill of up to £200 if they're stopped by the police.
Teenagers like Kelly say the tough fines have trapped her into a life of prostitution.
Anti-vice campaigners like former boxer, Eddie Neilson have all but cleared up the red-light district.
Despite Kelly's example, he still sees high fines as a deterrent, although there may be alternatives.
So as prostitutes are being deterred from Swindon by big fines and clear up campaigns, they're taking the problem elsewhere; to the cities like London, where the fines are low and demand for their work is high.
One MP is critical of inconsistent fines.
Voice over
At the moment each Magistrates bench is able to decide its own policy.
But from October the first things should change.
The Criminal Justice Act will mean fines will reflect the seriousness of the offence and the income of the defendant and should provide more consistency.
But for Kelly, there's no solution.
Ballroom dancing could be making a comeback.
A festival held to revive the art attracted hundreds of people, many of them complete novices.
Among them were two refugees from Bosnia.
Liz Hannam reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
JULIA BARNES/Organiser
Voice over
They say if you can walk, then you can be taught to dance.
And with this in mind, hundreds of budding Fred and Ginger's hot-footed it along to Cheltenham Town Hall for the first Ballroom Dancing Festival.
Female speaker
It's mainly a question of confidence and taking the first few steps.
Sometimes, you've just come home from work and your feet are sore and your head aches, but then the music starts playing and away you go.
Female speaker
It's wonderful.
I've danced since I was a child.
I love it.
Male speaker
I was a bit nervous because I didn't have a partner.
But I soon got someone and away we went.
Female speaker
If you enjoy it you soon forget your aches and pains.
Voice over
Although the event was aimed at all age groups, most participants are over 40 years old.
But there were exceptions.
2 of the youngest were refugees from Bosnia.
Female speaker
I wanted to forget all the things about my country.
I came here to relax.
Female speaker
I've never been happier.
I came to England 3 and a half months ago and this is my happiest day since then.
Voice over
They've been ballroom dancing in Cheltenham Town Hall for 50 years now.
And organisers are hoping that the success of this event will keep it going for another half century.
Gas prices cut by further 2
British Gas is to cut prices for domestic users by a further two per cent, the second cut this year.
Lord Carrington steps down from peace role
Lord Carrington is to step down from his intensive role in peace talks in the former Yugoslavia, talks in London tomorrow will go ahead.
Neo-Nazis riot in Germany
A thousand neo-Nazis have firebombed a refugee hostel in eastern Germany, the government there has pledged to take action.
Louisiana prepares for hurricane
The people of Louisiana are preparing for the onslaught of Hurricane Andrew which left Southern Florida in tatters, looters have set to work there.
French set to vote against Maastricht
An opinion poll suggests that the French will vote against the Maastricht Treaty on closer European ties.
FTSE down 30
The hundred shares index closed down again thirty point one at twenty-two, eighty-one point zero.
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety-nine and at two marks, seventy-nine.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
082592prgoramme
Grendon Prison in Buckinghamshire is unique in Britain.
There the prisoners are encouraged to confront the true nature of their crimes and themselves.
Mike Rowbottom reports on how the inmates work together to change their lives in part two of our series, Inside Story.
GRENDON UNDERWOOD/Buckinghamshire
JOHN SHAW/Prisoner
JACK WRIGHT/Senior Medical Officer
PETE MOSELEY/Prisoner
DANNY KEEFE/Prisoner
SHAUN HAZEL/Prisoner
Voice over
Wednesday morning on D-Wing at Grendon.
It's 7.50 a.m. and the inmates have been locked in their cells since 8.45 p.m. the previous evening.
This is the morning they like the least because once they've showered and taken breakfast, they must go straight into group therapy.
Some of them think of it as shock tactics.
The regime is similar throughout the prison where 200 inmates must undergo several group sessions a week, as well as 2 meetings of the wing.
D-Wing has 37 prisoners split into 5 groups.
That's where the Grendon technique gets to work; listening, talking, breaking down barriers and not letting anyone pull the wool over their eyes.
Prisoners come to Grendon with demons to get rid of.
Male speaker
I had a nervous breakdown at Frankland Jail and suddenly discovered feelings about my childhood.
I'd been sexually abused and all of a sudden the poison that had been there for years started boiling to the surface.
Voice over
John Shaw is serving life for manslaughter.
He's made 2 escape attempts and had a reputation for persistent violence.
After 16 months in Grendon, he's a trusted worker in the gym and chairman of D-Wing.
Male speaker
You can con any system to a certain extent, but here cons work with cons and you can't con a con.
The group is encouraged to bring out everything, including things they'd never admitted to themselves before, then other members provide support.
Male speaker
Violence is what I know; it's what I can do.
I know what can happen.
Male speaker
You have to get rid of that person and put a caring person in.
Male speaker
I was the most cold blooded, sadistic person you could think of.
You imagine someone going round kneecapping people; that's the sort of person I was.
Male speaker
I ended up killing someone Shaun and I never wanted to kill again.
I used to find myself walking the landing bladed up and it only needed one word out of place and I'd turn them into a Tetley Tea Bag and I'd never get out.
Voice over
Not everyone succeeds at Grendon, some of them don't get past the initiation stage at A-wing.
It's up to Jack Wright, the senior psychiatrist in charge oif the therapy, to decide who's suitable and who not.
Male speaker
We do get failures, it depends on what you mean.
Voice over
Even the governor is on first name terms with the inmates, although the staff still keep a respectful distance.
It's tough enough for those who stay.
Grendon starts doing its best work after 18 months, but it's hard work getting there.
Male speaker
Recognising you've got a problem is fine, but changing it is the hardest part and a lot of people don't do it.
There are people who can pull the wool over peoples' eyes.
Some won't be told.
Male speaker
You can't just accept love and affection.
I've had enough of this life.
I'd rather die than go back out the way I was.
Voice over
The toughest part for many is dealing with the no violence rule.
It's one of 4, including no sex, drugs, or alcohol.
Other inmates act keep an eye on people likely to blow up.
That's unheard of in other prisons.
Male speaker
I was very new on the wing and someone in for a bad sex offence talked about their crime and I was badly affected.
I wound up in my cell with 2 friends keeping the door shut.
All I wanted to do, was go down and hurt the guy.
Voice over
The intensity of the group sessions is broken up with other prison activities, and relaxation.
There's a flourishing bird culture, some write, others draw.
The only time the prisoners are locked in, is overnight, but that's still 11 hours of solitude.
Male speaker
It's the best time of the day for me.
I keep birds and I've learned to do my hands doing tapestry.
Male speaker
Banged up at 9 p.m. or 10 p.m. at night it still goes on.
We're still talking to each other.
Voice over
The success rate is enough to suggest every prison should adopt the Grendon technique.
Success or failure, the Grendon inmates always move on in the end; either back to the prison system, or parole, or release.
But the staff are there all the time.
Tomorrow we look at their role within the prison.
Football…
Oxford United hope to secure their place in the second round of the Coca Cola Cup tonight.
They take a three nil lead to Swansea for the second leg of their first round tie.
Last week two goals from Chris Allen finished off a spirited performance by the Welsh side at the Manor.
But United…with midfielder Jim Magilton making his first appearance of the season…should be too strong.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
TOM CHAMBERLAIN/Neighbour
GERALD ROUSE/Postman
JOHN JONES/Chairman/Local Conservative Association
Voice over
Cyril Reenan — the man at the centre of the scandal they're calling Dianagate.
But that's about all the world's media, camped outside his house in Park Road in Abingdon, got to see of the retired bank manager.
He's gone to ground since The Sun named him as the man who passed on a tape of a telephone call allegedly made by the Princess of Wales to an admirer on New Year's Eve 1989.
The amateur radio enthusiast is quoted as saying he considered destroying the tape but eventually decided to hand it to The Sun.
The Reenan's house is in a quiet select area of Abingdon…
Mr Reenan and his wife Phyllis apparently listened into the conversation using a radio scanner…linked to a twenty foot aerial in the garden…
Neighbours who live with a view of the Reenan's hobby were surpised and angry about the whole episode.
This is the second scandal in a matter of days to rock the Royal Family.
Last week a prominent Abingdon Conservative reacted to the publication of intimate pictures of the Duchess of York by calling for legislation to protect people's privacy.
Today he came face to face with the journalists he wants to reign in.
Staff at the Abingdon branch of the TSB in Stert Street, where Mr Reenan used to work, have been instructed not to comment on the affair, but with speculation that further revelations are likely to be published tomorrow there'll be more pressure on Mr Reenan to speak.
GARETH FURBY/Abingdon/Oxfordshire
JOHN SHEPPARD/Modulations Communications
DES KAYLOR/Licensed Radio Amateur
CHRIS GENT/Vodafone
Chief Insp JOHN REEVE/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The brother of a man jailed for seven years in Baghdad has offered to keep him company, or even change places.
The man, a catering worker, was jailed for crossing the Iraqi border from Kuwait.
Tim Hurst reports.
WORCESTER
PHIL RIDE/Brother
BRIAN RIDE/Father
Voice over
Paul Ride, the father of a 17-month-old son, faces seven years in a Baghdad jail after wandering into Iraq from his catering job in Kuwait.
He had stopped to ask directions.
Now from his home in Worcester, Mr Ride's brother has offered to take his place, even though their father is against the idea.
The International Red Cross and the Russian embassy in Baghdad, representing British interests, have asked to visit Paul Ride in his prison cell.
His father is also considering a visit.
From his home in Worcester, Phil Ride says he'll keep up pressure on the British Government to work for his brother's release.
The headmaster of a school at the centre of allegations into sex abuse is to take early retirement on medical grounds.
Council officials say it won't in any way effect their inquiry.
Clare Lafferty reports.
MALVERN/Worcestershire
ALEC MACKIE/Hereford and Worcester County Council
Voice over
HMS Gloucester is heading for the Adriatic Sea to help stop weapons being smuggled to Serbian forces.
LIBRARY PICTURES
The Destroyer will join other NATO ships patrolling international waters in search of gun runners.
Gloucester, which saw active service in the Gulf War, will monitor traffic to and from Serbia and Montenegro for the next few months.
It left Portsmouth yesterday.
The journey to the Adriatic will take up to a week.
Welcome back:
A sanctuary for wild animals is having to deal with a new phenomenon…bald hedgehogs.
(WES NEXT)
The creatures have been found in the wild without any spines or facial fur.
Now a campaign's being launched to fund research into the hedgehogs' plight.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Haddenham
LES STOCKER/St Tiggywinkles
Voice over
It's got wildlife experts baffled!
How does an otherwise perfectly healthy and normal hedgehog wind up…in the pink, as bald as a new born baby, devoid of spines, naked to the world.
The St Tiggy Winkles Animal Hospital at Haddenham has taken in three of them this month and they're stumped for an answer.
Male speaker
they're certainly getting a lot fitter.
They're responding to tender love and care.
But the spines aren't doing anything
Voice over
St Tiggy Winkles deals with up to three thousand hedgehogs a year.
At any one time they are likely to have two hundred and fifty in various stages of recovery.
For the most part they will have a full complement of spines but this year there seems to have been an increase in hedgehog baldness.
What small recovery there is takes the form of a few white straggly spines…not enough to serve their purpose.
Male speaker
spines protect them against predators but without them they fall prey to weasils and stoats.
They also act as an insulation
Voice over
The animal hospital says more research is needed to find out if it'scaused by environment, diet, agricultural chemicals or something else.
So they've launched a nationwide fundraising campaign using a comic featuring wildlife.
It costs 95 pence a copy and will be available in supermarkets.
Male speaker
being a charity we have to raise money for what we need and the comic will do that as well as teach youngsters about wildlife
Voice over
If they succeed in finding a cure not only will the spines be restored to the hedgehogs but there will almost certainly a long queue of humans eager to try it out.
Some of the finest stained glass windows in Britain can be found in churches in this area.
But many of them are in dire need of repair.
In the second part of our series’ Light on the World’we visit the country's leading expert on glass conservation.
The ancient treasures he restores are so precious that the location of his workshop is a carefully guarded secret.
SIMON GARRETT/North Yorkshire
KEITH BARLEY/Stained Glass Conservator
Voice over
Cloistered in converted farm buildings a few miles from York…craftsmen breathe new life into Fairford's medieval glass.
It's an almost monastic existence.
To safeguard the priceless treasures they work with Barley studios have no signs at the door…they don't advertise.
They're embarked on a ten year project to clean restore and preserve the Fairford windows.
Recording each detail of glass and lead in thousands of photographs.
Repairing damage previous restorers could only botch
Male speaker
We do have this process where we can edge-glue the broken pieces so when a piece is broken and a previous glazier put in a piece of lead we can edge bond instead
Voice over
Removing the mender's lead leaves gaps which have to be filled with new glass…aged and painted to closely match the original.
The edges are carefully bitten away or grosed to fit.
Male speaker
With the glass at Fairford it's so complete…there's only 5% lost…it's like joining the dots.
There's very little missing.
We're not actually inventing anything, we actually know what was there
Voice over
Fortunately for the restorers the glory of Fairford was recorded in precise detail by the Reverend Joyce in 1870…before acid rain and car exhausts had done their worst.
But some images are gone.
An artist restores the picture without altering what's left of the original
Male speaker
We're cutting 1mm thick sheet clear glass and restoring lost detail.
Under a microscope or with a side light we can see where the paint's been lost.
Combined with Joyce's records we can actually restore lost detail to important features.
We're4 not treating the whole window but by doubling the pieces together of the details it gives some feel…restores some interpretation to the original work of art
Voice over
Once restoration and cleaning are complete the windows will go back inside new ventilated clear glass cases and non-corroding magnesium bronze frames.
They will look exactly the same, but temperature and moisture will be controlled…in effect they will cease to age
Male speaker
In theory it should never need attention again.
It isn't subjected to wind pressure and its fully suypported in the frames.
All being well I see no reason why it should need attention in the future
Voice over
You'll do yourself out of a job
Male speaker
I don't think I'll be around to think about it
Voice over
The vestry window at Tewkesbury Abbey shows the limits of past restorers capabilities.
Fairford's windows have stood for five hundred years despite the ravages of the Reformation…
Cromwell the Victorians and even twentieth century pollution.
Today's restoration work at least makes it possible they could still be there to be admired in another five hundred
Soccer, Hereford won a dramatic penalty shoot-out last night to reach the second round of the Coca Cola cup.
Trailing two-nil from the first leg, they levelled the scores and then beat Torquay with four goals from the penalty spot at the end of extra time.
MARTIN GRAHAM-SCOTT/Reporting
Voice over
Hereford were outplayed in the early stages until Derek Hall sent a long ball upfield…
Torquay keeper Lowe made a mess of things to present Leroy May with the first goal of the night.
Then Hereford substitute Colin Anderson ran into a crowd of defenders only to be brought down by Barrow.
Hall sending the keeper the wrong way to level the tie two all on aggregate.
The game was to be decided with a nervewracking penalty shoot out…
Torquay never recovering after Loram hit the post with their first spotkick…
It was left to Max Nicholson to send Hereford through with their fourth penalty…the end of a memorable fightback rewarded with a place in the second round.
Every year the average family throws away two tonnes of rubbish and very little of that is recycled.
But the government has set a target of recycling twenty-five percent of household waste by the end of the century.
That means councils are having to rethink the way they deal with waste.
Our environment reporter Harriet Ryley has been looking at the changing attitude to what we throw away and how we deal with it.
SUTTON COURTENAY/Oxfordshire
WILL SPUR/Greenways
PETER BUTLER MP/North-East Milton Keynes
ALISON AUSTIN/Sainsburys
MILTON KEYNES
KEITH ELY/Milton Keynes Borough Council
Putting out the rubbish — a family of four produces about 4 bags of rubbish a week…that's twenty a month.
and a hundred and sixty a year.
There are almost 600,000 households in the Central South region —
The amount of rubbish we produce a year would cover an area the size of
Oxford city centre.
Disposal of our domestic rubbish is something we tend to forget about once it's been picked up by the dust-cart.
But it's becoming a major issue as landfill sites fill up.
Most of our rubbish goes to sites like this one at Sutton Courtenay in Oxfordshire.
It doesn't just take local waste — every year trains bring 200,000 tonnes of rubbish here from London.
Male speaker
in London there are very few holes in the ground for rubbish.
Oxfordshire is one of few counties in the south-east in which we have a surplus of holes in the ground and so Oxfordshire is one of those counties that has to help London out.
Voice over
Greenways which runs this landfill spends more than it has to by law to make sure the site is safe.
It spent a third of a million pounds on this flare siphoning off dangerous methane gas — and has these Nigerian Lanner Falcons on constant guard against flocks of seagulls which can be a danger to planes from nearby RAF bases.
There are plans to build a recycling plant here — that's a sign of the times with the insistence by the government that 25% of all household waste is recycled by the year 2000.
The weekly shopping for a family of 4.
Out of this, the glass, food tins and paper can be recycled.
The Department of the Environment has just issued a thinly- veiled threat to the packaging industry…increase your recycling — or else:
Male speaker
We all know packaging is often superfluous…an excess to make people buy the product rather than just wrap it up and that must be recovered…so we want the industry to use minimum packaging and we want the industry to come forward with ideas on that — if they don't then we'll legislate.
Voice over
One of the big four supermarkets, Sainsbury's says it's happy to take up the gauntlet.
It already recycles plastic shrink-wrap into shopping bags, and 550 own-brands products are packed in recycled cardboard.
Female speaker
For over a year now we've been running a major initiative which is a systematic review of all our Sainsburys brand packaging to see where we can minimise the use of materials, but still allow the packaging to do the job of protecting the product and preserving it.
Voice over
At the other end of the line the approach to waste disposal varies from authority to authority.
Milton Keynes is committed to recycling and spent five million pounds on this recycling plant opening in November.
Two thirds of the 74,000 households it covers take part in its green box scheme.
It's convinced plants like this which it says will probably be the most advanced in Europe, are the way of the future:
Male speaker
we've got to have them — we'll need one every 50-75 miles around the country, with smaller mini-sites to feed into the ones like this in Milton Keynes.
Voice over
Oxford United Football Ground — its pitch is not about to become a landfill site — but dealing with waste is the business of one of its sponsors.
Biomass plans to build a series of lagoons covering ten acres — a fraction of the average lanfill site.
The lagoons would be lined and filled with organic waste, after recyclable materials had been separated.
Water on top of that would be heated by the composting waste and the company plans to farm shellfish in it.
The composted waste would be used as topsoil.
One of 20 councils interested in the idea is the Vale of the White Horse in Oxfordshire.
But critics are concerned that it isn't up and running anywhere yet, though a pilot scheme is planned in Portugal.
Whatever the way forward — there's a clear need for a re-think on wazste management…but while the debate goes on, the waste too goes on…piling up.
Still to come in Central News, a prickly subject.
The balding hedgehogs who are losing their spines.
Police are hunting raiders who held up a lorry driver at gun-point.
They escaped with the vehicle although it was later found with its contents, forty thousand pounds worth of clothing, still inside.
The men used two cars to force the driver to stop on a main road before tying him up and abandoning him in woods.
KIM BARNES/Milton Keynes
Det Sgt DAVE PURNELL/Milton Keynes Police
Voice over
This stolen taxi was abandoned in a picnic area after the early morning hijack.
It was one of two cars used to force an articualted lorry to stop on the A5.
He says the men got out, produced firearms and went to a picnic area.
Forensic investigations are under way for clues about the five-strong gang.
The driver, though bound and gagged, managed to make his way to the roadside where he was found.
He's obviously very upset.
It was a very stressful incident.
The lorry which came from this warehouse in Bletchley was found in North London later this morning still carrying its load of forty thousand pounds worth of clothes although the doors are damaged.
It has the registration number E791 0WY and the Principles logo on the side.
Police want to talk to anyone who saw the lorry, the taxi or a white Cavalier SRi in the area earlier today.
The Marquess of Blandford has been fined one thousand pounds for not paying taxi fares.
The heir to the Blenheim Palace estate in Oxfordshire pleaded guilty to all six charges.
KAREN THOMPSON/Central London
Voice over
Jamie Blandford, who was named on the list at Horseferry Road Magistrates Court in London, as Charles James Spencer-Churchill, arrived on foot looking relaxed and cheerful.
There was a brief scuffle at the entrance between photographers and a male colleague with the Marquess.
Magistrates fined Jamie Blandford a thousand pounds, a hundred pounds prosecution costs and 179 pounds in compensation after he admitted six charges of taking taxis in London without paying.
He would tell a cab to wait and then fail to return.
The Marquess, who's thirty seven, is the heir to the Blenheim palace estate in Oxfordshire and its one hundred million pound fortune.
But his lifestyle has lead to court appearances on drug and driving offences and he's served two jail sentences.
The Marquess married his wife Becky in 1990 but he now lives apart from her and their son.
And what a waste…changing what we do with what we don't want.
Good evening:
ANNE DAWSON
Flat owners face losing their homes after being landed with a bill for ground rent going back fifteen years.
They've been told they've got a week to pay or risk being evicted.
WESLEY SMITH
Many of the families claim to have made regular payments but the landlords say they never received them.
Another company has now bought the freeholds and is demanding that the money is paid — in some cases amounting to almost two thousand pounds.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
SUZANNE JONES/Resident
DAVE ESCOTT/Resident
DAVID SPENCER/Property Solicitor
Voice over
Suzanne Jones faces an uncertain future.
She and her husband have only recently moved into their marital home and their first child is due at Christmas, but they don't even know where they'll be living this time next week.
The Joneses have just been asked to find 15 years' back rent along with the residents of the other 17 flats at Shire Court in Swindon.
Dave Escott bought his flat, leasehold, 5 years ago.
He was paying thirty pounds a month ground rent into a management fund, but he's since discovered the money wasn't getting through to his former landlord, Titcombe Developments in Marlborough.
Now the freehold's been sold to a Salisbury firm called Sarum Heritage Limited, and the new landlord's told him to pay 1500 pounds by the end of this month or risk losing his home.
Legal experts believe the residents have a strong case.
Neither Titcombe Developments nor Sarum Heritage was prepared to comment.
Legal action is already under way.
Meanwhile, more than half way through her pregnancy, Suzanne Jones can't make plans for the future.
Dave Escott bought at the height of the boom, and any back rent will only add to his negative equity.
But when he is able to move, he won't be buying leasehold.
A shopkeeper is in hospital after being clubbed to the ground with a baseball bat.
Twenty three year old Mashtaq Ali and his cousin Ali Ashraf were ambushed outside their shop.
Police believe it's the result of a feud between two Asian families.
Community leaders have condemned the attack.
MARIA COYLE/Oxford
DUNCAN ARMSTRONG/Trader
MICHAEL MOORE/Trader
SHAUKAT QURESHI/Asian Cultural Centre Assoc
KHURSHID AHMED/Asian Cultural Centre Assoc
Voice over
Saleem Iqbal, Mr Mashtaq Ali Ashraf's cousin received a broken arm in the attack which he refused to talk about on camera.
Police say he and Mr Ashraf were ambushed outside their shop in Cowley road in Oxford.
Scores of shoppers and traders watched the fight spill onto the road stopping traffic.
Intv with traders who describe what they saw
Many of the Asian traders who saw the attack wouldn't be interviewed for fear of reprisals.
But community leaders at the Asian Cultural Centre Association have condemned the violence which police say arose out of an argument between two Asian families.
Intvs with community leaders condemning the attack.
Mr Ashraf's family have been at his hospital bedside for much of the day.
He's stable after emergency surgery on a headwound.
Police are appealing for witnesses to the attack which they describe as a very nasty injury inflicted after an earlier verbal confrontation.
Mr Ashraf was seriously hurt last year when he was stabbed with a ceremonial sword in the Cowley area, but police say the two incidents aren't linked.
Two men will appear before Oxford magistrates tomorrow morning to face charges of grievous bodily harm and affray.
An inquest has heard that a baby boy, who lived for less than an hour, could have died because of injuries caused by forceps used during his birth.
Now his father says he's taking legal action against the hospital.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
MARK SMITH/Father
Voice over
Mrs Sharon Smith gave birth to her first baby, a son named Oliver, 28 hours after being admitted to the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital in Gloucester in June.
For most of that time she was in labour and great pain, she told an inquest this afternoon.
She sat through other evidence, with her policeman husband Mark Smith, at Gloucester's Shire Hall, while seven doctors and 3 midwives gave evidence.
One of those witnesses, Dr. Abdul Mahfouz, eventually delivered baby Oliver using forceps.
A later post mortem showed that baby Oliver had compression injuries of the skull.
He had lived for just 55 minutes after being born, despite intensive efforts in the special care baby unit of the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital to revive him.
After the verdict, Mr Smith gave his reaction to the verdict.
Mr and Mrs Smith have already taken legal advice.
There's been no immediate comment from the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital.
Rail enthusiasts are rebuilding a Victorian steam engine using the original drawings of Isambard Kingdom Brunel.
They've just reached the half way stage of the project but it's taken them five years to get this far.
They don't expect the train to be back on the tracks until the turn of the century.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM Didcot
JOHN MOSSE Fire Fly Trust
KEN GIBBS Fire Fly Trust
GEOFF EYRES Fire Fly Trust
Voice over
There was a time when the Firefly locomotive class was the pride of the Great Western Railway.
It was the first intercity service between Paddington and Bristol going through Didcot and Swindon.
The Firefly society hope they can recapture some of that era with their replica currently being put together at the Didcot Railway Centre.
Male speaker
they were record beaters.
They were designed only eleven years after the rocket and are much more advanced
Voice over
Sixty two Firefly engines were made in the mid-nineteenth century and not one of them has survived the scrapheap.
The Didcot project makes the sixty third.
They're sticking to the original pattern as far as possible of a broad gauge engine with wheels seven feet in diameter and extensive use of wood.
They're using the original drawings by Isambard Kingdom Brunel.
Everyone involved in the project is a steam enthusiast and most have engineering experience.
Male speaker
The fascination is in the love of steam.
I was apprenticed at Swindon in the steam age and I thought it had passed.
But here I am doing it again
Voice over
Many of them rue the passing of the seven foot broad gauge railway.
The Great Western pioneered the idea but it never caught on in the rest of the country.
It means there won't be many places the Fire Fly can go when it is completed.
Male speaker
Brunel made the broad gauge because he saw the advantage of stability, and making extra room for passengers
Male speaker
Narrow gauge actually originates from the width of a horse's backside.
The mines used to use horses and they laid rails for the carts.
Locomotives took ovewr from them.
Then the narrow gauge became the standard
Voice over
A rail system based on a horse's behind.
Not many would argue with that.
It's taken five years and sixty thousand pounds to get this far…half way.
They still have to make and pay for a boiler so this particular age of Victorian Steam may have to wait until the next century before it makes a comeback.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Pit lessons learned
FTSE up 29
The hundred shares index closed up twenty nine point nine at three thousand and seventy nine point two 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty eight and down at two marks, fifty.
A farmer has been using four oxen to plough a field in what's believed to be the first public demonstration of the skill in almost twenty-five years.
They were being worked alongside their successor, the heavy horse, and as Liz Hannam reports, the arguments continue over which was the best.
GOODRICH/Herefordshire
CHARLES MARTELL/Oxen Driver
CHARLIE COFFEN/Ploughman
Voice over
It takes all Charles Martell's skill and determination to steer a straight course at the Wye Valley Farm Park in Herefordshire.
But 300 years ago, a boy a quarter of his age, would have had no difficulty with double the number of oxen.
For 3,000 years, they were the most popular animals used by farmers.
But the skills have been almost forgotten and that's what makes reviving them so difficult.
Male speaker
I'm even tireder than them.
You've got to keep them going.
You have to drive them and they've nothing on their heads.
You guide them by word alone and that word doesn't always get through, I can tell you.
Voice over
Oxen have an important place in British history.
Many imperial measurements such as the furlong and the acre were originally calculated by the 5 and a half acre rod that's used to guide the oxen.
But towards the end of the 17th century, their importance dwindled as more and more farmers turned to heavy horses; which although more expensive are faster and easier to control.
Today the argument as to which is best still rages.
Male speaker
I don't think there's any competition.
I thought you had to drive them, not beat them about with a stick.
Male speaker
But the horse needs an ox.
It has an ox's skin on its back and that seems rather unfair on the ox.
Female speaker
I love horses, but the ox is more traditional.
Female speaker
The horse is more steady, but the ox came first, so I think prefer the ox.
Voice over
But whether you choose horses or oxen, it will still take a day to plough an acre.
No wonder the tractor took over almost as soon as it was invented.
Major's plea for compromise in crisis talks
At crisis talks in London, the Prime Minister has warned all sides involved in the strife in the former Yugoslavia that they must compromise or face total isolation.
US to join Tornadoes in no-fly zone
The United States has announced its forces are to join British Tornadoes in the no-fly-zone planned for Southern Iraq.
FTSE up 4
The hundred shares index closed up four points at twenty-two, eighty-five exactly.
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety-eight but up at two marks, eighty.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back: Now we continue our series looking into the unique regime that operates behind the walls of Grendon prison.
The jail demands not only that the prisoners change, but so too do the prison officers.
Tonight, in his third report Mike Rowbottom examines the role of the staff in Inside Story.
GRENDON UNDERWOOD/Buckinghamshire
TIM NEWELL/Governor
TREV BALLINGER/Senior Officer
JOHN SHAW/Prisoner
ANGELA McCOURT/Prison Officer
DANNY KEEFE/Prisoner
SHAUN HAZEL/Prisoner
Voice over
Is this an honest face…
Male speaker
I'm a trusted person
ever been in trouble with the police
Voice over
Anywhere else in the British prison system the sight of inmates chatting openly with prison officers would be almost unthinkable.
They'd be seen as grasses or informers.
Male speaker
you don't gop near an officein a normal prison, everyone wants to know what you're up to 
The idea of dropping into the wing office for a gossip on first name terms would be beyond belief.
But Grendon is founded on this kind of relationship between the staff and prisoners.
Male speaker
it's just bringing downm the barriers and not hiding behind the uniform.
Some of the older officers still try to do it, they're not willing to changeNot only does Grendon demand a different attitude from its prisoners, the staff must also change.
Many volunteer for Grendon, but many are sent without any real feeling for the regime.
It's a problem recognised by the governor.
Male speaker
Working in Grendon must be one of the most difficulkt places for an officer becausec we're telling them they're not dependant on their uniform but their personality and ability to relate to people.
They're going to be veryexposed in a group setting.
They need leadership ande fortunately we have some dedicated and skilled staff able to do that
Voice over
Danny Taylor used to patrol a conventional solitary confinement block at an ordinary prison.
Now he sits on a therapy group helping the same types of people he used to lock up.
Male speaker
My attitude on the block was; they know what they're there for, if they overstep the mark they know what to expect.
I asked to come to Grendon, I didn't like it when i got here, it took a lot of getting used to
He's learned to enjoy his work…and even benefit from the groups
Male speaker
You had a death in the family which I could understand, so I lent you a book, which you haven't returned.
Male speaker
My brother in law died and i felt gutted for quite a long time
Voice over
There are specialist medical and counselling staff, but the officers have to, learn on the job, and not always willingly.
Male speaker
it often happens that someone is sent here who is unsuitable.
They usually ask to be transferred.
Not everyone here is committed, but the majority are(I've also seen a member of staff put his papers in.
He didn't like being chasllenged.
His attitude; I am an officer, cons don't talk to me like that)
Voice over
Many of the younger officers have come straight from training school and have only known Grendon Prison, they slip into the regime quite easily.
They include a small number of female officers taking part in the group sessions, especially on G-wing, the specialist unit for sex offenders.
Female speaker
I think it makes them more aware of the people they have abused.
They may have thought they had been abused therefore they could do it.
But having a woman on the wing makes them realise they have hurt real people, they see me as a real person
Male speaker
I find some offences disgust me, Im let the guy know, but then I let them know I want to help them
Joe Chapman has been at Grendon for fourteen years.
He is currently working on A-wing receiving new inmates…
Dave Casteley has been sentenced for Arsen.
It can prove too much for some of them.
The pressure of taking on other peoples' problems can cause breakdowns.
Female speaker
Other officers can take on too much
Voice over
For all the concern and first name friendship the officers are still jailers with keys.
Come quarter to nine each evening they split up.
Some accept it, others don't.
Male speaker
I accept it as part of something that has to happen.
I used to be annoyed, but I'm not any more
Male speaker
Bang-up is what I know.
As for them being my mates they're not.
I don't trust them and I haven't for the seven and a half years I've been inside jail.
That's an attitude which may change with time because everyone who goes to Grendon is affected one way or another, staff and prisoners.tomorrow we see how much good has been done when they finish.
Football, and Oxford United are through to the second round of the Coca-Cola cup.
They lost one-nil at Swansea last night, but qualify three-one on aggregate.
No such luck for Hereford United…they're out after losing five nil at Torquay.
Tim Russon reports 
Voice over
Doctors believe they've made a significant breakthrough in the fight against one of Britain's fastest growing illnesses.
Asthma kills two thousand people a year, but the new research shows that the gene which can cause it is only active when it's passed on by the mother.
Mark Kiff reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
SHIRLEY CHERRILL/Asthma Sufferer
DR JULIAN HOPKIN/Asthma Genetics Research Group
KERRY WISE/Asthma Sufferer
Voice over
Shirley Cherrill and her family know only too well the cost of asthma.
They all suffer the symptoms.
Shirley's grandfather died from it.
They're living proof that asthma can be passed from generation to generation.
Shirley Cherrill says she's always believed asthma is hereditary, because so many of her family have had it.
Now scientists working at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford believe they've made a significant discovery in how asthma is passed down the family tree.
The key link, it appears, is the mother.
Dr Julian Hopkin says that although the altered gene is passed from generation to generation by both sexes, the mother appears to be the final passage for the development of the illness.
What the Oxford team's research suggests is this:
If a woman carries the altered gene responsible for asthma, located on chromosome 11, she will pass it to her children, who will both develop asthma.
When her daughter has children, they will also carry the gene and develop the illness.
But her son's children, although they might carry the gene, won't get asthma.
Although later his daughter's children will.
For the Cherrill family, the research could have important implications.
If Richard, who suffers badly from asthma, had children, they might not get asthma.
But Kerry's children could.
Kerry says it wouldn't really bother her.
She's coped with asthma and she's sure her children could.
For Shirley, who has battle with asthma on a daily basis, the genetic research has no direct bearings yet, but for her children's children, it could make better treatment, perhaps even a cure, a reality.
A woman who waited three days for news of her husband while he was stranded without power or telephone lines in the American hurricane, now knows he's safe and well.
She managed to contact him in Florida, as the clearing up got under way.
Kim Barnes reports.
GLOUCESTER
CYNTHIA COLES
Voice over
Today Cynthia Coles got the news she's been waiting for.
Ringing from her local radio station, she heard her husband Duane is safe and sound.
Duane!
It's good to have news of you at last!
His home state of Florida took a battering from Hurricane Andrew.
Locals were told to evacuate, but Duane stayed put.
It meant no electricity and no telephone link with the outside world but there was no structural damage.
he says the house is fine, Key Largo is untouched.
It's hard to take in what's happened.
Last night the hurricane moved on to Louisiana.
Now the hurricane's on its way inland and said to be dying down.
For Cynthia too; the worst is over.
I feel wonderful, on Cloud 9!
Cynthia's due to join her husband in Florida in September, hoping for a quieter life.
In part two: Friend or foe?
Inside Grendon with the prison officers
Down but not out.
Oxford still bubbling in the Coca Cola Cup.
And the end of their tether: The perils of ploughing the old fashioned way.
Cancer patients recalled
Social services deny overreacting
have denied overreacting in taking seven children into care after they had been left at home alone.
Jackson cancels another concert
FTSE unchanged at 3079
The hundred shares index was unchanged at three thousand and seventy nine point two 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty and up at two marks, fifty.
RUNS=0:10
Welcome back
Forty years after it all but vanished, the humble eel could be about to make a comeback.
(WES NEXT)
River pollution nearly wiped out eel stocks in the Thames, but now the water's cleaner it's set for a revival.
GRAEME BOWD/Widford
VAUGHAN LEWIS/NRA Fisheries Officer
GRAHAM SCHOLEY/NRA Conservation Officer
Voice over
They wriggle, they're slimey and they give some people the creeps.
But the experts say that Britain's rivers are much poorer without them.
Now the National Rivers Authority wants to put them back where they belong.
Over the next few weeks they're releasing ten of thousands of tiny elvers in Thames tributaries like the River Windrush in Oxfordshire.
But eels are seldom seen and don't provide much sport.
So why do we need them?
Male speaker
They vanished from the Thames because up to 1970 pollution in the lower reaches prevented migration.
This has now improved.
There are also problems with barriers like weirs.
Voice over
These elvers are the lucky ones.
To get this far they had to swim from their breeding grounds in the Gulf of Mexico.
Then they had to survive the River Severn eel harvest — most are sold to East Europe and Germany where they're a delicacy.
There's no commercial eel fishing here in Oxfordshire.
But natural predators could benefit, especially the otter which is rare here, but may in time return.
Male speaker
We have a healthy fish population, but the eel is missing.
It is an important part of the otter's diet.
Voice over
It takes ten years for eels to reach maturity and return to their spawning grounds.
The next generation will have to cross many obstacles if they're to return to the River Windrush.
But they're slippery customers and they'll probably find a way.
A hundred and fifty thousand people are expected to attend a spectacular music festival over the weekend.
It will bring together a symphony orchestra, pop stars, hot air balloons and fireworks in one of the biggest events of its kind ever staged in England.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
ROD GUNNER/Event Organiser
MIKE HORN/Balloon Co-Ordinator
BILL FISHER/Thamesdown Borough Council
Voice over
20 miles of cable will provide 1 000 000 watts of light and 24 kilowatts of sound…for the first ever Wiltshire Festival at Lydiard Park in Swindon.
A crew of more than 150 technicians are working round the clock, preparing Europe's largest mobile stage for live performances by Van Morrison, Martha Reeves and the London Philharmonic Orchestra.
Even by the standards of organiser Rod Gunner, the man they call Mr Event, the shows will be spectacular.
Rod boasts one of the most impressive CVs in showbusiness — the highlight being the Prince of Wales's Symphony for the Spire at Salisbury Cathedral, an achievement which earned him a BAFTA award.
But it's not just music that's on offer at Lydiard. 50 000 litres of gas will be used to launch at least 100 hot air balloons…the climax, a Night Glow on Monday in which the balloons will be choreographed to music and fireworks.
The event has been 9 months in the making.
Local companies have contributed half a million pounds, but the driving force behind the festival is Thamesdown Borough Council.
The council hopes Lydiard will stage the festival for at least 5 years, but Rod Gunner's ambitions go further than that.
150 000 visitors are expected, but one absentee will be this giant Fosters 4-pack.
The balloon's been stolen, and 10 crates of lager are being offered to anyone who helps locate it.
The organisers hope the recipient will be the only person that doesn't remember the Wiltshire Festival.
Now something for anyone thinking of investing in property.
A disused Victorian toilet block has just gone up for sale.
It was used as a public convenience for more than a hundred years.
But, despite that, estate agents think it could make the ideal restaurant.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
ANDREW DRISCOLL/Estate Agent
Voice over
It's got to be one of the most unusual properties ever put on the market in Cheltenham.
A disused Victorian toilet block, with many of the original fixtures and fittings still in tact.
Up until about two and a half years ago, the public convenience was still used by locals in Cheltenham who'd been caught short.
No self-respecting lady or gent would use it now.
But estate agents think it's got alot going for it.
In particular, they say it boasts a convenient location.
The people we asked didn't much fancy the idea of eating lasagne and quaffing Lambrusco in an old lavatory.
Female speaker
I wouldn't fancy eating there.
Female speaker
I wouldn't like the idea.
Male speaker
I think it's a pretty grim idea myself.
Male speaker
That's a disgraceful idea.
Voice over
If you're keen to invest in property and you're particularly flush at the moment, you'll be interested to know that all this could be yours for thirty thousand pounds.
And of course for that, you do get vacant possession.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
A woman has offered to spend a hundred thousand pounds of her own money to reopen a village school that's been closed for over a year.
Valerie Welham wants to buy the empty building and run the school with a government grant.
The local authority says it's against the idea and has taken the property off the market.
ABI DONALD/Brockweir
VALERIE WELHAM/Architect
JAMES HUNTER JOHNSON/Parent
KEITH ANDERSON/Chief Education Officer
Voice over
The playground at Brockweir school has been deserted for over a year, once a 100 children were educated at this small village school, but it was closed last year because of declining numbers.
But today people living in Brockweir have pledged their support for a scheme to reopen the school.
Valerie Welham recently came in for an inheritance, she's offered the county council a hundred and ten thousand pounds for the building.
Female speaker
I think it's a very good cause, I wanted to invest in the future.
Voice over
Valerie conducted a survey of parents in the village and has found that 30 children would definitely want to attend the school, and another 26 have expressed an interest.
Male speaker
As you can see we've got three children who will be going to the school and I don't want them to think they have to get in a car every time they travel anywhere.
I'd like them to be able to walk to school, and that's what they could do if this school was open.
Voice over
The plan is to buy the school from the council and then apply for a governmnet grant to run it like other opted out schools.
But although the school was up for sale it's now been taken off the market and the council doesn't believe the scheme is in the best interests of pupils.
Education officers believe the children wouldn't be offered the range of facilities and resources they need.
Male speaker
I have great sympathy with the needs of village schools but at the end ofg the day we have to consider the needs of the children and I have no doubt in my mind that trying to open a school in Brockweir is simply not on for the children.
Voice over
Valerie is still hopeful that she'll be able to get the school reopened but at the moment it looks as if this is as close as these children will get to being at Brockweir School.
