One of Britain's oldest roads is at the centre of a row over who should be allowed to use it.
Walkers are determined that four-wheel drive vehicles and motorbikes should be banned from the Ridgeway on Sundays and Bank Holidays.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
MORRIS MENDOZA/Friends of the Ridgeway
TIM LEWIS/All Wheel Drive Club
PENNY REED/British Horse Association
ROGER TOLSON/British Mountain Bike Assoc
Voice over
Following in the footsteps of neolithic ancestors along the course of the Ridgeway — one of the oldest roads in Britain.
It can get busy at weekends — especially Sundays, with walkers, cyclists and horse-riders and the occasional car or four-wheel drive all contributing to the wear and tear of the track.
The Ridgeway which was designated a national trail by the Countryside Commission in nineteen seventy-two, runs from Overton Hill in Wiltshire Ivinghoe Beacon in Buckinghamshire.
Last year the Countryside Commission called for an inquiry to decide whether recreational vehicles should be banned on Sundays and Bank Holidays on the stretch between Streatley in Berkshire to Overton Hill.
Ten months on there's no decision.
A voluntary ban is in operation, which most drivers observe — but not all, and the walking lobby wants it enforced.
He says our feeling is very much that that's the right idea, beacuse it enables the place to be used for quiet enjoyment at a time of the week when most people are free.
He says I don't think vehicles should be allowed here unless they're agricultural — I think they're destroying the environment.
That's something members of the All-wheel drive club disagree with strongly:
He says I think the vast majority of damage done to the Ridgeway is done by much heavier, bigger vehicles — farm vehicles and so on.
There is support for the driving lobby from cyclists and horse-riders.
She says mostly they're the soul of courtesy — embarrassingly polite and come to a grinding halt…
I've met few recently, but they've been very good.
He says it's the thin end of the wedge and once they ban motorised vehicles, they'll probably then turn their attention to cyclists and horse-riders — and obviously we like using the Ridgeway.
The Department of Transport, which held the inquiry last year gave no reason for the delay on a decision and says it can't say when it'll make one.
So everyone continues to use the Ridgeway in a fairly easy truce — while the men from the ministry make up their minds.
Still to come on Central News, meals on eels.
Stocking our rivers with food for otters.
All cisterns go.
The public convenience that's a hot property
Good Evening 
ANNE DAWSON
An RAF pilot has been killed and a woman civilian seriously injured in an air crash.
It happened when a Chipmunk light aircraft from RAF Benson in Oxfordshire hit the ground as it tried to make an emergency landing in Wales.
(WES NEXT)
WESLEY SMITH
The pilot has been described as a senior officer with responsibility for air training.
An investigation's already begun into what caused the crash 
SIMON GARRETT/RAF St
PAUL DAVIS/Eye Witness
Flt Lt HUMPHREY VINCENT/RAF St Athan
Voice over
The two-seater Chipmunk aircraft had just taken off when it unexpectedly veered sharpley back towards the runway.
The aircraft hit the top of a nhangar and came down out of control on the edge of the runway at RAF ST Athan.
The aircraft…part of Number 6 air experience flight had arrived from RAF Benson near Wallingford in Oxfordshire on a routine training exercise.
Male speaker
We just seen an aircraft flying round and come in to land.
We heard a bang and heard the fire engines going down the runway.
It just sort of come in to land and it veered off the runway as such.
We couldn't see no more because of the hangars
Voice over
The dead man's been named as Group Captain Roger Sweatman who at 58 was the Regional Commandant of Air Cadets in Wales.
An inquiry's already begun into what happened
Male speaker
It's wrong to speculate about psosible aircraft failures after take off.
It seems like the pilot had a problem or he wouldn't haved effected that manoeuvere.
There probably was a problem.
We don't yet know what it was.
Voice over
The Chipmunk was designed nearly fifty years ago.
This particular model's been in use by the RAF since 1958.
It's a pilot's favourite and has a reputation for being safe and reliable.
Many airforce and civilian pilots trained at least in part on the aircraft.
Number six air experience flight used to be based at RAF Abingdon before the short move to Benson.
The Chipmunk's in the process of being phased out of service and replaced by the Bulldog trainer…itself not a new aircraft either.
But the transition won't be overnight.
The Air experience flight based at Benson is one of thirteen around the country with a total of 63 chipmunks.
Tonight no one from the air base ia making public comment
The inquests into the deaths of three women from the same family have been opened and adjourned.
The coroners court heard that all three…grandmother, mother and daughter…had to be identified by their fingerprints.
The women were all found in their own homes after being beaten around the head with a hammer.
Last Friday/KIM BARNES/Oxford
Voice over
The coroner heard that the body of 78 year old Florence Jeffrey was found at her home in Jericho in oxford after a member of the public became concerned at not seeing her.
Later that evening the bodies of her daughter Margaret Godfrey, who was 54, and her 22 year old grand-daughter Susan Godfrey were found at their home in Marston, Oxford.
They had all been dead for several days.
At today's inquest evidence of identification was given by coroner's officer PC John Graham.
Coroner Nicholas Gardiner opened and adjourned the inquest for two weeks so that funerals can be held.
But it's not expected to re-open until the trial of 58 year old Ron Godfrey, Margaret's husband, is held.
He was remanded in custody in Oxford last Saturday charged with the murder of all three.
Post office staff have gone on strike after a technician was suspended for refusing to use machinery blacked by his union.
The National Communications Union says its members will stay out until he's reinstated.
The Post Office says the strikers could be acting illegally.
MARIA COYLE/Swindon
LEN GANDER/Branch Secretary of NCU
ALAN NORRIS/Branch Representative NCU
Voice over
The strike at the Royal Mail Research and Development centre in Swindon involves technical staff.
It's the latest run in in a dispute which has been rumbling on for some weeks betweenthe Post office and the National Communications union.
Twenty staff walked out yesterday when a colleague was suspended for refusing to use a sorting machine in Bristol.
He should have been carrying out a test run but refused because the machine is blacked by the NCU.
The strikers are staying out until he's reinstated.
Intv.he outlines what the union wants ie. reinstated colleague without disciplinary action etc.
Intv. he sez morale is very low and this industrial action is the last thing the men wanted.
Industrial relations became strained when the post office abolished a flexible shift system at the SWindon branch.
In response the union staged as series of stoppages.
But the post office says the original ballot taken on industrial action maynot cover this strike over a suspension as it's an entirely different issue.
Altho there are threats to escalate the strike, so far mail deliveries have not been effected.
A self-taught blacksmith has won a prestige commission to create new gates for Hereford Cathedral.The job will take him three months to complete.
Richard Barnett reports:
TITLEY/Herefordshire
PETE SMITH/Blacksmith
WALFORD/Herefordshire
Voice over
To visit the Forge at Titley on the Herefordshire/Wales border, is to roll back the centuries.
Pete Smith uses techniques that date back to medieval times to work the rods of metal into everything from gates to furniture.
So it's appropriate that he's been chosen to make new gates for the North porch of Hereford cathedral, to replace wrought ironwork that was made and then removed centuries ago.
The commission will take 3 months, 5 days a week to complete.
It's the latest episode in a success story for Pete, who has no formal training as a blacksmith.
Male speaker
He'd always wanted to be a blacksmith and he learned by doing the job.
Pete is also about to start renovating the gates for Bathurst Park in Cirencester.
Voice over
4 years ago, he restored the magnificent entrance to Hill Court, near Ross on Wye, not once, but twice.
He rebuilt the gates, after a lorry drove into them.
And then was called back to do the job again when a lorry ran into the restored ironwork.
To demonstrate the blacksmith's craft, Pete made us a rams head fire poker.
The rod is heated to almost 2000 degrees centigrade in the white hot coke, then it's forged by hammering on the anvil.
A succession of processes reheating and working the metal with chisels creates the rams horns; then the head, mouth and eyes.
Half an hour later, the poker is complete.
Male speaker
You have to follow the rules and work at the right pace to make it work.
Voice over
Pete designs some of his own gates, like this imaginative entrance that plays tricks with perspective.
But he sees the gates for the Cathedral as a major challenge.
Male speaker
He was surprised to be chosen to do the gates, but he knows they will work out right.
Voice over
Judging from his previous work, there's no doubt the cathedral will be delighted with their new gates.
And it's likely the commission will open up new avenues for the blacksmith who taught himself everything he knows.
A man who advertised for a woman to live on a desert island with him is looking for another female travelling companion to repeat the trip.
Gerald Kingsland's exploits on the island were immortalised in the film Castaway.
Now he's advertising for another Girl Friday to share the sun, sea and sand with him.
Clare Lafferty reports.
BROMYARD Herefordshire
GERALD KINGSLAND
Voice over
Today he's living a quiet life in Bromyard.
But 10 years ago, Gerald Kingsland hit the headlines when he advertised for a woman to live with him on a desert island.
Lucy Irvine answered the ad.
The couple married and spent a well documented year on Tuin island in the Pacific Ocean.
They suffered dreadful hardships there including illness and even starvation.
But Gerald wasn't put off.
A decade on he wants to return to the islands and he's advertising for a Herefordshire woman to accompany him.
On this trip, Gerald plans to stay on a boat, so his companion won't have to rough it as much.
But she still needs staying power.
Gerald has been married and divorced 4 times.
But he's still optimistic that whoever answers the ad, will bring romance as well as adventure into his life.
Despite offers of sun, sea and sand, Gerald hasn't exactly been overwhelmed by the response.
No.
There simply aren't any adventurous women in Herefordshire.
But we found a few.
Female speaker
No thank you.
I prefer Bromyard.
Voice over
Gerald plans to set off on his trip in December.
But for the moment, it seems he isn't the luxury most women want to take on a desert island with them.
Government praises GCSE results
FTSE up 26
The hundred shares index closed up twenty six point six at two three one one point six 
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety seven and down at two marks, seventy nine.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
All this week we've been looking at life inside Grendon Prison in Buckinghamshire.
Under its unique regime, prisoners are given the chance through therapy to come to terms with their crimes, and hopefully start a new life.
Tonight Mike Rowbottom looks at what happens to the prisoners after they leave Grendon, in the final part of his series, Inside Story.
GRENDON UNDERWOOD/Buckinghamshire
TIM NEWELL/Governor
JOHN SHAW/Prisoner
JACK WRIGHT/Senior Medical Officer
TREV BALLINGER/Senior Officer
MICK BANKS/Prisoner
Voice over
Grendon is unlike all other prisons in Britain, not least because it's easier to get out than to get in.
There's a long waiting list and those who get there have to run a gauntlet, which not all survive.
Some of them are returned to normal prisons before they ever make the intensive group therapy regime.
But it's what happens to the ones who succeed which raises serious questions.
Many of them go through the freedom of Grendon, only to be returned to the rough and tumble of ordinary jails to finish their sentences.
Will all the good work go to waste?
Male speaker
If I go back, then I know I'll go back to the way I used to think.
It's a frightening thought that you come to Grendon to sort yourself out, then you have to go back into the system.
Voice over
As with everything else, it's a subject for discussion on the group.
Male speaker
If you've been here long enough, you can move on to a progressive prison; to a C cat, or even D cat.
Male speaker
But it's still the system.
No matter where you go, there will still be drugs.
Voice over
Will the pressure prove too much?
Grendon is a Category B Security Prison.
Successful inmates can hope to move back to a lower category C security, or even a Category D open prison.
Some may even finish their sentences, but it's not an ideal world.
Male speaker
It's a deficiency that they have to go back to another culture, but we hope they've got sufficient strength from being here to get through that.
Voice over
Certainly staff at other prisons are astonished at the changes in inmates when they return from here.
Male speaker
You're preparing me to go out into the street, but I still have to go back to the system first.
Some of the barriers I've built up are going to be chipped away and it's only going to take one incident and I'm going to be stuffed.
Male speaker
We've all seen it when you arrive at a new prison.
Someone comes up to you and you only have to say you're not interested in drugs; sooner or later they'll leave you alone because they're too busy trying to find a £5 deal to bang up with in the evening.
Male speaker
If I have to go back it will be different.
I've gone through courses like Alternatives to Violence and Psychodrama, which are so highly pressured, that I know if I can do those.
I can withstand the pressures of the system.
Voice over
There are no comprehensive figures to show how successful Grendon is.
Some have left never to reoffend; others have committed crimes, but of a much less serious nature than before.
Others have slipped back to their old ways.
Male speaker
There is evidence that it works in terms of reoffending, but there are lots of other indices like home life, burden on the welfare.
I believe anecdotally it works.
Voice over
Some think a major step forward would be to establish Grendon-type wings at every prison.
One problem faced by everyone including the staff, is its reputation outside the walls.
Male speaker
It has a bad reputation in the system.
I'd like to see staff coming here from other prisons to see what we do.
We're not monsters, neither are the inmates.
Male speaker
I've been inside for over a decade, the fact that I could be out soon cares me.
I don't even know how to operate one of those card telephones.
Male speaker
In here or out, there you must be an individual.
It's people feeding off each other that have something to hide.
You have to be yourself.
Voice over
Eventually they will move and the reality will be upon them.
Mick Banks has been in institutions since he was 12.
He leaves at the end of this year to start a career in leisure management.
He'll be on his own.
Male speaker
It hasn't prepared me for the outside world; all it's done is given me an awareness of myself.
But when I get out there I can't call a group.
Male speaker
I don't know what's making you feel like this, but the fact is if you can change here you can change anywhere.
You don't know who you're going to meet when you get outside.
Voice over
Shaun has been in Grendon for 3 months and already he's facing himself.
It's up to him, as with everyone at Grendon, to see out the rest of his time.
Cricket now and Kent have posed problems for Gloucestershire in their match at Canterbury scoring a hundred and six for one (106-1) in their second innings.
Gloucestershire scored one hundred and seventy five (175) all out in their first.
Rain has prevented play today in Worcestershire's match with Nottinghamshire and Northamptonshire's match with Middlesex.
Football now.
Oxford United have been drawn against premier league club Aston Villa in the second round of the Coca Cola cup.
United will be at home in the first leg on September the twenty second and away at Villa Park two weeks later.
Car dealers say the world's fastest production car may not prove to be the sellout they'd expected it to be.
They say many of the prospective owners who put down a fifty thousand pound deposit are now looking to pull out.
The car makers say they're confident there'll be no shortage of buyers.
Kim Barnes reports.
BLOXHAM/Oxfordshire
TOM HARTLEY/Car Dealer
BILL DONNELLY/Jaguarsport
JUNE 1992
MALCOLM BARBER/Car Auctioneer/Sotheby's
Voice over
Sleek, swift and sophisticated; the Jaguar supercar was snapped up when it was unveiled in 1989. 1,500 applications for a production run of just 350.
But now dealers say the bubble has burst.
With a price tag of £415,000, some of those who signed up for the XJ 220 are backing out, despite having paid a deposit of £50,000.
he says…
I've had around two or three calls a week for the last few months.
since the car began to roll off the line.
The Bloxham manufacturer admit some buyers have had cold feet.
But they say it's only around 30.
he says…
We've seen cases where this has been a life long ambition, its tragic.
The good news is they are finding other buyers.
So they're not losing their deposit?
That's correct.
And they say any spare cars are being snapped up by foreign buyers.
The first 10 are already on the road, sen off by Michael Heseltine.
Collecting experts say the enthusiast will probably make sure he gets the car of his dreams.
It's the speculator looking for an investment who'll lose out.
he says…
People who wanted a quick return will get less.
he says The economic trend we're seeing is cyclical.
The top secret buyer's list includes european royals, rock stars, and millionaire businessmen.
with a top speed of over 212 miles an hour, the Big Cat is aiming to leave the recession standing.
Hercules transport aircraft have begun flying to the Gulf in support of the new air exclusion zone in Southern Iraq.
A third of the transport fleet from RAF Lyneham will be flying to and from Saudi Arabia, carrying supplies for RAF Tornadoes.
Simon Garrett reports 
RAF LYNEHAM/Wiltshire
Flight Lt TIM BURGESS/70 Squadron
Group Captain DAVID ADAMS/Station Commander
Voice over
The 23rd Hercules in 2 days leaves RAF Lyneham near Swindon heading for Saudi Arabia.
First it'll stop off at Brize Norton to pick up supplies for the Tornadoes operating the air exclusion zone.
Others will load at Mareham in Norfolk.
The crew has been expecting a return to the Gulf.
Male speaker
You pick up the warning signs from the news and so on before you get the official warning to go, but it's still short notice.
Voice over
After months of trips to the Dahran air base in the war for Kuwait, the journey's become distinctly routine.
Male speaker
The first few times you go it's interesting and exciting as anything new is, but eventually it's hot and dusty and really quite boring.
Voice over
The rest of the 60-strong Hercules fleet still has important tasks including making relief flights to Sarajevo.
Male speaker
We're carrying on with that as normal and with many other jobs as well; we've cut down some of our local training sorties to release aircraft for the main lift, but we're coping pretty well.
Male speaker
They're obviously going into a difficult area and if it breaks out into open conflict, there will be slight risk, but at the moment it's fairly routine for us.
Voice over
By the weekend, around 50 flights will have been made at the rate of one every 2 hours and the deployment will be complete.
However, Hercules will still have to make resupplying runs to Saudi Arabia for so long as the air exclusion operation lasts.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Several Bosnian families have already been given shelter in this country until the fighting at home is over.
But social service officials have warned that even if this latest rescue mission is successful the children could face long-term emotional problems.
Mike Dolan reports 
KETTERING/Northamptonshire
KEVIN BIRD/Rescue Co-ordinator
GERALD SMITH
Food and medicines loaded on to a coach at Kettering in Northamptonshire.
Their destination the town of Graz in Austria close to the former Yugoslav border.
The trip has been hurriedly arranged by a group of pub locals.
Fifteen of them will travel to the region which has been devastated by civil war to bring back its most heart rendering victims…the children.
Kevin Bird co-ordinator says
The plight of the country's refugees has tugged at the nation's heart.
But despite the crisis the Foreign Office and the United Nation's has urged individual groups not to travel to Bosnia.
They believe it's too risky.
The authorities also believe if these mercy missions continue it could present long term problems.
Phil Cooke, Northamptonshire Social Services, says
Similar missions to the region have already proved successful.
Six families are currently enjoying the peace and quiet of England after being rescued by a Northampton teacher.
He believes rescue missions should be carefully planned but do serve a purpose.
Gerald Smith says
The organisers of the Kettering rescue mission know the task ahead of them is dangerous.
But they hope that in a few days forty orphaned children will be on their way to a new life in England…leaving behind them an horror of war which has already killed thousands of innocent youngsters.
Angry creditors have accused a tourist board of living off borrowed money before it collapsed with debts of more than three hundred thousand pounds.
The Thames and Chilterns Tourist Board went into liquidation last month amid allegations that it had been living beyond its means.
Now creditors have been told not to expect their money back.
Robin Powell reports.
THAME/Oxfordshire
MELANIE BURTON/Former Employee
WYFOLD/Oxfordshire
LIZ MARTIN/Creditor
JOHN EAST/Chief Executive/English Tourist Board
MIKE OLDHAM/Liquidator
Voice over
A month after the Thames and Chilterns Tourist Board went into voluntary liquidation, creditors owed nearly a third of a million pounds, met at a hotel in Thame to find out why.
Reporters weren't welcome, but most of those who did attend were unhappy with what they heard.
Some, made redundant by the Board, still haven't been paid wages.
Liz Martin used to rent out her cottage next door to her home near Henley, as part of the Thames and Chilterns Cottage in the Country scheme.
She's lost around £350.
Others are owed much more, but that's little consolation.
Thames and Chilterns was one of 12 tourist boards around the country.
Among the 5 counties, it was responsible for were Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire.
Its role was to boost tourism in the region, but it ended up in debt to just those it was supposed to help.
Many of the small creditors, bed and breakfast owners, are already struggling because of the recession.
The biggest lender Oxfordshire County Council, owed £53 000, the British Tourist Authority £40,000 and Witney Press, which printed its brochures, almost £19,000.
It's unlikely they'll ever be repaid in full.
Former officials of Thames and Chilterns are lying low.
Its accountant was sacked, its Chief Executive resigned.
His successor refused to comment.
How long they can remain silent is uncertain.
The English Tourist Board's holding its own investigation into why an organisation charged with the apparently simple task of luring tourists to one of the most attractive parts of the country, came so unstuck.
A woman has been raped in her own home by a man she met at a local market.
Police say the attacker had visited the house once before, then returned to carry out the attack.
Erika Barnes reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
Det Insp PAUL EASTHAM/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
This is the man who allegedly raped a 38 year old woman.
It's understood he'd met the victim some weeks before in the Fleet Street area of Swindon.
She'd invited him back home at that time.
Police say the attack happened in the early hours of Wednesday morning.
The attacker is white, in his 20s; slim; with short fair hair.
He told the woman he was involved in drugs.
Thousands of people will be on the water this bank holiday weekend — but for some it could end in tragedy.
The National Rivers Authority say messing about on the river isn't clever, and that too many people fail to appreciate the dangers.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Northmoor
NICK BROWN/National Rivers Authority
PAUL SENIOR/National Rivers Authority
Voice over
Rivers can be fun, and they can be frightening.
It all depends on who is using them.
Locks weirs and boats need to be treated with respect according to the National Rivers Authority, but there are still some people who put themselves at risk by behaving foolishly.
Male speaker
Drink can sometimes get in the way.
A group of youngsters can often come down to the river and go over the top
Voice over
Two of the country's great rivers run through the region the Severn and the Thames.
They are a magnet for tourists, experienced boaters and amateurs alike.
One message is very clear, don't overdo the drink.
Female speaker
I've sen people pie eyed completely icapable of driving the boat
Male speaker
When people have taken too much drink it can make some strange situations, especially going into the locks
Voice over
Inexperienced boaters unfamiliar with the craft cause special concern for the river inspectors.
Especially with refuelling which they say can sometimes lead to a floating bomb.
Male speaker
we've had explosions where the fuel system has been at fault.
That comes down to bad maintenance
Voice over
Just such a fire happened this spring.
Other hazards lurk around every corner like people jumping from bridges, swimming in dangerous areas, and incompetent boat handlers.
Female speaker
They weave from side to side and usually havenm't a clue what they're doing
Voice over
The message is: Be careful.
The rivers' safety record is reckoned to be quite good and the authority wants tyo ensure that this wweeekend people don'ty do over the top in case they wind up going under.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, a cross channel challenge.
Welcome back.
Later on the warbirds wing in for the big show.
But now with a look at the weekend's sport, here's Tim Russon.
(TIM NEXT)
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
JOHN GORMAN/Town Manager
Voice over
When you're at the top it's the best job in the world — when you're bottom a football manager's lot is not a happy one.
After just 4 games Swindon's John Gorman is facing the first pain barrier of the season; 4 defeats and 14 goals conceded.
How are you John?
John Gorman says he's fine and once they start getting a few points you'll see all the smiling faces back again.
He says it's hard in a new league with new players but his job is to look at the positive things and not the negative ones.
They've been playing well and creating chances.
Let's hope the chances are taken tomorrow when Town play at Norwich.
Defender Adrian Whitbread has come through a fitness test, Micky Hazard could get a recall.
The form for Swindon can only get better; the games are coming thick and fast.
As for Norwich they've had a good start and will take some stopping.
At the Manor Ground Oxford United take on Watford, the bottom club in the first division.
They beat them at the end of last season thanks to a Chrissy Allen goal, and the winger was on form in the opening home game against Portsmouth.
United should be unchanged.
Striker Alex Dyer has been suffering with a tummy bug — Nick Cusack who scored a hat-trick in the reserves is ready and willing.
United are in the middle of the table — they need to win tomorrow but so too do Watford — their only win has been against Brentford in the coca cola cup
Hereford will be hoping their cup form overflows into the league game against Lincoln at Edgar Street tomorrow.
United came back from 2-0 down to beat Torquay — 3 cheers for them.
Manager Greg Downs has to change a winning team.
He's ruled out through injury so Colin Anderson will wear the number 3 shirt.
Hereford's league form has been disappointing but they aim to change that against Lincoln who've not faired much better.
Goal of the week belongs to Oxford United's Les Robinson — a scorcher — a net bulger — the best so far for Central South.
who can better that tomorrow I wonder…now our action round up this week focusses on the final of the village cricket knockout competition at Lords…it's between two Central South teams…
Frocester from Gloucestershire and Kington from Herefordshire 
EDWARD PRICE/Kington Captain
Voice over
Time will be standing still in Kington on sunday…the streets should be empty…they'll all be at Lords to cheer their cricket team on the village eleven have made it all the way to the final after 25 years of trying…
Edward Price says it will be a dream of a lifetime…he says it will never happen again because the competition is getting stronger…and jokes there'll be no bumps at Lords
Across in Frocester they'll be celebrating come what may…the Lords final clashes with the annual beer festival…
They'll be pulling pints in the cricket club on saturday and then heading for London on Sunday…may the best team win…
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
CLARE LAFFERTY/Burghill
BRIAN WILCOX/Environmental Health
Dr DICK MAYON-WHITE/Consultant in Public Health Medicine
Voice over
The two year old is one of forty five children who attend the Mrs Tiggywinkles kindergarten in the Burghill area of Hereford.
He became unwell and was found to have contracted a rare form of food poisoning that attacks the kidneys.
As his condition deteriorated he was sent to hospital where he is now being treated on a kidney dialysis machine.
The nursery has closed down while environmental health officers try to find the source of the food poisoning.
Experts say the organism which causes the food poisoning is becoming more common in Britain.
Letters have been sent out to all parents asking that they keep their children away from other nurseries while tests are carried out.
Public health technicians are checking specimens from all the children and staff.
Even the nursery's pet rabbit is being tested as a possible carrier of the organism that causes the illness.
The results of the tests are expected next week.
Meanwhile the condition of the two year old boy is said to be improving.
A jockey who almost lost a foot in an accident says she's determined to race again.
Candy Morris suffered horrific leg injuries when she slipped into a paper shredding machine.
But she's made an amazing recovery and is now about to go home.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
CANDY MORRIS/Jockey
FIONA STEWART/Physiotherapist
LORNA MOORE/Candy's Mother
Voice over
Candy Morris has amazed doctors at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford.Just two weeks ago her foot was almost severed when she fell into this shredding machine at her own paper baling business.
She says it slipped and set off the magic eye which set the baler off which crushed the bottom part of my leg causing me to lose the tissue and muscle from my ankle up to my shin.
Candy who lives at Ashbury near Wantage has 35 winners to her name.
She's determined to get back into the saddle and onto the race course.
She says it's my life, it's my career, it's all I know.
Once you've done it it's something it's hard to get out of.
I'm young enough to get another couple of years out of it.
If doctors say no, I'll count myself lucky I'm still walking around.
Doctors had to replace her ankle muscle with one taken from her back.
She's also had a major skin graft.
There'll be months of physiotherapy but medical staff say she's a fighter…
She says it is going to be a struggle for her because it is quite a severe leg injury but she's determined and what we're looking at now is very good recovery so thpat should continue.
On Monday she's going back to mum for a few days.
Is she going to be a good patient?
She says NO!
She's not a good patient.
I know from experience because of the jumping, she's had accidents before.
She's not very good.
What she lacks in patience she makes up for in determination which she hopes will soon see her on horseback.
A peace campaigner has appeared in court charged with criminal damage.
Library Pictures/UPPER HEYFORD/Oxfordshire
Anne Scott cut her way through wire fencing at RAF Upper Heyford in Oxfordshire last April.
She was given a year's conditional discharge by Bicester Magistrates and ordered to pay a hundred pounds in costs and sixty pounds compensation.
She says she won't pay the money and will go to prison if she has to.
Interpol has been called in to try and help trace a man who's been missing in Bosnia for almost a year.
Philip Sessarago, who's in his thirties, left Hereford late last year telling friends he was looking for security work in the former Yugoslavia.
But he hasn't been heard from since.
The Foreign Office is making inquiries.
Villagers are protesting against plans to turn an area of outstanding natural beauty into a rubbish tip.
The local Euro MP says he's very concerned about the lack of notice given about the scheme.
But the county council say the project's unlikely to go ahead, because of the impact it would have on the environment.
MARIA COYLE/English Bicknor
WALTER BERRY/Local resident
HAZEL BERRY/Local resident
Sir JAMES SCOTT-HOPKINS/Hereford
PAUL FOUNTAIN/Glos Planning Dept
Voice over
A view of the Wye Valley near English Bicknor an area of outstanding natural beauty which villagers fear could soon become an eyesore.
Just under two and a half acres of land untouched for centuries is at stake.
The farmer who lives at nearby Eastbach Farm has applied for permission to dump rubbish despite widespread opposition from the village.
Interview.
he outlines why he's opposed.
she sex why' she's opposed.
This hundred name petition against the dump concludes that not enough notice was given of the plans.
she sez when she heard
MP sez he's concerned about lack of notice.
Gloucester County council's planning department will decide in October whether to grant permission for the dump.
he outlines what the council's policy usually is.
Even if the planning department passthe application environmental health officers must also decide whether to grant a waste disposal licence.
The farmer and his agent declinedtocomment on the issue but protesters say the dump threatens to change a village famed for its peace and beauty.
The future of a derelict quarry has been thrown into doubt because of a planning decision made half a century ago.
The owners were first given permission to quarry the area just after the second world war — with no legal restrictions on their activity.
Now they want to build on the site, but the local council say it should be restored as part of the countryside.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
PATRICK BURKE/Cherwell District Council
CHRIS HALL/Blue Circle
The one hundred and seventy acre site was quarried for limestone by Blue Circle Cement for over sixty years until nineteen eighty-five.
In the forties the quarry owners got emergency planning permission called an Interim Development Order or IDO.
That was before planning was controlled by law, and it had no conditions attached.
Blue Circle wants to put up a small commercial development on the site of the old cement works and use the profits to pay for the restoration work — two lakes — one for fishing and sailing, the other for geologists and birdwatchers.
But Cherwell District Council insists’ the polluter pays’, and says the owners should start restoration now, out of their own pocket.
He says the difficulty is that the site is on the Oxford greenbelt and therefore there's a presumption against any commercial development.
What the council has made clear in the past is that the company ought to bear the brunt of the responsibility to clear up this site.
He says the company is committed to the restoration.
There are no conditions specifically attached under the IDO but of course we have obligations — the county minerals officer will be pursuing us for restoration quite rightly — what we'd like to do is go beyond the basic restoration and make it much better.
The company says it will come up with the costings for demolition and restoration in a couple of weeks.
But if the two can't agree over planning permission, the peace of wildlife here is unlikely to be disturbed by development work in the near future.
A hospital for pensioners that opened almost a hundred years ago is about to close its doors for the last time.
Shutting it down will save the National Health Service almost a million pounds a year.
TIM HURST/Over
MARY ESKINS/1944-47
BETTY AWFORD/Fever Nurse 1944
CAROLE OSBORNE/Ward Sister
Voice over
The party's over, after almost a century, for Over Hospital near Gloucester (or Oover as the villagers call it).
Designed as an isolation hospital in the 1890's, Over has cared for elderly patients since the 1960's, patients that are now being moved to modern accomodation more in keeping with the 1990's.
Closing Over, much of which is already locked up will save the NHS almost a million pounds a year, which will be spent on more community nursing and rehabilitation.
Today's farewell party brought together staff who'd worked there during the Second World War.
Times have changed and the hospital can longer offer up to date facilities for the elderly.
The last patient will leave Over next week.
After that, the only visitors are likely to be the bulldozers.
Here's a question for you.
What sporting challenge first conquered in 1875 has been attempted by four thousand two hundred people and achieved by just 423?
Give in?
Answer: swimming the English Channel.
This week Kevin Morris from Cheltenham set off to be the 424th and the very first to do it backstroke.
We can join him now in our Friday Feature.
KEVIN MORRIS
Voice over
Dover in the dark.
No bluebirds over the white cliffs; the lights are shining bright at the ferry port.
But away at Wellington Docks the only sign of life is on the good ship Sea Satin.
On board, Kevin Morris, a swimming instructor from Cheltenham.
He's about to tackle what must be the longest and the loneliest battle of all — swimming the English channel.
His mum and girlfriend have come to wave him off.
His dad and pals from the local swimming club have come to cheer and chase him on.
First we're off to France by boat.
Why?
Well Kevin, who's already tried and failed once before, reckons it's going to be easier swimming to England.
Kevin Morris says that he wants to get the boat journey over with first because last time they were so ill coming back.
He wants to swim the channel because it's always been his dream.
So it's full steam ahead to France, to Cap Gris Nez.
The forecast is good, light winds and calm waters.
Kevin's swim could take up 15 hours, so survival is the name of the game.
You're allowed to eat and drink in the water as long as you don't touch the pilot boat.
On the menu energy drinks, bananas, chocolate bars and biscuits.
At sunrise it's time to go, time to swim.
But first you need time to get ready.
Grease and fat and plenty of it is the only way to beat the cold of what could be 26 miles of chilling and choppy sea water.
Kevin says he's swimming backstroke because it's the only stroke he can do.
But he wants to become the first man to do it all the way across.
He jokes that one of the problems of backstroke is that he can't see where he's going.
Joking apart Kevin has been training for nearly a year.
Four to five hours of swimming a day; he's swum parts of the channel before with a relay team but never alone.
Kevin hits the water at two minutes past six.
His pals from the Cheltenham club are going to take it in turn to swim alongside as pacemakers and companions.
They've been planning this for months.
What they hadn't bargained for was a sudden and dramatic change in the weather.
The waves get higher and higher and the water washes over and almost sinks Kevin.
To swim the channel costs £1,000.
The boat skipper gives Kevin a choice — swim or struggle on in the bad weather and lose your money.
Come out now and come back for another go at the weekend.
There is no choice really as Kevin pulls himself out of the water.
Kevin says there was no way he could swim in such rough water.
All he needs is 13 hours of calm weather.
He's not beaten and will be back to do it on Saturday, that will be his day.
Some of the world's finest vintage aircraft will be taking to the skies at a display this weekend.
And with the exception of a well-known pop musician, the stars of the show are all women.
ROBIN POWELL Wroughton
CAROLYN GRACE Display Pilot
ELLY SALLINGBOE Event Organiser
GARY NUMAN Display Pilot
Voice over
This 1944 Spitfire is one of about 100 vintage aircraft on show at this weekend's Great Warbirds Air Display at Wroughton Airfield near Swindon.
That the pilot's name is Carolyn Grace might come as a surprise to some, but Carolyn's encountered so much chauvinism in her flying career that now she hardly notices.
The organiser, too, is a woman…though she'd rather give pride of place at the air display to another female — Sally B, a B-17 bomber, star of the film Memphis Belle.
Continuing the American theme, visitors to Wroughton can also expect to see a range of Mustangs…and Canadian-built Harvards.
Don't be confused by the Japanese ensign on this one…its owner, the pop star Gary Numan, says he wanted to be different.
For 15 years he's been a warbirds enthusiast and wouldn't fly anything else…
As for this weekend's display, Gary wouldn't miss it for the world.
The Great Warbirds Air Display starts on Sunday, finishing Bank Holiday Monday.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Hospitals postpone operations
Driver crashes in practice
Zanadi is recovering after crashing at 170 mph during a practice session before this Sunday's Belgian Grand Prix.
FTSE up 21
The hundred shares index closed up twenty one point four at three thousand one hundred point six 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty nine and down at two marks, forty nine.
Dozens of birds have been killed by what's believed to be an outbreak of botulism.Experts at the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust have been carrying out post mortems to confirm the cause of the deaths.Richard Barnett reports:
SLIMBRIDGE/Gloucestershire
MARTIN BROWN/Animal Health officer
PURTON/Gloucestershire
GORDON HYAM
IAN SLEIGH/Trust Deputy Manager
Voice over
For staff at the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust at Slimbridge, carrying out post mortems on birds is a depressing task.
And in recent weeks it's become a daily chore, as more and more birds have been brought in from the nearby Gloucester Sharpness canal.
It's believed warm weather has led to a build up of botulism bacteria in the canal.
When birds feed in the mud, they take in the bacteria which paralyzes their legs and necks.
Male speaker
Twenty birds have been brought in and more must have died.
Voice over
Gordon Hyam lives by the canal at Purton, the worst affected stretch of water.
He lost 4 domestic ducks to the disease.
Male speaker
It's heartbreaking to see your ducks dead in the water.
Voice over
Staff at Slimbridge say their 7,000 waterfowl are unlikely to be affected by the outbreak, which can't be passed on from bird to bird.
Male speaker
Botulism tends to remain in one location, so it's not a threat to Slimbridge.
The birds' health is being monitored all the time at the trust.
Voice over
It's now believed the worst of the outbreak is over and some birds are getting over the disease.
This female mallard was brought into Slimbridge yesterday totally paralysed and she's already showing signs of recovery.
And the wildfowl and wetlands trust say that if you should find a sick bird, don't take it to them — contact your local branch of the RSPCA.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
DAVID PENNEY/Oxford United
CRAIG MASKELL/Swindon Town
GREG DOWNS/Hereford United
Voice over
our next stop is over in Herefordshire at Ross on Wye…we're meeting up with a young tennis player who's won himself a place at the world's top coaching clinic…the story of Tim Bibby is our Friday Feature 
TIM BIBBY
CHRIS FRIEND/Coach
CLIVE BIBBY/Father
JENNY BIBBY/Mother
Voice over
and good luck to him…for us it's full steam ahead…we're calling at Spa…
Henley…
Swindon and Milton Keynes for Mark Kiff's action round-up 
Voice over
Nigel Mansell showed today that he's still out to win despite having already wrapped up the World Championship.
In practice for Sunday's Belgian Grand Prix, Mansell was more than two seconds quicker in the Oxfordshire Williams car than his nearest rival Ayrton Senna.
Two Swindon speedway riders aim to emulate Mansell's success on two wheels this weekend…
Robins skipper Mitch Shirra and team mate Jimmy Nilsen compete for the world speedway crown in Poland tomorrow.
Barcelona gold medallists Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent have been given a boost for their 1996 Olympic hopes…by an American sportswear firm.
The company is doubling its sponsorship deal for the Henley rowers.
The ice hockey season faces off this weekend…the Swindon Wildcats are at home to Basingstoke on Sunday while Milton Keynes entertain Romford tomorrow…the Oxford Stars play an international challenge against the Toronto Buds on Sunday.
Former England striker Peter Withe is among a team of Aston Villa Old Stars who take on Tewkesbury Town this Sunday in a festival of football.
And since we started with a world champion Nigel Mansell…let's finish with another one…
Dave Thorpe…the motocross star tops the bill this Bank Holiday Monday at Foxhill Park in Swindon.
One of the most famous warplanes in aviation history is about to make its farewell appearance.
The Vulcan Bomber's going out of operation, but this weekend it's the main attraction at what's being billed as Britain's most spectacular air show.
Robin Powell reports.
Sqdrn Ldr PAUL MILLIKIN/Vulcan Display Team
ELLY SALLINGBOE/Airshow Organiser
Voice over
The Vulcan Bomber; preparing to take a final bow at this weekend's Great Warbirds Air Display near Swindon.
The veteran bomber's just 4 flights away from passing into the history books; a sad prospect for the pilots who've flown them.
The Government's invited bids to save the Vulcan, but no one 's come up with the money needed to give it the necessary overhaul.
As well as being the world's only woman air show organiser Elly Sallingboe's the proud owner of the Sally-B, star of the movie Memphis Belle.
She's dedicating the display to the memory of more than 50,000 American airmen who lost their lives in World War Two and hopes it'll be a fitting tribute.
It's the first time the Warbirds Display has come to Wroughton, but already there are plans to make this a permanent fixture.
For want of about £2 million, the same can't be said of the Vulcan Bomber.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
SOUTHFIELDS/Northampton
Det Supt DAVID JOHNSON/Northamptonshire Police
Voice over
It's thought the man was involved in a fight in the hall of his house.
2 men were seen walking away and then driving off with a woman and possibly another man.
The dead man had been renting the house on the quiet estate for 18 months.
He was a virtual stranger to others living in Evesham Court and police still haven't confirmed his identity.
Neighbours were disturbed in the night by sounds of fighting.
Male speaker
We heard another 4 lots of screaming, but then the last time we heard it, that was really loud.
That was the last we heard then.
Male speaker
I heard the ambulance and the police cars and I saw them putting the man into the ambulance and trying to resuscitate him and driving away.
Voice over
The man died shortly afterward.
2 men are being held by police, but no charges have been laid.
The men who carried out the attack have both been described as white and 25 to 32 years old.
One was 6ft to 6ft 4 tall and very heavily built, the other was shorter and slimmer with black hair.
A post mortem 's yet to be carried out on the dead man.
Male speaker
While I can't give a cause of death at this stage, I can say the dead man had suffered a number of lacerations about his face and body and a stab wound to his side.
That wound had been inflicted with an instrument with a blade perhaps an inch wide.
Voice over
That weapon's yet to be found and police have been searching through the gardens of nearby houses and lifting drains in the surrounding area looking for the knife.
50 officers are involved in the hunt for the man's attackers; scenes of crime and forensic experts have been here for most of the day.
Police still know precious little about the dead man, least of all why anyone should want to kill him.
They're desperate for help from the public to find some answers.
And police have just named the dead man as thirty-six year old Digby Sanderson from Evesham Court Northampton.
A man who was captured on video torturing a cat has appeared before a court in Worcester.
Ivor Smith admitted kicking the animal which later died.
The RSPCA has condemned the attack as’ sickening’.
Adrian Britton reports.
AMATEUR VIDEO/WORCESTER
CHRIS SIMPSON/RSPCA
There's new concern about the disease TB after a survey showed some health districts are going against government advice and not vaccinating school children.
Oxfordshire is among those who've abandoned school innoculations, claiming the risk is low.
But now the disease is on the increase.
Kim Barnes reports.
Dr DICK MAYON-WHITE/Community Health Physician
Dr DAVID HUNT/Gloucs
Voice over
Tuberculosis should be a thing of the past.
Associated with poverty, screening and vaccination in the 50s had a dramatic impact.
But instead, recent years have seen a resurgence and the spotlight is once again on vaccination.
Oxfordshire District Health Authority is one of 15 which dropped routine jabs for schoolchildren.
But the Government advises vaccination, known as BCG, for 13 year olds, advice which is heeded in Gloucester.
Worcestershire Health Authority is another which doesn't vaccinate youngsters.
For their part, Oxfordshire say they do still vaccinate at-risk babies, which they believe is far more effective.
But they say their policy is reviewed every 6 months.
There may well be changes.
The report in the British Medical Journal is calling for new school vaccination policies.
Farmers say that this month's heavy rain has stopped them harvesting much of their wheat.
It's been so wet that seed company's say there won't be enough high quality grain to provide next year's seed.
And if the rain continues, some farmers may lose their entire crop.
Debbie Kelly reports.
LOCKINGE/Oxfordshire
JOHN TINGEY/Farmer
TOM BEWLEY/National Farmers Union
Voice over
It should have been a bumper harvest, but since this wheat was ready to cut 2 weeks ago it's rained virtually every day.
40% of the crop is still in the fields and the longer it stays there the more difficult it is to harvest.
Male speaker
We have the physical problem of getting grain into the machine, because the weather is pushing the crop closer to the ground.
When it gets closer to the ground, you can't pick it up.
Voice over
Over half the wheat in Oxfordshire has yet to be harvested.
Male speaker
A particular worry is the case of milling wheat which is used for bread.
The quality of the grain is deteriorating fast, as long as it is raining.
Voice over
The highest quality grain is used as seed.
Already, seed merchants are complaining that much of the seed already harvested is small, sprouting or diseased, which could lead to shortages next year and some farmers could face greater problems.
Male speaker
Some people will have some very late wheat crops that almost may never be harvested.
If it goes on for another 2 weeks, that is a distinct possibility.
Voice over
Once he's harvested the wheat crop, there's still the beans, which cannot be cut because of the rain.
Ideally, farmers want a 2-week heatwave.
They'd settle for at least a couple of days.
Thousands of soldiers have clashed in a re-enactment of a famous battle.
It was the climax of celebrations to mark the anniversary of the siege of Gloucester.
KEN GOODWIN Gloucester
MEGAN PERRY Sealed Knot
Voice over
Three hundred and fifty years ago Gloucester was under siege.
Now it's happening all over again.
Three thousand members of the Sealed Knot have been re-staging the civil war battle in which the city managed to hold off the royalist seige for twenty six days.
It's all been condensed into two hours, and they've even built a replica set of city gates over an old railway bridge.
If you can forget about the row of portaloos in the background it could almost be the real thing.
They've even got authentic food.
He says that it is a mixture of rice, chicken and saffron, to give it a golden colour.
But it looks green?
Oh, that's the wild rice!
Then the action starts.
Soon there's canons to the left, right, and centre.
It may look dangerous, but compared with their ancestors these soldiers have got it easy.
She says that the canons used to be filled with nails, nuts and bolts etc and they could cut a man in half.
Thousands of spectators watched the battle, and enjoyed every minute.
He says that it's very spectacular.
She thinks it's marvellous.
He likes the’ Load of bloodshed’
In the Sealed Knot, there's no room for shirkers.
In this battle, being dead is no excuse.
She says get up and fight!
Do I have to do it for you?
Hundreds died in the real siege of Gloucester.
In this battle, thankfully, there are just a few bruises 
ANDREW TRYTHALL
More prisons to be privatised
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down point six at thirty one hundred 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty eight and down at two marks, forty nine.
Welcome back.
It's been a weekend of turmoil for Oxford United, still looking for a new manager.
(WES) With the latest on the story he was first to report, here's Tim Russon.
TIM RUSSON
BRIAN HORTON
KEITH COX/Managing Director
Voice over
hello there…welcome to the empty manager's office at the Manor Ground…the desk is clear…the chair vacant who will take over from Brian Horton…we've a competition for you tonight in which you can vote for who you want to be the new Oxford United manager…but what a weekend it's been and Central South of course was first with the news that shook the football world…
Who'd have guessed at the start of the season that within a handful of games Oxford United would be looking for a new manager…
The news that Brian Horton was taking charge of premier league club Manchester City surprised everyone including the man in the middle of it all
Brian Horton says it all happened so quickly…he got a phone call late on thursday morning but could not tell the players anything…
The first practice game for Brian Horton as manchester city manager was in the back garden of his woodstock home with twins matthew and lucy…some United fans are glad to see him go…sadly his passion for good football…his achievement of keeping a small club alfoat with little or no money hasn't been given enough credit…he did the club proud…
Brian Horton says they think they've done well to stay in a tough league having spent hardly any money…
With Horton and his assistant David Moss gone…the search is on for a new management team…what happens now…that's what managing director Keith Cox has got to decide
Keith Cox says the directors are up at Bolton tonight when they will look at the list of people who have already applied for the job and decide whether to appoint from that or advertise the post
There's speculation around the Manor Ground that the club may have new owners this week…former director Tim Midgley is rumoured to be trying to buy control…so it could be all change…
so who's going to be sitting in this chair for the rest of the season…if you're an Oxford fan you'll have some thoughts…and you can have your say…we've a competition to pick the manager…
this is for fun…the Oxford board will decide but they watch central south so here's your chance…we've a shortlist of ten…first is Steve Coppell…he left Palace at the end of last season after nine years as manager…lots of experience…or how about Ray Clemence the ex England goalie…he lost his job at Spurs in the summer and would welcome a manager's job…he could work with Doug Livermore who was also pushed aside when Ossie Ardiles moved into White Hart Lane…
Livermore and Clemence did a good job last season…
from north of the border Joe Jordan could be in the running…he's at Celtic at the moment but was looking for a chance to return to English football…
from Northern Ireland there's big Billy Hamilton…he's an old Oxford favourite…the fans were calling for him on saturday…he's done well with Distillery…
Denis Smith ejoyed great success with York and Sunderland…he's got a lot of experience and is bound to be interested after being sacked from Bristol City…
and then theres's Jim Smith…the ex Oxford manager still lives in Woodstock…his current team Portsmouth have had a bad start…he's the man who took United to the old first division…
another former manager still living in the area is Mark Lawrenson…he fell out with the Maxwells…he knows the club inside out…and has a great record…
the man that Brian Horton replaced at Maine Road Peter Reid will also be looking for work…he gave Manchester City some good times…
or how about Ray Wilkins…still playing of course in the premier league but he's surely made of the right stuff to be a manager…
the other runners…could include some of these…good players looking for a manager's job…manager's from lower divisions looking for promotion…or you may have your own fancy…
write the name of the person you'd like to see manager on a postcard and send it to Pick the Manager…
Central South…
Abingdon…0X 14 1SA…
for the winner…the one who guesses correctly there's two season tickets…and we've five runners-up prizes of United shirts…we'll announce the winners when we know the new manager of course…now United are playing at Bolton tonight…they need at least a point after a disappointing defeat against watford on saturday…
United 2 watford 3 was the score here's the action…
Life after Brian could not after started better for United…just 41 seconds after kick-off they were in the lead…a defence slip-up by watford but they all count…
Les Robinson getting his second goal in as many matches…
Watford though were a tough bunch…they weren't going to lie down and die and sure enough they were back with an equaliser from Ken Charlery…
United kept going…kept chasing and just before half-time were rewarded with a second goal…
Joey Beauchamp scored with a header…but that was the last of the celebrations.,.
Watford were the better team in the second half they pulled level with a header from Julian Alsford and went and won it in the very last minute with a great strike from Gary Porter…
down in Division three hereford are still searching for their first league win of the season…tonight they're at home to Wycombe…on saturday they went down to Lincoln…the score 2-1
United were unlucky on Saturday…nothing they could about the first Lincoln goal…a blockbuster…from Baraclough…
Hereford deserved at least a draw but lost it for good three minutes from time when Johnson got a second for Lincoln…
in the last minute United got a goal back…
Hall's penalty was finally knocked in by Owen Pickard…
Hereford were robbed…
hereford v Wycombe is an eight o clock kick-off…
Swindon who won their first point on saturday are at home tomorrow to manchester city…just like old times with Brian Horton back in Central South…so much for football we've got some new champions to celebrate tonight…
Kington from herefordshire went and won the village knockout cup at Lords on sunday
It was a final worthy of Lords…the villagers of Kington and Frocester did the knockout cup proud…the Herefordshire team batted first…wicketkeeper Michael Porteous was top scorer with 45…skipper Edward price got 29…
Hudd was Frocester's best bowler with three for thirty six…from their forty overs Kington made 191 for 6…it was anybody's game…you'd have possibly put money on the Gloucestershire side as they raced to a 143 for three…but leg spinner Clive Scott took three wickets for just ten runs and Frocester were all out for 189 on the very last ball…victory to Kington by two runs…
and that's it don't forget about our competition…to try to pick the new manager here at the Manor ground…you know Anne there has been some thoughts they'd like to see a women in this chair…what do you reckon
Fire fighters from across the country have been paying tribute to airmen who were killed in the second world war.
The RAF used to fly bombing missions from the place where the fire fighters now train.
A memorial stone has been unveiled to commemorate their bravery.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Moreton-in-Marsh
JAMES HOOD/Fire and Rescue Service
JERRY TYACK/Wellington Enthusiast
Voice over
Today it's the place where fire fighters from all over the world learn how best to do their job.
But fifty years ago, the Fire Service Training Centre in Moreton in Marsh was an RAF base were airmen were trained how to fly Wellington bombers.
This afternoon past and present came together.
After a fly past by a RAF VC 10, divisional officers from fire brigades all over the country unveiled a plaque in memory of the airmen who died during second world war.
The Wellington crews who were trained here came from all over the world.
They took part in various raids, including the bombing of Cologne in 1942.
Many of those who died at Moreton in Marsh are buried in the local cemetery.
Those who never came back to the Cotswold village can now at last be remembered.
(WESADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, who'll be the new man at the Manor
Welcome back.
It's been a weekend of turmoil for Oxford United, still looking for a new manager.
(WES) With the latest on the story he was first to report, here's Tim Russon.
TIM RUSSON
BRIAN HORTON
KEITH COX/Managing Director
Voice over
hello there…welcome to the empty manager's office at the Manor Ground…the desk is clear…the chair vacant who will take over from Brian Horton…we've a competition for you tonight in which you can vote for who you want to be the new Oxford United manager…but what a weekend it's been and Central South of course was first with the news that shook the football world…
Who'd have guessed at the start of the season that within a handful of games Oxford United would be looking for a new manager…
The news that Brian Horton was taking charge of premier league club Manchester City surprised everyone including the man in the middle of it all
Brian Horton says it all happened so quickly…he got a phone call late on thursday morning but could not tell the players anything…
The first practice game for Brian Horton as manchester city manager was in the back garden of his woodstock home with twins matthew and lucy…some United fans are glad to see him go…sadly his passion for good football…his achievement of keeping a small club alfoat with little or no money hasn't been given enough credit…he did the club proud…
Brian Horton says they think they've done well to stay in a tough league having spent hardly any money…
With Horton and his assistant David Moss gone…the search is on for a new management team…what happens now…that's what managing director Keith Cox has got to decide
Keith Cox says the directors are up at Bolton tonight when they will look at the list of people who have already applied for the job and decide whether to appoint from that or advertise the post
There's speculation around the Manor Ground that the club may have new owners this week…former director Tim Midgley is rumoured to be trying to buy control…so it could be all change…
so who's going to be sitting in this chair for the rest of the season…if you're an Oxford fan you'll have some thoughts…and you can have your say…we've a competition to pick the manager…
this is for fun…the Oxford board will decide but they watch central south so here's your chance…we've a shortlist of ten…first is Steve Coppell…he left Palace at the end of last season after nine years as manager…lots of experience…or how about Ray Clemence the ex England goalie…he lost his job at Spurs in the summer and would welcome a manager's job…he could work with Doug Livermore who was also pushed aside when Ossie Ardiles moved into White Hart Lane…
Livermore and Clemence did a good job last season…
from north of the border Joe Jordan could be in the running…he's at Celtic at the moment but was looking for a chance to return to English football…
from Northern Ireland there's big Billy Hamilton…he's an old Oxford favourite…the fans were calling for him on saturday…he's done well with Distillery…
Denis Smith ejoyed great success with York and Sunderland…he's got a lot of experience and is bound to be interested after being sacked from Bristol City…
and then theres's Jim Smith…the ex Oxford manager still lives in Woodstock…his current team Portsmouth have had a bad start…he's the man who took United to the old first division…
another former manager still living in the area is Mark Lawrenson…he fell out with the Maxwells…he knows the club inside out…and has a great record…
the man that Brian Horton replaced at Maine Road Peter Reid will also be looking for work…he gave Manchester City some good times…
or how about Ray Wilkins…still playing of course in the premier league but he's surely made of the right stuff to be a manager…
the other runners…could include some of these…good players looking for a manager's job…manager's from lower divisions looking for promotion…or you may have your own fancy…
write the name of the person you'd like to see manager on a postcard and send it to Pick the Manager…
Central South…
Abingdon…0X 14 1SA…
for the winner…the one who guesses correctly there's two season tickets…and we've five runners-up prizes of United shirts…we'll announce the winners when we know the new manager of course…now United are playing at Bolton tonight…they need at least a point after a disappointing defeat against watford on saturday…
United 2 watford 3 was the score here's the action…
Life after Brian could not after started better for United…just 41 seconds after kick-off they were in the lead…a defence slip-up by watford but they all count…
Les Robinson getting his second goal in as many matches…
Watford though were a tough bunch…they weren't going to lie down and die and sure enough they were back with an equaliser from Ken Charlery…
United kept going…kept chasing and just before half-time were rewarded with a second goal…
Joey Beauchamp scored with a header…but that was the last of the celebrations.,.
Watford were the better team in the second half they pulled level with a header from Julian Alsford and went and won it in the very last minute with a great strike from Gary Porter…
down in Division three hereford are still searching for their first league win of the season…tonight they're at home to Wycombe…on saturday they went down to Lincoln…the score 2-1
United were unlucky on Saturday…nothing they could about the first Lincoln goal…a blockbuster…from Baraclough…
Hereford deserved at least a draw but lost it for good three minutes from time when Johnson got a second for Lincoln…
in the last minute United got a goal back…
Hall's penalty was finally knocked in by Owen Pickard…
Hereford were robbed…
hereford v Wycombe is an eight o clock kick-off…
Swindon who won their first point on saturday are at home tomorrow to manchester city…just like old times with Brian Horton back in Central South…so much for football we've got some new champions to celebrate tonight…
Kington from herefordshire went and won the village knockout cup at Lords on sunday
It was a final worthy of Lords…the villagers of Kington and Frocester did the knockout cup proud…the Herefordshire team batted first…wicketkeeper Michael Porteous was top scorer with 45…skipper Edward price got 29…
Hudd was Frocester's best bowler with three for thirty six…from their forty overs Kington made 191 for 6…it was anybody's game…you'd have possibly put money on the Gloucestershire side as they raced to a 143 for three…but leg spinner Clive Scott took three wickets for just ten runs and Frocester were all out for 189 on the very last ball…victory to Kington by two runs…
and that's it don't forget about our competition…to try to pick the new manager here at the Manor ground…you know Anne there has been some thoughts they'd like to see a women in this chair…what do you reckon
The funeral has taken place of the security guard who was killed trying to stop a raid.
Ron Letts as run down by a stolen truck outside the warehouse where he worked.
Police say they're anxious to trace a car and a van which may have been used by the gang.
GRAEME BOWD/Northampton
DAVID COWDEN/Director
MILTON KEYNES
Sgt DAVID PURNELL/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Colleagues of the dead guard were among mourners at Kingsley Park Methodist Church in Northampton.
It was here that Ron Letts was married.
Last month he was killed, the victim of a bungled raid on the warehouse where he worked.
Male speaker
Mr Letts is the second guard killed in 25 years.
We are absolutely devastated.
We share in the sorrow of his family and our thoughts are with them.
Voice over
For most of his life Mr Letts ran a baker's round.
He joined Securicor two years ago and became a guard at this warehouse in Milton Keynes.
It was here that he spotted two men stealing a truck loaded with aluminium scrap.
Mr Letts tried to block their escape route and was mown down.
For the last month 30 police officers have been working on the case full time.
They're now trying top trace two vehicles seen nearby which may have been used by the raiders.
Male speaker
One was a white Escort with alloy wheels.
That was in front of the gates.
The other was a white Transit van.
We would like to hear from both of those drivers.
Voice over
Securicor has offered a reward of £25,000 for information.
The dead man's family have also appealed for help.
But as they attended a private cremation tonight there was still no word from the local criminal informants.
Police believe must hold the key to tracing the killers.
Police chiefs say an operation to stop an illegal rave party was a great success.
They arrested eighty people after a tip-off that the three-day event was to take place.
Now they're investigating how the rave was organised.
Police Video/KIM BARNES/North Buckinghamshire
Asst Chief Con ROBERT DAVIES/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Police used a thermal imaging camera to record the arrival of the would-be Bank holiday ravers…
They were expecting a three day music festival at this site near Milton Keynes.
What they found was a police operation aimed at sending them back where they came from.
Residents say party-goers trying to get across adjoining land.
VPs
Police set up Operation Tweed late last week…over the weekend they drafted in fifty officers.
Access points to the site were blocked with gravel.
The site is commercial woodland which has been on the market for two years.
It's used once a fortnight for clay pigeon shoots.
The landowner, who now lives in Wales, knew nothing about the planned event.
There were around 80 arrests…some have been released without charge, some bailed.
Police say they were determined to prevent the rave…
intv
The investigations are continuing as police try to find out exactly who organised the event.
Public nuisance charges could follow.
Meanwhile tons of sound equipment seized by police has today been reclaimed by the people who hired it out.
Farmers are being warned to be on their guard following eight arson attacks on farms in Hereford and Worcester in the space of two days.
The fire service say that if the attacks continue sooner or later someone will be killed or seriously injured.
KEITH WILKINSON/Reporting
IAN DAVIES/Station Officer
CHRIS CHURCHILL/Leading Firefighter
BARBARA KIRBY/Farm Owner
NEVILLE TURNER/Sub-Officer
Buildings on six farms were set ablaze during last night.
The first target was at Dunley near Stourport.
Two hundred tons of straw and silage went up in flames.
And a van was burned out.
Cattle were rescued from an adjoining building.
Male speaker
’ We had the large barn which was well alight on our arrival.
There was the fear that fire would spread across the rest of the premises.
Cattle in there had been taken out before our arrival.’
Voice over
Target number two was at nearby Great Witley.
Here ten bulls escaped.
But the farmer's barn was wrecked.
Male speaker
’ A four-bay barn.
Two bays stacked right to the roof.
One with hay.
The other with straw.
They have been virtually destoyed.
The roof has gone through.
There's been damage to farm machinery as well…’
Voice over
Hope House Farm near Martley was next.
Again the barn was destroyed.
A neighbouring farmer had a lucky escape.
He discovered burning matches close to his barn and put out the fire.
The day before two other farm buildings were set alight.
And a few days ago, a number of fires were started in fields in the area.
It's put Hereford and Worcester fire brigade under strain.
Female speaker
’ They must be completely sick.
Because before long someone is going to get killed or hurt.
When the firemen are all involved in this, if there's a house fire somewhere they have no hope of getting there.
It's very frightening.’
Voice over
There were two more fires last night near Bromyard.
Here the arsonists set alight a barn which adjoined the farmhouse…putting lives at risk.
Male speaker
’ When we rolled up at the incident, it was serious.
As you see behind there is a stone range of buildings, which actually connect to the house.
It was going well when we arrived.
But we were able to stop it getting into the farm house.’
Voice over
So it's lucky people haven't died in these incidents?
’ That's correct’.
Police are warning farmers to be on their guard.
They don't know who's to blame.
They don't have a motive.
But they do fear the arsonist will strike again.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
A dying man has been refused a refund on the air ticket he'd booked to visit his grandchildren in America.
He'd paid for insurance but the travel agency hadn't passed his premium on to its insurers.
WESLEY SMITH
The travel agent admits he's in the wrong and says he's trying to ensure that Norman Culliford gets at least some of his money back.
Mr Culliford says a refund would help pay for his relatives to fly to England, so he could see them before he dies.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
PHYLLIS CULLIFORD/Wife
NORMAN CULLIFORD
DEAN MANSFIELD/Travel Agent
DEREK KETTERIDGE/Insurance Broker
Voice over
The Cullifords were to have spent 3 weeks visiting their daughter and 3 granchildren in Illinois.
But then Norman, who has blocked arteries and a kidney complaint, was told he was terminally ill and unfit to travel.
They'd paid 98 pounds for travel insurance, but now they've learnt that the travel agent failed to pass the premium on to the insurance company and they're not entitled to a refund.
Phyllis was made redundant from British Telecom last year.
They paid for the holiday out of her redundancy money.
They're now almost 1200 pounds out of pocket, but Norman says it could have been much worse if he'd gone to America and fallen ill.
Norman and Phyllis booked through a Swindon travel agent called Imagination Air Travel.
The firm's been in financial difficulties and moved out of its premises in the Brunel Centre last month.
Its owner admitted to us that he'd spent the Cullifords and other people's insurance premiums paying off company debts, but insisted he was trying to get their money back.
Imagination Air Travel isn't a member of the Association of British Travel Agents.
Its Brighton-based insurance broker says customers should only deal with agents which are.
Dean Mansfield says the ticket price is redeemable and he hopes to claim most of it back from the airline.
Norman doesn't expect a refund, but if he gets one he'll send it straight to his relatives, who at the moment can't afford to fly to England.
With 12 months to live, it's his only chance of seeing his grandchildren again.
Four women were injured when they were hit by a car that went out of control.
One of them is critically ill in hospital.
The driver ran away from the scene, but is now being questioned by police.
MARIA COYLE/Wotton under Edge
JESSICA HALL/Neighbour
CHARLIE HALL/Neighbour
Insp
Voice over
A evening out with friends ended in tragedy for the four women just after midnight.
A high powered Sierra was careering down a steep hill in Wotton under Edge.When the driver reached the bottom he lost control and ploughed into the women who'd just got out of their parked cars.
On hearing the crash neighbours immediately rushed out to help.
Interview.
she sez she heard screams saying please for god sake stop and she ran to fetch her husband to see if he could help.
Interview.He sez he went to see if he could help because he's a first aider.
He saw two of the women under the mini being tended to, so went to help one who was screaming out loudly obviously in a lot of pain.
During the day relatives and friends of the girls comforted each other at the scene.
As they did detectives continued their search for the driver who'd disappeared immediately after the crash.
Interview.
he sez they went to several addresses but then the driver surrendered himself at the police station.
Interviewer asks what state he's in.
The response is that he's very upset and concerned about the women.
Detectives are also interviewing a passenger who was in the Cosworth.
Four cars damaged in the pile up have been towed away for forensic tests.
Meanwhile three of the women who are all in their late teens are being treated in Frenchay hospital near Bristol.
The most seriously injured 18 year old Isobel Lettis is in a critical condition.
The other two women aren't seriously hurt.
(1)
Welcome back: The Anglo-Italian Cup…a new football competition which gives first division teams the chance to play in Europe kicks-off at the Manor Ground tonight with Central South rivals Oxford and Swindon playing each other…
We've news of that coming up…first the action from the weekend which brought a win for Swindon…a draw for Oxford and defeat for Hereford…
Tim Russon reports 
Voice over
And Oxford United have made their next big cup game against Aston Villa at the Manor on Wednesday the twenty third of September all ticket…
Members can buy their tickets from tomorrow…while other fans can get their's by going to the next home game against Sunderland 
Cricket now, and the England women's team is on tour in the build-up to hosting next year's World Cup.
But without the sort of big-money sponsorship that goes to the men's game the women are having to spend precious time fund-raising rather than concentrating on their playing.
Simon Garrett reports 
LETCOMBE REGIS/Oxfordshire
WENDY WATSON/England Captain
DEBBIE STOCK/England
ANGELA BAINBRIDGE/England
RICHARD TAYLOR/Letcombe Regis Captain
Voice over
Women's cricket isn't new.
It was first played in 1774.
A woman invented overarm bowling and the great WG Grace was coached by his mother.
But for the England players having a friendly against the men of Letcombe Regis the lack of a big sponsor hinders their every effort.
Female speaker
You can't play sport properly on a shoestring so if we could get a major sponsor for the world cup it'd put a lot of people's minds at rest so they could concentrate on their cricket
Voice over
Debbie Stock plays for Letcombe alongside the men.
Today among her 2 wickets, 2 catches and 2 run outs, none other than her father.
She's a known personality in Australia and New Zealand, but frustratingly anonymous at home.
Female speaker
In New Zealand Tetley gave the men a million pounds but wouldn't even give us a set of tee-shirts.
You would have thought it would have been good for them.
Voice over
Women's cricket is very watchable.
What they lack in brawn they make up for in skill.
Female speaker
Technically we're as good as the men.
They're faster and stronger but in other ways we're as good as them
Male speaker
We're all learning from them.
They're very good players
Voice over
Next year's world cup will involve eight countries and the England side fancy their chances.
The final will take place at Lords; ironically the home of cricket doesn't accept women as members.
Female speaker
I think lots of men would like to see us accepted at Lords.
It's just the old school tie brigade who don't like the idea
Voice over
The players are amateurs.
They have to rely on the indulgence of their employers and the depth of their own pockets to take part.
Bringing 7 visiting teams here and putting on the matches will cost almost quarter of a million pounds.
Small change for the men's game but it's a tough task for the women to raise such a sum by next summer.
Gloucestershire have heard they're losing one of their leading batsmen.
It was a miserable day all round for Gloucestershire, in fact.
RUNS=0:05
The bank holiday weather may have blown away any chance of a fun weekend for most of us, but it didn't deter one group of sportsmen and women.
The country's top paragliding experts were staging a national competition…the first time it's been held in the region.
Gareth Furby watched the action.
SOUTH CERNEY Gloucestershire
JUDITH ELWOOD Paraglider
ARTHUR BENTLEY LLOYD BENTLEY
Capt NICK WALFORD British Airways Pilot
Bush returns to Florida to check on relief operation
FTSE up 14
The hundred shares index closed down fourteen point two at two two nine eight point four 
The pound is up at one dollar eighty two and down at two marks, seventy eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Farmers have attacked plans to have all of Britain's rights of way opened up to the public by the year Two Thousand.
The Countryside Commission has produced an action pack to show how the countryside can be made more accessible by clearing obstacles on footpaths and bridleways.
But some farmers say the idea is simply not practical.Jessica Fowle reports.
JIM LENNON/Countryside Commission
FRASER HART/National Farmers' Union
Voice over
Too familiar a problem for too many people setting out to enjoy a walk in the British countryside, according to the Countryside Commission.
A footpath blocked by barbed wire and it's certainly ruined the outing for this group.
A Commission survey has shown that walkers have only a one-in-3 chance of being able to complete any 2 mile walk.
So they've brought out a guide to show walkers HOW to make the countryside more accessible for themselves and for others.
Male speaker
We've set the target of the year 2000 to make all rights of way accessible and the action pack should help to achieve that.
Voice over
The sort of obstacles you might come across on a typical walk include crops or overgrown natural vegetation, missing styles or gates and badly drained land.
The guide gives plenty of encouragement to groups who've got together to keep the rights of way open to everyone.
Male speaker
It would encourage newcomers; especially if they'd been on a few walks and seen the problems.
Voice over
But some farmers, with over-grown footpaths on their land, are concerned that the entire responsibility for clearance will fall to them.
Male speaker
’ It has to be done because it's the law but there will be a lot of ill feeling if farmers take all the responsibility for clearing the land and then no-one uses it.’
Voice over
The Countryside Commission says they would be used if they were cleared and that the answer's cooperation.
Male speaker
’ Lots of people want to help and the walkers and farmers can work together to get the job done.’
Voice over
With a network of around 120,000 miles of footpaths, bridleways and by-ways to tackle — it'll take clearance groups at least until the year 2000 to get the job done.
An electronic bug the size of a staple is helping protect valuable antiques.
The bug can be inserted into antique furniture or pieces of art.
When scanned with a special machine, it'll give off it's own unique identity code.
Clare Lafferty reports.
UPTON BISHOP/Herefordshire
IAN JEBBETT/Designer
Insp STEVE NORGATE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Suppose this antique chair was your pride and joy.
Although it's precious to you, it's not unique.
So if it was ever stolen, how could you definitely identify it as being yours.
Well, this could be the answer.
It's a microchip which, when inserted into some part of the chair, will act like an electronic identity tag.
Male speaker
It's so small, it'll fit in a wood worm hole.
It's a device which when read by scanner, gives a unique code; one of 34 billion possibles.
Voice over
The scanning device has been developed by a company in Upton Bishop in Herefordshire.
Although it's specifically marketed for use with antiques, there's no end to the kind of property it can tag.
For example, thousands of people might have this kind of electric guitar.
But only one person can own this particular instrument.
Police have approved the system.
Male speaker
It's a great.
It means that when we find stolen goods, we can automatically reunite them with their owners.
Voice over
The designers say implanting the electronic bug won't devalue antiques.
Male speaker
The people who implant the bugs are very specialised and they know exactly where to drill the hole, so it won't harm the furniture.
Voice over
If wood worm is the plight of the legitimate antique dealer, then this electronic bug looks set to make life difficult for rogue dealers and thieves.
One of the country's top chefs has been sampling life at the bottom…testing school dinners.
He was called in to give a boost to the campaign to get more pupils to have lunch at school…and as Mike Rowbottom found out, he seems to have enjoyed it.
WHEATLEY/Oxfordshire
RAYMOND BLANC/Restaurateur
Voice over
Now there's a sight you don't see every day, Restaurateur and Chef Extraordinaire Raymond Blanc, the man who sets culinary trends at up to £70 a head, queueing up for a school dinner in Oxfordshire.
He was there to help the county council's school meals service boost its image in the face of the threat of privatisation.
Raymond runs the exclusive Manoir aux Quat Saisons in Wheatley, where there's no such thing as a free lunch.
He made the short journey to sample the fare of the proud dinner ladies from Wheatley Park School.
At £1 a sitting, it was cheap at the price.
Male speaker
I'm having lamb stew with sweetcorn and baked potato.
It will see me all right for the day.
Voice over
The idea was to demonstrate just how much school meals have changed since today's parents went to school.
There was a choice of vegetarian lasagne or lamb stew with baked potatoes, sweet corn and garlic bread.
There was also a choice of puddings.
It's hoped parents will encourage their children to eat school meals and there's a TV advertising campaign to back them up.
Tele-images are all very well, but the proof of the pudding is in the eating.
Female speaker
It's excellent.
I haven't had a school dinner since I was at school and I'm really impressed.
Voice over
He is asked: Is it at good as your mother's cooking?
No.
Will you eat it?
Maybe.
What if your mother says you have to eat it?
Then I suppose I'll have to.
Raymond Blanc insisted it was not a come down from his restaurant.
Male speaker
I don't eat like my guests all the time.
It would be quite dangerous for me.
This is like the staff food we cook for ourselves.
Voice over
Then it was time to compare notes on cost with his opposite number in the kitchens; Mabel Giles.
Female speaker
It costs us about 30p a meal.
Voice over
That's as close to a free lunch as you're likely to get.
But with only 40% of the pupils eating them, they need to sell a lot more.
In part two: Pasta Blaster…
Swindon's four-goal warning to Oxford for the Anglo-Italian Cup.
And it's a breeze.The OTHER way to spend a windy bank holiday
Britain's most successful cable television company is going into competition with British Telecom.
(WES READS NEXT) It's promising to cut people's phone bills by at least ten per cent.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
JIM HARVEY/Telus Corporation
DAVE GOSLING/Swindon Cable
Voice over
Swindon Cable already claims more than 30 per cent of the local television audience.
Now it plans to use its underground cable network to offer customers a telephone service as well.
The project's a joint venture between Swindon Cable's parent company, CUC Cablevision, and the Canadian telecommunications giant Telus.
Swindon Cable transmits more than 30 different channels, including Central, for the benefit of those viewers who otherwise don't receive it.
More than 200 000 customers subscribe, giving the company a bigger market share than any other cable firm in Britain.
Now it's confident of transferring that success to the telephone business.
But British Telecom points out there are disadvantages to switching to cable, not least a change of telephone number.
We welcome competition, a spokeswoman said, but local calls are still cheaper with us…and our size and expertise mean we can deliver the quality of service most customers expect.
Exactly when the new Swindon service will come into operation depends on the results of technical tests currently under way in the London area.
Even if the telephone war turns nasty, Swindon Cable can rest assured that British Telecom won't be stealing any of its television viewers.
BT's prevented from using its netwrk to transmit TV programmes by its licence.
Football, and we start with the news that Oxford United are hoping to name a new manager by early next week.
Applications have been flowing into the Manor Ground but no moves have yet been made.
Whoever takes charge will have to try to end a losing run of three games with United going down again last night at Bolton.
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
Voice over
The new manager could have been at Burnden Park watching United last night…several men chasing the job were in the stands…hopefully genning themselves up for an interview…they'll have plenty to talk about lots of food for thought as United lost their third game in a row…
The only goal came more by luck than judgement but McGinlay's flick was good enough to win it…
Oxford crammed the midfield and brought keeper Paul Reece in for his first game of the season…he was made to work overtime as newly promoted Bolton chased their first league win…
The United attack never got a look in…
Bolton's could have had a few more goals…thankfully Reece and his defence managed to stop the rot…
At the Manor today it's been all quiet…the postman has delivered more applications…the board will meet either Friday or Saturday to draw up a shortlist…
In the meantime you can pick the man you want to be the new manager in our special competition…
Here are a few names to be going on with…fancy any of these…
Denis Smith…
Mel Machin and Peter Withe were all at Bolton last night…we want you to vote for who you want…
Billy hamilton…
Jim Smith and Mark lawrenson are among the favourites…
put the name of your man onto a postcard and send it to us at Central South…in Abingdon where our post code is 0X 14 1SA…prizes if you guess or vote for the right man…two season tickets for the manor and five United shirts…
Ex manager Brian Horton is at the County Ground in Swindon tonight with his new team Manchester City…one of his big pals is Town boss John Gorman who's got the same squad on standby tonight but may recall striker Jan Aage Fjortoft…the Norweigan was left out at Norwich in a tactical switch
If the County Ground game is as exciting as the match at Hereford last night there'll be a real treat…
United against Wycombe brought seven goals…a sending off and a penalty…which put Wanderers into the lead after just 9 minutes…
Keith Scott the scorer…
Hereford put up a great fight…they really went for it last night and deserved more than they got…in centre forward Chris Pike they have a new goal hero…
after hitting the post he raced through to make it one-all…
seven minutes later Pikey was on target again with a header and united were two -one up…
it was all square at half-time though…
Greg Downs will be having a few words with his defence about long high balls…corners and free kicks…
United couldn't cope with them…but Wycombe's Andy Kerr could…
at the start of the second half the Hereford defence were caught out again as Scott put Wycombe back into the lead…
things went from bad to worse then as United defender Colin Andreson got sent off…for a challenge that was late but not as bad as it looked…ref had different thoughts
so it was down to 10 men but why do teams always fight harder and play better when they're one man short…
Hereford rolled up their sleeves, gave it everything and were rewarded with an equaliser from Derek Hall…
Three three would have been just about right but with just four minutes to go Wycombe went and won it…
Andy Kerr the scorer…4-3 to Wanderers the score…
Britain's most successful cable television company is going into competition with British Telecom.
(WES READS NEXT) It's promising to cut people's phone bills by at least ten per cent.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
JIM HARVEY/Telus Corporation
DAVE GOSLING/Swindon Cable
Voice over
Swindon Cable already claims more than 30 per cent of the local television audience.
Now it plans to use its underground cable network to offer customers a telephone service as well.
The project's a joint venture between Swindon Cable's parent company, CUC Cablevision, and the Canadian telecommunications giant Telus.
Swindon Cable transmits more than 30 different channels, including Central, for the benefit of those viewers who otherwise don't receive it.
More than 200 000 customers subscribe, giving the company a bigger market share than any other cable firm in Britain.
Now it's confident of transferring that success to the telephone business.
But British Telecom points out there are disadvantages to switching to cable, not least a change of telephone number.
We welcome competition, a spokeswoman said, but local calls are still cheaper with us…and our size and expertise mean we can deliver the quality of service most customers expect.
Exactly when the new Swindon service will come into operation depends on the results of technical tests currently under way in the London area.
Even if the telephone war turns nasty, Swindon Cable can rest assured that British Telecom won't be stealing any of its television viewers.
BT's prevented from using its netwrk to transmit TV programmes by its licence.
Football, and we start with the news that Oxford United are hoping to name a new manager by early next week.
Applications have been flowing into the Manor Ground but no moves have yet been made.
Whoever takes charge will have to try to end a losing run of three games with United going down again last night at Bolton.
TIM RUSSON/Reporting
Voice over
The new manager could have been at Burnden Park watching United last night…several men chasing the job were in the stands…hopefully genning themselves up for an interview…they'll have plenty to talk about lots of food for thought as United lost their third game in a row…
The only goal came more by luck than judgement but McGinlay's flick was good enough to win it…
Oxford crammed the midfield and brought keeper Paul Reece in for his first game of the season…he was made to work overtime as newly promoted Bolton chased their first league win…
The United attack never got a look in…
Bolton's could have had a few more goals…thankfully Reece and his defence managed to stop the rot…
At the Manor today it's been all quiet…the postman has delivered more applications…the board will meet either Friday or Saturday to draw up a shortlist…
In the meantime you can pick the man you want to be the new manager in our special competition…
Here are a few names to be going on with…fancy any of these…
Denis Smith…
Mel Machin and Peter Withe were all at Bolton last night…we want you to vote for who you want…
Billy hamilton…
Jim Smith and Mark lawrenson are among the favourites…
put the name of your man onto a postcard and send it to us at Central South…in Abingdon where our post code is 0X 14 1SA…prizes if you guess or vote for the right man…two season tickets for the manor and five United shirts…
Ex manager Brian Horton is at the County Ground in Swindon tonight with his new team Manchester City…one of his big pals is Town boss John Gorman who's got the same squad on standby tonight but may recall striker Jan Aage Fjortoft…the Norweigan was left out at Norwich in a tactical switch
If the County Ground game is as exciting as the match at Hereford last night there'll be a real treat…
United against Wycombe brought seven goals…a sending off and a penalty…which put Wanderers into the lead after just 9 minutes…
Keith Scott the scorer…
Hereford put up a great fight…they really went for it last night and deserved more than they got…in centre forward Chris Pike they have a new goal hero…
after hitting the post he raced through to make it one-all…
seven minutes later Pikey was on target again with a header and united were two -one up…
it was all square at half-time though…
Greg Downs will be having a few words with his defence about long high balls…corners and free kicks…
United couldn't cope with them…but Wycombe's Andy Kerr could…
at the start of the second half the Hereford defence were caught out again as Scott put Wycombe back into the lead…
things went from bad to worse then as United defender Colin Andreson got sent off…for a challenge that was late but not as bad as it looked…ref had different thoughts
so it was down to 10 men but why do teams always fight harder and play better when they're one man short…
Hereford rolled up their sleeves, gave it everything and were rewarded with an equaliser from Derek Hall…
Three three would have been just about right but with just four minutes to go Wycombe went and won it…
Andy Kerr the scorer…4-3 to Wanderers the score…
Stolen valuables ranging from jewellery to model trains have been put on display by police.
They believe the goods, which are worth several thousand pounds, were all stolen by one gang.
GARETH FURBY/Reporting
Det Con DAVE BOWLER/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Some of the thousands of items stolen from homes accross the Thames Valley area.
Police believe its all the work of just one gang who took everythin they could carry.
Antiques, jewellery, glasswear and even a collection of model trains.
He says they're the items left over from a large number of burglaries.
They're the small items which most people don't want to buy.
He says the medal was issed on behalf of the pope.
Anyone interested in viewing the property should contact Reading police.
One of the Bosian evacuees who was treated at hospital in Oxford has been told he wont be able to return home for several months.
He's one of two patients now re-couperating with a family at a secret address.
KAREN THOMPSON/Reporting
PAULINE SMITH/British Red Cross
DAVID WILSON/Radcliffe Infirmary
Voice over
Dino Dugganitch and Senad Mirvic were airlfted into Britian last month as part of Operation Irma which brought the wounded out Sarajevo.
The men were treated at the Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford.
Now having been discharged they're convalescing from surgery with a family in Oxfordshire away from the glare of publicity.
The two men have different plans for the immediate future.
Dino, who's undergone surgery on his eye and nose, cant wait to return to Sarajevo.
Whereas Senad, who lost an eye, and needed a jaw operation must stay in Britian for at least another few months.
Staff at the Radcliffe Infirmary where Senad and Dino were treated are very pleased both men are well on the way to recovery.
Meanwhile, the British Red Cross has been contacted by many people across the region offering accommdation and help if more wounded from the former Yugoslavia are brought here in future.
A group of people who practise transcendential meditation claim to have caused a drop in violent crime in America.
The rate fell by a third after thousands of people took part in a mass meditation experiment in Washington.
The practitioners say if enough people joined in, meditation could even end the fighting in Bosnia.
ERIKA BARNES/Reporting
HUGH GODFREY/Meditator
Library Pictures/WASHINGTON
BRACKLEY/Northamptonshire
RUSSELL FRANCE/Meditator
MENTMORE/Buckinghamshire
Dr GEOFFREY CLEMENTS/TM European Director
Bringing peace to the troubled city of Washington.
Four thousand people outside the White House sending a message of peace and harmony through trancendental meditation.
Male speaker
It was great for meditation.
It was blissful and exciting.
I felt as if I was taking part in history and the results were spectacular.
Voice over
A police chief said only twenty inches of snow would stop crime rising in one of the world's most violent cities.
But after four weeks of mass meditation, the rate apparently dropped by nearly a third.
A convincing connection…or coincidence?
The Washington police won't draw any conclusions until the figures are fully analysed.
Russell France is back home in Brackley after taking part in the Washington experiment.
He's a convert to the power of positive thinking.
Male speaker
When we practice, coherence and harmony is broadcast into the environment.
And anyone who thinks can pick it up.
Voice over
And when the thousands of like minded people joined forces it wasn't just the crime rate that seemed to improve.
Male speaker
Governments behave more clearly.
President Clinton's ratings went up by nine percent.
Voice over
At the British headquarters of trancentental meditation in Buckinghamshire, they're turning their energies elsewhere.
The apparent success in Washington and in other similar crime-cutting programmes, gives them confidence to tackle more intense trouble spots, like Bosnia.
We know it'll work.
So to the peace makers, this is the type of strategy that will work, where nothing else will.
Male speaker
People know the value of individual meditation.
Now this is something much broader.
I'll be going to Governments and health authorities to tell them about the benefits for a whole society.
Voice over
The sceptics denounce the power of thought as a way of ending violence and war.
But the meditators maintain they have scientific proof that it does work and they can bring peace to a troubled world.
(WESADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, ringing in the changes.
The TV company which is tuning in to telephones.
Plus, It's the pits…
Mrs Hill and Brundle sample life in the driving seat.
Good evening,
ANNE DAWSON
A five day old baby and her mother have narrowly escaped injury in a shotgun attack on their home.
Marion Howells and her daughter Kayleigh were asleep just a few feet from a window which was shattered by the blasts.
(WES TO READ NEXT)
The 
WESLEY SMITH
GRAEME BOWD/Cheltenham
MARION HOWELLS/Mother
BRIAN HOWELLS/Householder
Det Sgt GEOFF BROOKES/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
The attack took place in the St Paul's district of Cheltenham just before three o clock this morning.
Police say a car containing three men drew up outside the house in Hudson Street.
Two shots were fired at the wall, cracking the front window.
Another hit a car belonging to the owner of the house.
Five day old Kayleigh Howells was asleep in the living room.
Her mother had taken her downstairs so as not to disturb the rest of the family.
Female speaker
I heard a loud bang.
That was it.
Voice over
Neighbours say the gunman spent some time outside the house.
Female speaker
There was one dhot and then another two.
They were in no hurry to drive off.
Voice over
Four other children and their father were asleep upstairs.
Brian Howells says his youngest daughter was lucky to escape injury.
Male speaker
If it hadn't been for the double glazing she would have been hurt.
That's what saved her.
Voice over
Neighbours said Mr Howells had been involved in row with another man shortly before the incident.
It seems the attack didn't come as a total surprise.
He said he knew why it might have happened but would not elaborate.
Male speaker
We understand there was a quarrel between local people.
We are investigating this.
Voice over
Police found cartridges and wadding at the scene.
They believe the shots were fired from a metallic coloured car, possibly a Ford Sierra.
Although many neighbours heard the shots there were few witnesses.
Detectives want to hear from anyone who saw the gunman and his accomplices.
The helicopters of the Queen's flight, used by the Queen and other members of the Royal family, have been grounded after a crash last month in which three air cadets died.
The Ministry of Defence says all Wessex helicopters have been suspended as a precaution, until the cause of the crash is established.
But it's possible the Wessex may never return to full service.
Amateur Video/HARRIET RYLEY/Reporting
12 August 1993
RAF BENSON/Oxfordshire
PAUL BEAVER/Jane's Sentinel
Voice over
The Wessex helicopter has been suspended following the crash three weeks ago in which three teenage cadets were killed.
They were on a routine flight from RAF Valley on Anglesey when their helicopter crashed into a lake in North Wales.
The three who died were members of the Air Training Corps from Bury.
A fourth cadet survived.
Now flights by the Wessex have been suspended following the discover of a mysterious metal fault in the aircraft's tail drive shaft furing tests by the RAF.
There are at least thirty Wessex helicopters based at RAF Benson in Oxfordshire.
Two are for the Queen's flight- to carry members of the royal family and VIPs — the rest are used by the RAF for training.
The grounding could be the beginning of the end for the Wessex — with a gradual phasing out over the next few years:
The RAF said that while the Wessex will remain grounded until the outcome of the inquiry into the North Wales crash, the helicopters will still be used for essential rescue missions and in Northern Ireland.
All royal flights are now in fixed-wing aircraft.
The RAF says it's continuing tests and have decribed the helicopter as a’ very reliable aircraft.’
Armed police laid seige to a house for seven hours pursuading a runaway prisoner to give himself up.
The man has convictions for violence and failed to return from home leave three weeks ago.
Police say the prison authorities should think again about home visits.
JESSICA FOWLE/Newport Pagnell
Supt ROGER YOUNG/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The convicted prisoner took refuge in a house on Sitwell Close in Newport Pagnell after police went to deal with a domestic incident involving a stabbing in Milton Keynes.
The twenty-nine year old man, who hasn't been named, is serving a four year sentence at Springhill Prison in Buckinghamshire for offences involving violence and theft.
He should have returned to the open prison on the tenth of August.
Specialist officers were called to the scene including armed police and trained negotiators.
The man had a woman and a four year old child in the house with him.
It was believed the man had a gun.
After around seven hours the man came to the door and after negotiating with police gave himself up.
Despite the peaceful outcome it had been a major operation.
Police say the episode raises serious questions about home leave for prisoners.
The Prison Service is reviewing the leave system, but defends it in principle, saying:
’ Ninety-six percent of those prisoners granted home leave return on time.
Although every failure is regretted, and is one too many, taken within that context it is actually a very small number who abuse the system.’
The man was questioned at Milton Keynes police station and will be returned to Springhill Prison.
The three youths were arrested by officers involved in Operation Overdrive, the police's attempts to crackdown on joyriding in Oxford.
It's twelve months since the problem reached its peak on the Blackbird Leys estate, leading to street battles when police moved in.
Blackbird Leys now seems to be succeeding in the struggle to improve its image, and later in the programme Nick Clark talks to the people who live there.
But first this report from Debbie Kelly on the fight against joyriding.
OXFORD
AMATEUR VIDEO
1 SEPTEMBER 1991/BLACKBIRD LEYS/Oxford
PC STEVE NEWBURY/Thames Valley Police
Sgt PAUL EMMINGS/Thames Valley Police
RECONSTRUCTION
Chief Supt DAVID LINDLEY/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
9 p.m. and a high performance car has been spotted on an Oxford housing estate.
Police believe it may be stolen.
Operation Overdrive is underway.
Male speaker
They know the short cuts and alleyways better than we do.
The other cars are blocking us.
They are going to travel at great speeds a lot faster than we think is safe.
Voice over
Joyriding is the youth crime of the 90s.
In Oxford for the past 18 months, it's taken a peculiar form when youths perform stunts in high performance cars in front of crowds.
It reached its height last September, when riot Police effectively sealed off Blackbird Leys as joy riders attempted and succeeded in outwitting them; performing in front of the crowds and the media.
The Police's long term answer has been Operation Overdrive.
The evening starts with briefing.
Each night, officers on foot and in traffic cars, patrol the favourite areas for displays.
Every day, 10; 20; sometimes 30 cars are stolen in Oxford.
The majority disappear from the city centre, but the thieves are now targeting villages and other cities, as the number of high perfomance cars available in Oxford drops.
Male speaker
They have moved away from the central area.
Anywhere the road is wide enough, they are congregating so we cannot anticipate where they will be.
Voice over
The aim is to disperse any crowd before a display can take place and trace the stolen cars.
Any young person in a high performance car is a target.
For those youngsters legally driving their cars its a frustrating time.
Male speaker
If a display does happen now that display is down to 2 handbrake turns and certainly no longer than 2 minutes, because of the success of the operation.
Voice over
But the displays continue.
82 year old, Ivor James, died after he was crushed against a wall.
A 19 year old has been charged with the new offence of causing death by dangerous driving.
2 families had to leave their homes after they were terrorised by a mob, angry they'd been helping the Police to catch the joyriders.
For the Police, the frustration is often seeing the same faces on the streets.
One youth, still 17, has been arrested 48 times in 2 years.
Over a quarter of his offences involved cars.
So far, he's had his licence endorsed and spent 28 days in a young offenders institution.
He's still regularly seen at or near displays.
Male speaker
We have to ensure that people who deserve to be locked up for the public good are locked up.
My officers find it frustrating to see the same persistant thieves out and about.
Voice over
Operation Overdrive has had its successes.
103 youths were arrested in the first four weeks, but there are porblems, sometimes in radio communications and it has been at a cost.
Male speaker
Understandably, whilst we are all concerned with crime we hear little of burglary and yet we have something like 60 new reported crimes a day the vast majority are burglaries and I just wish we could do more about those crimes.
Voice over
There is no doubt Operation Overdrive has reduced the scale and frequency of displays in Oxford, but a hard core of youngsters persist and the Police say they alone cannot solve the problem.
Many of the ten thousand people who live on Blackbird Leys say the media coverage of last year's troubles gave the world a false impression of life there.
A year on they acknowledge the problems, but are at pains to defend the good name of their community.
Nick Clark reports.
JONAS TORRANCE/Blackbird Leys/Adventure Playground
JIM HEWITT/Church Community Worker
ALF HENNESSEY/Jubilee Community Centre
VAL SMITH/Blackbird Leys Councillor
Voice over
Less than half a mile from last year's troublespot there's a nature lesson for the Blackbird Leys adventure playground group.
It's a thriving organisation which keeps many children happily occupied in the holidays.
Schemes like this have been operating at Blackbird Leys for years…this, the locals say, is an example of the real face of the estate.
Joyriding still happens here, but nothing like on the scale of last year, it's concentrated on other estates.
Like anywhere, life simply goes on as normal, as it always has.
Like anywhere there's crime…but for the residents the so-called Blackbird Leys jungle is a media invention, the troubles of ninety one were grossly magnified by the media spotlight.
Male speaker
The media lit the touchpaper, it was a media bomb.
Voice over
Sunday morning…the congregation worship in the church of the Holy Family…here too the feeling is the estate was dealt an unfair blow last year.
Male speaker
Despite our fears that life would be difficult in fact the community has recovered very quickly.
Voice over
It's bingo night at the Jubilee hall on the estate, a popular meeting place.
Most here spoke of good spirit and high morale.
But they're quick to acknowledge the problems too…
Male speaker
Unemployment is the main problem.
The kids just end up getting into bad ways.
Voice over
The obvious solution is to provide activities to give the critical sixteen to eighteen age-group a more worthwhile focus.
The estate youth centre is only run on a part-time basis.
Female speaker
We need a full-time youth worker.
Male speaker
there's notghing to do.
We just wonder round the estate.
Voice over
Blackbird Leys is growing.
More than four hundred homes are going up over three years, the problem of teenage boredom could therefore worsen.
But in the end the conclusion must be drawn that this estate is not really different from any other community.
It has its pride, it's spirit, and it's problems.
For the most part people just want to get on with life as best they can.
Subway rape:A hundred men to be blood tested.
A waiting game:Jobs in the balance as Beaverbrook hits money problems
And winning the fight: The police and Blackbird Leys…one year on.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
The samples are likely to be used for DNA analysis, the so-called genetic fingerprint test 
WESLEY SMITH
The men, aged between sixteen and sixty will be tested in the next few weeks and the results are expected before the end of the year.
Police say anyone refusing will be questioned closely about their reasons.
Tim Hurst reports.
HEREFORD
Det Ch Insp PHILIP EVISON/West Mercia CID
OXFORD
Voice over
The blood sampling follows the rape of a woman alongside a subway in Hereford city centre.
Detectives have uncovered evidence that the rapist comes from a small but precise location within the city.
They won't say exactly which location, but in the next three weeks, 100 men between 16 and 60 who live there will be asked for a blood sample.
The attack happened in March, and in a bizarre twist, the rapist returned to the scene some hours later to replace a pair of shoes he's stolen from his victim.
The new blood testing exercise will cost up to five thousand pounds.
Blood samples from Hereford will be sent to forensic science laboratories in Birmingham, labs that are also equipped to test blood for DNA matching.
It's the DNA technique which is being used to trace a multiple rapist at loose in Oxford, responsible for three attacks in the last 12 months.
There too men are being asked to give blood samples.
Men in Hereford are eager to help police.
The Hereford results are expected before the end of the year.
Staff at Lord Beaverbrook's estate in Oxfordshire are waiting to learn if their jobs are safe after it was confirmed that he can't pay his debts.
A bank is taking court action over the former Tory Party chairman's half a million pound overdraft.
Among those who say they're owed money is a local business.
Gareth Furby reports.
DENCHWORTH/Oxfordshire
ROBERT ROWLAND/Agricultural Contractor
COLIN ROWLAND/Agricultural Contractor
Voice over
This afternoon Lord Beaverbrook wasn't at home.
He lives at Denchworth Manor with his wife and three children.
Lord Beaverbrook's solicitor has confirmed he can't pay his debts.
And the Royal Bank of Scotland says its taking court action over a half a million pound overdraft.
Until July Lord Beaverbrook was treasurer of the Conservative Party.
It's beleived up to a dozen men and women are employed on his estate and today despite the news, the work went on.
Some Denchworth villagers feel sorry for the Lord of the Manor.
He says he is a gentleman.
He says they're shocked.
But others are owed money.
The owners of Rowlands Agricultural Contractors says Lord Beaverbrook employed them three months ago, and a bill for four hundred pounds is still unpaid.
He says a man in his position shouldn't do this.
He says he's let the village down.
Lord Beaverbrook has only a few weeks to sort out his finances.
A court order freezing proceedings will expire on November the ninth.
There's speculation that he may have to sell off a collection of Ferraris.
And one report today claimed he's already decided to make six estate staff redundant.
A pregnant woman and her three-year-old son have been injured in a head-on crash involving a stolen car.
OXFORD
The stolen Vauxhall Nova was spotted by police in the Dene Road area of Headington, in Oxford.
It later collided with another car in Quarry High Street.A passenger in the second car, twenty two year old Ginette Wheatley, who's seven months pregnant, was treated in hospital for minor injuries.
Her son was treated for cuts and bruises.
Three teenagers have been charged with aggravated vehicle taking.
One of them, who's fifteen, is also charged with dangerous driving.
In part two: Taken for a ride.
Sports fans claim Olympic travel firm ripped them off.
A pizza cake.Swindon flatten Oxford in the Anglo-Italian Cup.
And what's all the flap?
The toys that don't have chips with everything.
A group of sports fans are claiming they were overcharged and let down by a tour operator who sold them tickets to the Olympic Games.
They say they paid premium prices to a firm with exclusive rights to sell holidays to the Olympics, but in return were given appalling accomodation.
Now they want an inquiry.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
PETER WAKEHAM/Complainant
MICHAEL NORRIS/Sportsworld Travel
Voice over
More than ten thousand British fans travelled to Barcelona last months to witness the first Olympics to be held in Europe for 20 years.
They all bought their tickets from an Abingdon based company, Sportsworld Travel, which held exclusive rights to sell them in Britain.
Around seven thousand people bought a package from the company which included flight, accomodation and Olympic tickets.
But a number of those have complained that although they paid premium prices, they only received budget accomodation.
Peter Wakeham is leading a group of more than a hundred people demanding an inquiry.
Male speaker
We're concerned about what they represented as the quality of the hotels.
The ones we stayed in were appalling…not at all what they led us to believe.
Voice over
Sportworld travel, which has handled five Olympic Games, says there are bound to be some complaints when dealing with such a large number of people.
And points out they have also received dozens of letters complimenting them.
Male speaker
The locations of the hotels in Barcelona was probably the biggest form of complaint…but I'm sure we're not going to be called upon to tredisgn the Spanish tourist industry.
Yes I agree with the fact ther3e wasn't enough cheap accomodation in barcelona…beu I think even the most violent of our detractors would agree there's a not a lot we can do about that.
Voice over
At the moment, the International Olympics Committee, which runs the Games, asks national bodies to nominate a single ticket agency…in this case Sportsworld Travel.
Mr Wakeham says this gives sports fans no choice.
He's written to the British Olympic Committee asking it to investigate.
In a statement the BOA said…
’ Having one ticket and tour agent means we can control the distribution of tickets…and ensure we offer a good and fair deal.
We have recieved a small number of complaints…and it's our intention to investigate every matter raised.’
Sportsworld Travel also says it will be investigating every complaint individually and where there were legitimate problems, will offer compensation.
Onto football, and the first Central South derby of the new football season has been won by Swindon Town.
At the Manor Ground last night they beat Oxford United by three goals to one in the Anglo Italian Cup…
Here with all the action is Tim Russon 
GLENN HODDLE/Swindon Player-Manager
Voice over
An exhibition of moving toys has just opened, with not a single battery, microchip or flashing light to be seen.
It's to show children of all ages just how ingenious you CAN be with wood, paper, string and a lot of imagination.
Simon Garrett reports 
BANBURY Oxfordshire
JULIA NICHOLSON Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
Everything here moves; not by clockwork or battery power; just good old mechanical principles.
Simple toys from all over the world, made from the cheapest often discarded materials.
It's a world away from flashing lights and microchips.
Female speaker
People have made wonderful toys in a lot of different places over a period of time.
We wanted to show you don't just get zippo-zappo toys from factories; individuals often working in the street with recycled materials can make fun toys.
Male speaker
All these different toys, they look brilliant, I wish I had some some of them
Male speaker
They're really good they're made of paper and stuff not like the ones we've got at home
Male speaker
They're good, made out of junk and stuff
Voice over
Apart from being fun the exhibition's designed to fit into the national curriculum.
Children learn how the toys work; for example by gravity or levers.
Some of the designs are virtually identical, even though they're thousands of miles or 100 years apart in origin.
Female speaker
You find the same toy as this in Indonesia in the shape of a lady bird, or at the turn of the century in London in the shape of an alligator
Voice over
With plenty they can actually get their hands on all the children find a favourite toy.
But will it encourage them to consign their transforming gobot decepticon to the dustbin?
Male speaker
I like the cat where you press a button and it brings a mask up over his face.
Male speaker
And what's your favourite toy at home?
Male speaker
My computer really
Voice over
The exhibition will leave Banbury later in the year for a national tour.
It'll give many people the chance to see toys no longer made and of course some others which are just ageless.
Figures show intervention cost
FTSE up 14
The hundred shares index closed up fourteen point six at two three one three 
The pound is up at two dollars, and up at two marks, seventy eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
There's an R in the month again so oysters are back on the menu.
That's good news for the restauranteurs who charge up to thirty pounds a dozen for the slippery delicacy.
But after a four month lay-off the people who have to open them can get rather out of practice, so they've been sharpening their skills against each other.
GRAEME BOWD London
KEVIN JENKINS Oyster Chef
ALAN FIELD Oyster Chef
Voice over
ANDREW TRYTHALL
12 prisons go private
Twelve British prisons are to be run by the private sector in the first phase of privatisation.
Firefighters reject 1
Firefighters have rejected a one point five per cent pay offer bringing them closer to a national strike.
Broadsheet price war
Rupert Murdoch is to reduce the price of The Times newspaper to thirty pence.
The fifteen pence cut is expected to hit The Independent and The Guardian hard.
Venables sells Spurs stake
Terry Venables has sold his twenty-three per cent holding in Tottenham Hotspur Football Club for more than three million pounds and resigned as a director of the club.
FTSE down 12
The hundred shares index closed down twelve point five at thirty, seventy-two point six.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty and more than three pfennigs down at two marks, forty-seven.
The new Chief Constable of Gloucestershire says persistent offenders are the scourge of the county.
Tony Butler says his force needs the support of courts and other agencies if it's to stamp out the problem.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cheltenham
Chief Con TONY BUTLER/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
For the first time since taking over as Chief Constable last month Tony Butler held a meeting to talk about policing in Gloucestershire.
He said one of his main concerns was the problem of persistent offenders.
Mr Bulter's predecessor, Albert Pacey, left the force saying that officers needed more support from the courts and the legislators.
Mr Butler agrees.
Mr Butler says he will put in another request for more officers.
While the new Chief Constable says he doesn't plan to make any major changes in the force, he's made a commitment to improve the quality of life for people in Gloucestershire.
Police are targetting heavy goods vehicles in a crackdown on drivers who're flouting the law.
They're warning that overloaded vehicles are dangerous and can cause serious accidents.
GARETH FURBY/Abingdon
PAUL DOSANJH/Vehicle Inspector
KEN MEREDITH/Lorry Driver
TIM MARSDEN/Lorry Driver
ALLAN ROBERTS/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
This morning on the A34 near Abingdon there was nowhere to hide.
Police motorcycles flagged down every suspect heavy goods vehicle.
This one was underweight.
But others were breaking the law.
He says he's a ton overweight.
He says he hasn't got any control over the loading shovels which fill his vehicle up.
Another lorry had too much weight on the front axle.
To lighten it, a water tank had to be emptied.
He says its one of those things, but it won't happen again.
The police say the crackdown will save lives.
He says an overweight lorry in a crash will smash a car to smithereens.
The police say some drivers still think they can get away with it.
But sooner or later checks like these will catch them out.
And persistent offenders face losing their licence.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, on the right track.
Welcome back.
A town best known for its links with the railways is trying to turn itself into a garden city.
(WES NEXT)
In the last of our series on summer gardens, we look at the efforts being made to make Swindon a more colourful place 
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
BILL FISHER/Head of Parks
MIKE SALTER/Moredon Community Gardening Centre
GEORGE READE/Tree Inspector
The Parks Department's budget might be dwindling all the time, but with the help of local businesses, the Council's spending what little money it does have adding a splash of colour to otherwise rather ordinary landmarks like shopping centres and roundabouts.
Another important part of Thamesdown's philosophy is passing on gardening expertise to ordinary people.
Here at the Moredon Community Gardening Centre, there are regular classes on anything from hanging baskets to dried flower arranging.
Moredon also boasts its own butterfly sanctuary, 5 colonies of bees, and a pondful of terrapins, dumped during the Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles craze of 2 years ago.
There's a scented garden — with a fountain — for the blind and partially-sighted.
But pride of place goes to a display which won a silver gilt at last year's Chelsea Flower Show.
More popular than ever this summer are the Town Gardens, 100 years old next year.
The Victorians made the gardens the highlight of the Old Town, and it remains to this day an ideal place to sit and relax.
This year it was roundabouts, next year the Parks Department is targeting Swindon's cemeteries, some of which are now drab and overgrown.
The council doesn't expect Swindon to be ready for an assault on Britain in Bloom for some time, but it's convinced all the effort's worth it.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
RICHARD BARNETT/Eardisley
Deputy Chief Con TONY BURDEN/West Mercia Police
DOUG BURGOYNE/Garage Owner
MARGARET FITNESS/Parish Warden
BARRY EVANS/Police Federation
MICHAEL HOWARD MP/Home Secretary
Voice over
This is the new front line in the battle against rural crime in North Herefordshire.
Margaret Fitness, Hilary Havard and Stanley Parrett were appointed by West Mercia Police today as parish wardens for Eardisley, Weobley and Pembridge.
Along with other rural areas, the villages have suffered a crime wave recently.
There have been more than sixty burglaries in the three parishes so far this year.
And in the absence of a village bobby, it's hoped the voluntary wardens will be able to help the community fight crime and act as a link with the police.
Male speaker
People have had enough of crime in rural areas.
It's a return to the old way of the community helping to fight crime.
Voice over
We joined parish warden Magaret Fitness on patrol.
Our first call, Burgoynes Garage, which has been broken into three times.
The last time the burglars were scared off by a neighbourhood watch member, but not before they'd cut the phone lines and disabled the alarm.
The key to Margaret's role is to encourage community vigilance.
So when she sees a driver acting suspiciously, she calls the police.
It's a false alarm, but next time it could be a burglar.
Local people are worried by the rise in all types of crime and they welcome the new parish wardens.
The Police Federation has attacked the initiative, calling it crimefighting on the cheap.
The next three parish wardens will be appointed in the Broadway area of Worcestershire.
And if the scheme works, West Mercia Police says many of its other 691 parishes will get the new breed of crimefighter too.
Residents claim that a council estate's become so run down that even the homeless don't want to live there.
It's been compared with New York's notorious Bronx, but now the council plans to smarten it up.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
ANGELA COLLINS/Resident
FRAN CAREY/Resident
DES MOFFATT/Thamesdown Borough Councillor
JOHN HICKMAN/Chief Housing Officer
Voice over
Built just 15 years ago, it's feared these flats in Pinehurst West could soon become slums.
Residents say this part of Swindon's so noisy and dirty that not even the homeless want to live here.
Disabled Angela Collins, burgled 4 times in the past year, is desperate to move.
Many of the tenants blame their landlords, Thamesdown Borough Council.
But concern about conditions on the estate has prompted a report to the council's Housing Committee.
Chairman Des Moffatt says he's familiar with another unflattering nickname for the flats, but the Bronx comparison's an exaggeration.
The council, though, admits the estate is worse for wear and promises to take action.
For administrative reasons, the Housing Department insists maintenance work can't start until the beginning of the next financial year.
For those who live in Pinehurst West, it can't come soon enough.
A hospital worker is critically ill after being stabbed in the neck by a patient.
The woman, an occupational therapist from Gloucester, is in intensive care after an operation lasting six hours.
Her family have travelled down from the city to the Devon hospital where the attack happened.
KIM BARNES/Reporting
NIKI HEALY/Royal College of Nursing
Library Pictures
Voice over
The attack happened at this pyschiatric unit at Torquay in Devon.
26 year old Georgina Robinson an occupational therapist from Gloucester was slashed across the throat by a male patient wielding a kitchen knife.Nurse leaders are concerned about this attack and others like it.
She says my first reaction is one of horror, then sympathy for the individual concerned but not surprise.
South Devon Healthcare Trust say it was a sudden and motiveless attack and they've launched a full inquiry.
But there are calls for staffing levels to be improved.
She says there are far less staff to deal with violent patients than there were before.
A 36 year old man is being questioned by police.
Meanwhile Georgina's family have travelled down from their home in Gloucester to be at their daughter's bedside.
She's tonight said to be critical but stable.
As an appeal is launched to save the starving millions in Africa, charity chiefs say they're confident the public will still give, despite the competing claims from other disasters in the world.
A relief worker from one of the region's charities who has just returned from Somalia says the appalling suffering of women and children will remain etched on his mind for ever.
Debbie Kelly reports.
CHARLES CLAYTON/World Vision
BRENDAN GORMLEY/Oxfam
Voice over
Its been described as the greatest human catastophe on earth…hundreds of thousands have died in Somalia…two million more are seriously at risk…relief workers…even those used to suffering…find the enormity of the task they face difficult to cope with.
He says;
The most harrowing television pictures maybe coming from Somalia…but the rest of Africa is in crisis…harvests have been devaststaed…an estimnated 19 million people will need food aid in Southern Africa this year…
Hence today's joint appeal…
Africa is just one of many causes in need of cash…but charity leaders are confident the British public still have money to give.
He says;
He says;
He says;
She says;
He says;
The Africa in Crisis appeal will be broadcast on television this evening…the agencies accept some people maybe beyond their help…but with funds believe others can be saved.
Prisoners at one of the country's most progressive jails are less likely to reoffend than those leaving other institutions, according to new research.
The findings are revealed as a report by Judge Stephen Tumim praises the care, humanity and dignity with which Grendon Prison is run.
But he criticises staffing levels in the prison's acute psychiatric unit.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
GRENDON UNDERWOOD/Buckinghamshire
PAUL/Grendon G-Wing Prisoner
Judge STEPHEN TUMIM/HM Inspector of Prisons
TIM NEWELL/Grendon Governor
Voice over
Judge Tumim's report recognises that Grendon therapy is tough and not everyone makes it through to the end.
But research released, along with his report, show those who do, will be far less likely to offend again, than people living other prisons, despite taking the country's most violent criminals.
Male speaker
When you get blokes crying their eyes out, it's not an easy ride.
Voice over
There are 200 prisoners in Grendon undergoing intensive therapy.
G wing exists specifically for sex offenders.
Male speaker
I haven't come to terms with the bloke I killed yet, but when I do, it will be frightening.
Voice over
Grendon has been operating for 30 years and Judge Stephen Tumim's report, published today, praises them for their standards of humanity, care and dignity.
However, he is critical of the staffing levels in the prison's acute psychiatric unit, the lack of racial minorities amoung the inmates and the effects of stress on staff.
New research from Grendon's psychology department shows 33% of Grendon graduates offended again within 2 years of being released, compared to 40% from normal prisons.
That was reduced to 17% of inmates completing 18 months of therapy.
And it's figures like that, which reinforce Judge Tumim's view, that another one like it should be established elsewhere in the country.
The holiday of a lifetime for a group of deprived schoolchildren may have to be cancelled because more than half of their business sponsors have gone bust in the recession.
What was to have been a lesson in geography looks like turning into a lesson in harsh economics.
Tim Hurst reports.
DURSLEY/Gloucestershire
DENNIS BROWN/Senior Care Worker
Voice over
A dream trip to Spain for 6 deprived schoolchildren from Gloucestershire, a year in the planning, is fading fast for the organisers at Cam House Special school at Dursley.
As the new term is about to start, they've been told that 6 of their 10 business sponsors have gone bust in the last 4 months.
The trip, from Dursley to Plymouth, then by ferry to Santander and finally to the Mediterranean coast, was to cost £2,400, but 6 companies can't now meet their £1,100 share.
Lessons in geography and Spanish continue, while staff try to find other last minute sponsors.
2 of those due to go can't be told until they return to school next week.
The Spanish trip was being sponsored by companies from South Wales.
Now the organisers are hurriedly trying to find others nearer home.
In part two:
The end of the line.Brundle is dropped from the Benetton team.
The winning line.Ben's a scrambling champ at six.
And, hook line and sinker.
The bait that Neville Chamberlain was happy to fall for.
Change the law…father's plea after drinking binge ends in daughter's death.
Out of the firing line…
Bosnians start new life in Britain.
And a model regime…judge praises prison for caring approach.
An inquest 
ANNE DAWSON
OXFORD
DANIEL MEINERTZHAGEN/Georgina's Father
Det Chief Insp DAVID BELCHER/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
16 year old Georgina Meinertzhagen was studying A levels at a private college in Oxford.
6 months ago, her body was found under a bedroom window at her lodgings.
She'd been drinking with friends.
Each had had 15 or 20 tequilas in a 50p a time promotion at the now closed Pier 19 bar above the Blue Boar pub in the city.
Nobody witnessed Georgina's fall and her body was only discovered the next morning.
One of them even slept in the same room as her, but heard nothing.
Georgina's father says that boy could also have died and the law must be tightened up.
Male speaker
It's part of the 1964 licencing act you're not allowed to serve drink to people already intoxicated.
These young people were not only happy they were roaring drunk and there could easily have been a double inquest with that other young man.
I sincerely hope the bar will lose their licence, although I don't plan a civil prosecution, because it won't bring my daughter back.
But if you made it law that the breweries would lose their retail outlet and the publican and barman would lose their licences, you'd soon find they make time and make staff check up to see if people were drunk.
Voice over
Georgina was great niece to millionaire businessman Lord Hanson.
Her lodgings were paid for and she had £50 pocket money a week.
Her friends, also studying at exclusive colleges, said they had no difficulty being served drink despite their ages.
Paul Farrow slept in the same room when she fell, too drunk to notice.
Male speaker
No comment whatsoever.
Voice over
Despite Mr Meinertzhagen's wishes, no one from the bar was called in evidence.
Coronor, Nicholas Gardiner, is writing to the licencing magistrates although police won't be prosecuting
Male speaker
The papers in the case have been sent to the crown prosecution service and they've decided there's no further action to take.
But in view of the coronor's remarks, the question of the justices and the licence must be considered.
Voice over
The secretary of the college Georgina went to said she was a mature, punctual young girl.
It was also said in court she didn't habitually drink so heavily, but she and her friends were regular social drinkers.
Having drunk 3 times, the driving limit; she probably went out onto the window ledge and fell off entirely by accident.
That was the verdict recorded by the coronor.
Well, as Georgina Meinertzhagen's father calls for the law to be tightened on under age drinking, landlords say it's almost impossible to tell how old some of their customers are.
And a specialist in alcohol abuse says youngsters don't realise the dangers associated with what is a potentially harmful drug.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES
ROGER SMITH/Landlord
Dr MALCOLM BRUCE/Addiction Specialist
ELANOR WATTS
RICHARD TUSTIAN
Voice over
Guessing how old someone is, is an age-old problem for publicans.
Unlike many other countries, young people in Britain, are not required to carry a form of identification.
It's up to the landlord's discretion.
But inevitably…
A group of Bosnian refugees who travelled a thousand miles with a relief convoy to escape the war have started their new life in Northamptonshire.
But relief workers who rescued them say the next challenge is to ensure they don't suffer psychologically from what they have witnessed.
Jane Saggers has this report.
ZBANIC ARIFA/Mother
ALASTAIR CONNON/Relief Worker
Tired and totally bewildered by their new surroundings, a group of 18 Bosnian refugees try to re-adjust to their new makeshift home in Kettering.
At 21 months, little Mirza is the youngest to be brought here from the mortar attacks and shelling around Sarajevo.
His mother made the agonising decision to leave her husband and family to get her little boy away from a war zone these people describe as sheer hell.
She says Sarajevo was her home town and she didn't want to leave it.
But she did only because of her little boy.
This family is still grieving for the son who was killed just a matter of weeks ago.
But leaving homes and families behind has not been easy.
She says we're happy to be in England but we are sad for our relatives.
My father is still in Sarajevo and I am worried about him.
EX ITN PICS
The refugees were picked up by a convoy of buses at the Austrian border.
Many of them had spent weeks getting there on a dangerous journey from their homes in Sarajevo.
And then it was another three days travelling by coach across France, and by ferry to Dover where they arrived last night.
For the little ones its been a great adventure.
Their parents can only hope they won't remember the days of war.
Today most of them felt exhausted from the stress and the long journey.
But at least they were safe.
She says she is very worried.
They know they are safe here and that is very important.
I came here only because I was so worried for my little son.
Marko's parents are both teachers.
Today was turned into an English lesson for him.
The Northamptonshire relief group which has brought them here know that they have a reposibility to care for people likely to suffer seriously psycholical problems of witnessing the war.
Connors celebrates 40th birthday
FTSE up 68
The hundred shares index closed up sixty eight point one at two three eight one point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety eight and up at two marks, seventy nine.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Welcome back.
Motor racing and Martin Brundle has been dropped from the Oxfordshire-based Benetton team.
The thirty three year-old driver is to be replaced by Nigel Mansell's Williams team-mate Riccardo Patrese.
The move will fuel speculation about the line-up of next year's Williams team.
Nick Clark reports.
PATRICK HEAD/Technical Director/Canon Williams
Voice over
There was everything to look forward to when Martin Brundle took his seat with the highly competitive Benetton team late last year, alongside the rising star, Michael Schumacher.
Now, before his first season there is over, the news he's to be dropped from the Kidlington-based outfit at the end of the world championships.
It'll be hard to swallow, because Brundle had won the Benetton contract after several lean years on the circuit with lesser teams.
THIS season Brundle's finished in the points in 7 of the last 8 grand prix.
Next year he may not get a drive at all.
That's the hard world of formula one, in his place comes Italian Riccardo Patrese, who's to quit the Didcot-based Williams team after 5 years, including 2 seasons with this year's world champion Nigel Mansell.
Patrese's move was expected; the grapevine's been awash with rumour over next year's Williams line-up.
Male speaker
We couldn't promise Riccardo a place here next year.
He's been a good, professional team member.
Voice over
Now Patrese's move has been confirmed, there will be further speculation about the Williams '93 team.
It's thought Mansell rival, the Frenchman, Alain Prost will join, while Mansell himself is negotiating a fee with team boss Frank Williams.
It's believed he wants £12million.
Male speaker
We're not announcing anything about the team at present.
Voice over
It's expected the Williams line-up will be made known next week.
For Martin Brundle now, the desperate job of maintaining enthusiasm for the remainder of the world championships, while the desperate need of finding a new seat hangs over him.
A six year old boy has become one of the youngest people to win the All British Scrambling Championship.
Ben Hunt has been riding motorbikes since he was three.
Now he plans to make a career of it.
Clare Lafferty reports.
THROUGHAM/Gloucestershire
BEN HUNT/Scrambler
WILF HUNT/Ben's Dad
LINDA HUNT/Ben's Mum
Voice over
He's this year's all British Scrambling Champion, is regarded as one of the best riders in Gloucestershire and in the last 12 months, he's won dozens of awards and trophies and he was only 7 last week.
But for Ben Hunt; his passion for motorbikes started a long time ago.
As well as the speed, he's getting quite a taste for the adulation from friends and relatives.
There was plenty of praise and some prizes for Ben when he became the All British Champ.
Ben concedes that he owes a great deal of his success to the help he gets from his Mum and Dad.
And Ben takes care of the action.
Ben's greatest wish is that when he grows up, he becomes a professional scrambler.
Mum and Dad are no doubt just wishing he'd take up an indoor sport instead.
Fishing tackle once used by wartime Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain is to be sold at an auction.
The politician who promised’ peace in our time’was an enthusiastic fly fisherman, and he made frequent angling trips to Gloucestershire.
Richard Barnett reports:
CIRENCESTER/Gloucestershire
ANDREW GIBBS/Auctioneer
SIMON BRETT/Dealer
Voice over
Neville Chamberlain has gone down in history, either as the politician who was duped by Hitler, or as a shrewd statesman who was playing for time, so Britain could re-arm.
But when he wasn't conducting affairs of state, there's nothing he enjoyed more for getting away from it all, than fly fishing.
Neville Chamberlain was a regular visitor to Cirencester, where he caught trout on the River Churn.
So it's fitting that his collection of fishing tackle is being auctioned off in the town tomorrow.
Among the lots, are a fly tin presented by the Parliamentary press gallery, rods and reels and a vicious looking gaffe which was used to haul fish out of the water.
And there's a letter which enclosed a gift of 6 salmon flies.
Dated November 1 1938, it states: Thank God the Prime Minister is a fisherman.
The patience and persistence which you must have learned as a fisherman would result in pulling us through.
Male speaker
He was a private man, and liked to relax fishing.It's unusual to have a complete collection for sale.
Voice over
For dealer Simon Brett from Moreton in Marsh, it's the quality of the items that matters.
Male speaker
The fishing tackle from the past is up to the quality of modern equipment.
Voice over
Looking at the wide array of flies, rods and other tackle, it's easy to imagine just how important the pursuit of trout and salmon was to Neville Chamberlain.
It seems clear that the man who failed to secure peace in our time, did at least find a personal tranquillity on the banks of the River Churn.
We're off to the world of eventing now…
September is a busy month…it's Burghley this weekend…
Blenheim in a couple of weeks and sandwiched in the middle are the European Championships in Germany…
Britain has its youngest team going to those…among the new names is William Fox-Pitt from Bicester in Oxfordshire and he's our guest in the Friday Feature 
WILLIAM FOX-PITT
JACKIE POTTS/Head Girl
Voice over
A new era is dawning in eventing…the young riders are galloping in…and William Fox Pitt from Bicester is leading the charge with his horse Chaka…
The two of them are off to ride for Britain in the European championships…their first big international test…their time has come…
William says both his parents were riding enthusiasts and he got put on a horse at the age of three…his mother used to ride for Britian in the sixties and she's encouraged him to compete…it used to terrify him at first and he never dreamt he'd be good enough to compete…
This week William and his horse Chaka have been training with the rest of the British team at Badminton…back in the spring they enjoyed their finest hour here when they finished seventh in the annual championships…
but success in this sport never comes easy
William says it's tough…it's physically and mentally tough…you have to known yourself and your horse…
the third member of the team is stable head girl Jackie Potts her job is to make sure the horse is in it's finest fettle…
Jackie says her role is to look after the horse and make sure he's ready on time and looking right and also to judge whether he's in a good mood or bad mood…she says's he's a good horse
William says that he wants to win and then hopefully look towards the world championship and then the next Europeans…it's been a good year so far so he hopes it ends like that anyway
Hundreds of keen gardeners have been visiting Blenheim Palace…not to inspect Capability Brown's work, but to look at the best of the country's autumn flowers.
The first Garden Show to be held in the palace grounds has been opened by Blenheim's owner, the Duke of Marlborough.
He says he too likes a spot of gardening.
KIM BARNES/Woodstock
The DUKE of MARLBOROUGH
BRIAN HOMEWOOD/Rushfields Nurseries
JENNY HOMEWOOD/Rushfields Nurseries
Voice over
Blenheim Palace has the kind of gardens to intimidate most keen amateurs but it welcomed hundreds of enthusiasts to its first autumn flower show, opened by palace owner the Duke of Marlborough.
He says Blenheim is more on a grand and formal scale.
But here it's nice to see the traditional gardeners and the interest in the small plants which go in the cottage gardens.
Nurserymen and women from all over the country showed off the plants and flowers they've carefully grown.
Ledbury based Rushfields Nurseries brought wildflowers grown for cottage gardens…the display won them first prize
He says we're thrilled, it's a wonderful achievement.
She says we like to find some of the older herbaceous plants which are more difficult to grow.
We're more of a specialist.
There are plants to inspire every shade of green-fingered…from begonias to venus fly traps…
With all this choice, was the Duke planning any purchases
He says you never can tell!
I shall be going round with a notebook.
I shall porbably have some packets of seeds or pot plants.
In fact the Duke and Duchess were tempted by some garden furniture.
this conversation bench kept them talking.
With lots of stalls to choose from there was plenty to carry home promising a busy weekend in the garden.
Have you had a hard day at the office?
Perhaps you're feeling a little tense.
Well then go and hug a tree.
People who believe in the ancient chinese art of Chi-Dynamics say it'll make you feel on top of the world.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
GAYE WRIGHT/The Centre for Harmony
ANNE HARLATT/Tree Healing Pupil
ROD NICHOLSON/The Centre for Harmony
Voice over
If you go for a stroll through the woods this weekend, don't be surprised to see this.
These people are from the Gloucester Centre for Harmony, and they're indulging in what's known as tree healing.
Awell as tree hugging, Gaye teaches tree breathing.
Ann has been attending tree healing sessions for several months now.
She says it's helped cure her bad back.
Tree healers think we could all benefit from hugging a trunk.
There are those who are a bit cynical about the benefits of bonding with the bark.
But if you want to get back to your roots, and fancy giving it a try, Gaye's running a workshop on Robinswood Hill in Gloucester this Sunday.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Welcome back.
Coming up later we visit one of the finest palaces in the country which is hosting its first flower show.
But first Here's Tim with the sport.
(TIM) Hello there.
TIM RUSSON
So who's going to be the next manager of Oxford United…the shortlist is being drawn up this weekend…the appointment will be made early next week…we can't tell you yet who it's going to be but we can tell the Manor Ground directors who you want…
All is revealed in our football parade 
BRIAN HORTON/Manchester City manager
JOHN GORMAN/Town Manager
Voice over
There's no game for Oxford this weekend so the next time the team takes to the field they'll be under new management…
Around 30 good applications have been mailed and faxed to the Manor…the directors will decide on their shortlist over the weekend and then start interviewing…
We've had hundreds of cards and letters for our special Pick the Manager Competition…some fans have been giving it plenty of thought…some have taken to the drawing board…
So who do you want…here are the results in reverse order…the man Brian Horton replaced at manchester city…
Peter Reid polled three per cent…next up is Denis Smith once of Sunderland and Bristol City…
Ray Wilkins pulled in quite a few votes…5 per cent…just above him is Ray Clemence…the top four…the heavywweights…the favourites…
Jimmy Smith polled ten per cent…surprisingly he was beaten by Steve Coppell…but the top two were way ahead…second big Billy Hamilton the ex United striker…and top by a long way the man who couldn't live at the Manor with the Maxwells…
Mark Lawrenson 41 per cent…he's the man you want…
there are three more names in the ring tonight though…
Ron Fenton…
Brian Clough's old right hand man…
Chris Nicholl who played for Villa and then went on to manage Southampton and Terry Venables…who knows he may even try to buy the club lock stock and barrel…
we're giving you three tips for the shortlist…
Nicholl a late entry is the favourite…followed by Denis Smith…but the man you voted for Lawro…will be in with a shout…
and the first job for the new manager could be to decide on the future of two of United's stars…
Joey Beauchamp and Jim Magilton…there's speculation that Brian Horton is coming back to the Manor with his Manchester City cheque book let's ask him
Brian Horton says he doesn't honestly know because he does not know how much money he's got available
Rock bottom in the premier league are swindon town…the side Horton's new team beat on wednesday…still only one point but they're still full of fighting talk at the County Ground…
John Gorman says…they still believe in themselves and still think they can do it but they need to get a result…
Also in need of a result are Hereford United…they're bottom of the third division and same story as swindon…nothing's going right…they need a change of luck soon before they get stranded at the wrong end of the table…
Hereford are our only side playing this weekend…team news…player manager Greg Downs is fit again and is likely to be back in defence…centre half Kevan Smith who had a spell with the club last season has been signed up again and is in the squad…
on form you have to fancy Scunthorpe…they're pushing for a top spot…but United have got to find some winning form sooner or later…
and let's give them some encouragement by awarding them the goal of the week…it was their first against Wycombe Wanderers on Tuesday night scored by centre forward Chris Pike…we want more
There's no premier league football this weekend of course because of England's world cup game next week…the Central Match live should be a cracker on sunday it's West Brom against Wolves…what else is going on…here's our action roundup 
Voice over
Oxford's Nichola Simpson has been on target in the British Outdoor Archery Championship…she won the indoor title last year now she's done the double…
Going for gold in the world rowing championships are the Henley pair of Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent…they've been cruising thro the early heats…
There'll be no cruising in the Midland Karting championships on sunday…they're being raced at Little Rissington in Gloucestershire…
Also opening the throttle are the hill climb drivers…the british championship will be decided at Prestbury near Cheltenham on Sunday…
and last but by no means least…
Cheltenham swimmer Kevin Morris who's been trying to make history by swimming the channel backstroke has missed out again…he was three and half hours out from Dover when a throat infection sunk his dreams…
Striking Royal Mail technicians say bosses are harassing them by calling at their homes at night.
A petition denying bad behaviour on the union side has even been signed by one of the managers.
The strike, in support of a suspended colleague, has been going on for more than a week.
SIMON GARRETT/Swindon
LEN GANDER/National Communications Union
SIMON KING/Suspended Postal Technician
Voice over
Technicians walked out nine days ago when Simon King was suspended for refusing to work a machine blacked by his union.
A rumbling dispute about changes to working conditions sparked an ill-temperered row in a research facility marked for twenty years of good industrial relations.
When management spoke to two technicians inside about the dispute they joined the strike too.
Now there are allegations of foul-play from both sides
Male speaker
They've lowered themselves to harrassment. 5 members have had visits at their homes.
If it goes on we'll call the police.
They claim I've threatened people, trying to mek them strike.
It's not true.
They had a meeting with two technicians who then joined the strike as well.
If they carry on this way we'll have the whole site out
Voice over
The man whose suspension sparked the walk-out says he was very upset by two unexpected home visits from a manager
Male speaker
He came to my door while I was having my tea.
I didn't want to talk to him.
It's not the right way to go about things
Voice over
The Royal Mail refuses to be interviewed, but in a statement they deny harassment and say the picket line is intimidating.
The strikers collected two hundred and fifty signiatures from people crossing their line refuting that…including one of the managers.
The company says the strike's unofficial although the union's national president is lending personal support.
The statement says’ The dispute is unjustified, unnecessary and pointless.
We would urge staff to stop this silliness and return to work.’
Postal services aren't affected by the dispute.
Two farmers who had more than a hundred and thirty animals taken away from their farm during an R-S-P-C-A raid are to plead not guilty to charges of cruelty.
They are both accused of fourteen offences of causing unnecessary suffering to animals.
TIM HURST/Reporting
Voice over
The charges refer to horses and goats, seized by the RSPCA on a farm at Lentwardine in Herefordshire.
133 animals were taken away, and both farmers, Margaret Hughes and Alvery George, face 14 charges each of causing unnecessary suffering.
They appeared in court at Leominster in Herefordshire this morning when the case was adjourned for a week.
Many of the animals seized by the RSPCA are still being cared for elsewhere in Herefordshire.
A drugs squad officer has just paid a visit to the owner of a field full of cannabis — but he won't be making any arrests.
The crop is a strain of cannabis or hemp that has almost no effect as a drug, and is completely legal.
It's being grown to make high quality paper and linen.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
OXFORD
PAUL KYBIRD/Thames Valley Drugs Squad
PETE MESSENGER/Hemp UK
Company Video
’ Is that right?’
An unlikely encounter — a drug squad officer chatting amicably with the owner of five acres of cannabis.
Until now cannabis, or hemp, was an illegal plant, classified as a schedule B controlled drug.
Now it's possible to get a licence to grow some varieties of the plant to make paper and linen.
The grower can also claim an EC grant of £250 an acre.
These plants contain only minimal amounts of the chemical — tetrahydro-cannabinol — which can make users high when smoked — so to get any kind of effect — you'd have to smoke the whole field.
He says they're very low in the chemical content and if you're going to get anything out of it it's going to be in your mind more than anything else.
Pete Messenger has been in the paper-making business for the last 6 years and he's convinced hemp paper is the way of the future.
He says there are a number of ecological as well as economic reasons — it's a longer, stronger tougher fibre — it makes a longer-lasting paper and it makes economic sense to grow the material in this country rather than importing it.
Until now Pete's paper-making company, Ecologically Sound Paper has had to import hemp pulp from Spain.
Now he'll be able to use his own crop to make paper — which is made at this plant in Scotland.
The current price is comparable with tree-based high quality paper,— that would fall once home-grown hemp is used.
There are also possibilties for linen made from hemp to make clothing and furniture fabric.
This year's crop was just an experimental one — it would normally be 9 feet high now — but was sown too late to reach full height.
Pete Messenger's licence to grow hemp increases from 5 to 500 acres next year — so the local drug squad will have to get used to the idea of legal fields of cannabis in Oxfordshire.
He says it's going to get bigger and bigger and alot of our pasture land is going to be cannabis plantations and they're going to be legal ones because they've been granted licences to possess and grow it.
But potential cannabis raiders — beware — Pete Messenger has a licence from the Home Office to grow and use his crop, but anyone who takes any of these plants is committing an offence under the Misuse of Drugs Act.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, Oxford United's new manager.
Your choice for the next Lord of the Manor.
And don't talk to the trees, hugging them is better for you.
now one of the most exciting contests of the weekend will have a Gloucestershire lad called Richard Mainwaring challenging for a world title…his sport…his life makes up our Friday Feature 
RICHARD MAINWARING
Voice over
A sculptor and a rock star have teamed up to honour hundreds of unskilled labourers who toiled in difficult, often dangerous conditions to build what's now a busy commuter railway line.
The workmen's efforts have already inspired a song by the band Genesis.
Now the group has helped pay for a bronze sculpture in memory of the navvies.
Robin Powell reports.
NORTHMOOR Oxfordshire
TONY STONES Sculptor
TOBY GOODGER Landscape Architect
DENNIS EDWARDS Railway Historian
Voice over
It's an unlikely double act.
Tony Stones, a sculptor who works in a shed near Oxford and Phil Collins, by virtue of his musical talents an international megastar.
But together, they've come up with this; a life-size bronze statue of a railway navvy, typical of the hundreds who helped build the Chiltern Line at the start of the century.
It's a job Tony's especially proud of.
The statue takes pride of place at Gerrards Cross station.
It's the brainchild of a local landscape artist, who's also responsible for bringing in Genesis, after hearing a song about railway workmen on their latest album.
Work on the Chiltern Line, linking London with Banbury, Bicester and Aylesbury, began in 1903 and took 3 years to complete.
The task of of carving through the English countryside was carried out by unskilled navvies, many of whom had come over from Ireland to earn a living.
The work was always hard and sometimes dangerous; accidents, some of them fatal, were commonplace.
Tony doesn't expect his navvy to turn many heads, but if it makes just one or two commuters appreciate the courage and dedication of the men who made the Chiltern Line, the effort was worth it.
House prices keep on dropping
FTSE down 19
The hundred shares index closed down nineteen point seven at twenty-three, sixty-two point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety-nine and up at two marks, eighty.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Doctors are warning that the new pub craze of barflying could cause serious injury and even disable a person for life.
It follows the case of a forty two year old woman who broke her neck and was lucky not to be paralysed.
But organisers of the pub game insist it is safe.
Gareth Furby reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
KEITH WILLETT/Consultant Trauma Surgeon
DAVID MATHER/Starmaker Promotions
SEAN HERMON/Barfly Operator
Voice over
Barfly is a pub craze imported from Australia.
It involves wearing a suit covered with velcro hooks, which then sticks fast to a velcro covered target.
In theory at least.
And three Oxford Doctors have now written to the British Medical Journal to highlight the case of a forty two year old who broke her neck when her suit didn't stick, and they say she was lucky not to be paralysed.
He says when her suit didn't stick she fell onto her neck.
It's an injury that could disable somebody for life.
Doctors at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford have only just started to keep a record, but so far they treated six people for barfly injuries.
But the Abingdon-based company behind many of Oxford's barfly promotions insists it is safe.
He says there are procedures to follow and its no more dangerous than many sports such as tennis.
He says he's never had a problem with events he's organised.
And people who've tried barfly don't seem too worred about the danger.
He says he saw one person fall but he wasn't hrut and it seems safe.
He says it can be a bit slippery in the wet but otherwise it's fine.
But the Oxford doctors behind today's letter stress there is a potential for serious injury.
They don't yet want Barfly banned.
But they say people must be made aware of the risks.
A counselling service set up in Gloucestershire to help victims of the Gulf War is to be extended to Bosnian refugees.
Psychologists are concerned that refugees have been mentally scarred by what they saw in Sarajevo.
Phil Bayles reports.
WENDY MORRIS/Trauma Aftercare Trust
As 18 bewildered, yet relieved Bosnian refugees made the best of their new physical conditions in Kettring, questions were being asked about their mental well-being.
While volunteers could be relied upon to make life as comfortable for them as possible, there's concern about whether the professional agencies are geared up to help with the deeper anxieties.
Although free of the horrors of Bosnia it's difficult to imagine what nightmares the refugees endure in the security of their makeshift British accommodation.
But the Gulf War produced experts able to understand the problems.
Families of servicemen returning found a system not geared up to help.
So they set up their own crisis counselling service to console the victims of battle.
Female speaker
It's not necessarily what you see, but what you experience.
These men were told they must be prepared to die.
That sort of trauma leads to long-term suffering.
Voice over
Now the Trauma Aftercare Trust says with its network of staff and clinics, it can help the refugees.
Female speaker
If it's a human being that's suffering, it doesn't matter where they come from.
It's up to us to help them.
We hope to help refugees from any war, any country.
Voice over
As well as qualified psychiatrists and psychologists, the network includes people able to translate for the refugees.
The Trust falls short of criticising the government's reaction to the problem.
But it points out that it has to depend on donations for its work; and like the organisations rescuing the refugees, it is running out of money.
In part two:
Hard work…barefoot waterskier faces one of his toughest challenges.
And hard labour…the railway navvies remembered by a rock band.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
a new rugby season starts tomorrow…and for Gloucester it's the start of a new era…they've lost half of their old side this summer…
Teague…
Mogg…
Dunn…
Preedy…
Scrivens…
Hamlin…all gone…so plenty for us to chew over in our first rugby review.
KEITH RICHARDSON/Coach
IAN SMITH/Captain
Voice over
want something to do…somewhere to go this weekend…there's plenty of choice…
Mark Kiff's got the action round-up 
Voice over
Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire is the place to be this weekend to see the world's best three day eventers in the Audi International Horse Trials.
After the first day's dressage the world class field was led by a local rider from Oxford…
Tina Sederholm…who was only a spectator at last year's event.
Can you believe your success?
Um, no.
Not at all.
It's something you always dream of.
I just tried to do the best I could.
Tomorrow it's the cross country…that's when World Champion Blyth Tait from New Zealand and Scotland's Mary Thompson renew their battle for the number one spot in the world.
Blyth Tait says that the last time he won the top spot from Mary he only kept it for a week and is hoping to hang onto it for longer this time.
360 weightlifters from all over world are in Oxford proving that life really can begin at 40.
They're competing until Tuesday in the 8th World Masters Championships at Oxford Polytechnic.
The British Hill Climb Championship returns to Prescott near Cheltenham tomorrow.
It's the climax of the season for the Bugatti Owners Club.
And one of the bigest kart meetings of the year takes place this weekend at RAF Little Rissington near Stow-on-the-Wold.
That's the Midlands Championships.
Two life sentences for the man who imprisoned and sexually assaulted a schoolboy.
He's Bankrupt…but Maxwell keeps his country home.
And flying into trouble?…doctors warn of latest pub craze dangers.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
A court was told that Marron assaulted the boy for half an hour in his bedsitting room while playing hymns and classical music at full volume to cover the boy's screams.
Marron told police he'd been copying what he'd seen on a pornographic video: Judge Paul Clark said it showed how harmful such videos were.
Robin Powell reports.
NORTHAMPTON
HENRY STEVENS/Neighbour
Voice over
Michael Marron had a record of assaulting young boys and had himself been abused as a child.
He was living in a bedsit in Colwyn Road, Northampton, when he subjected the 11 year old boy to half an hour of terrifying sexual abuse.
After approaching him on the street and ushering him into the house he told the boy;’ Welcome to the Devil's Kingdom’and threatened to kill him if he didnt co-operate.
While the assaults were carried out, Marron played hymns and the Hallelujah Chorus, to drown out his victims cries and stop other people in the house hearing what was going on.
When it was over, he gave the boy £2.20.
In June, at Northampton Crown Court, Marron admitted false imprisonment, indecent assault and another serious sexual offence.
The court was told that at the time he thought he had AIDS.
He also told police he'd been copying a homosexual video tape.
Today he appeared for sentence at Warwick Crown Court.
Judge Paul Clark read social inquiry reports on Marron, before sentencing him to 2 life jail terms.
He told him that anybody who thought there was no harm in pornographic videos, was completely wrong.
The funeral has taken place of a teenage soldier who was killed by the IRA.
Paul Turner was on his first tour of duty in Northern Ireland when he was shot while on patrol.
Clare Lafferty reports.
HARPLEY/Worcestershire
Lt Col MARK ELCOMB/Paul's Commanding Officer
Voice of the Rev JOHN RITSON
Voice over
Soldiers of the Second Battalion of the Light Infantry Regiment carried the body of their colleague into the same church where he was baptised just over eighteen years ago.
Private Paul Turner was on his first tour of duty in Northern Ireland when he was killed.
He was patrolling the streets of Cross Maglen in Southern Armagh when he was hit in the chest by a terrorist bullet.
At his funeral in Saint Bartholomew's church in Harpley, his Commanding Officer praised Paul.
Paul was the three thousand and first victim of the troubles in Northern Ireland.
But addresing the congregation in and outside the church, the Army Padre the Reverend John Ritson asked people to forgive.
The service was conducted with full military honours, ending in shots being fired over Paul's coffin.
His mother father and youngest brother and sister then led the procession to a private cremation.
Kevin Maxwell, who's been declared Britain's biggest bankrupt, will be keeping his family's luxury home in Oxfordshire.
The house won't be affected by the record four hundred and six million pound bankruptcy order, because it's in his wife's name.
Mr Maxwell was there today with his wife and children.
Gargy Patel reports.
HAILEY/Oxfordshire
KEVIN MAXWELL
12 JUNE 1992
Voice over
An outing to the local pub for Kevin Maxwell and his family and time to reflect on being made Britain's biggest bankrupt.
After a Ploughman's lunch with his wife Pandora and 4 children, he drove his Renault Espace van back up the lane to their luxury home in Hailey village, saying nothing about his financial situation.
At yesterday's private hearing in the High Court Kevin Maxwell was officially declared bankrupt for a record £406million.
It follows months of investigation into his business affairs after the death of his father Robert Maxwell.
3 months ago, the luxury converted barn in Hailey was raided by Fraud Squad officers.
Kevin and his brother Ian were later arrested in London.
Ownership of the £300,000 Oxfordshire house was transferred to Pandora Maxwell last August, which means despite the debt the family will keep their home.
A baby girl who was born sixteen weeks premature and weighed less than a bag of sugar has celebrated her first birthday.
But Jade Pike has come close to dying many times in the past year.
Even now, she and her mother are virtual prisoners in their home, because Jade depends on bottled oxygen.
SIMON GARRETT/Grendon Underwood
1 December 1992/STOKE MANDEVILLE/Buckinghamshire
ROSE PIKE/Jade's Mother
TONY PARNELL/Family Friend
Voice over
Jade Pike's a year old.
If she'd been born on time this party wouldn't have happened until Christmas.
She arrived sixteen weeks early and was kept alive by the skills of staff at Stoke Mandeville Hospital's special care baby unit.
She went home for the first time after twelve weeks…but she's been in and out of the unit constantly ever since.
Female speaker
We have to go day by day.
She's getting there.
Hopefully her lungs will improve in time.
It's hard work but she copes
Voice over
Saving premature babies has its costs.
Weeks on a life support machine unavoidably damaged Jade's lungs.
She's wholly dependant for breath on the oxygen bottle she's attached to.
This portable version allows her out of home or hospital for a few hours…but for most of her life she must stay connected to a larger non-stop supply.
The determination and cheer of her and particularly her mother inspired their friends to throw the birthday bash
Male speaker
She's wonderful…she's really done well.
She's had a lot to put up with.
It's no easy task when a baby's almost died on her however many times.
But she's just pulled her through.
She's a wonderful woman
Female speaker
When it's your child you've watched fight for her life and then you get to the stage where she's reached one.
There's the emotional and mental side to cope with as well.
There's a lot of family pressuress…other children and everyday life to consider.
It's hard work but once she smiles you know it's all worth while.
I wouldn't swap her for nothing…nothing.
she's been wonderful
Voice over
Jade and Rose continue to show their appreciation for the medical staff at Stoke Mandeville who fought to keep the baby alive.
The Jade fund to buy equipment for the special care baby unit has so far raised three thousand pounds
A social worker has been sacked after admitting smoking cannabis during a holiday with children in care.
GLOUCESTER
Gloucestershire County Council dismissed the care worker, who hasn't been named, after a disciplinary hearing.
A further hearing, relating to a second residential care worker on the same holiday, is to be held next week.
Six men have appeared in court charged with conspiring to plant a fake bomb on a residential street.
OXFORD
The men who appeared at Oxford Magistrates are all in their early twenties or late teens.
They're charged with conspiring to leave what's described as an’ article’under a parked van near shops on Girdlestone Road in Oxford intending people to believe it was a bomb.
The case was adjourned for a month.
It's understood all six will plead not guilty.
A (1931) nineteen thirty one Lagonda sports car has been bought at auction by a man who owned it more than forty years ago.
Tony Guy sold the car then for four hundred pounds.
To buy it back cost thirty one thousand, but he says it's worth every penny.
GRAEME BOWD/Wallingford
TONY GUY/Owner
CLARE GUY/Tony's Daughter
Voice over
Most people have fond memories of their first car.
Tony Guy could hardly forget his.
The Lagonda was a present from his father when he was just 19.
He rediscovered it by chance.
His daughter was auctioning her MG at Sotherby's.
When Tony looked in the catalogue there was the Lagonda.
Male speaker
First I thought it was like the one I used to own.
Then I looked at the chassis and registration numbers and realised it was my old car.
It's still in the same colours.
It's been beautifully restored.
Voice over
The car appears in his family albums.
Tony believes he sold it for around £400 in 1949.
To buy it back cost £31,000.
He would have paid more.
But perhaps to avoid being carried away by nostalgia, he wisely left the bidding to his wife and daughter.
Female speaker
It was very exciting.
We had our limit and the bidding was going up and up.
When the hammer went down we were leapt with excitement.
Voice over
It's not clear where the Lagonda has been since Tony last owned it.
The recorded mileage is unlikely to be genuine.
The car has its idiosyncracies.
The brake pedal is on the right, the accelerator in the middle.
Back in the driving seat for the first time in 40 years the memories came flooding back.
Male speaker
We used to take it to vintage sports car events.
The roads were so empty in those days that you really could enjoy driving it fast.
The chances of seeing another vehicle were remote.
Voice over
The Lagonda will have to earn its keep.
Tony plans to hire it out for weddings and film work.
It could prove a very sound investment if he ever decides to sell it again.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, the Italian job.
Pastas new for the Cherry and Whites in Venice.
Plus, watching and weighting.
The prison that's providing a real pick-me-up.
In Central News tonight: Two firemen killed, two injured, in explosion at a poultry factory.
Brain disease death.
Was fertility treatment to blame?
And happy birthday Jade.
The miracle baby who's still fighting.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
Fire fighters were unable to rescue trapped and injured colleagues because of the intense heat and toxic fumes.
Houses near the factory have been evacuted.
At the moment there are no indications of how the fire started…
CLARE LAFFERTY/Hereford
ROBIN RICHARDS/Chief Fire Officer
EDDIE CLARKE/Sun Valley Poultry
Voice over
An art gallery owner has lost ten years of research in a fire.
He was working on a biography of a nineteenth century painter which was due to be published next month.
It's thought the computer he was using to write the book was itself the cause of the fire.
JESSICA FOWLE/Broadway
RONALD ANDERSON/Gallery Owner
Voice over
Counting the cost of a fire which has brought his business to a standstill and caused ten years of research to go up in smoke.
Ronald Anderson was woken in the early hours of the morning.
Black smoke was coming through the walls of his bedroom above his art gallery on the High Street of Broadway in Worcestershire.
His first thoughts were for an eighteen month old child and an elderly lodger also in the house.
But then he realised he'd lost the manuscript for a biography he's writing on the nineteenth century painter James Whistler.
Ten years of world wide research, held on floppy disks, had melted.
Male speaker
Once I realised no-one was hurt then came the dreaded moment.
I felt sick.
The research is from all over the world.
It's valuable stuff gone.
Voice over
Some of the manuscript has been saved because it had been printed off for a friend to proof-read.
Ironically it seems that the personal computer Mr Anderson was using to write the book was the cause of the fire.
The good news is that hundreds of thousands of pounds worth of paintings were saved.
Male speaker
Very few paintings have been destroyed.
Most of the work from the exhibition on at the moment was protected by glass.
Voice over
Mister Anderson has a tough time ahead of him.
As well as dealing with the damage to the gallery, he's determined to go ahead with the biography.
And that's due to be published next month.
The family of a woman who died from the human version of Mad Cow Disease are claiming she was a victim of contaminated hormone fertililty treatment.
Iris Friel died in her forties after a series of hormone injections.
The health authority involved says the two are not connected, but Mrs Friel's family want a public inquiry.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
WENDY WARMAN/Daughter
ROSEMARY BEGBIE/Daughter
Dr ELAINE FARMERY/Swindon Health Authority
Dr ROSY McNAUGHT/Fertility Treatment Helpline
Voice over
18 years after their mother died, Wendy Warman and Rosemary Begbie want to know why.
According to her death certificate, Iris Friel died aged 44 of Creutzfeldt-Jakob diease, the human equivalent to B-S-E.
A few years earlier she'd undergone fertility treatment at the Victoria Hospital in Swindon, and in the light of new research suggesting a possible link between such treatment and premature dementia, her family's demanding an inquiry.
Last week the Government warned that around 300 women who'd been injected with a hormone called gonadotrophin, extracted from the pituitary glands of human corpses, could be at risk.
Though they can't be certain, Mrs Friel's daughters believe that was the treatment their mother received, and they're alarmed at the damage it could have caused her and many others like her.
Swindon Health Authority says Mrs Friel's notes have since been destroyed, but it's almost certain that the hormone she was injected with wasn't gonadotrophin.
That had to ne injected daily, but her husband recalls the injections being much less frequent.
Dr Farmery blames the Department of Health for causing undue alarm, but that claim's rejected by the Helpline set up to address public concern.
The Government warns that the offspring of affected women could also develop Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease.
It's an outside chance — but all the more reason why Mrs Friel's daughters want to find out more about the treatment their mother received.
Britain's best weightlifters have held a unique training session…behind bars.
They were guests at a young offenders' institution…and found the inmates were one of the most appreciative audiences they'd ever had.
SIMON GARRETT/Nuffield
DARREN BASHFORD/Inmate
DARREN ARMSTRONG/Inmate
DAVE SNOWDON/Prison Officer and Coach
ANDREW CALLARD/Weightlifter
STEPHEN WARD/Weightlifter
JULIANNA AUGUST/Weightlifter
JOHN LEAR/National Coach
Voice over
The men's national squad and the pick of Britain's women went through their paces at Huntercombe Place Young Offenders Institution.
More than eighty inmates came to watch the experts in what's a highly popular sport inside
Male speaker
Everyone does weights in prison.
It helps to pass the time.
Then you get into and improve your shape and then it's a buzz
Male speaker
It helps us sleep at night.
We do a lot of training and it tires us out
Voice over
The prison officer in charge of weightlifting at Huntercombe is also the national women's coach
Male speaker
The true value of bringing the experts in is it shows the boys what limits can be reached
Male speaker
If we have an audience we're encouraged and we do better lifts which in competition is the pay-off
Male speaker
We do have league matches in prison so we're used to them.
But they're more appreciative of the sport…they join in a lot more
Female speaker
I didn't expect them here.
I thought it was a normal training session.
But it's nice having an audience and it gets your adrenalin going as well 
Male speaker
The appreciation here has been absolutely fantastic.
Some of the boys have been close to their best this afternoon.
I think some did achieve or equal their bests
Voice over
Staff hope offenders who take the sport seriously may adapt the discipline of weights to their lives when they finish their sentences
Male speaker
It's amazing the weights they're lifting.
Hopefully I'll be there one day
Voice over
Dozens of vintage aircraft are converging on an old airfield for a nostalgic flying display.
Among some of the exotic craft on display are bi-planes used in the First World War.
KEN GOODWIN/Rendcombe
MATTHEW HILL/Stunt Pilot
VIC NORMAN/Stunt Pilot
MANDY PANTALL/Wingwalker
Voice over
It looks so easy.
But this pilot is skilled enough to throw a plane around while keeping perfect control.
The Royal Flying Corps aerodrome at Rendcombe near Cirencester is playing host this weekend to a display of vintage aircraft, and some vintage flying.
He says that it's using plane's controls in a different way, and flying close to the ground which creates excitement.
On the ground there are planes which will send enthusiasts into a spin.
This Dragonfly Rapide, is one of only two left in the world.
When first manufactured in the 1930's, it was the ultimate in luxury air travel.
And more up to date, there's this nippy little number from Russia.
It's called a Yak, and it's fast, agile and already proving a big favorite with pilots.
It can skim the airfield at a couple of hundred miles an hour.
He says that it's a better craft than those in which he trained.
You can't beat it for a breath of fresh air — wing walking.
At Rendcombe, one woman is chosen from a dozen hopeful applicants to take part in the weekend show.
She says that she loves the air of danger.
But it's hard to talk because it makes your jaws so cold!
Soon the airfield will once again be echoing to the sound of craft common in it's heyday.
An air extraveganza with plenty of high flyers.
Oxfam has launched its new autumn collection of clothes with the boast that the fashion-conscious can dress themselves for just twenty five pounds!
And who better to promote such knock-down prices than boxing champion, Chris Eubank.
But although a snappy dresser himself, he didn't actually buy anything.
MARIA COYLE/London
CHRIS EUBANK/World Super Middleweight Champion
CHRISTINE BEATTIE/Oxfam
CAROLINE ENGLAND/Student
Voice over
And now back to tonight's top story and the news that two firemen have been killed fighting a serious fire at a poultry processing factory.
For an update on the latest from the scene at the Sun Valley factory in Hereford we go over to our reporter Gareth Furby.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Train driver arrested
FTSE up 1
Voice over
The hundred shares index closed up one point seven at three thousand and fifty nine 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty two and down at two marks, forty six.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, how to dress in style, the Oxfam way.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
With no game this weekend the Manor Ground was closed for business…but the directors were working overtime in the boardroom…sorting through thirty applications for the manager's job…they've drawn up a shortlist…four men are being interviewed over the next couple of days…who are they…the club are keeping the names a secret…we reckon Chris Nicholl…the former Southampton manager is still in the running…so too is the former Sunderland and Bristol City chief Denis Smith…the fans favourite is Mark Lawrenson who was in charge of United for a short spell before he fell out with Maxwells and the fourth man…is a mystery…could be the dark horse the names of former England keeper Ray Clemence and one time Villa striker Peter Withe have been under discussion…all will be revealed later this week…
over at the County Ground…
Swindon Town have strengthened their side by signing the former Spurs and England defender Terry Fenwick on a one year contract…
but there'll be no selling…
Southampton have been chasing Nicky Summerbee…manager John Gorman has told them he's not interested
Only one of our teams was in action at the weekend, and Hereford did us proud by winning at Scunthorpe.
It was United's first league win and their points of the new season.
The score 2-1 
Voice over
Sooner or later Hereford had to get it right…and everything came good at scunthorpe…striker Chris Pike charged through to give his team the lead after only two minutes…great goal…his third in just two games…
it was close from then on…
United kept Scunthorpe out and then went and made sure of victory with the second goal after seventy five minutes…no marks for slack defending by Scunthorpe…top marks for tenacity from skipper Derek hall…and that was his third strike of the season…
with just four minutes to go Scunthorpe got a goal back…the United defence dozed off as Ian Thompstone thumped the ball low and hard past Judge…thankfully it was too late…three cheers for Hereford
the only game this week is in the Anglo Italian cup…
Oxford are playing at Bristol City tomorrow night.
We've an Italian flavour for our first rugby action of the new season because Gloucester are just back from a two match trip to Venice.
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
Voice over
In the dark old days rugby tours never went further than the west country or Wales…but times are changing fast as the sport gets more professional…you have to think big time now to win matches and survive in the first division…that's why Gloucester's new full-time director Barrie Corless and coach Keith Richardson took the players off to Italy for a two match tour
Keith Richardson says…that he thinks every first division club needs a pre season tour…it does not have to be italy but that was a good place to go and you have more much more time than any training sessions back home
Sightseeing lasted just a couple of hours…the rest of the time was devoted to training and playing…
The Cherry and Whites kicked off with a win in their first game…more like a romp as they ran in 45 points against Casale…
Keith Richardson says
45-10 was the score in the first game…the tries came from Nicholson…he got two…
Fowke…
Ashmead…
Holford…
Merchant and skipper Ian Smith all ran over to touch down…
the second game against benneton treviso was always going to be the real test…
Gloucester went down in this one…the Italian team winning by 18 points to thirteen…the cherry and whites only try was scored by Don Caskie…no complaints from coach Richardson though he reckons the team are ready for the challenge of a new season
Keith Richardson says it's looking good but more important it's feeling good and there's a grit and determination about the team this season
so much for the Italian job Gloucester are back home training this week and getting themselves ready for the first league match of the season…that's against wasps at Kingsholm on saturday (1)
and you can see the highlights of the Blenheim Horse Trials on Channel Four on Saturday September the twenty sixth…the next big sunday event for horse fans around here will be in November when Cheltenham races stage the first ever sunday jump meeting…they've been unveiling their plans today…here's Mark Kiff 
LORD VESTEY/Chairman/Cheltenham Racecourse
NIGEL CLARK/Chairman/Sunday Racing Campaign
EDWARD GILLESPIE/Cheltenham Racecourse
Voice over
Where better place to hold the country's first Sunday jump meeting than Prestbury Park at Cheltenham…the home of National Hunt Racing.
The Cheltenham Festival and the Mackeson Gold Cup draw race goers in their thousands…but never on a Sunday.
Until, that is, this November, when Cheltenham adds a third day to its Mackeson meeting.
Today the Jockey Club held a press conference to highlight Cheltenham's Sunday Best.
Lord Vestey, Chairman of Cheltenham Racecourse, says it's an advantage to us becasue we're used to holding three day meetings.
Britain's the only major horse racing nation which cannot hold normal meetings on a Sunday…betting at a racecourse on the Sabbath is forbidden.
That's something the Jockey Club wants to see changed.
Nigel Clark, CHairman of the Sunday Racing Campaign, says we had a meeting in Doncaster in July which was an unprecedented success.
We wanted a jump meeting as well as a flat meeting to demonstrate there is a demand for Sunday racing in this country.
Edward Gillespie, Managing Director of Cheltenham Racecourse, says we're hoping to attract families and people who have not been to Cheltenham before.
And Sunday racing comes to Cheltenham on November 15th.
With little sign that the recession is lifting people are having to cut their cloth accordingly.
To mark its fiftieth birthday the Oxford-based charity Oxfam has been holding a fashion show with a difference.
All the outfits on the catwalk were made up from clothes donated to its charity shops.
CHRISTINE BEATTIE/Show Organiser
Voice over
It was all the rage during the war; it's still looking pretty good 50 years on and now it's for sale for £40.
This black dress will sell for £11.99 and the coat, £25.
Everything at this morning's London show was donated to an Oxfam shop somewhere in Britain.
They may not sell many plastic macs or pairs of 60s kinky boots, but with a 70s revival in the air Oxfam shop volunteers are being swamped with requests for clothes like this.
Power dressing may have been left firmly in the 80s, but the suit has a Pierre Cardin label and a £39 price tag.
That's a bargain by many people's standards.
None of the models has ever shopped at Oxfam, but this assignment has been an inspiration.
These clothes are being modelled around the country all week, but after that they'll be back on the Oxfam rails.
And most shops in the region are now dusting off the platform shoes and diamante brooches, which have been centre of the autumn collections of the last 50 years.
An invention that started out as a simple toy for children grew over the years to become a lifetime hobby for millions of people.
With just a few bits of metal and lots of imagination, Meccano addicts can build anything from a replica of Blackpool Tower to a Lancaster bomber.
Gargy Patel reports.
HENLEY on THAMES Oxfordshire
GEOFF WRIGHT Organiser
Rover cuts 7
FTSE up 10
Voice over
The hundred shares index closed up ten points at twenty-three, seventy-two point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety-nine and up at two marks, eighty.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The parents of a young woman killed in a car accident have launched a road safety competition in memory of their daughter.
Catherine Kenyon was the innocent victim of a race between a car and a motorcyle, and her parents hope that the Young Driver of the Year competition will help to raise driving standards.
Kim Barnes reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
TED KENYON/Catherine's Father
DIANE LUNB/Test Candidate
PC GARY BALDWIN/Competition Organiser
NEIL BROWN/Best Young Motorist
Voice over
Difficult enough in a car park, never mind under the eagle eyes of a Thames Valley traffic officer.
But 30 young drivers put themselves through it to try and win the title best young motorist.
It follows the death of 27 year Old Catherine Kenyon near Aylesbury.
A car driver racing against a motorbike lost control and ploughed into Catherine's vehicle.
Her parents have set up a trust fund and this competition.
The candidates faced hours of written exams, manoeuvres and then a gruelling road test through Milton Keynes.
Diane Lunb is one of the oldest at 24.
She's finding out what makes a good driver.
Road accidents are the major cause of death for 17 to 25 year olds.
Between tests, the emergency services showed how they have to step in when bad driving takes its toll.
With an eye to a safe driving career, Neil Brown from Wing near Aylesbury was declared the winner.
His prize; a day in the pits at the British Grand Prix and the chance to pick up even more driving tips.
Brewers from all over the world have been gathering to examine this year's crop of hops.
The wet weather has caused some problems for hop farmers, but the brewers say it's still one of the best harvests they've seen.
Clare Lafferty reports.
WITHINGTON/Herefordshire
JOHN DENT/Hop Farmer
Voice over
It's expected to take just over 2 weeks to pick the 46 acres of hops grown at Withington Court Farm in Herefordshire.
There to witness the start of this years harvest were representatives of some of the world's biggest breweries.
Hops give beer its distinctive bitter taste and in Herefordshire they're also famous for being aromatic.
But the wet weather this year has caused problems, prompting something called cock hop.
Despite the cock hop problem, brewers seem very impressed with this years crop.
Male speaker
I've never seen hops so big.
Male speaker
Herefordshire hops are always good.
Voice over
It takes just one and half hops to make a pint of beer.
With this lot on its way to the breweries, bitter drinkers can rest assured there'll be no shortage.
Voice over
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
and bearing in mind Northampton's the centre of the boot and shoe industry guess what their fans sing…
What a load of old cobblers…daren't tell you what Hereford supporters were singing about the ref tho…to the first division now…a draw for Oxford…defeat for Swindon 
Voice over
so no winners on the football field for us this weekend…but I'm happy to say we've got other victories to celebrate starting with one for Shelley Nutt in the world barefoot water ski-ing championships 
Voice over
two more winners this weekend were Rodney Powell and a horse called Limmy's Comet…that's the team that won the Audi Horse Trials at Blenheim Palace yesterday 
Voice over
River search…divers called in after mother-of-two woman goes missing.
Organic but ugly…farmer's told to move out of his wooden shack.
And tailor-made…throw-away fashion that suits the pocket of the thrifty.
Good evening.
(harriet next)
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
HARDWICKE/Gloucestershire
DCI RALPH GOODRICH/Gloucester Police
Voice over
Tania Probyn has been missing from her home in Whitminster in Gloucestershire for five days now.
She was last seen at around eleven thirty last Wednesday night.
She'd been to visit her estranged husband at the house the couple used to share at Hardwicke.
Mrs Probyn's husband has told police that the pair, who've been living apart for several months, had a row.
He said his wife left the house in a very distressed state.
A team of police have spent the day searching the area surrounding the house.
And frogmen have been dragging the River Severn near Hardwicke looking for clues.
In particular they're trying to find Mrs Probyns car, a White Renault 19 with a distinctive red and green stripe down each side.
When she was last seen Mrs Probyn was wearing white Bermuda shorts, a blue and white check cardigan and a blue and green jacket.
Her car registration is H553 UVO.
Police are appealing for anyone who thinks they've seen Mrs Probyn or her car to get in touch with them immediately.
They plan to continue searching the River Severn and the Gloucester to Sharpness canal tomorrow morning.
The badly-decomposed body of a young man has been found in a field.
The discovery was made by a farmer out spraying his crops.
Police believe the body may have been in the field for several weeks and they're still investigating the cause of death.
Ken Goodwin reports.
MICKLETON/Gloucestershire
CHRIS SLATTER/Farmer
Voice over
The body was found near Mickleton on the Gloucestershire/Wiltshire boarder.
Farmer Chris Slatter was spraying a crop of flax when he made the grim discovery.
A Home Office pathologist was called to the scene.
He established that the body which was badly decomposed was that of a male aged between 16 and 25.
The cause of death is not known.
Police say they haven't launched a murder inquiry at this stage.
A farmer and his family who live in a wooden shack on their organic farm say they will lose their home and their livelihood if they aren't allowed to build a proper house.
But the local council says their present home breaks every rule in the book, and their plans would put an area of outstanding natural beauty at risk…
Erika Barnes reports.
WINDSOREDGE/Nailsworth/Gloucestershire
STEPHEN MORGAN/Organic Farmer
IAN GOBEY/Stroud District Council
Voice over
The house that Stephen Morgan built.
A country ideal tucked away on the edge of a Cotswold village.
A farming ideal too, organically grown produce, means the family are self sufficient.
But to protect the fruits of 7 years of their labour, they feel they have to stay at the site.
Male speaker
We have charcoal and wattles stored at the site worth thousands of pounds.
We have geese and livestock too.
We have to be there to protect it.
Voice over
The house was a former packing and washing shed for the vegetables they grew.
They moved in when they outgrew a caravan on the site.
When they applied to Stroud District Council for permission to build a house, they were turned down flat.
Male speaker
The made out it was in an area of outstanding natural beauty, which it is.
But we said we'd build in local stone and blend in with the area.
We don't understand.
Male speaker
But it's clear to the council, the shack and any other home on the site, breaks every planning rule in the book.
Male speaker
We had complaints that it was being used without permission.
It would be wrong to build it because they were trying to hide it away.
It would set a precedent in an area of outstanding natural beauty.
Voice over
Now 7 years after the Morgans took over the site, the matter is going to a public inquiry.
If they lose that, they'll lose their home and much more.
Male speaker
The livelihood will go out the window.
I'd be worried about the vandalism.
All these things would go to waste.
Voice over
Stephen Morgan wants to mend fences with the council not build obstacles.
He simply wants an ideal home.
The final say will come from the public inquiry next month.
Welcome back.
A group of venture scouts has been bringing smiles to the faces of children from refugee camps in Bosnia.
(WES NEXT)
They set up a traditional Scout camp, to give the children a break from the harsh conditions of their day to day existence.
Amateur Video/KATE GARRAWAY/Reporting
KATHY CHALMERS/Scout Association
Voice over
Sunshine, a song and a whole lot of giggling.
It would seem to anyone the perfect recipe for a good holiday but to these youngsters it is particularly special.
As refugees from the war in Bosnia this holiday camp at Korcula near Dubrovnik is in stark contrast to the camps where they have been living.
It has all been organised by a group of venture Scouts from Abingdon in Oxfordshire.
Female speaker
It was most wonderful when you saw all the children bronzed and happy knowing what they went through it was great that they began to trust us.
It was wonderful for me and I think for them also.
Voice over
The children, at first shy, soon lost their inhibitions when it was time to put on the camp play, enjoying a freedom which many other youngsters take for granted.
But the scouts were very aware that the fear of war was never far from their minds.
Female speaker
There were alot of helicopters going overhead and when they came I have never seen children move so fast.
So you could tell that even though they were very happy the fear of war was never far from their minds.
Voice over
The scouts are planning another camp next year.
But they hope that then the troubles in Bosnia will be resolved and the youngsters will be able to escape thoughts of war, not just for a few days, but forever.
More help for Bosnia is on the way in the form of three thousand pairs of counterfeit Doc Marten boots and shoes.
The makers of the genuine article have agreed to let Oxfam pass the shoes on to refugees who are desperate for footwear.
The charity says more shoes and clothing are needed as the Bosnian winter approaches.
RICHARD BARNETT/Bicester
STEPHEN GRIGGS/Doctor Martens
TONY VAUX/Oxfam Relief Co-ordinator
Voice over
The fake Doc Martens were seized in Hong Kong…and now they've found their way to the Oxfam Emergency Warehouse in Bicester.
The 3,000 pairs of shoes and boots are labelled Dr Marties…and they are a mixture of childrens and adults sizes.
The Doc Martin Company based near Northampton says normally counterfeit goods are destroyed…but this time these shoes and boots will be put to good use in Bosnia:
Male speaker
The shoes and boots would normally be burned or chopped up.
But it seemed a shame not to send them to people who need shoes.
Voice over
Tony Vaux is co-ordinating Oxfam's relief effort in Bosnia.
He says the footwear is sorely needed:
Male speaker
In one refugee centre in Bosnia there aren't enough shoes to go round.
Whoever goes out takes a pair from a pile.
And with winter approaching there's a desperate need for more clothing and shoes.
Voice over
The shoes and boots will be shipped out to Bosnia within the next few weeks.
And for the refugees who end up wearing them, they'll be just what the Doctor ordered.
Well, the Doc Marten has now been granted official recognition — it's one of the words making its debut in the new Shorter Oxford English Dictionary.
Other first-time entries include palimony, kissogram and sloane ranger.
But it seems that not everyone can keep up with the way our language is changing.
HARRIET RYLEY/Oxford
LESLEY BROWN/Editor
Voice over
Leafing through the results of 13 years work — editor Lesley Brown and 25 assisstant editors have just completed the job of updating the shorter Oxford English Dictionary.
Because it hasn't been updated since 1973 some words which seems to have been around a while -palimony, Watergate and glasnost for instance have only just made it.
She says you have to have evidence of continued use over a period of time and in a variety of sources so that it's not just very specialised and short-lived.
Other new words which might sound familiar include sloane ranger, Rambo, kissogram and decaf.
But the editor's favourite word is now obsolete.
She says I think one of the worst or strangest is errif which is a two year old canary — why anyone would want to have a word for that I don't know.
Others might wonder whether it's advisable to sanction the likes of decontextualise and unproblematise…
A random sample of new words did not go down well with passersby.
He says he doesn't know what dweeb, himbo or sunnies mean.
She says a dweeb is a nerd.
He says he doesn't know what a himbo is.
Reporter explains it's a male bimbo.
She says a pair of sunnies is a pair of sunglasses.
The two volumes with their half a million definitions will set you back £120 — but will reveal the secrets of a wobbly — a fit of panic, a cereologist — one who studies crop circles and a guppie — a green yuppie.
Now back to the inquest into the death of a fifteen year old hunt saboteur from Milton Keynes who was crushed by a horse box at a hunt in Cambridgeshire.
Maria Coyle joins us now from outside the coroner's court in Huntingdon.
Voice over
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Solicitor to defend Libyans
FTSE down 20
The hundred shares index closed down twenty point four at three thousand and thirty eight point six 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty four and up at two marks, forty eight.
RUNS=0:10
A man who was stabbed and beaten with a metal bar on the doorstep of his own home, says he feared for his life.
Derek Cantwell was attacked when he opened his front door late at night.
He's just been released from hospital.
JESSICA FOWLE/Oxford
DEREK CANTWELL/Attack Victim
KAREN CANTWELL/Derek's Wife
Voice over
Back home from hospital Derek Cantwell is in severe pain.
He's badly bruised and has difficulty moving because of the stab wound to his back.
At around midnight on Sunday he was sleeping on the sofa in the front room of his house in the Rose Hill area of Oxford.
He heard a knock at the door.
He went to answer it and the next thing he knew he was being attacked by a group of men.
He was stabbed and beaten with a metal bar.
Male speaker
I thought that was it.
They were kicking me and hitting me with a big bar.
I couldn't get back up
Female speaker
I thought he was dead.
I panicked when I saw the blood.
He crawled in here and the police came.
Voice over
The couple have two children and Derek's wife is frightened for the family's safety.
But Derek says he won't let his attackers intimidate him into moving away from the area.
Male speaker
I don't want to move.
I want to stay here.
My wife wants to move but I want to stay here.
Voice over
Police are appealing for any witnesses to the attack to come forward.
Tap water which costs less than a penny a litre is being filtered, treated and then sold for more than fifty times that much.
The company that bottles the water says it's acting completely within the law and is simply responding to customer demand.
But some consumer groups say it's a con.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Hereford
NIGEL GRIFFITHS MP/Labour Consumer Spokesman
DUDLEY GUEST/Hereford
Voice over
WATER
Get it out out the tap and it costs less than a penny a litre.
Buy it in a bottle and you could be paying more than fifty times that.
Davies Brook which bottles the water is based in Hereford.
And like most people living in the city it gets it straight from the mains of the Welsh Water company.
It then filters the water several times, treats it, and calls it table water.
Some consumer watchdogs are concerned that the labels on the bottles aren't clear enough.
Most of the people we asked were surprised to discover the water's origins.
Female speaker
It doesn't say tap water and it should.
Female speaker
As long as they're filtering it that's fair enough.
Voice over
Hereford and Worcester Trading Standards Department has just completed a report on bottled water.
It makes several recommendations about how to improve labelling.
No one from Davies Brook was prepared to be interviewed.
But a spokesman said that there was no intention to mislead customers.
He said the company would look into the possibility of redesigning labels, although he couldn't say it would definitely use the words’ tap water’.
As to how much it costs Davies Brook to produce each bottle of table water, we were told that was confidential information.
A scientist claims he's invented a way of making charcoal which could be a life-saver in third world countries desperately short of fuel.
Ninety per cent of fuel used in the developing world is wood, which is in increasingly short supply.
The charity Oxfam is taking an interest in the invention, but one charcoal dealer is unimpressed.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
OXFORD
ERIC LAMONT-GREGORY/Inventor
BOB BAGNELL/Charcoal Dealer
ALAN REED/Oxfam
Voice over
Foraging for firewood in Nepal — like other third world countries its people depend on wood — often made into charcoal — for ninety per cent of their fuel.
But supplies are running out as mountainsides become denuded and tree stocks are not replaced.
Eric Lamont-Gregory, a research fellow into energy at Oxford, making charcoal briquettes in the garage at his home.
For every ton of charcoal burnt, there's another ton in charcoal dust which is normally thrown away as waste.
He's come up with an organic binder which makes it possible to turn the left-over dust into briquettes which burn for two and half hours.
He says I'd like to get this technology out to the third world as quickly as possible.
I've asked Oxfam to sell the charcoal and use the proceeds to support household fuel programmes in the developing world.
He also argues his idea would go some way to helping save the rainforest, part of which is used to make charcoal.
But Bob Bagnell, who has imported charcoal from Indonesia for the last four years, says his source is not endangering the environment.
Much of the three thousand tonnes of charcoal he imports every year comes from mangrove swamps near the Indonesian coast.
He says if it's not cut down it literally chokes the jungle and so every four or five years the mangrove is cut and then it grows again like a blackthorn or hawthorn hedge would grow.
He's not impressed with the Lamont-Gregory briquette which he says is not the consistency the British market expects and adds that Indonesia and Brazil are already using a similar technique.
But the charity Oxfam is interested.
He says it looks quite exciting if it can save alot of trees, make fuel accessible to people who are having difficulty finding enough fuel, then it should be good.
Oxfam is regularly approached with inventions and has not yet decided whether it will be able to do something with the’ friendly fuel’.
It has gone on sale in’ One Village’shops in the region.
They sell goods direct from communities in developing countries and say they're selling the briquetters to encourage Eric Lamont-Gregory in his quest to export his invention to the third world.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, boots for Bosnia.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
TIM HURST/Hereford
ROBIN RICHARDS/Fire Chief
ROGER MONAGHAN/Factory Inspectorate
Voice over
One of the men who died at a processing plant in Hereford was fire fighter David Morris from Hereford.
He was 35, married with 2 children and had been in the brigade for 11 years.
The second man who died in the fire was leading fire fighter John Davis, from Leominster, a part-timer for 13 years, also married with 2 children.
They died when part of the Sun Valley processing plant in Hereford collapsed as 120 men from 3 brigades fought to control the fire.
Wearing breathing apparatus they were a few feet into the building when overhead piping collapsed, trapping them.
Flowers have been left by wellwishers at the plant and an appeal fund opened today for the families of both men has already reached £5,000.
It's too early to pinpoint the cause of the fire, but a full scale enquiry into yesterday's tragedy will investigate the design and construction of the building which collapsed.
The investigation team includes men from the Factory Inspectorate.
Not since 1974 has a serving member of the Hereford and Worcester brigade died on duty.
19 years on, the flags at brigade headquarters are again at half mast.
KEN GOODWIN/Hereford
STEPHEN ORLEDGE/Sun Valley Ltd
CHRIS APPERLEY/Sun Valley Worker
Voice over
Twenty four hours after the fire started the pall of smoke has lifted — revealing the full extent of the damage.
The whole of what's known as the Corbet block was completely destroyed.
It's here that chicken is processed into Macnuggetts for Macdonalds restaurants for the whole of Britain and much of Europe.
It's a huge contract, and management are eager to get the plants four hundred and fifty staff back to work as soon as possible.
At the moment workers are at home on full pay — they're being assured their jobs are safe.
Health and safety experts are touring the plant to begin an investigation into what caused the fire, and how two firemen came to lose their lives:
No figure has yet been put on the cost of the fire — management will only say that it's bound to run into millions.
But it's the human cost of the fire that's on the minds of most staff at the moment.
Firefighters expect to stay at the scene for at least the rest of the day — the strain of working amoung the debris under which two of their friends died shows only too clear to see.
A coroner's court has heard how a fifteen year old anti-hunt demonstrator was crushed to death by a horsebox.
Seventeen witnesses including members of the hunt, their supporters and saboteurs are giving evidence.
The horsebox driver and his son said they'd felt a bump but thought it was a hole in the road.
MARIA COYLE/Huntingdon
Voice over
Workmates of a computer technician who's thought to have have killed his wife and children before committing suicide have held a memorial service to pay their last respects.
Some of Dennis Garvey's former neighbours also attended.
GARETH FURBY/Teddington
Voice over
Employees from the Cheltenham offices of the insurance company Eagle Star joined relatives and friends for today's memorial service.
In the churchyard a fresh grave with flowers laid in memory of the victims…
And just a hundred yards away is the family home, where computer technician Dennis Garvey lived with family until last May.
Benjiman and Hannah Garvey were suffocated.
Their mother had been battered to death with a hammer.
And Dennis Garvey's body was washed up two days later on the Suffolk coast.
Police are not looking for anyone else in connection with the killings.
But four months on villagers still can't understand what happened.
He says me must have had his reasons.
But they don't know.
And work colleagues were giving little away about the man they knew.
He says its a private service.
He says they don't want to comment.
It's expect the inquest into the deaths will be completed within the next few months.
One of Britain's most popular actors, Paul Nicholas, is currently tackling his most demanding role.
He's playing the lead in the circus musical Barnum.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
OXFORD
PAUL NICHOLAS/Barnum
Voice over
The actor, singer and dancer Paul Nicholas is following some mighty big footsteps by taking it on, including Michael Crawford and Jim Dale.
But he's been doing very well at it despite having to learn terrifying new skills, like walking a tightrope.
Paul is bringing the entire Barnum troop to the Apollo Theatre in Oxford in the Autumn.
He was here to get a feel for the place.
Stone circles like Stonehenge attract thousands of visitors each year drawn by the excitement of the ancient and unknown.
One farmer is so enthralled by the idea of such monuments, he's built his own.
Simon Garrett reports 
SOUTHMOOR/Oxfordshire
RICHARD COX/Farmer
Voice over
Stonehenge, Wiltshire.
Giant temple or ancient calender and Almanac?
The enigma of the stones draws druids to perform their weird rituals.
The Rollright Stones of Oxfordshire.
Silent.
Brooding.
Mysterious.
And now, Southmoorhenge.
Purpose; to commemmorate the building of Southmoor and Longworth bypass.
The stones were dug up by the earthmovers and placed here by farmer, Richard Cox.
Male speaker
I thought if I could get one or two put up, it'd be a miniature Stonehenge; call it Southmoorhenge and get ourselves on the map.
I'm also hoping to put in time capsules, so people in 150 years time will know what what was happening in Southmoor and the locality.
Voice over
Southmoorhenge hasn't yet been listed as a historic monument and no Americans have been spotted having their pictures taken next to it, but it's early days.
After all Stonehenge was thousands of years old before the first bus-load pulled up.
Its fame has at least spread to the villagers of Southmoor.
Female speaker
I like the shape and the size.
Female speaker
It's fascinating.
Voice over
Other Ancient sites have become earmarked for visits by travellers.
Mr Cox has thought of that.
Male speaker
I would take out my shotgun…
Voice over
Mr Cox has put up a plaque explaining the stones.
He may even add some more to the site.
Male speaker
That's me.
Voice over
In years to come, when the new road has fallen into disuse and the plaque has been worn away by time, people may come here and wonder what is the hidden significance of the stones; or maybe by then, they'll have discovered that Stonehenge was built by some ancient farmer, commemmorating a new bypass.
And now back to our top story.
Police investigating the disappearance of Gloucestershire woman Tania Probyn have found a body in the River Severn.
Within the last half an hour, police have confirmed that a body has been found in a car dragged from the river.
Insp MIKE PENNINGTON/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Mandela urges removal of Ciskei Leader
ANC President Nelson Mandela has called for the removal of the Ciskei homeland leader after his troops shot down 28 demonstrators.
He was speaking after laying a wreath on the spot where the protestors died.
FTSE down 34
The hundred shares index closed down thirty four point five at twenty-three, thirty-seven, point seven.
The pounds is up at two dollars zero cents, and down at two marks seventy nine.
Hedge clippings from a country estate are being used in the fight against cancer.
The clippings are being hailed as the unlikely source for a new drug which could save many women's lives.
Simon Garrett reports 
CIRENCESTER PARK/Gloucestershire
Dr PAUL JENKINS/Leicester University
LORD APSLEY/Cirencester Park
Voice over
The Yew hedge at Cirencester Park is 250 years old.
In each of those years, estate workers have had to keep it trimmed.
But for the first time the clippings are not being dumped.
Instead, they're being put in the hands of chemists trying to extract a cancer drug called Taxol.
Taxol was discovered in America; a chemical found in the Pacific Yew tree it can paralyse cancer cells, but extracting it destroys the tree.
Now scientists hope to isolate a chemical which works like taxol from the European Yew.
Male speaker
For the past 10 years we've been working on synthesising the chemical; now we're trying to see if the European Yew will provide the starter material for producing anti-cancer activity.
Voice over
The problem for researchers in this country has been getting enough Yew to carry out their work.
Now several of the great estates of England have been enlisted to help.
Male speaker
My wife read an article in the hairdressers about Taxol and told me about it.
A German interested in the project was visiting Cirencester and saw our trees and asked us about the clippings.
Voice over
Taxol is used to help women with breast and ovarian cancer, but it's not a miracle treatment.
The Yew tree is one of the most poisonous plants in the countryside.
It takes long hours in the laboratory to convert deadly greenery into a possible lifesaver.
Male speaker
The yew contains a mixture of poisonous compounds and only a chemist can extract anything good from it so people shouldn't eat or drink anything connected with the Yew tree.
Voice over
The research to find a European version of taxol is likely to continue for some years.
The original was discovered as one of 115,000 samples taken from plants all over the world.
It was the only chemical from all those which showed any potential for cancer treatment.
Small wonder the chemists are working so hard to get British Yew trees to yield up their medical secrets.
An eighty four year old man has foiled a mugger who tried to steal his pension book.
The pensioner was so angry, he tripped up the mugger with his walking stick and grabbed the book back.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
DOUGLAS COX/Victim
Sgt PAUL DONOVAN/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
84 year old, Douglas Cox, was attacked just yards from the old people's home he lives in in Cheltehnam.
He was walking along Suffolk Parade to the post office to draw his pension, when he was approached by two youths.
One of them grabbed his pension book; but the mugger got more than he bargained for, as Mr Cox tripped him up with his walking stick.
Male speaker
I made a hell of a balloo…
I hooked him, made him stumble, and he was only too glad to to give it me back.
And then he was away in no time…cor he was quick, straight from the Barcelona Olympics I think.
Voice over
Unfortunately the attackers escaped, but without the pension book.
The police praised Mr Cox, but said, in general, people shouldn't tackle muggers.
Male speaker
I thought he was a plucky old man and it worked out for him very well.
But it could have gone badly and we wouldn't normally recommend they take on theives when they're mugging them.
Voice over
But Mr Cox was unconcerned.
Male speaker
There was no danger…he was more frightened of me than I was of him…but that's not the point…if it had been an old lady…he coulde have given her a heart attack…
I'm alright…
I've no heart!
Voice over
Douglas Cox is now safely back at home entertaining his friends with his tales of bravery.
Now for the latest in our series looking at summer gardens.
Richard Barnet joined a group of holidaymakers on a visit to the Cotswolds, as they toured three very different gardens.
CIRENCESTER/Gloucestershire
SUSAN BECK/Owner
SHIPTON MOYNE/Gloucestershire
AMANDA HORNBY/Owner
JANE ROBERTS/Tour organizer
MISERDEN/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Gardeners are an inquisitive breed and when they're on holiday, there's nothing they enjoy more, than snooping around in other people's gardens.
And that's the idea behind Cotswold Garden tours, which organises holiday breaks in the region.
We joined some of the holidaymakers, as they looked around the garden at Little Tulsa in Cirencester.
It's the home of Father John Beck and his wife Susan, who shared a lifetime of gardening experience with their visitors.
Tulsa is a classic cottage garden, with more than 500 varieties of perennials tumbling over eachother in a battle for space.
They include echinops, the globe thistle, red bergamot and sneezewort; which centuries ago was used to make snuff.
Female speaker
You have to love plants to create a garden.
If the plants are happy, so are the visitors.
Voice over
Soon it was on to our second garden of the day; Hodges Barn at Shipton Moyne.
A 500 year old converted dovecote surrounded by 6 acres of grounds.
Amanda Hornby has gardened here for 20 years and her husband; he looks after the lawns.
This is a garden of broad vistas, with wide grassed over areas contrasting with woodland and it's a place to relax.
Female speaker
Gardening is hard work, but it's also excellent relaxation.
Female speaker
The tours are proving very popular.
People enjoy seeing the gardens and the scenery.
Voice over
Our final visit is to Miserden Park, where everything is on a grand scale; from the borders, which are 100 yards long and 22 yards wide, to the Yew hedges, which take 8 weeks to cut.
The park also boasts some rare plants, including the white willowherb.
The tour is almost over, but has it been a success.
